























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Women's Economic Empowerment Rural Development Project (P164443) 

 
 

  
Aug 29, 2018 Page 1 of 18  

     

      

 

Combined Project Information Documents /  
Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (PID/ISDS) 

 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 29-Aug-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSA24505 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Afghanistan P164443 Women's Economic 
Empowerment Rural 
Development Project 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

SOUTH ASIA 31-Aug-2018 28-Sep-2018 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Finance Ministry of Rural 
Rehabilitation and 
Development 

 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 

To increase social and economic empowerment of poor rural women in selected communities. 

 
Components 

Community Mobilization and Institution Development 
Building Access to Finance and Linkages with Financial Institutions 
Providing Technical Assistance and Improved access to Markets 
Project Management and Knowledge Management 

 
 

PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
   

SUMMARY-NewFin1  
 

Total Project Cost 100.00 

Total Financing 100.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 25.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 

 
   
DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 25.00 


          IDA Grant 25.00 

Non-World Bank Group Financing 

     Trust Funds 75.00 

          Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund 75.00 

    

Environmental Assessment Category 

B-Partial Assessment 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate     
 
B. Introduction and Context 

 
Country Context 

1. Despite notable progress in rebuilding the economy, strengthening institutions, and restoring 
infrastructure and basic services, Afghanistan faces tremendous challenges today. Afghanistan has relatively 
successfully managed the immediate challenges resulting from the political transition post-election of 2014.  The 
country has maintained macroeconomic stability and established the conditions for a slow recovery of the 
economy. Risks to the economy remain significant, however, and withdrawal of international security forces 
starting 2011, coupled with political uncertainties and declining aid, have resulted in deceleration of economic 
growth, while fiscal pressures increase as security threats mount. The latest numbers from the Afghanistan Living 
Conditions Survey (ALCS)1 released by the Central Statistics Organization (CSO) show that poverty in Afghanistan 
has increased from 38.3 percent in 2012-13 to 54.5 percent in 2016-17.2 With the population continuing to grow 
more than 3 percent a year, per capita GDP fell during the same period from US$ 669 to US$ 551, making it one 
of the poorest countries in the world. At the same time, private sector growth has fallen 9.4 percent in the period 
2003-2012 to only 2.1 percent between 2013 and 2016. Private sector development and diversification is 
constrained by political instability, weak institutions, inadequate infrastructure, widespread corruption, and a 
difficult business environment (Afghanistan was ranked 183rd of 190 countries in the 2017 Doing Business Survey 
and 177 out of 180 in Transparency International’s Corruption Perception Index)3. With a fresh election cycle 
approaching in 2018-19, it is vital that the Government focuses on private sector led growth and revitalization of 
the economy to fill up the void emerging from the declining donor inflows over the longer-term.  
 

2. A particularly concerning challenge is the low level of economic empowerment of Afghan women. The 
current level of women’s formal economic contribution to Afghan development is low. While women constitute 
47 percent of the estimated 34.65 million population of Afghanistan in 20164 the female labour force 
participation rate stands at only 26.8 percent (down from 29 percent in 2013-14). Among the working age 

                                                           
1 Source: ALCS 2016-17; available at https://cso-of-afghanistan.shinyapps.io/ALCS_Dashboard  
2 This is measured against a national poverty line of 2,064 AFN per person per month – approx. $1 a day in current exchange 
rate terms. 
3 Sources: www.doingbusiness.org/data and www.transparency.org/cpi  
4 Statistics in this section are taken from the ALCS 2013-2014, ALCS 2016-17, the World Bank development database; and the 
WEE-NPP Strategy paper, December 2016. 

women, only 29 percent are economically active and most are employed in the agricultural sector (70 percent) 
while 24 percent are in manufacturing. The share of women in wage employment in non-agricultural sector is 
only 10 percent. Only 19.9 percent of the female population is literate (versus 49.4 percent for men), although 
this figure nearly doubles to 38.7 percent if only the female population under 25 is counted, a significant 
testimony to the advances that have been obtained over the past decade. Women earn significantly less than 
men. For the same type of job, women earn 30 percent less than men on average. 

 

3. Women in Afghanistan face significant legal, regulatory and cultural challenges that hinder their ability 
to run businesses and access markets5.  While the Afghan Constitution clearly states that “the citizens of 
Afghanistan – whether man or woman – have equal rights and duties before the law”6 and while most commercial 
laws have no explicit gender-legal differentiations, there are implicit cultural barriers and lack of legal incentive 
mechanisms that reduce the ability of women to participate in the economy successfully. Likewise, there are 
numerous actual gender-legal differences when it comes to non-commercial laws (like the Marriage Law, Civil 
Code, Labor Law, etc.). These include differences in the legal age of marriage, mobility of women, ownership of 
property, and duration and types of work that women can undertake7. This lack of legal incentives for women to 
participate in formal business activities, has translated into very low levels of female entrepreneurship and 
women-owned businesses, although this number has increased steadily thanks to donor and Government efforts. 

 

4. Access to finance, particularly for rural women, is especially constrained. Financial inclusion is a core 
development challenge in Afghanistan – with only 10 percent of the population (and 3.8 percent of women) 
having accounts in formal financial institutions8. Microfinance has been a widely-used strategy in Afghanistan to 
address barriers to financial inclusion, with the Microfinance Investment Support Facility for Afghanistan (MISFA) 
serving as an apex institution channeling funding and technical assistance to the whole sector. While the sector 
has grown and consolidated over the last decade, the total number of clients of micro-finance institutions (MFIs) 
only stands at 0.22 million, of which only 0.13 million are active borrowers. The outreach of MFIs is limited to 80 
districts of 14 provinces, and only 12 percent of their active clients are from rural areas. Naturally, therefore, 
demand for microfinance services continues to far outstrips supply, especially in rural areas where financial 
markets have limited presence. The outreach of the banking industry is equally limited in rural areas. Currently, 
there are 15 licensed banks in Afghanistan including three state owned banks, nine private sector banks, and 
three foreign banks. The Banking sector has gradually been offering range of financial products and services but 
their services are mostly limited to urban areas. Most commercial banks have no branches outside Kabul yet, and 
a few are providing loans to local businesses, much less small rural businesses. 
 

5. There is hence tremendous potential to increase women’s participation in national development. 
Global evidence increasingly showcases that greater gender equality can enhance productivity, improve 
development outcomes for the next generation, and make institutions more representative.9 Actions to expand 
women’s economic activity in Afghanistan are constrained by a variety of cultural, institutional, and economic 
factors. Afghan women suffer discrimination that is multi-faceted, inter-related and self-reinforcing. But the 
current international perception that Afghan women are blocked from the economy is an unhelpful over-
generalization given the variation in cultural practices across the country. Furthermore, as in other parts of the 

world, cultural practices are more dynamic than often realized. As an economy grows and more opportunities 
arise, cultural beliefs about women’s ability to contribute to household income and their participation in 
economic activities will change. Moreover, addressing gender disparities and empowering women is essential 
for consolidating peace and security in fragile and conflict-affected societies. The imperative for investing in 
women’s economic empowerment (WEE) in Afghanistan can thus not be over-emphasized. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 

6. Recognizing this imperative, the Government of Afghanistan (GoIRA) launched the Women’s Economic 
Empowerment National Priority Program (WEE-NPP) on March 8th, 2017. The WEE-NPP forms the third pillar of 
the GoIRA’s Gender Strategy which is encompassed in the broader Afghanistan National Peace and Development 
Framework (ANPDF) – the country’s five-year development plan. The WEE-NPP aims to build poor women’s 
capacity to strengthen the economy of their households, communities, and the entire nation. It is structured as 
an umbrella program (rather than a stand-alone project/operation) that would operate through over a dozen 
line ministries (through ongoing or pipeline projects) and coordinated through a Program Coordination Office 
(PCO) in the Ministry of Labor, Social Affairs, Martyrs and Disabled (MOLSAMD). The latter would in turn provide 
start-up technical and financial resources to support women-owned businesses, and development of job skills, 
and financial literacy. The program would further help create an enabling environment for WEE through policy 
and planning reforms that will remove legal barriers to women’s economic participation; streamline and reduce 
regulatory barriers to women’s involvement in marketing; and improve the quality and use of gender statistics 
for planning and monitoring women's economic progress.   

 

7. The WEE-NPP builds upon and complements other initiatives of the GoIRA. The WEE-NPP builds on 
previous government-led initiatives to expand women's economic empowerment, including the gender elements 
of the Afghanistan Compact, the 2008-18 National Action Plan for the Women of Afghanistan (NAPWA), and the 
2008 Afghanistan National Development Strategy (ANDS). The GoIRA has also fully committed to gender equality 
and has backed this commitment with credible reforms to increasing the role of women in government, providing 
access to property, and implementing UN Resolution 1325. The WEE-NPP compliments these efforts and links 
closely to other NPPs – notably the Citizens’ Charter National Priority Program (CCNPP), the Agriculture NPP and 
the Human Development NPP. 
 

8. The WEE-NPP is comprised of six pillars. The WEE-NPP encompasses two domains of action. Facilitating 
activities (the first two pillars) include reforms that improve the regulatory and normative environment for 
women’s economic development, and investment activities (the last four pillars) include projects and programs 
that provide resources directly to women. In this way, the six WEE-NPP pillars focus on: (i) increasing the 
availability and analysis of gender statistics; (ii) removing legal and regulatory barriers to participation; (iii) 
training in literacy, business management, and labor skills; (iv) ensuring inclusive access to finance; (v) improving 
access to agricultural inputs, extension services, and markets; and, (vi) promoting access to creative economy 
markets. The activities under each of these pillars will be implemented by different ongoing and pipeline projects 
under various line ministries. 

 
9. The proposed women’s economic empowerment rural development project (WEE-RDP) will directly 
implement the last four pillars of WEE-NPP, while contributing to the others. It offers a national framework for 
women’s economic empowerment starting at the community level and with an explicit targeting of poor rural 
women. As acknowledged in the WEE-NPP document, past efforts at women’s economic empowerment have 
often focused on better-off, urban women. WEE-RDP reverses this approach. 

10. The project builds off the lessons from the ongoing Afghanistan Rural Enterprise Development Program 
(AREDP). The AREDP was approved by the ARTF Management Committee on April 11, 2010 with the objective of 
improving employment opportunities and income of rural men and women, and sustainability of targeted local 
enterprises. The project was successful in integrating the poorest segments of the population and empowering 
women who were the main direct beneficiary groups of all Project activities. AREDP’s operational activities have 
resulted in the strengthening of about 64,328 community members (56 percent women) including marginalized 
groups, IDPs and Returnees through a community-driven savings and enterprise model for income and 
employment generation. More than 5,193 SGs (54 percent women), 1,336 EGs (841 EGs managed by women) 
and 505 VSLAs were established and supported. Community Saving Groups have saved US$4.2 million (US$2.2 
million by women), where US$4 million of loanable savings are in circulation at any given time. Additionally, the 
program supported 657 SMEs to strengthen backward/forward linkages with the rural economy and utilized 
them as business service providers for the newly established community enterprises. A recent Bank funded 
analytical study ‘Jobs from Agriculture and Rural Development Operations in Afghanistan’ found that the 
employment effects of AREDP on female beneficiaries were significant. Participation of women in program 
activities has emerged as one of key strengths of AREDP as over 60% program beneficiaries are women. The 
impact of the project on the local economy and its catalytic effect on social inclusion facilitate its transition into 
a programmatic and women-oriented operation under the WEE-NPP.  
 

11. The project will leverage the social mobilization and outreach of the Citizens’ Charter program. Most 
successful women’s empowerment programs are built on a community platform which also provides access to 
basic services and enables trust. This is why the WEE-NPP conceived the WEE-RDP to leverage the institutional 
structure of the Citizens’ Charter National Priority Program (CCNPP). The CCNPP emerged from the foundation 
of the highly successful National Solidarity Program (NSP), which introduced a community-driven development 
(CDD) approach towards rural infrastructure and service delivery and reached approximately 35,000 
communities over the past 14 years. The Citizens’ Charter Afghanistan Project (CCAP) which implements the first 
phase of the CCNPP aims to deliver core infrastructure, emergency support, and social services to participating 
communities through strengthened Community Development Councils (CDCs). By helping to improve services, 
especially for the poor and most vulnerable through the CDCs, it also ensures social inclusion. The CCAP was 
planned to be a major contributor to building strong and accountable institutions especially by strengthening the 
capacity of CDCs to plan and monitor local service delivery and hold government and service providers 
accountable. The CCAP can thus provide an umbrella body for women’s groups and help women access critical 
social infrastructure. 

 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

12. To increase social  and economic empowerment of poor rural women in selected communities. 

 

13. The project defines “social empowerment” as participation in community level women’s institutions, with 
an implicit theory of change that such participation leads to social empowerment. These institutions will be 
provided seed capital, technical assistance, and in turn be linked to formal financial institutions and markets so 
as to enable economic empowerment. “Economic empowerment” is defined in this project as having both the 
resources to advance economically and the power to make and act on economic decisions. Economic 
empowerment starts with fair and equal access to markets and institutions, but women also need agency and 
control over resources to ensure they benefit from economic activities. Economic empowerment also 


encompasses financial inclusion, which increases women’s access to products and services to exercise control 
over money.  

 
PDO Level Indicators 

14. Following the focus of the project on social, financial, and economic inclusion and empowerment, the 
proposed PDO level indicators are as follows: 

(a) Number of direct beneficiaries (of which female)  
(b) % of women self-help group (SHG) members from poor or vulnerable households  
(c) Number of beneficiaries reached with financial services (Corporate Results Indicator) 
(d) % of women EGs/PAs showing increase in volume of sales 

 
D. Project Description  

15. Based on the rural goals outlined in the WEE-NPP, the WEE-RDP has three core intervention tracks – one 
around social mobilization to develop community institutions and federating them to higher levels; the second 
dedicated to providing inclusive access to finance, and the third focusing more on enterprise development and 
value chain/market linkages. These would be supplemented with program support that would also link back to 
both the WEE-NPP and the CCNPP. This ‘institutional approach’ to empowerment of women has proven very 
successful in rural livelihoods projects in other South Asian countries, notably in India, since it harnesses the social 
capital of poor women and uses this to develop both financial and economic capital. The overall approach and 
functions are similar to what existed under the AREDP, but the fundamental shifts would be (i) specific design 
features to promote participation of poor women; (ii)a more prominent role of social mobilization (with a goal of 
‘saturating’ as many women into savings/self-help groups as possible, of which a subset would receive enterprise 
support); and (iii) a much stronger focus on building sustainable community institutions for women’s agency and 
empowerment. Keeping this core design model in mind, each of the project components is described below.  
 

COMPONENT-1: Community Mobilization and Institution Development (est. US$ 30 million) 

16. Overall focus: The first component of the WEE-RDP aims to build sustainable community institutions 
through social and economic mobilization of rural women. This is perhaps the most critical component of the 
project, since it lays the institutional foundation on top of which the rest of the activities will depend. The 
formation of sustainable institutions would build the social capital of women in the rural areas and serve as the 
first stage of their economic empowerment. The core community institutional framework envisaged under the 
project are women’s savings groups (WSG or simply SGs) which would be federated into VLSAs. From these would 
emerge community level enterprise groups (EG) which in turn would be aggregated to producer associations (PAs). 
The project will heavily draw on the mobilization efforts undertaken by CCAP and leverage the network of CCAP 
facilitating partners (FPs) working with the program.  
 

Component 2: Building Access to Finance and Linkages with Financial Institutions (est. US$ 38 million): 

17. Overall approach: The second component will facilitate empowering of both community institutions i.e. 
SGs/VSLAs and its members to develop as sustainable financial institutions at the community level and eventually 
establish direct linkages with financial service providers including MFIs and commercial banks. Evidence from past 
experiences in Afghanistan as well as other countries demonstrates that this is a long-term process that has to be 
approached in phases. The key focus of WEE-RDP would be to strengthen the ‘demand side’ by creating an 
ecosystem of women savings groups that are built on mutual trust and respect to support their livelihoods and 


federate to VSLAs for sustainability. This would prepare the women groups to link with MFIs and make them 
bankable. In this way, there would be three stages in the access to finance:  

(a) the first stage is to develop an own savings culture through SHGs and federate them into VLSAs.  
(b) In the second stage, the project will inject seed capital, which will support transforming VSLAs to 

the next level in terms of scale as well as operational and financial sustainability.  
(c) Finally, the third stage would be to link the VSLAs to MFIs and Banks. 

 

18. The component will have a strong focus on ensuring the financial and operational sustainability of VSLAs 
and will work with MFIs and commercial banks to create an enabling environment for investment in the 
livelihoods of rural women by increasing their access to sustainable financial services. 
 
19. Financial Intermediation. Given the above, the project complies in general terms with OP 10.00 para 15 
on financial intermediation. However, there is a significant reason for concern about how loan contracts can be 
enforced, and how VSLAs will be sustainable when relying on ad hoc profit sharing arrangements (under Islamic 
finance) instead of predictable interest rates. There are also major security concerns in rural areas that could 
make the financial intermediation activities difficult to implement on the ground. An additional concern is how 
risks will be covered, including force majeure risk and credit risk (on loans to SHGs by VSLAs, and on loans from 
microfinance institutions and commercial banks to VSLAs in the future).  Given that VSLAs are supervised by the 
Ministry of Rural Rehabilitation and Development, a new arrangement for supervision will be necessary as they 
take on a financial intermediation role. Mature VSLAs managing grants and a growing loan portfolio may be 
supervised by the Central Bank, while others will require technical assistance and supervision from another 
agency.   It would also be critical to have a certification process to insure basic practices and systems are in place 
before seed capital is provided. For VSLAs that initially meet requirements and later do not, there needs to be a 
decertification or strengthening process in place – and this would have ripple effects for groups who have 
provided their savings. As for the eventual participation of MFIs, there is no law in place yet, which might limit 
their role. However, efforts are underway to pass a law to provide clear legal status and supervision 
arrangements. 
 
20. Component 3: Providing Technical Assistance and Improved access to Markets (est. US$ 18 million):  
This component aims to finance common assets of public goods nature based on business needs and assessment 
of market failures using the ‘maximizing finance for development’ (MFD) cascade principle (see figure 6 below) 
in order to provide catalytic support for the growth of viable economic activities and leveraging more private 
sector investments. These investments are expected to be catalytic, helping individual level investments reach 
economies of scale through increased coordination. This will be supplemented with technical assistance, business 
development support, as well as market exposure and linkages.  

 

21. Approach: Groups of women with homogeneous economic activities under the project will be enabled 
and incentivized to come up with business ideas that will provide the rationale for partnership and formation of 
Enterprise Groups (EGs) and Producers Associations (PAs). 10 Any support under this component will be against 

                                                           
10 Enterprise/Producers Groups (EGs or PGs) are primary economic interest groups consisting of members from same village 
working on common enterprise/production systems. This could be in the areas of farm; non-farm or off farm activities. Members 

of an EG normally ranges from 8-20 depending upon nature of economic activities. Producer’s Association (PAs) would be a higher 

order, secondary organization i.e. Federations of EGs/PAs. EGs/PGs from multiple villages engaged in common economic or 

income generating activities could be federated at a cluster level i.e. 10 to 20 villages. While, EG and PG would be an informal 

 
robust Business Plan with a ceiling of $ 2000 per EG, which may also be aggregated for the larger assets 
/infrastructure at the PA level depending upon specific business case and project requirements. The committee 
reviewing the business plan would have members of commercial banks/MFIs and representatives from industries 
and private sector, who could also choose to co-finance the proposal. The project is also considering contracting 
an independent third party to verify and validate the Business plan in terms of feasibility, fiduciary process and 
inclusion. It is expected that this build-up process will help women to increase their productivity, 
competitiveness, which would in turn improve the job opportunities for women and contribute to their economic 
empowerment. The component builds on the existing successful framework of AREDP on enterprise 
development which has proven effective in developing women enterprises and supporting them on capacity 
building, business skills and linkage to markets. EGs will be encouraged among all SHG members engaged in 
common economic activities. Thus, the component would help both individual and collective women enterprises 
to participate in organized and competitive supply chains, which would be identified through provincial 
situational analysis and other related studies. The focus will be on pro-poor, high value commodities such as 
vegetables, horticulture, milk, poultry, ship; fish; goat; carpet; honey, handicrafts etc. where women participation 
tend to be higher. Overall, only a sub-set of total households and geography having growth potential and are 
part of either economic clusters or value chains would be specifically supported under this component. This 
component will also facilitate EGs access to credit from VSLAs to support building of a healthy portfolio for the 
VSLAs and hence contributing to their sustainability. This component will also seek to draw partnerships and 
synergy with other ARTF, bilateral donor funded, and NGO run programs and projects that work on similar 
themes11. Investments made under this component would be largely/mostly of public in nature. 
 
22. COMPONENT 4: Project Management and Knowledge Management (est. US$14 million): Under this 
Component, the project will finance salaries of project staff, consultancies, training programs, office equipment, 
and incremental operational costs of set up under MRRD and provincial units. The component will also support 
project coordination, implementation, monitoring and evaluation (M&E) at the national and provincial levels, 
Management Information System (MIS), financial management (FM), procurement, human resource 
management, knowledge management and communication systems as well as environmental and social 
safeguards management, and running of the grievance redress mechanism. The project will leverage the existing 
institutional infrastructure available in the CCAP program at the MRRD level for various project management 
activities including procurement, FM and communications. A detailed M&E plan will be prepared to align project 
activities and tasks with the key results and the related PDO level results indicators and the intermediate level 
indicators at the component level. There will be systematic internal monitoring of activities and results that will 
be fed into the preparation of Implementation Status report and Annual Progress reports. An M&E/ MIS system 
will be established to collect and process appropriate information that will enable determination of the progress 
towards the achievement of the project development objective, tracking of progress at each phase of the results 
chain, and if required, adjustments will continuously be made and at Mid-Term. Baseline information will also be 
collected as part of the project preparation activities. 
 

23. Other areas of support under the component include the following: 
(a) Technical assistance to inform implementation and policy development, and capacity building of 

some of the MRRD directorate/cell/units to mainstream and ensure long term adequate staffing 

                                                           
organization, efforts would be made to convert PAs as formal community based organization registered as co-operatives or 

companies. Membership of PAs could range from 50 to 500 depending on the value chain.  

11 In this respect, the project is exploring a formal partnership with the “Women in Economy” program run by USAID. 

as part of exit strategy; 
(b) Partnership arrangements with some of the projects in India/Pakistan e.g. JEEViKA, Bihar in India 

or PPAF, Pakistan for overall technical assistance and implementation guidance; 
(c) Overall training and capacity building of staff/community professionals; identification, 

development and deployment of CRPs; organizing study tours and field learning trips; exchange 
of knowledge etc. could be also supported as part of this component. 

 
E. Implementation 

 
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 

24. The WEE-RDP will be implemented by the Ministry of Rural Rehabilitation and Development (MRRD) 
under the overall framework of WEE-NPP. Although, MRRD is going through an structural changes, which will 
evolve during the course of 2019, as per the latest thinking, it is proposed to restructure the Ministry into three 
operational general directorates, each covering the main functional pillars of MRRD’s operations. These are – (a) 
Community Development (covering the Citizen’s Charter Afghanistan Project (CCAP) as well as supporting public 
goods/infrastructure projects such as the Afghanistan Rural Access Project (ARAP)); (b) Sustainable Economic 
Growth (covering the livelihoods/private goods related operations such as AREDP); and (c) Balanced Growth and 
Border Areas (covering specialized cross-border programs targeting these geographies as well as specific 
populations). Common functions (such as HR, procurement, finance, etc.) would be centralized at the Ministry 
level. The WEE-RDP, given its livelihoods and private sector goods focus, would be situated under the second 
pillar (Sustainable Economic Growth). However, WEE-RDP would work closely with CC General Directorate as 
well as balanced growth pillars at both the national and sub-national levels and would leverage existing 
implementation architecture set up under different programs, particularly CCAP.  
 

25. The existing WEE-NPP Steering Committee will provide overall strategic guidance and oversight. The 
High-Level Steering Committee established under the WEE-NPP will be used for the overall co-ordination, 
guidance, setting up direction for program implementation and to enable leveraging of resources and drive 
synergies among various related programs of these Ministries for the overall socio-economic empowerment of 
women in Afghanistan. The steering committee will also be an avenue to move forward with any policy reforms 
and legal provisions that may be needed to facilitate the program (e.g. registration of VSLAs, or easing the process 
of issuing national IDs to women, etc.). The WEE-RDP directorate at the national level will coordinate its activities 
with the other programs being implemented under the aegis of the WEE-NPP through other related Ministries, 
such as the Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Livestock (MAIL); Ministry of Commerce and Industries (MoCI); 
MoLSAMD; and Ministry of Women Affairs (MoWA) so as to ensure synergy and coordination.  
 

26. At the national level, the existing AREDP PIU, will be re-modelled for WEE-RDP and positioned within 
the new Sustainable Economic Growth Directorate. The Directorate/PIU will be fully staffed with technically 
competent multi-disciplinary team of senior professionals, consultants and sector specialists to implement & 
manage the enterprise development, access to finance, access to market and economic empowerment elements 
of the program. WEE-RDP will utilize MRRDs common resources/systems for program support services related 
to HR; Finance Management, Procurement, and other technical units like communication; gender; Grievance 
redressal; Governance and Accountability etc. as part of the proposed Ministry restructuring. Only a lean team 
of complementary skills set with WEE-RDP will be maintained at the WEE-RDP directorate level for overall co-
ordination; policy/guidelines formulation; and for building partnerships with various public & private 
development organizations/institutions. 


27. At the sub-national level, the WEE-RDP structure will be merged with the existing institutional 
arrangements for the CCAP to avoid duplication. The WEE-RDP would therefore piggy back on the provincial 
management units (PMUs) and District Offices that have been set up under CCAP. The latter would be 
supplemented with one District Coordinator (DC) for each of the 76 districts under WEE-RDP coverage and the 
program would also establish seven regional offices for coordination across the provinces under them. 
Additionally, a team of 3 SOs (two female and one male) would be hired for every 30 CDCs covered for the first 
two years, which would then be reduced to 3 SOs per district in the remaining three years of implementation 
once the speed and scale of the program had increased sufficiently and most of the VSLAs were formed. Likewise, 
a team of 3 VFs (again two female and one male) would be deployed for every 10 CDCs for 2 years and 
subsequently for every 20 CDCs in Years 3-5. This same implementation model would be proposed for the FPs 
(who would be asked to on board VFs as well) so that at exit there is a common implementation architecture for 
the program. Selection of the sub-national positions will be done through a competitive process managed by 
MRRD at the provincial level. 

 
 
 
 .    
F. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 

Based on the AREDP experiences and lessons learnt, the proposed project, WEE-RDP is designed to be a 
more women centric program that is in better alignment with the WEE-NPP objectives. It will cover a total 
of 76 districts across all 34 provinces in the country with an average of 2 districts covered per province. 
More than two thirds of these districts overlap with the ongoing CCAP and therefore the WEE-RDP will 
benefit from the community mobilization and capacity building (including a range of participatory analysis 
and tools) that have been done as part of the former. At this stage it is envisaged that, the environmental 
and social adverse impacts will be insignificant, minor and reversible in nature. The environmental impacts 
may include issues with health, safety and labor hygiene as well as concerns on handling and disposal of 
agro-based wastes. However, given the scope and scale of planned businesses, the impact are minor and 
easily manageable. The environmental and social safeguards issues will be managed through a framework 
approach, and if required the framework will include necessary provisions to spell out with additional 
safeguards tools and plans which will be used throughout the project life.  


SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 is triggered. 
The access to finance under compoent-2 and the 
provision of seed capital (revolving fund) for VSLAs 
under subcomponent 3 and  may cause some 
adverse environmental and social impacts including 
occupational health and safety issues. The 
environmental and health and safety concerns may 
arise from different enterprises including agro-
businesses, food processing machinery, chicken 
farms, carpets weaving and other handcraft 
industries etc.  
Similarly, the project has also triggered Pest 
Management OP/BP 4.09 to ensure address safe 
utilization of pesticide and other associated risks 
related to agri-business. A ToR for Pest Management 
Plan (PMP) has been prepared by the client . The 
project has adopted a framework approach, as the 
specific locations and details of activities will only be 
determined by the borrower during project 
implementation.  The Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) prescribes 
directions and procedures that would avoid, 
mitigate, or minimize adverse environmental and 
social impacts and it will also spell out the policies, 
guidelines and procedures including mitigation plans 
to minimize and mitigate the likelihood of envisaged 
negative impacts. The ToR for preparation of the 
PMP is annexed in the project ESMF.   
The ESMF was prepared, consulted, cleared and 
disclosed before project appraisal and the required 
mitigation plans for sub-project and businesses 
activities under WEERDP will be identified during 
implementation.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No 

The project is owned, designed and will be 
implemented and supervised by the MRRD, which is 
a Government Agency and therefore the OP/BP 4.03 
is not triggered. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 No 
OP/BP 4.04 is not triggered since; the scope of the 
project will not pose any risk to the natural habitats. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No 
OP/BP 4.36 is not triggered since; the scope of the 
project will not pose any risk on Forest. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

OP 4.09 (Pest Management) is triggered, since under 
component-3 the project operations will lead the 
EGs (Enterprise Groups) to use pesticides for 
Agricultural related works and agri-business related 
activities.  
 
The Client will prepare an Pest Management Plan 
(PMP) during project implementation stage. The 
PMP will be subject to review by the Bank, consulted 
and disclosed. 
 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No 

OP/BP 4.11 is not triggered because there are no 
activities that will impact the quality of physical 
cultural resources as defined under the policy. 
However, the ESMF will also comprise guidelines for 
Chance Find Procedures according to national laws. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 

This policy is not triggered as there are no 
Indigenous Peoples that meet the criteria of OP/BP 
4.10 in the country that could potentially benefit or 
be adversely affected by the Project’s activities. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 No 

The World Bank’s operational policy on Involuntary 
Resettlement (OP 4.12) is not triggered, since the 
project will not have land acquisition and 
resettlement, in case of land requirement, the ESMF 
will provide guidelines and provisions on land 
acquisition through willing buyer-willing seller 
approach, or the Government provides government 
land to the community for sub-project 
implementation, requiring no resettlement and/or 
compensation for losses, and the land should be free 
of squatters and any dispute.  
The RSA concurs on the proposal not to trigger OP 
4.12 given that there is no physical footprint; land 
acquisition or subsequent impacts of physical or 
economic resettlement or loss of access to resources 
are not anticipated. The ESMF includes a section on 
land acquisition through willing buyer-willing seller 

=
method, if that should occur during project 
implementation. 
 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 
The Project does not have any activity involving 
dams. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
The Project does not involve any activity that will 
affect international waterways. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
The Project does not involve any activity in any know 
disputed area. 

 
 

KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
OP/BP 4.01 is triggered for the project hence the project is an Environmental Safeguards Category-B. The project 
under component 2 and 3 is intended to develop WSGs/VSLAs/EGs and PAs who would be provided with access to 
funds by multiple agencies. The funding would lead to village/community level businesses in various selected 
provinces. Although, the scope and nature of these businesses are not known at appraisal stage, however it is 
predicted that such businesses may have minor health and safety issues. The environmental and social safeguards risk 
rating for WEE-RDP is thus Moderate: due to insignificant negative impact on health, safety and environmental aspect 
from the project related operations.  
 
OP/BP 4.09 on Pest Management is also triggered as agricultural activities supported under Component 3 could lead 
Enterprise Groups (EGs) and Producer Associations (PAs) to use pesticides for agriculture related works and 
agribusiness related activities. The client will prepare an Pest Management Plan (PMP) during implementation to 
mitigate the risks from this. The PMP will be subject to review by the Bank, consulted, and disclosed during 
implementation. 
 
Likewise, activities under the project are not expected to have major adverse social impacts.  Systematic involvement 
of the local community throughout the planning and implementation of sub-projects will underpin the identification of 
potential negative social impacts and corresponding mitigation measures to be included in the ESMPs. Given the 
economic activities under the EGs and PAs, there is a potential risk of child labor. The project will therefore update 
and refine the ‘child labor’ strategy that had been used under AREDP. Training on labor safety will also be part of the 
training modules for EGs/PAs. Similarly, as global evidence shows, there can potentially be an enhanced risk of gender 
based violence (GBV) when working on women's economic empowerment. Although, there hasn’t been any evidence 
of increased GBV under AREDP as a result of engaging male community members, especially village elders and 
Mullah’s, this could be a potential risk to beneficiaries given that the focus now is only on women. To mitigate this 
risk, the project as part of its mobilization activities will discuss the importance women economic empowerment from 
Islamic point of view (the fact that women are given Mahr is to ensure their access to finance and making them 
empower financially) as well as highlight the good practices in Islam (wife of prophet being a merchant). Furthermore 
as part of capacity building and training activities under each component, the project will train women on soft skills 
including their wellbeing and how to manage/resolve conflict within family and community. The VSLA and SHGs will 


also serve as a safe-space to discuss/tackle potential GBV issues. 
 
As the project is owned, designed, implemented, and supervised by the MRRD (a Government Ministry), the OP/BP 
4.03 on Performance Standards for Private Sector Activities does not apply. 
 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
The project is not expected to have any harmful indirect or long-term impacts due to anticipated future activities in 
the project area. 
 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. 
Not applicable. 
 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower 
capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
To manage the environmental and socials safeguards (ESS) issues during the project implementation stage, the client 
has adopted a framework approach and prepared an environmental and social management framework (ESMF), 
which is consulted with stakeholders. Clearance has been obtained from the WB and disclosed officially. The ESMF has 
necessary provisions to prepare required safeguards mitigation measures including an Environmental and Social 
Management Plan (ESMP) and checklist to affectively address risk related issues during project implementation. Based 
on the experience of similar projects, notably AREDP that was managed by the same Ministry and team, most of the 
communities in the selected villages have no capacity/awareness to tackle risks associated with the day to day 
businesses under planned SGs/VSLAs. However, MRRD as an implementing agency has years of experience with 
similar projects and is therefore expected to provide the required technical assistance and capacity building to ensure 
that the provisions in EMSF are implemented. The project will hire an ESS focal officer at HQ level, as well as appoint 
safeguards focal points at each provincial level, the terms of references (TOR) for whom will need to be approved by 
the Bank before recruitment. The ESMF will guide the preparation of any Social Impact Assessments (SIA) and ESMPs, 
if required. The ESMF has been translated and disclosed in-country at Ministry’s Website and the World Bank’s 
external website on August 25, 2018. The ESMF contains the terms of reference for the proposed pest management 
plan. The PMP will be prepared and disclosed during project implementation. 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, 
with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are the communities and rural women who will be the beneficiaries of the project. The project 
will undertake a range of training and capacity building efforts with the target groups under each of the Components 
of the project. This will include awareness raising with regards to the ESS provisions in the ESMF. The project will also 
leverage similar efforts and capacity building done for CDCs through the Citizens Charter Afghanistan Project (CCAP). 
The ESMF has been translated and disclosed in-country at Ministry’s Website and the World Bank’s external website 
on August 25, 2018. 
 
 



 

