













































World Bank Document


COMBINED PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENTS / INTEGRATED 

SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET (PID/ISDS) 

Additional Financing 
. 

                                                                                                          Report No.:  PIDISDSA21555 

Date Prepared/Updated: 6-May-2017 

I. BASIC INFORMATION 

 A. Basic Project Data 

 Country: Haiti Project ID: P163081 

  Parent Project ID : P126744 

 
Project Name: Relaunching Agriculture: Strengthening Agriculture Public Services 

II Project - Additional financing (P163081) 

 
Parent Project Name: Relaunching Agriculture: Strengthening Agriculture Public Services 

II Project (GAFSP - IDA) (P126744) 

 Region: LATIN AMERICA AND CARIBBEAN 

 Estimated Appraisal Date: 02-May-2017 Estimated Board Date: 14-Jun-2017 

 
Practice Area (Lead): Agriculture Lending Instrument: Investment Project 

Financing 

Borrower(s) Ministry of Economy and Finance 

Implementing Agency Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources and Rural Development 

 Financing (in USD Million) 

     Financing Source Amount 

 International Development Association (IDA) 0.00 

 IDA Grant from CRW 35.00 

 Financing Gap 0.00 

 Total Project Cost 35.00 

 Environmental Category B-Partial Assessment 

 Decision  

 Other Decision (as needed)  

 Is this a Repeater project? No 

 
Is this a Transferred 

project? (Will not be 

disclosed) 

No 

. 

 
 

 
. 

B. Introduction and Context 

P
u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d



 Country Context 

 

Haiti’s geography, people, and history provide it with many opportunities.  The third largest Caribbean 

nation by area and population (10.4 million), Haiti shares the island of Hispaniola with the Dominican 

Republic. In addition to an illustrious early history, as the first independent nation in the region and the 

first nation in the world to be led to independence by former slaves, Haiti benefits from proximity and 

access to major markets, a young labor force, a dynamic diaspora, and substantial geographic, 

historical, and cultural assets. The country possesses untapped markets and a pent-up demand for the 

private sector to explore, including agribusiness, light manufacturing, and tourism. 

 

However, almost 60 percent of Haiti’s population, or 6.3 million people, remain poor, and 24 percent 

or 2.5 million, extremely poor, with poverty highest in rural areas.  The poorest regions, which are also 

the furthest from the capital, show extreme poverty rates exceeding 40 percent and very limited access 

to basic services. Like poverty, inequality is high with a Gini of 0.6 (highest in the Americas). 

 

Natural disasters have hindered the country’s ability to overcome these poverty levels. On January 12, 

2010 a magnitude 7.0 earthquake struck Haiti, causing the death of 230,000, displacing 1.5 million 

people, and resulting in damages and losses equivalent to 120 percent of its GDP.  In the months 

following the earthquake, cholera spread throughout the country infecting 800,000 people and cusing 

9,500 deaths. Nevertheless, in the aftermath of the earthquake, Government, Partners and private 

actors together invested approximately US$3 billion in Official Development Assistance and much 

more from private flows. Over 1.2 million people returned to more permanent housing. Collapsed 

infrastructure and many affected neighborhoods have been rebuilt, education services have been re-

established and extended, and deaths from cholera driven down to below 1 percent of cases (though 

resurgences of the disease remain).  The 2015 Poverty Assessment undertaken jointly by the 

Government and the World Bank shows that the percentage of extremely poor Haitians (those who 

cannot fulfill their nutritional needs) fell from 31 percent to 24 percent between 2000 and 2012, mostly 

in urban areas and especially in the capital. 

 

On October 4, 2016, category 4 Hurricane Matthew struck Haiti, affecting over 2 million people, about 

20 percent of the country’s population. The Government of Haiti (GoH)’s Directorate of Civil 

Protection (DPC) reported  546 deaths, 128 missing, 439 injured, 175,500 people living in temporary 

shelters, and immediate humanitarian assistance needs for 1.4 million people (about 12.9 percent of 

the population).  The GoH has requested CRW support in light of the large scale of damages, losses 

and reconstruction needs, and the deep poverty of the affected region. The hurricane also caused the 

first round of Haiti’s long postponed Presidential elections to be rescheduled to November 20, 2016. 

Haitians elected Mr. Jovenel Moise, the candidate from former President Martelly’s party, in one 

round, with over 55 percent of the vote. The Electoral Council confirmed these results on January 3, 

2017. President Moise was sworn in on February 7, 2017. 

 

Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraint 
Hurricane Matthew made landfall on October 4 at 7a.m. on the south-west coast of Haiti.  The 

hurricane caused maximum wind speeds of 230/km/h and rainfall of over 600mm in less than 24 

hours, and a rise in sea levels of two to three meters in the departments of Grande-Anse, Nippes and 

Sud. This is the first hurricane of this magnitude to make landfall in Haiti in 52 years.  The hurricane’s 

high wind speeds, heavy rainfall, and devastating storm surge resulted in flooding, landslides and 

extensive destruction of critical infrastructure and livelihoods, including large sections of road 

networks and bridges, with some key roads and bridges washed away.  The southern departments of 

Grande-Anse, Nippes, and Sud were especially affected, where 80 percent, 66 percent, and 65 percent 

of people respectively are poor (under the national poverty line of US$2.41 per day) and 36 percent, 

30 percent and 26 percent are extremely poor (under the national extreme poverty line of US$1.23 per 



day).  Lesser damage was seen in coastal areas in other parts of the country. 

 

On October 4, 2016, Haiti’s interim President called for an immediate emergency response in the face 

of the national crisis and humanitarian emergency. The Government appealed to the international 

community to fund US$120 million in humanitarian assistance to provide relief to 750,000 severely 

affected people. The United Nations launched a flash appeal for that amount on October 10, 2016.  On 

October 13, 2016, the Minister of Finance requested support from the World Bank and the Inter-

American Development Bank (IDB) in undertaking a Rapid Damage and Loss Assessment (DaLA).  A 

team immediately set to work. The Rapid Assessment results became available on October 26, 2016, 

showing a massive impact on the Southern regions.  The Bank also participated in the subsequently 

launched Post-Disaster Needs Assessment (PDNA). 

 

Total damages and losses were initially estimated by the DaLA Rapid Assessment at US$1.9 billion, 

the equivalent of 22 percent of GDP, and later to the equivalent of US$32% by the PDNA, with 

impacts largely concentrated in areas with poverty rates higher than the national average (Grande-

Anse, Nippes, and Sud departments).  The agriculture and housing/urban sectors were the hardest hit. 

Up to 90 percent of crops and livestock were lost in coastal areas, including stable food crops, but also 

cash and tree crops such as coffee, cocoa and vetiver.  Thousands of structures were damaged and 75 

percent of structures in the heaviest hit communities in Grande-Anse were entirely destroyed. More 

than 100,000 houses were heavily damaged or destroyed, half of which were Grande-Anse. 

 

Given the magnitude of the disaster, the GoH requires significant support to respond”, and to enhance 

the country’s overall resilience to disasters.  In the wake of Hurricane Matthew, emergency funding 

was sought from the IDA17 Crisis Response Window (CRW) in the amount of US$100 million toward 

recovery and reconstruction. of which US$35 million for the Agriculture Sector.  will support the 

country’s recovery needs under the Project.  Given the urgency to respond to the disaster, the Project 

would be processed invoking the Condensed Procedures set out in para 12 of OP 10.00 (Projects in 

Situations of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints). The Safeguards Action Plan 
setting forth the sequence for the preparation of the relevant safeguards instruments is annexed to the 

project paper.  

 Sectoral and Institutional Context 

 

Haiti remains extremely vulnerable to natural disaster with 96 percent of the population at risk. On 

October 4, 2016, Hurricane Matthew, a category IV hurricane, landed in Haiti and caused a large scale 

disaster affecting over 2.1 million people (almost 1/5 of the population) and leaving almost 1.4 million 

people in need of lifesaving assistance in the southern part of the country. Winds speeds up to 140 

mph and torrential rain for 48 hours (around 1,016 mm) triggered widespread flooding and numerous 

landslides and caused severe damage to all sectors - water, electricity, education, health, food security, 

and livelihoods - particularly in the Departments of Sud, Grande-Anse, and Nippes. It is estimated that 

Hurricane Matthew caused losses and damages equivalent to 22 percent of the Gross Domestic 

Product, killed 500 people and triggered humanitarian assistance for 1.4 million people (12.9 percent 

of the population). The impact of Hurricane Matthew on the agricultural sector is estimated at 

US$603.0 million, including US$213.0 million in losses and US$390.0 million in damages, making 

Hurricane Matthew one of the most devastating events of the past decades. 

 

Agriculture plays a significant role in the Haitian economy, contributing to more than 25 % of the 

country’s GDP. The sector employs about 57% percent of the active population, while providing 66% 

of employment in rural areas and 75% of employment to low-income rural households, thus 

representing the main source of income in rural areas. National agricultural production provides about 

50% of food availability, which is complemented by commercial imports (45%) and food aid. The 



departments struck by Hurricane Matthew had under cultivation 85% of the national production of 

maize and 37% of the national fruit production. These areas also accounted for about one third of the 

country’s stock of cattle, pigs and goats and poultry. 

 

In urgent need of assistance because of a natural disaster, the approval of this Additional Finance 

would allow to quickly mobilize the resources needed to provide much needed support to farmers in 

the areas affected by Hurricane Mathew. The task team has discussed alternatives to the proposed AF 

with the GOH and it was agreed that the proposed RESEPAG II AF is the most appropriate 

mechanism for a rapid mitigation response.  Indeed, the activities will primarily target areas already 

covered under the original project, the same profile of producers and tools to engage these producers, 

and use identical delivery mechanisms.  It will also be possible to use the current institutional 

arrangements and staff already in place. 
. 

C. Proposed Development Objective(s) 

 Original Project Development Objective(s) - Parent 

 

The PDOs are to strengthen the Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources and Rural Development's 

(MARNDR) capacity to define and implement the National Agriculture Extension Strategy, to 

increase access of small farmers to agriculture extension services and training on animal and plant 

health in priority regions, and to provide financial assistance in the case of an agriculture sector 

emergency. 

 Current Project Development Objective(s) - Parent 

 

The development objectives of the Project are to: (a) reinforce the capacity of the Ministry of 

Agriculture, Natural Resources and Rural Development to provide or facilitate access to services in the 

agricultural sector; (b) increase market access to small producers and food security in Selected Areas; 

and (c) provide financial assistance in the case of an Agriculture Sector Emergency. 

 Proposed Project Development Objective(s) - Additional Financing 

 

The new proposed PDO is: to (a) reinforce the capacity of the Ministry of Agriculture, Natural 

Resources and Rural Development to provide or facilitate access to services in the agricultural sector; 

(b) increase market access to small producers and food security in Selected Areas; (c) improve 

livelihood in areas affected by Hurricane Matthew and (d) enable the Government to respond promptly 

and effectively to an eligible emergency. 

 Key Results  

 
The proposed AF would allow to support 41,000 households affected by the hurricane. It would bring 

the total number of beneficiaries of the project (parent and AF) to 60,000, of which 40% of female.  
. 

  

 

D. Project Description 
 
Following the devastation caused by Hurricane Matthew, the project expects to receive US$35M 

Additional financing (AF) from the IDA Crisis Response Window to help restore productive assets 

lost, rehabilitate damaged or destroyed infrastructures, and support livelihoods to victims of Hurricane 

Matthew. The AF would (i) provide emergency assistance to allow more than 8,000 farmers to carry 

out winter 2016 and spring 2017 planting campaigns to secure food production; and to increase the 

number of beneficiaries of the pre-existing voucher schemes by 7000 (increasing from 8,000 to 15,000 

farmers) while fostering more resilient production systems; and (ii) introduce new activities to 

restore/rehabilitate irrigation systems through cash-for-work programs and larger infrastructure civil 



works allowing at least 3,500 hectares of agriculture land to recover access to irrigation and providing 

temporary jobs to at least 21,000 persons; and help restock part of the small animals lost by around 

6,000 poor households. 

 

In the Proposed AF, the emergency assistance and extension of the voucher scheme program activities 

would remain in the department of Sud, although more municipalities would be targeted. Irrigation 

works would be also conducted in the department of Sud, and would be closely related to the voucher 

schemes areas to ensure the adequate access to irrigation services of farmers benefiting from voucher 

schemes. Lastly, activities related to livestock restocking would concern the western areas of the 

department of Sud and Grande-Anse. 

 

Changes to the original project as part of the level 1 restructuring include: (i) Revision of the Project 

Development Objective (PDO) wording to reflect activities in the affected areas and an increase in 

scope of the Emergency Response Contingency (ERC); (ii) Activation of the Involuntary Resettlement 

Policy (OP/BP 4.12) to anticipate the possibility of an involuntary resettlement in the affected areas; 

(iii) Upgrading of the Results Framework to reflect adjusted outcomes and targets, and emerging good 

practices in climate resilience; (iv) Extension of the original grant closing date of to align it with the 

closing date of the Additional Financing; and (v) a reallocation between disbursement categories. 

 

The AF will trigger Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). While the implementation of RESEPAG 

II has thus far not involved any resettlement of families or economic restrictions, rehabilitation of 

irrigation and water management infrastructure may result in involuntary resettlement. A Resettlement 

Policy Framework (RPF) will be prepared in accordance with OP4.12 to ensure application of the 

appropriate safeguard policies. The completion of social safeguards instruments was deferred to the 

implementation stage in line with the flexibility afforded by OP 10.00 paragraph 12.  Consultation in 

the affected areas will include outreach to main stakeholders and the affected communities to the 

extent possible.  Once sites where project activities will be implemented are identified, Resettlement 

Action Plans (RAP) or Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plans (Abbrev. RAP) will be prepared 

consulted and disclosed for sites with resettlement impacts in accordance with the policy. Any 

compensation or livelihood restoration efforts that may be needed will be completed prior to 

commencement of the works. 

 

Closing Date 

 

The proposed AF would extend the current closing date of the original Grants from 30-June-2018 to 

31-Dec-2019. The Financing Agreement of the parent project would be amended accordingly.  This 

extension would allow for the completion of the activities under the Parent project so as to allow for 

emergency recovery and reconstruction activities as described under the components listed below and 

in more detail under the Project Paper. 

 

Component Name 

 

The project will maintain its structure around four components: Component 1: Agricultural support 

services; Component 2: Direct support to producers and associations; Component 3: Emergency 

Response Contingency Reserve; and Component 4: Institutional strengthening, monitoring and 

evaluation, project management and studies. 

 

The proposed AF will finance the scale up and the implementation of new field activities under 

Component 2 only, which will increase in cost by US$28.7M; Component 3 will receive an additional 

allocation of US$ 2.4M to compensate for expenses already incurred immediately after the Hurricane, 



and Component 4 will receive and additional allocation of US$ 3.9M to account for additional 

operational and monitoring costs. 

 

PHCOMP  

Component Name: 

Component 1 Agricultural Support Services (Total: US$ 11, IDA-H7410 US$ 1, GAFSP TF-11396 

US$ 10, US$ 0 IDA/AF). 

Comments ( optional) 

This component will not change. 
 

 

PHCOMP  

Component Name: 

Component 2: Direct Support to Producers and Associations (Total: US$ 54.2, IDA-H7410 US$ 

25.5, GAFSP TF-11396 US$ 0, US$ 28.7 IDA/AF). 

Comments ( optional) 

The activities planned under the Parent project (voucher schemes and matching grants) will not be 

modified. The Additional financing will (i) scale up the provision of vouchers under this 

component;  it will broaden the current geographical scope for this activity (Centre and Sud) with 

the inclusion of new municipalities within the Department of Sud and it will use the same delivery 

mechanisms as the Parent project reaching an additional 7,000 beneficiaries; (ii) add two new sub-

components: (a) Animal Husbandry and (b) Irrigation Rehabilitation and Micro-catchment 

protection. 
 

 

PHCOMP  

Component Name: 

Component 3: Emergency Response Contingency Reserve (Total: US$ 3.9, IDA-H7410 US$ 1.5, 

GAFSP TF-11396 US$ 0, US$ 2.4 IDA/AF). 

Comments ( optional) 

This component will change in title to “Emergency Response Contingency (ERC)”. Through this 

component uncommitted project funds, rather than an established upfront reserve amount, will be 

channeled to facilitate a timely response in case of an eligible emergency. 
 

 

PHCOMP  

Component Name: 

Component 4: Institutional Strengthening, Monitoring and Evaluation, Project Management and 

Studies Services (Total: US$ 11, IDA-H7410 US$ 7.1, GAFSP TF-11396 US$ 0, US$ 3.9 

IDA/AF). 

Comments ( optional) 

This component will not change in its design. However, to take into account the increased technical 

and geographical scope, and the increased in financial resources, additional allocation are being 

considered for equipment, vehicles, staff and consultancies. 
 

 
E. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if 

known) 

 

Parent Project 

Component 1, 3 and 4 activities are conducted nationwide. Component 2 activities are implemented in 

specific areas located in the Sud and Centre department for the voucher schemes; and Sud, Nord and 

Nord-Est departments for the matching grant schemes. 

 

Additional Financing (AF) 

The Haitian government carried out a Post-Disaster Needs Assessment (PDNA) identifying the areas 

most affected by Hurricane Matthew, and prioritized the most pressing interventions to ensure food 

production in the season following the disaster. The emergency assistance program and extension of 

the voucher scheme program activities would remain in the Sud department, although more 

municipalities would be targeted. Irrigation rehabilitation works would be also conducted in the 

department of Sud, and would be closely related to the voucher scheme areas to ensure optimization of 

benefits. Lastly, activities related to livestock restocking would concern the western areas of the 



department of Sud and Grande-Anse. 

 

Salient physical characteristics relevant to environmental and social safeguards under the RESEPAG 

II AF relate to high variability of landscapes, biodiversity and climatic zones, extreme weather, 

advanced deforestation, earthquake activity and climate change. Alternating topography of mountains 

and valleys create variability in rainfall varying from 550 mm on leeward slopes to 2,700 mm on 

northern and windward slopes. The heterogeneity of the territory is a determining factor for crop types, 

cropping season, land use and forest cover. 

 

Haiti is subject to extreme weather events such as droughts, hurricanes and tropical storms.  

Deforestation and steep slopes have intensified these risks. Loss of forest to charcoal and timber 

production and to agriculture since colonial days has reduced forest cover from 75% to 1.5%. 

Deforestation has contributed to high runoff, erosion, landslides, flooding, dust, loss of agricultural 

productivity, reduced rainfall, siltation of waterways and degradation of coral reefs and mangroves. An 

estimated 36 million tons of topsoil are lost in Haiti annually. 

 

Haiti is seismically active as it sits astride two shallow fault lines; it is vulnerable to earthquakes, 

especially in built-up areas. 

 

Although degraded, Haiti’s natural environment still contains areas with notable concentrations of 

globally or regionally threatened species, including numerous endemic ones. These Key Biodiversity 

Areas (KBAs) occur throughout Haiti. 

 

With predicted climate change, temperatures are projected to increase and rainfall is projected to 

decrease, which is likely to intensify droughts in the center of the country. Sea level is projected to rise 

between 0.13 and 0.56 m by 2090, which would threaten coastal zones. Future increases in number 

and intensity of tropical storms and hurricanes are likely, with associated increases in highly erosive 

rainfall, floods and storm surge levels. 

 

The project expands access to agricultural extension services and promotes environmentally friendly 

investments and practices in agriculture. The project aims to have a positive impact on agriculture, 

resource use and surrounding landscapes. It does not support any activities that have large-scale, 

significant or irreversible adverse impacts on the environment. The project provides agricultural 

extension services to existing agricultural lands, and will discourage the clearance of new lands.. 
. 

 F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 Asli Gurkan( GSU04 ) 
 

 Felipe Jacome( GSU04 ) 
 

 
Nicolas Kotschoubey( GEN04 ) 

 
 

II. IMPLEMENTATION 

The proposed AF will be implemented under the same institutional arrangements of the parent 

project. The closing date of the proposed additional grant would be December 31, 2019 to 

ensure that all additional planned activities would be satisfactorily completed in accordance 

with the revised and updated implementation plan. The date of the original grant would also be 

extended to December 31, 2019. 
 

. 



III. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 

4.01 
Yes This policy will continue to be triggered under 

the AF as original activities under the parent 

project will not change; and animal husbandry 

and rehabilitation of irrigation canals activities 

will be added. 

 

Environmental impacts under the Parent 

Project have been low, and safeguards 

performance has been satisfactory. The project 

was designed to avoid the financing of 

activities with significant environmental 

impact and promote environmental good 

practice such as reforestation and soil 

conservation.  In the control of agricultural 

pests, the project has focused on integrated 

pest management. 

 

In summary, impacts observed include 

inadequate sanitation in sub-projects (poor 

design of latrines and septic tanks) in several 

sub-projects, as well as limited clearing of 

existing land of trees and shrubs for market 

gardening, as expected in an agricultural 

project. Poor sanitary practices in food 

production (e.g., dairy production) also posed 

potential risks, although no incidences of 

contamination has been recorded. 

 

Several positive activities were financed under 

the project, including use of biological control 

methods against the mealybug, a parasite of 

pea, bean and groundnut; planting of trees as 

part of productive landscapes (for cover as 

well as for fruit production); and planting of 

mangroves to compensate losses resulting 

from expansion of salt ponds. 

 

E&S impacts were adequately managed using 

the Environmental and Social Management 

Framework (ESMF) and Integrated Pest 

Management Plan (IPMP) prepared for 

RESEPAG II. No new, significant impacts are 

expected under the AF. 

 

The MARNDR will make minor updates and 

modifications to the ESMF and IPMP, to 

identify and manage the potential adverse 



impacts under the AF, which include:  

(i) animal husbandry, mostly small scale, 

resilience-oriented, mixed agriculture-

livestock systems, with very limited inputs, to 

around 6,000 households: includes training, 

production of forage, preparation of 

enclosures (for goat keeping), provision of 

beehives and protective equipment (for bee-

keeping). Impacts would be limited and 

include production of waste (animal waste), 

cutting of vegetation (for feed), overgrazing, 

and damage to riparian habitat. Mitigation will 

include effective waste management, control 

of water discharges, prevention of animals’ 

access to surface water bodies and prevention 

of free-grazing by raising animals in closed 

systems and provision of feed via forage tree 

planting and harvesting; and 

(ii) Irrigation Rehabilitation and Micro-

catchment protection: cash for work for small-

scale rehabilitation works (off-farm 

infrastructures); and civil works on river 

intakes, rivers embankments, sections of 

canals and drains, protection of infrastructure 

(mainly bridges and access roads). Impacts are 

likely to include health and safety of workers, 

construction waste (cement, metal and timber 

scraps, etc.), noise, dust, water quality 

(turbidity). Mitigation will include generic 

workplace design good practice, providing 

adequate protection equipment to workers, 

adequate waste management systems, etc.  

 

The project was rated category B because 

potential adverse impacts on the environment 

were moderate and easily identified, mitigated 

and managed. The project will remain 

Category B. 

 

Social risks and impacts: On the social side, 

no major safeguards risks are expected. 

Potential risks may include delays in 

compensation related to land acquisition or 

lack of appropriate consultations on relevant 

project information. The project will avoid or 
minimize land acquisition based on lessons 

learned. The RPF will include measures to 

deal with such potential delays in payments 

should land acquisition be necessary.  The 

communication activities will particularly 



target matching grants and voucher schemes 

activities, which may be open to speculation 

of corruption and unfairness unless the project 

team clearly explains the rules and procedures 

for distributing project benefits.  Risks linked 

to labor influx are expected to be limited. 

They will be mitigated by prioritizing local 

labor and ensuring clarity on where laborers 

coming from outside will be hosted through 

their stay in the host community and ensuring 

that contracts are consistent with ESMF and 

RPF provisions. The revised ESMF will 

include an annex with a social assessment 

targeted to new locations and sub-projects to 

be covered under the AF. 

 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes This policy will continue to be triggered under 
the AF as original activities under the parent 

project will not change; and animal husbandry 

and rehabilitation of irrigation canals activities 

will be added. 

 Because the project focuses on capacity 

building and provides agricultural extension 

services to existing agricultural lands, it does 

not support the clearance of new lands and 

such activities are not eligible for direct 

support. No agriculture activities that require 

the clearing of forested land or that damage 

freshwater habitat are supported. 

Nevertheless, because of the potential for 

indirect impacts on natural habitats, 

particularly if some agricultural activities are 

carried out around protected areas or KBAs, 

this safeguard policy has been triggered.  

 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes This policy will continue to be triggered under 
the AF as original activities under the parent 

project will not change; and animal husbandry 

and rehabilitation of irrigation canals activities 

will be added in the revised ESMF. 

 Because of the project’s potential to indirectly 

influence the management of natural forests, 

particularly in silvo-pastoral landscapes, this 

safeguard is triggered. A section in the ESMF 

requires the development of a Forest 

Management Plan (FMP), should any project 

activities affect such forest landscape.  

 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes The project supports investments related to 
agricultural extension services. These 

investments include the procurement, 

handling, storage and use of pesticides for plot 



demonstration and emergency interventions of 

insect pest outbreaks. Only approved 

pesticides under national or international law 

(including World Health Organization – 

WHO) will be supported under project 

financing. A list of pesticides that fall under 

these categories or are otherwise ineligible for 

support are included in the IPMP. 

 

In line with the approach taken under 

RESEPAG II, activities under the AF will 

avoid the intensive use of pesticides and 

instead will support an approach that includes 

IPMP: (a) avoiding the use or promotion of 

pesticides in WHO toxic categories I (Ia and 

Ib) or II (except under strict supervision of a 

trained and certified “Pest management 

Specialist”); (b) reduce reliance on synthetic 

chemical pesticides; (c) promote the use of 

biological or environmental pest control 

methods based on prevention, surveillance and 

monitoring; (d) favoring the use of multiple 

strategies (e.g. crop rotation, cultural 

practices, host plant resistance, biological 

control methods, chemical control); (e) pest 

control that increases natural enemies of 

parasites; (f) applying products only when 

infestation levels are critical; (g) avoiding the 

use of herbicides and pesticides near water 

sources and their contamination with pesticide 

residues when cleaning the equipment used; 

and (h) training producers, technicians, and 

farm workers to responsibly manage pesticide 

products, equipment, and containers to avoid 

their own contamination or that of livestock 

food or produce. 

 

Under the AF, the project will continue to 

implement the IPMP developed under the 

guidance of the ESMF, including screening 

criteria to exclude pesticides that are 

prohibited under the Bank’s policies. A 

specific plan is included in the IPMP to 

provide for screening, no-objection and 

monitoring during the procurement of 

pesticides. The IPMP also includes guidelines 

on the relevant aspects of integrated pest 

management that are part of the extension and 

training services provided under the project. 

 Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP No This policy will not be triggered since the new 



4.11 activities (irrigation) will not have additional 
impact on physical cultural resources. 

 
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No The policy is not triggered because there are 

no groups in Haiti who meet the definition of 

IPs of OP 4.10. 

 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes This policy was not triggered in the original 
project as no involuntary displacement of 

people or land acquisition was foreseen. 

 

The AF will trigger Involuntary Resettlement 

(OP/BP 4.12). While the implementation of 

RESEPAG II has thus far not involved any 

resettlement of families or economic 

restrictions, rehabilitation of irrigation and 

water management infrastructure may result in 

involuntary resettlement. 

 

A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will 

be prepared, consulted and disclosed at project 

implementation stage in accordance with 

OP4.12 to ensure application of the 

appropriate safeguard policies. The deferral of 

the completion of safeguards instruments to 

the implementation stage was granted in line 

with the flexibility afforded by OP 10.00 

paragraph 12. This will ensure adequate time 

to prepare, consult, and disseminate the RPF 

and other safeguard-related documents 

following the Safeguards Action Plan annexed 

to the Project Paper. 

 

Consultation in the affected areas will include 

outreach to main stakeholders and the affected 

communities to the extent possible.  Once 

sites where the project activities will be 

implemented are known, Resettlement Action 

Plans (RAP) or Abbreviated Resettlement 

Action Plans (Abbrev. RAP) will be prepared 

consulted and disclosed for sites with 

resettlement impacts in accordance with the 

policy.  Any compensation or livelihood 

restoration efforts that may be needed will be 

completed prior to commencement of the 

works. 

 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No This policy will not be triggered since no 
dams, nor will irrigation systems dependent on 

dams, per the WB definition, be restored or 

rebuilt. 



 

Projects on International Waterways 

OP/BP 7.50 
No This policy will not be triggered since neither 

the parent project, nor any activities under the 

AF, will take place on international 

waterways, per the WB definition. 

 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 

7.60 
No This policy will not be triggered since neither 

the parent project, nor any activities under the 

AF, will take place in disputed areas, per the 

WB definition. 
. 

IV. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 

 A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 

 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and 

describe any potential large scale,  significant and/or irreversible impacts: 

 

Safeguards Implementation under the Original Project 

 

Component 1, SPS activities: impacts from handling and use of testing material, disposal of 

animal carcasses, disposal of syringes from vaccination campaigns and occupational health 

and safety concerns were adequately managed.  

Component 2, Support to Producers: the project targets improved, environmentally friendly, 

climate smart agriculture. The voucher program which has not started field-based activities 

had no impact. Impacts from inadequate sanitation in sub-projects under matching grants 

(e.g., poor design of latrines, septic tanks), cutting trees and shrubs for land clearing for 

market gardening, poor sanitary practices in food production (e.g., milk production), were low 

and properly managed. In addition, an integrated pest management plan waste management 

plan was prepared to manage agrochemicals. 

 

Components 3 and 4 had no recorded adverse impacts. 

 

The Social safeguards ratings under the Parent project have been consistently satisfactory. OP 

4.12 was not triggered under the Parent project and there were no resettlement impacts or any 

other major social risks or issues that occurred to date. Under the Parent project, an 

involuntary resettlement screening form has been used to properly detect and exclude any 

investments with OP 4.12 related impacts.  Under RESEPAG I, a social assessment was 

carried out based on extensive consultations with both Ministry of Agriculture (MARNDR) 

staff and community members in the pilot areas as well as a stakeholder analysis. The results 

of this assessment have served as the basis for the design of RESEPAG II. Under the AF, the 

ESMF update will include an annex with a social assessment targeted to new localities and 

new activities covered by the AF. MARNDR has started  to consult with people that would be 

potentially affected by the future AF activities.  

 

A gender review has been carried out during RESEPAG I. Consultations with women during 

the project preparation phase ensured women’s inclusion at the policy and program levels. A 

resultant just-in-time grants series “Fostering Economic Empowerment for Women 

Agricultural Producers in Haiti” is working to integrate gender, particularly women’s issues, 

within the Ministry of Agriculture. A collaboration between the gender specialist and the 



Ministry of Women Condition allowed to consider gender inclusion during the design of 

RESEPAG II. The Ministry of Agriculture has also hired a gender specialist to ensure that 

gender is being respected in the different parts of the project implementation. The Ministry of 

Women Condition has been a key stakeholder in the implementation of the matching grant 

component allowing the project to reach almost 50% of women participation. Under the 

Additional Financing the inclusion of women will remain important to at least 40% with some 

of the activities reaching 80% notably with the livestock packages. 

 

In terms of capacity for managing social safeguards,  the project team has a good presence in 

the field and is regularly in contact with the project beneficiaries. The project team has been 

holding consultations about the project activities and preparing minutes of these consultations.  

There is no social safeguards specialist under the parent project. However, the environmental 

specialist have attended several safeguards trainings. He is familiar with the OP 4.12 

requirements and have used screening forms to detect any resettlement related impacts. Under 

the AF, a second safeguards specialist will be hired, to be in charge of monitoring social risks 

and impacts. The person hired by the PIU will have documented social expertise, particularly 

given the fact that resettlement action plans may have to be implemented under the project. 

 

Additional Financing to Respond to Hurricane Matthew 

 

Under the AF, most of the planned activities would restore or improve pre-existing 

agricultural production conditions, and therefore are not expected to create any significant 

additional adverse environmental or social impact. However, (i) animal husbandry and (ii) the 

rehabilitation of damaged irrigation canals, water intakes, and water reservoir infrastructures 

may imply some minor environmental and social impacts related to: (i) additional waste 

(animal waste), vegetation harvesting, overgrazing, damage to riparian habitat, etc. Because 

the production systems in Haiti to be supported by the AF are of very small scale, point 

source pollution of wastewater, ammonia, odor, nuisances, etc., typically associated with 

intensive production systems, are not expected to be encountered; and (ii) construction, 

especially around water bodies (streams, canals) may impact health and safety, and result in 

waste production, noise, reduced water quality (turbidity), increase level of dust, or result in 

loss of vegetation cover, etc.). These potential negative impacts are however expected to be 

moderate, localized,  and can be mitigated through (i) for animal husbandry system promoting 

enclosure of goats, training and technical assistance that goes with the livestock will be the 

principal vehicle to effective management of waste, wastewater, preventing animals’ access to 

surface water bodies, production of forage trees for feed,  etc.; (ii) for irrigation rehabilitation, 

mitigation will be through the application of good construction and management practices and 

with close supervision of contractor performance by field engineers and in close consultation 

with local communities. The potential impacts and mitigation measures will be identified and  

included in  the ESMPs (and RAPs when relevant) for each subproject. 

 

The AF triggers the Involuntary Resettlement Policy (OP 4.12) as works along riverbanks and 

irrigation systems may require a minimal degree of land acquisition and cause economic 

impacts, such as impact on fruit trees or damaged crops. These works will not be large-scale, 

significant or have irreversible adverse impacts on the population. Because of the deferral of 

preparation of the safeguards instruments, the project will prepare, consult and disclose a 



Resettlement Policy Framework at project implementation stage. 

 

Lessons learned on social safeguards from RESEPAG II: 

 

Lesson 1:  It is important to have a dedicated social specialist as part of the PIU to track and 

document social issues and impacts. Under the AF, there will be a second safeguards 

specialist hired to focus on social safeguards and social issues at large. 

Lesson 2:  A well-functioning Grievance Redress mechanism is needed to keep track of 

beneficiaries’ concerns and provide timely response. Under the parent project, there is a 

hotline established under the Ministry of Agriculture. 10 complaints were received, mostly 

coming from agricultural producers whose proposals were not accepted. Under the AF, the 

hotline will be coupled with a communication strategy focusing some specific social risks. 

(Eg.to explain to the farmers the eligibility criteria, targeting strategy and the voucher system 

that the project is implementing). The Ministry of Agriculture will designate one focal point 

from the Ministry in each Department to act as liaison for managing safeguards-related issues 

and address grievances. The Focal Points would resolve issues, and escalate them to the staff 

in Port-au-Prince as needed. Meetings will be held every two months between staff in capital 

city and the regional Focal Points to exchange information. 

Lesson 3:  Even in projects that have not triggered OP 4.12, the involuntary resettlement 

screening form is a useful tool as part of ESMF to detect potential resettlement risks upfront. 

Under the AF, this practice will continue as part of first environmental screening and a RAP 

will be prepared when potential impacts are detected. No activities will be able to start before 

the RAP is effectively implemented and the project affected people have received their 

compensation. The safeguards specialists under AF will receive a refresher training on OP 

4.12 as well as how to screen out social impacts beyond resettlement. 

 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in 

the project area: 

 

The project has potential indirect impacts on natural habitats if some agricultural activities are 

carried out around protected areas or Key Biodiversity Areas (KBAs). Also, the project has 

the potential to indirectly influence the management of natural forests, particularly in mixed 

land use landscapes (forestry and grazing). 

 

However, the project is designed to avoid the financing of activities with significant 

environmental impact and promote environmental good practice such as reforestation and soil 

conservation.  The ESMF has provisions to prepare a Forest Management Plan (FMP) should 

any project activities affect such forest landscape. 

 

In the control of agricultural pests, the project has focused on integrated pest management: 

use of approved pesticides only; reduce reliance on synthetic pesticides; promote biological 

pest control; utilize multiple strategies (crop rotation, resistant varieties, and biological 

control); natural predators of parasites; critical use of products; protect water sources; and 

training operators. 

 

Furthermore, the ESMF and the capacity building provided to the Environmental Cell in 

MARNDR will enhance the ability of the Ministry to optimize environmental outcomes in the 



project area. 

 

No potential indirect or long term social impacts are expected. Resettlement, land acquisition 

and loss of economic livelihood are unlikely. The project will avoid or minimize land 

acquisition based on the lessons learned regarding delays and complications with land titles. 

RPF will include measures to deal with such potential delays in payments should land 

acquisition be necessary.   

 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse 

impacts. 

 

The project design is broad and includes many components. It takes into consideration the 

role played by the agricultural sector in employment (57% percent of the active population; 

66% of rural employment; and 75% of employment to low-income rural households); the 

variability of the topography and climate; environmental degradation; and social vulnerability. 

Project design considered the current alternative, which avoids funding activities with a 

significant environmental impact, commercial crops, monoculture and export-oriented crops, 

but promotes good environmental practices such as reforestation and soil conservation at the 

micro-producer level. 

 

Most of the planned activities under the AF are not expected to create any significant adverse 

environmental or social impact, as they will be restoring or improving pre-existing 

agricultural production conditions, and will put a particular emphasis on the quality and 

resilience of these structures and systems. As the proposed project would support the 

rehabilitation of damaged irrigation canals, water intakes, and water reservoir infrastructures, 

including river embankments, this may imply some minor temporary environmental and 

social impacts. These civil works are expected to be mostly of small size, and efforts will be 

placed on minimizing any possible negative effect through solid preliminary studies allowing 

to clearly identify areas of interventions, avoiding if possible to modify any previous canal 

routes, and ensuring the adequate design, use of appropriate construction materials, and 

construction techniques etc. Clearing canals and areas of interventions may produce some 

solid wastes that could present disposal issues. Adequate management of waste and debris 

would be embedded in the Terms of reference and contractual obligations for the contractors.  

 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an 

assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 

 

Parent Project 

 

The Borrower has prepared all the required safeguard instruments (ESMF and IPMP). The 

ESMF is the instrument used to identify when additional Environmental and Social 

Management Plans (ESMPs) are necessary and includes a procedure to screen out projects 

that will (i) negatively impact critical natural habitats; (ii) adversely affect the management of 

natural forests, or (iii) an IPMP that will address an increase in the use of, or the storage of, 

application or handling of, pesticides in categories I and II of the WHO Recommended 

Classification of Pesticides. The project design emphasizes the adoption of environmentally-

friendly technologies and others that favor increased productivity over simple land expansion. 

 

The MARNDR is experienced in implementing donor-funded projects (including World 



Bank, the IDB and IFAD) and managing the requisite safeguard actions. To strengthen their 

capacity, the MARNDR with the support of the RESEPAG II project has created an 

Environmental Cell within the Ministry to manage environmental risks within the agricultural 

sector more broadly. The project is supporting the development and operationalization of this 

Cell. The preparation, implementation and oversight of safeguard actions will continue to be 

provided by this Environmental Cell during implementation. 

 

To assist the Environmental Cell, the ESMF includes indicators to monitor compliance as 

well as a training and dissemination program to build capacity within the Cell and to build a 

constituency for environmental awareness in the agricultural sector more broadly. The Bank 

(external consultant) will closely monitor environmental compliance to identify opportunities 

to enhance environmental outcomes and better manage adverse impacts. 

 

The environmental and social capacity of the RESEPAG II project team has been largely 

adequate; it consists of an environmental specialist/agronomist; an economist/social specialist; 

and a social/gender specialist, who work on safeguards issues on a part-time basis.  

RESEPAG II staff is acquainted with the Bank´s policies after attending several safeguards 

workshops organized in country. 

 

Additional Financing to Respond to Hurricane Matthew 

 

Under the AF, the ESMF, and its attached IPMP, will be updated to reflect the new 

components added to the project; reference will be made to the World Bank Group ESHS 

guidelines.   

 

Under the AF, given that OP 4.12 is being triggered to address potential involuntary 

resettlement, the project concluded that the capacity of the PIU will need to be enhanced and 

that an additional specialist would be required to complement the current team. The Task 

Team recommended that the MARNDR/RESEPAG II hire a full-time, entry-level socio-

environmental specialist to complement the team, to be in charge of monitoring 

environmental and social risks and impacts, and receive training by the team on an ongoing 

basis. Given the urgency of the emergency works the environmental specialist at the PIU will 

be trained to screen works for potential involuntary resettlement. The Bank will assist the 

MARNDR in preparing the TORs and in selecting the socio-environmental specialist. 

 

The Project will also hire the services of a second Socio-Environmental Specialist in the 

coming months to prepare a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to ensure the compliance 

of involuntary resettlement safeguards, as well as a social assessment annex to the ESMF. 

  

Social safeguards rating under the Parent project has been satisfactory. OP 4.12 was not 

triggered under the Parent project and there were no resettlement impacts or any other major 

social risks or issues that occurred to date. Under the Parent project, a rubric in the ESMF 

screening form covering involuntary resettlement has been used to properly detect and 

exclude any investments with OP 4.12 related impacts. 

 

In terms of capacity for managing social safeguards, the project team has a good presence in 



the field and is regularly in contact with the project beneficiaries. There is no social 

safeguards specialist under the parent project. However, the current environmental specialist 

have attended several safeguards trainings. He is familiar with the OP 4.12 requirements and 

have used screening forms to detect any resettlement related potential risks. Activities likely 

to cause involuntary resettlement were excluded. 

 

In the event that involuntary resettlement cannot be avoided by the necessary works, the Bank 

team will support the PIU to develop and implement Resettlement Action Plans. The Bank 

Task Team will provide an additional safeguards training for relevant PIU staff before the 

beginning of AF activities. A second training will be provided 6 to 10 months into the 

implementation of the AF. 

 

The AF will reinforce the existing Grievance Redress Mechanisms (GRM) established by the 

Parent Project. The GRM ensures that complaints received are promptly reviewed in order to 

address project-related concerns. Additionally, communities and individuals who believe that 

they are adversely affected by a World Bank (WB) supported project may submit complaints 

to existing project-level grievance redress mechanisms or the WB’s Grievance Redress 

Service (GRS). 

 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on 

safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 

 

The rural population depending on the Agricultural sector for their livelihood in Haiti is 

estimated to be around 5 million. The main stakeholders are the segment of this population 

who live and work in the regions supported by this project. Among this population, the project 

will pay special attention to women. Studies from RESEPAG I show that while women 

undertake a large part of agricultural activities and participate in many productive 

organizations, they are disadvantaged compared with the men in terms of decision-making, 

control over resources, and access to economic benefits. Other stakeholders include the 

Ministry of Agriculture central and regional staff, local government officials, extension 

service providers, both public and private, as well as the general public who will benefit from 

improved agricultural output (in quantity and quality), as well as from the reduced risk of 

disease transmission through improved plant and animal health safety. 

 

The Project team will conduct consultations in beneficiary communities affected by Hurricane 

Matthew areas to inform beneficiaries of project activities, opportunities to participate, 

potential adverse short-term impacts, and the grievance redress mechanism available to them. 

These consultations will be key in engaging the population in the emergency response 

programs, reconstruction works and cash-for-work activities. Specifically, the content of 

voucher programs will be consulted and validated with the beneficiaries; the beneficiaries of 

livestock replacement will be identified through community participatory engagement; 

irrigation infrastructure will be identified through community mapping; and cash-for-work 

schemes will be established through participatory processes. People affected by involuntary 

resettlement will be consulted on compensation and resettlement policies in accordance with 

OP4.12. 
. 

 
B. Disclosure Requirements (N.B. The sections below appear only if corresponding safeguard policy 

is triggered) 



 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/OtherPHEnvDelete 

 Date of receipt by the Bank 26-Jul-2011 

 Date of submission to InfoShop 03-Aug-2011 

 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the 

EA to the Executive Directors 
 

 "In country" Disclosure 

 

PHEnvCtry  

Haiti 03-Aug-2011 

Comments: 
 

 Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy ProcessPHResDelete 

 Date of receipt by the Bank 07-Sept-2017 

 Date of submission to InfoShop 14-Sept-2017 

 "In country" Disclosure 

 

PHResCtry  

Haiti 14-Sept-2017 

Comments: 
 

 

PHIndCtry  

Haiti  

Comments: 
 

 Pest Management PlanPHPestDelete 

 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal? Yes 

 Date of receipt by the Bank 26-Jul-2011 

 Date of submission to InfoShop 03-Aug-2011 

 "In country" Disclosure 

 

PHPestCtry 

Haiti 03-Aug-2011 

Comments: 
 

 
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the 

respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 

Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 

 If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:: 

  
. 

 

C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is 

finalized by the project decision meeting) (N.B. The sections below appear only if corresponding 

safeguard policy is triggered) 
PHCompliance 

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 

Does the project require a stand-alone EA 

(including EMP) report? 
Yes [] No x NA [] 



If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit 

or Practice Manager (PM) review and approve 

the EA report? 

Yes [] No [] NA x 

Are the cost and the accountabilities for the 

EMP incorporated in the credit/loan? 
Yes x No [] NA [] 

 

PHCompliance 

OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 

Would the project result in any significant 

conversion or degradation of critical natural 

habitats? 

Yes [] No x NA [] 

If the project would result in significant 

conversion or degradation of other (non-critical) 

natural habitats, does the project include 

mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank? 

Yes [] No [] NA x 

 

PHCompliance 

OP 4.09 - Pest Management 

Does the EA adequately address the pest 

management issues? 
Yes x No [] NA [] 

Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes x No [] NA [] 

If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and 

approved by a safeguards specialist or PM?  

Are PMP requirements included in project 

design?If yes, does the project team include a 

Pest Management Specialist? 

Yes x No [] NA [] 

 

PHCompliance 

OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 

Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy 

framework/process framework (as appropriate) 

been prepared? 

Yes [] No x NA [] 

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for 

safeguards or Practice Manager review the 

plan? 

Yes [] No [] NA x 

Is physical displacement/relocation expected? 
Yes [] No x TBD [] 

Is economic displacement expected? (loss of 

assets or access to assets that leads to loss of 

income sources or other means of livelihoods) 

Yes x No [] TBD [] 

 

PHCompliance 

OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 

Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and 

institutional issues and constraints been carried 

out? 

Yes [] No x NA [] 

Does the project design include satisfactory 

measures to overcome these constraints? 
Yes [] No [] NA x 



Does the project finance commercial 

harvesting, and if so, does it include provisions 

for certification system? 

Yes [] No x NA [] 

 

PHCompliance 

The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 

Have relevant safeguard policies documents 

been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop? 
Yes x No [] NA [] 

Have relevant documents been disclosed in-

country in a public place in a form and language 

that are understandable and accessible to 

project-affected groups and local NGOs? 

Yes x No [] NA [] 

 

PHCompliance 

All Safeguard Policies 

Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear 

institutional responsibilities been prepared for 

the implementation of measures related to 

safeguard policies? 

Yes [X] No [] NA [] 

Have costs related to safeguard policy measures 

been included in the project cost? 
Yes [X] No [] NA [] 

Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of 

the project include the monitoring of safeguard 

impacts and measures related to safeguard 

policies? 

Yes [X] No [] NA [] 

Have satisfactory implementation arrangements 

been agreed with the borrower and the same 

been adequately reflected in the project legal 

documents? 

Yes [X] No [] NA [] 

 

 

V. Contact point 

World Bank 

 

PHWB 

Contact:Norman Bentley Piccioni 

Title:Senior Rural Development Specialist 
 

. 

. 

 Borrower/Client/Recipient 

 

PHBorr 

Name:Ministry of Economy and Finance 

Contact:Jude Alix Patrick Salomon 

Title:Ministre de L'Economie et de Finances 

Email:hermann.augustin@agriculture.gouv.ht 
 

. 

. 

. 

 Implementing Agencies 

 

PHIMP 

Name:Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources and Rural Development 

Contact:Jules Cesaire YAGANZA 

Title:Directeur du Departement Techniques Industrielles et Exploit 

Email:legrand_cesar@yahoo.fr 
 



. 

. 

. 

VI. For more information contact: 
. 

 The World Bank 

 1818 H Street, NW 

 Washington, D.C. 20433 

 Telephone: (202) 473-1000 

 Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects 

 



