














































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Climate Resilient Agriculture and Productivity Enhancement Project (P162956) 

 
 

  
Jan 04, 2018 Page 1 of 18  

     

 
 
      

 

Combined Project Information Documents /  
Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (PID/ISDS) 

 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 28-Feb-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSA23460 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

P
u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d



 

The World Bank  
Climate Resilient Agriculture and Productivity Enhancement Project (P162956)  

 

 

  
Jan 04, 2018 Page 2 of 18  

 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Chad P162956 Chad – Climate Resilient 
Agriculture and 
Productivity Enhancement 
Project 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA 26-Feb-2018 26-Apr-2018 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Republic of Chad Ministry of Agriculture, 
Irrgation and Equipment 

 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to “promote the adoption of improved technologies leading to 
increase productivity and enhance the climate resilience of agricultural production systems in the areas targeted by 
the Project”. 
 

 
Components 

Institutional support for sustainable agriculture development and climate resilience 
Supporting adoption of demand driven technologies and climate-smart agriculture 
Contingency Emergency Response 
Coordination. Knowledge management and Monitoring and Evaluation 

 
 

Financing (in USD Million) 

 

Finance OLD 

Financing Source Amount  

IDA Grant   41.00  

Total Project Cost   41.00  
    
 

Environmental Assessment Category 

B - Partial Assessment 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the preparation to continue     



 

The World Bank  
Climate Resilient Agriculture and Productivity Enhancement Project (P162956)  

 

 

  
Jan 04, 2018 Page 3 of 18  

 

 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
B. Introduction and Context 

 

Country Context 

1. Chad is a vast and landlocked country in Central Africa characterized by land degradation and 
erratic climatic conditions. It has a total land area of 1,284,000 km2 that encompasses three agro-
ecological zones: Saharan, Sahelian, and Sudanian. Out of a total population of over 14 million people, 47 
percent live below the poverty line. Chad ranked 186 out of 188 on the 2016 Human Development Index 
(HDI, 2016), making it one of the poorest and most deprived countries in the world. Chad remains largely 
rural, with over three-quarters of its population living in rural areas where they depend on subsistence 
farming for both household food and income security. The country is also beset with high unemployment, 
particularly among the youth. 

2. The economy continues to underperform, due to impacts from two main exogenous shocks: 
low oil prices and elevated regional insecurity. The oil and agricultural sectors were Chad's main growth 
drivers until the fall of the world oil price in 2014. Since then, Chad has experienced a sharp economic 
slow-down, with a fall in government revenue, resulting in a significant reduction in public expenses 
negatively impacting GDP growth (from 6.3% in 2014 to 0.2% in 2017)1,  leading the economy into deeper 
recession.  This difficult economic situation has been exacerbated by the prevailing serious threat to 
security in the region (including civil conflict and low-level insurgencies in the neighboring countries of 
Sudan, Nigeria, CAR and Libya), which has caused economic disruption in Chad and forced the Government 
to reprioritize its spending to defense, hosting of refugees and internally displaced persons. It also had an 
impact on cross-border trade, leading to the collapse of internal and external trade, especially for 
livestock, and a major disruption of the trade routes of imported products, especially in the Sahel.  

3. The short and medium-term outlooks remain challenging, with projected GDP growth for 2019 
of 3.15 percent. The situation has led the Government of Chad to prioritize diversification of the economy, 
focusing more on the non-oil sectors. The most important of these is the agricultural sector, which 
employs 80% of the Chadian workforce and accounts for 52% of GDP. It is also the second largest source 
of export income, after oil. In its 2016 – 2020 national development plan, the Government has, among 
other actions, prioritized the industrialization of agriculture, with the aim of boosting exports in order to 
diversify the economy to reduce its dependence on oil exports and increase tax revenue. 

4. The country is also experiencing rapid population growth (6.3% annually from 2010 to 20152), 
with a large youth cohort – more than 65% of the population is under the age of 25. The majority of the 
population remains rural, deriving their incomes from subsistence farming and herding activities, relying 
on traditional extensive production techniques, with limited access to markets and services (Systematic 
Country Diagnosis - SCD, 2015). Women engaged in agriculture and/or living in rural areas face 
considerable barriers: Chad ranks 140 out of 144 on the Global Gender Gap Index. Adult female literacy 
rate is 13.9% per UNESCO, about half that of men, and women are often confined to producing 

                                                           
1 The World Bank Group countries statistics (2017) (https://data.worldbank.org/country/chad) 
2  World Statistics Pocket Book, UN 2016 

https://data.worldbank.org/country/chad


 

The World Bank  
Climate Resilient Agriculture and Productivity Enhancement Project (P162956)  

 

 

  
Jan 04, 2018 Page 4 of 18  

 

subsistence crops and traditional farming, with little access to advisory services and inputs (mainly 
captured by men). As a result, they are financially more vulnerable.  

5. Food insecurity is a big concern that is likely to be exacerbated by climate change. It is estimated 
that one out of 10 Chadians, or 1.4 million people, are chronically food-insecure, meaning they are unable 
to meet their basic food requirements even during “good” years of crop harvest. The situation worsens 
during “bad” years – characterized by limited availability of and constrained access to food – where 
millions more can easily and quickly fall into transitory food insecurity. Difficulties in access to food are 
partly attributed to the poor performance of the important crops and livestock sub-sectors, which are 
characterized by sluggish productivity growth due to multiple factors. Such factors include lack of and 
limited access to promising technologies, underinvestment in new technologies, as well as climate-related 
constraints. Crop and livestock production are highly dependent on rainfall, making these sub-sectors 
extremely vulnerable to climate shocks (in particular the scarcity and poor distribution of rainfall over 
time and space). This situation is aggravated by the country’s vulnerability to climatic risks, both short-
term risks associated with its inherent climatic variability and long-terms risks associated with climate 
change. The National Action Program of Adaptation (NAPA, 2010) reported that the main short-term 
climate risks are associated with droughts, floods, poor spatial and temporal distribution of rainfall, 
extreme heat, and strong winds. 

 

Sectoral and Institutional Context 

6. Chad has enormous unrealized agricultural potential. The country has a total agricultural area of 
more than 49 million hectares, of which only 6 percent is currently cultivated. Similarly, the available 
water resources remain largely untapped, with only 9 percent of this potential being used. Less than 1 
percent of the agricultural land is under irrigation in Chad. The main Agro-Ecological Zones (AEZ) in Chad, 
from North to South, are the Saharian (up to 200 mm average annual rainfall), the Sahelian (200-700 mm) 
and the Sudanian (over 750 mm) AEZ. These distinct AEZs provide a unique opportunity to diversify 
agricultural production and to develop dynamic and complementary crop and livestock value chains. 
While other projects are already targeting livestock systems in the Sahelian AEZ, the proposed project will 
focus on the higher potential Sudanian AEZ where smallholder farmers are engaged mainly in traditional 
rainfed cereal-based (sorghum, millet and berbéré and associated pulses) farming systems, but including 
also some small livestock production. This zone is also a transit zone for livestock herds as they move 
southwards from the Sahelian AEZ during the dry season, causing some farmer-livestock herder conflicts. 

7. Despite its vast potential, the agriculture sector continues to underperform. Yields of key cereals 
are far below the averages for sub-Saharan Africa (SSA), and yield gains have not kept pace with the yield 
gains achieved in other countries. For example, sorghum yields average stand between 720 and 785 
kg/ha3 respectively for Sahelian and Sudanian zones of Chad, against an average of 980 kg/ha in the 
ECOWAS4 region.  

8. Average rainfall ranges between 800 to 1250 mm in the Sudanian Agro-Ecological Zone (AEZ), but 
the distribution increases in variability, in both inter-annual quantities and geographic distribution, when 
moving from the south towards the north. The main crops are cereals (sorghum, berbéré, maize and rice), 

                                                           
3 Chad – Agriculture Sector Review (ASRR), May 2017 
4 Feeding Africa (2015): Report on Cereal Crops: Rice, Maize, Millet, Sorghum, Wheat, H. Mac Cauley (Africa Rice), Tabo 
Ramadjita (ICRISAT) 



 

The World Bank  
Climate Resilient Agriculture and Productivity Enhancement Project (P162956)  

 

 

  
Jan 04, 2018 Page 5 of 18  

 

mostly intercropped with legumes, and roots and tubers, mainly grown for household consumption. 
Farmers also cultivate cotton for cash. Unfortunately, production of cotton is in sharp decline due to weak 
value chain organization. The Sudanian AEZ area is also classified as a cattle husbandry (and 
transhumance) area. Finally, collection of wild fruits and plants remains common, especially collection of 
shea nuts. 

9. The 2017 Agriculture Sector Review Report (ASRR) described how Chadian agriculture is going 
through a deep crisis. The sector is struggling to modernize and remains largely dependent on weather 
conditions. However, the report emphasized the potential for development of family farming in terms of 
productivity, profitability and resilience to shocks and its potential to meet the national and external food 
demand and improve the welfare of the rural populations.  

10. Several related factors explain the low productivity of Chadian agriculture: 

▪ Weak research and extension services as well as low overall institutional capacity constrain 
innovation and slow the rate of technical change. The agriculture research and development 
(AR&D) system is weak, with limited human and infrastructure resources and lack of continued 
programmatic support. In addition, the limited reach of public and private agricultural extension 
and advisory services significantly affects the dissemination and adoption of promising 
technologies.  

▪ The use of low yielding agricultural technologies and poor and unsustainable traditional 
agricultural practices are the main characteristics of Chadian subsistence farming. Farmers lack 
access to improved agricultural technologies, as well as to the know-how needed to improve 
productivity. For example, less than 5% of farmers are currently using improved seeds (Agriculture 
Sector Review, May 2017).  

▪ The growing population is increasing pressure on existing fertile production resources and hence 
rendering the practice of extensive subsistence agriculture and traditional livestock management 
systems more challenging over time. Increased competition for the shrinking natural capital often 
results in tensions between diverse user communities with at times conflicting interests. As a 
result, the increasing pressure on natural resources, particularly in marginal areas and their fragile 
eco-systems, are leading to lower soil fertility levels, soil erosion and degradation. 

▪ Climate shocks are exacting an increasing toll on Chadian agriculture. The Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) categorizes Chad as one of the countries highly vulnerable to the 
impacts of climate change. Vulnerability in Chad is characterized by increasing scarcity of available 
natural resources, fragile and substantially degraded soils, high level of food security and poverty, 
and lack of infrastructure, which hinder the capacity of local population to adapt to severe 
weather conditions. Indeed, the Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC) of the 
Republic of Chad (September 2015) indicates that over the past decades, the Saharan and 
Sahelian climatic zones of Chad have progressed southwards by 150 km.  

▪ Weak or lack of policies also lead to cumbersome administrative and organizational procedures in 
Chad. The Agriculture Sector Review Report (ASRR) highlighted the persistent lack of concrete 
measures to address effectively the major factors that impact food and nutritional security. In 
practice, efforts to address those factors are very limited, and often questioned. As an illustration, 
the ASRR proposed a process for  setting up a pastoral code, which has not moved forward even 
though there has been a resurgence of conflicts related to the access and control of natural 



 

The World Bank  
Climate Resilient Agriculture and Productivity Enhancement Project (P162956)  

 

 

  
Jan 04, 2018 Page 6 of 18  

 

resources by different users. This situation of land insecurity is still limiting private investment 
and the sector’s performance. 

11. To address these constraints, the 2017 Agriculture Sector Review Report has identified improving 
productivity and strengthening resilience of family farming as effective and appropriate means of reducing 
poverty in rural areas. 

12. The Project will coordinate closely with other IDA-financed projects and projects being 
implemented by other partners to ensure effective synergies on the ground. For example, the Project will 
rely on the Chad Hydrological and Meteorological Services Modernization Project (P164256) to strengthen 
the capacity of the National Meteorology Agency (ANAM) to provide effective agro-meteorological 
services in support of the Project’s activities, including training and acquisition of digital solutions for data 
collection and analysis and weather forecasting (e.g. remote sensing application and GIS products). The 
Project will also complement interventions in pastoralism management being supported under the 
Regional Sahel Pastoralism Support Project (PRAPS – P147674). The Project will support mixed crops and 
livestock systems in agro-pastoral zones, while PRAPS will target purely pastoral zones. The Project will 
establish strategical and operational linkages with the Rural Mobility and Connectivity Project (P164747) 
which will be implemented in two out of the three targeted regions. This Project will to improve road 
access to selected agricultural production basin and markets in the Project area. Technologies to be 
introduced by the Project would also be used in the irrigation schemes developed by the Chad’s 
Component of the Sahel Irrigation Initiative Project (P154482). The is aligned with the Sahel Alliance 
Initiative which objective is to improve the support and coordination of development partners in the 
region to contribute effectively and more broadly to the stabilization and eradication of poverty, by 
developing rural areas, creating employment for youth, improving energy infrastructure and 
strengthening governance.  

 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 

13. The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is “to promote the adoption of improved 
technologies leading to increase productivity and enhance the climate resilience of agricultural 
production systems in the areas targeted by the Project.”  

 
Key Results 

 

14. The PDO-Level Results Indicators are:  

i. Number of direct Project beneficiaries – or farmers/producers/processors reached with 
agricultural assets or services (of which 40% female and 50% youth); 

ii. Total land area under improved technologies (in hectares) disseminated by the Project 
(including % in CSA technology - proxy for climate resilience technologies/practices); 

iii. Increase in average yields of the direct beneficiaries compared to average yields in the 
Project area (% of baselines for targeted crops in the project area); and 

iv. Share of targeted beneficiaries with rating ‘Satisfied’ or above on Project interventions 

 



 

The World Bank  
Climate Resilient Agriculture and Productivity Enhancement Project (P162956)  

 

 

  
Jan 04, 2018 Page 7 of 18  

 

D. Project Description  
 
The total project amount is the equivalent of USD 44.6 million (IDA grant of USD 41 million and beneficiaries contribution 
of USD 3.6 million) over a period of 5 years. The project consists of four components, namely: (A) Institutional support 
for sustainable agriculture development and climate resilience; (B) Supporting adoption of demand driven technologies 
and climate-smart agriculture; (C) Contingency emergency response; and (D) Coordination, knowledge management and 
monitoring, evaluation, and learning (MEL). 
 
COMPONENT A: INSTITUTIONAL SUPPORT FOR SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURE DEVELOPMENT AND CLIMATE RESILIENCE: 
This component is designed to strengthen institutional capacities for Agricultural Research & Development (AR&D) and 
climate change adaptation at national level. It includes the following sub-components : (A1) Strengthening the agricultural 
research and development (AR&D) system;  (A2) Strengthening of national support services for sustainable agricultural 
development and climate resilience and  (A.3) : Strengthening the framework for sectoral strategies and reforms 
preparation and monitoring    
 
COMPONENT B: SUPPORTING ADOPTION OF DEMAND DRIVEN TECHNOLOGIES AND CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE: 
This component will support the adoption of high productivity potential and climate resilient technologies /practices. It 
is sub-divided into three sub-components: (B.1) Improving the effectiveness of agricultural support services in the 
targeted areas; (B.2) Accelerating adoption of improved technologies and innovations; and (B.3) Implementing climate-
smart agriculture plans.  
 
COMPONENT C: CONTINGENCY EMERGENCY RESPONSE 
This component will create a mechanism for financing emergency works in case of another disaster event by including a 
“zero-dollar” Contingency Emergency Response Component (CERC). Should this component be activated, it will allow 
rapid disbursement of funds to help reduce damage to infrastructure, ensure business continuity, and enable early 
rehabilitation. Following an adverse event that causes a major disaster, the GoC will be able to request that the Bank to 
channel resources from other components into an Immediate Response Mechanism (IRM). The IRM will enable the use 
of a portion of uncommitted funds from the overall IDA portfolio to respond to emergencies. To mobilize resources from 
the component, it will use the “Immediate Response Mechanism Operational Manual.”  

 

COMPONENT D: COORDINATION, M&E AND KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT 
This component is to support the Project on: (i) coordination and management, including human resources, financial 
management and procurement; (ii) M&E, gender impact evaluation and technical studies, (iii) knowledge management 
and communication; and (iv) safeguards and citizen engagement. The project will pilot the “Iterative Beneficiary 
monitoring” (IBM) System which is a simple low cost, high frequency feedback mechanism elaborated to inform regularly 
on what is not working during the project implementation and help to improve project results gradually and quickly 
without need of lengthy and expensive evaluations. 
 
E. Implementation 

 
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 

15. The project will be implemented under the supervision of the Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation 
and Agricultural Equipment (MAIEA).  It will be supported by a National Steering Committee for all 



 

The World Bank  
Climate Resilient Agriculture and Productivity Enhancement Project (P162956)  

 

 

  
Jan 04, 2018 Page 8 of 18  

 

projects/programmes in the Agricultural sector, chaired by the Ministry’s General Secretary, whose 
composition and mandate will be specified in a MAIEA decree5. 

16. By Ministerial Decree, dated 05 October 2017, all new projects/programmes under the MoA are 
under a unique Project Coordination Department (CCP). The CCP mandate are to ensure: (i) the alignment 
of agricultural projects/programs with national and regional policies and strategies; (ii) the development 
of synergies and collaborative frameworks between agricultural projects/programs funded  by different 
donors; (iv) monitoring the progress of projects / programs by updating the MoA’s indicators dashboard; 
(vi) knowledge management and communication on the projects and programs achievements ; (viii) the 
organization of capacity building activities and exchange between the different projects/programs; (xi) 
the recruitment of the (external) financial auditor in accordance with the provisions of the Financing 
Agreement and monitoring of the implementation of the recommendations; and (x) support for the 
release of counterpart funds for sector projects/programs.  

17. The day to day project management and coordination will be under the responsibility of a 
Technical and Fiduciary Coordination Unit (UCTF).  As agreed with MAIEA, the UCTF will be the 
implementation unit for all new World Bank funded operations in the agriculture sector. Reporting to the 
CCP, the UTCF main functions of this unit are to: (i) coordinate all projects of the agricultural portfolio of 
the Bank and their relations with the technical departments of the Ministry; (ii) the preparation and 
signing of the various memoranda of understanding, agreements and contracts linking the project (s) to 
the various partners and service providers; (iii) Financial Management (FM) and procurement activities in 
accordance with the provisions of the Credit Agreement between IDA and the Government and the 
procurement and FM guidelines;  (v) Terms of reference preparation, recruitment and management of 
support staff and technical units of Bank / IDA (UTPs) agricultural projects; (vi) preparation of annual work 
plans , budgets and progress reports and presentation of these documents to the PSC in relation with the 
CCP; (vii) daily liaison with all national partners, including communication on agricultural projects / 
programs funded by the World Bank; and (viii) the organization of supervision missions, mid-term and 
final evaluations of WB agricultural program projects. 

18. The UCTF will be headed by a National Programme Coordinator. It will include the following staff: 
an Internal Auditor, an Administrative and Financial Officer, an Accountant, one Procurement Officer, an 
Environmental Specialist, Gender and Social Development Specialist, a Monitoring and Evaluation and 
knowledge management Officer, and support staff. 

19. At field level, a Regional Technical Support Unit (RTSU) will be set up in Sarh for the field activities 
coordination and follow up. The TSU will be reporting to the UTCF.  The TSU will be a light structure that 
will work closely with the regional rural development delegations. The TSU mandates are to: (i) ensure 
and support the project activities implementation within its coverage area; (ii) providing technical and 
management support to project beneficiaries; and (iii) ensuring the compliance of the various subprojects 
to the operational rules and procedures. 

 
 .    

                                                           
5 See MAIEA Minister Decree n°91/PR/PM/MAIEA/SE//SG/2017 – of 5 October 2017. 



 

The World Bank  
Climate Resilient Agriculture and Productivity Enhancement Project (P162956) 

 

 

  
Jan 04, 2018 Page 9 of 18  

 

F. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 

The proposed Project will primarily target the Sudanian Agro-Ecological Zone of Chad, considered as high 
potential for agro-pastoral activities, but where the risk of food and nutritional security and rural poverty 
are of serious concern. The project's activities will be implemented in three (03) administrative regions, 
namely Salamat, Middle Chari and Mandoul located in the south-eastern pole of Chad. The project areas are 
home to about 1.55 million people, representing over 11% of the total population. Targeted regions are 
further characterized by high poverty rates of 70.9% in Mandoul, 61.4% in Middle Chari, and 48.4% in 
Salamat. In these communities, the average rate of fertility is estimated at about 6.5. In terms of natural and 
human resources, the targeted areas have significant agricultural potential, representing the Sudanese AEZ 
with annual average rainfall ranging between 800 to 1250 mm. However, the rainfall is highly variable in 
both inter-annual quantitates and in geographic distribution when moving from the south towards the 
north. Wooded Sudanian savanna constitutes the main vegetation in these areas, while relatively poor 
leached tropical ferruginous soils (on hills) and richer floodplains soils favorable to the culture of rice and all-
season vegetable production dominate the main soil types. 

 
 
G. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 
 

Demba Balde, Social Safeguards Specialist 
Cheikh A. T. Sagna, Social Safeguards Specialist 
Emeran Serge M. Menang Evouna, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 
Bougadare Kone, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 

 
 
 

SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The Project is classified as category B project.   
As part of the project’s aim of improving agricultural 
productivity, the project will support the use of 
improved agricultural inputs including fertilizers, 
improved seeds, irrigation agriculture and pesticides 
that will require environmental assessment to 
ensure potential adverse effects are mitigated.  The 
project is expected to be beneficial to the 
environment given the aim is to ensure the impact 
of climate change is mitigated, adaptation measures 
implemented and resilience is built in to the 
production landscape.  The project will ensure that 



 

The World Bank  
Climate Resilient Agriculture and Productivity Enhancement Project (P162956) 

 

 

  
Jan 04, 2018 Page 10 of 18  

 

modern efficient utilization of pesticide and fertilizer 
will be introduced and farmers trained in their 
applications that will have a positive impact on the 
environment compared to the status quo. Further, a 
strict control mechanism will be put in place to avoid 
potential adverse impacts such as pollution from 
agricultural runoffs. An Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared by 
the borrower given that the exact detailed footprint 
types and locations of project activities and their 
respective sites have not yet been identified. The 
ESMF will be consulted upon and publicly disclosed, 
both in-country and at the InfoShop before 
appraisal.  In addition, for subprojects that are 
expected to be identified during preparation, an 
ESIA will be prepared by appraisal.   

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 No 
The project is not expected to intervene in any 
critically natural habitats 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No The project will not support forest exploitation . 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

OP 4.09 is triggered based on project’ s activities to 
increase agricultural productivity which is expected 
to result in increased use of agrochemicals, such as 
pesticides. Any use of pesticides will be justified 
under the Integrated Pest Management (IPM) 
approach that will be promoted by the project. An 
Integrated Pest Management Plan (IPMP) will be 
developed, consulted upon by the borrower and 
publicly disclosed thereafter, both in-country and at 
the InfoShop before appraisal. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 

Due to potential impacts on Physical Cultural 
Resources associated with civil works, the ESMF will 
include provisions of “Chance Finds” approach to 
ensure that these aspects will be taken into account 
in ESIAs/EMPs to be developed under the ESMF. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 
There are no Indigenous Peoples People, as per the 
policy definition,  in the project area. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

This policy is triggered because the project 
investments may support interventions that could 
entail land taking or limiting access to land and other 
resources. Since details of the subproject footprints 
are still unknown at this very juncture, an RPF will be 
developed by the borrower, consulted upon and 
publicly disclosed, both in-country and at the 
InfoShop, before appraisal. Where and when 
warranted Full Resettlement Action Plans (FRAPs) or 



 

The World Bank  
Climate Resilient Agriculture and Productivity Enhancement Project (P162956) 

 

 

  
Jan 04, 2018 Page 11 of 18  

 

Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plans (ARAPs) will 
be prepared, reviewed, cleared and disclosed. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No The project is not building dam (big and small). 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
The Project is not intervening on International 
Waterways. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No Non applicable 

 
 

KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The environmental and social impacts and risks of the project activities are expected to be moderate to low, mostly 
site-specific and easily manageable to an acceptable level, typical of Category B projects. The potential negative 
environmental and social negative impacts and risks of the proposed project are associated with the implementation 
of Component 1 an 2, which are designed to support various activities for strengthening the agriculture research 
system and productive and resilient technology dissemination. These include: soil erosion due to agricultural 
developments; the spread of waterborne disease vectors and health risks associated with pesticide use, risks of 
increased prevalence of HIV/AIDS and other SCDs due to foreign workers on construction sites, the risk of pollution 
and environmental degradation byfertilizers and pesticides, reduced vegetation and pasture due to agricultural 
developments, etc. At the social level, though the project does not anticipate to physically display people, some of its 
proposed activities may require acquisition of land plots or restriction of access to productive natural resources, and/ 
or loss of incomes and livelihood resources without proper precautionary measures taken on time, could potentially 
lead to the involuntary resettlement of project affected persons (PAP). 
 
The proposed project triggers are OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment), OP 4.09 (Pest Management),  OP/BP 4.11 
(Physical Cultural Resources); and OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement). In conformity with the World Bank' 
requirements and the Government's Environmental Impact Assessment legislation, an ESMF was prepared, amply 
consulted upon, along with a RPF, and a PMP. These were approved by the Ministry of Environment through a 
national validation workshop, cleared by the Bank and publicly disclosed both in-country and at the World Bank 
website prior to appraisal. 
 
No large-scale or irreversible adverse impacts and risks haves been identified during the participatory ESMF, IPMP and 
RPF analysis conducted. 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
No adverse long term impact and risk haves been identified during the EA process. Instead, the project is expected to 
deliver significant environmental and social benefits to hundred thousands of Chadians’ beneficiaries whose main 
livelihoods depend largely on agriculture crops and value. The adoption of improved technologies, the sustainable 
management practices of land and water as part of the formulation and implementation of climate-smart agriculture 
plans are expected to increase the productive capital of the land and the net carbon stock; and to increase the 
resilience of agro-sylvo-pastoral systems to climate risks. However, project activities to increase agricultural 



 

The World Bank  
Climate Resilient Agriculture and Productivity Enhancement Project (P162956) 

 

 

  
Jan 04, 2018 Page 12 of 18  

 

productivity could potentially induce indirect, but manageable impacts associated with increased use of 
agrochemicals, such as pesticides. These issues are addressed in the Pests and Pesticides Management Plan (PMP). 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. 
N/A 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower 
capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The proposed project will be implemented by an new PIU under the Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Agriculture 
Equipment. The Ministry has some experience in implementing the Bank’s safeguards policies as it has implemented 
the Agriculture Support Production Project (P126576). The Government of Chad (GoC) has completed the preparation 
of an ESMF, an PMP and a RPF to address issues related to the safeguard policies triggered. 
 
The ESMF outlines an environmental and social screening process for future sub-projects to ensure that they are 
environmentally sound and socially equitable, sustainably implementable, and in line with GoC and World Bank 
operational safeguards policies and guidelines on environmental and social impacts and risks management. The 
implementation cost of the ESMF is estimated at FCFA 502 million, is proposed to be included the overall project 
budget. 
 
A Pests and Pesticide Management Plan (IPMP) has been prepared based on project activities to increase agricultural 
productivity which is expected to result in increased use of agrochemicals, such as pesticides. The PMP action plan aim 
to ensure safe pests and pesticides management. It includes: (i) promoting the use of alternative pest management 
strategies in the project areas; (ii) strengthening of controls during importation of phytosanitary products; (iii) capacity 
building of key actors on the rational use of pesticides; (iv) sensitization of producers on good pesticide management 
practices (transport, storage, applying, safety measures);  (v) environmental monitoring of the physico-chemical 
quality of water resources (groundwater and ponds); (vi) health monitoring of pesticides users and management of 
empty containers; and (v) a coherent budget of FCFA 328.5 million proposed to be included in the overall project 
budget. 
 
The RPF sets forth the basic principles and procedures to be followed once the physical footprints of project activities 
are known in details to properly mitigate any potential adverse social impacts (i.e. preparation of site specific 
resettlement action plan-RAP, etc.). The RPF includes specifics such as valuation of assets, public consultation and 
participation, institutional arrangement, capacity building, monitoring and evaluation, grievance redress mechanism, 
budget and source of financing. CFA 192.5 million are proposed to support resettlement (RAP preparation, 
sensitization and training of key stakeholders), and to be included in the overall project cost. These do not include 
compensation costs which will be borne by the Government 
 
A 2-person team of Social and Environmental Safeguards Specialists (SESS) will be established at the PIU level to 
adequately handle the implementation of social and environmental recommendations. The SESS will work in tandem 
with the WBG safeguards specialists to ensure due compliance with core safeguards policies requirements. 
 
All bidding documents for civil works will have embedded environmental and social clauses (ESC), in order to enable 
contractors to follow up on environmental and social due diligence and to mitigate the anticipated negative risks and 
impacts. Depending of the type, scope/nature and size of construction, a supervising engineer (Bureau de contrôle) 
will be hired by the project to oversee the construction works (including implementation of environmental and social 
measures by the constructor) on behalf of the PIU. For small size construction type, the PIU will rely on the 



 

The World Bank  
Climate Resilient Agriculture and Productivity Enhancement Project (P162956) 

 

 

  
Jan 04, 2018 Page 13 of 18  

 

deconcentrated technical services like Génie Rural, Regional Directorate for Environmental, as well as local level Socio-
environmental Specialist, etc. to ensure due diligence on safeguards as described in the ESC. Regular Environmental 
Assessment and Pollution and Nuisance Control Directorate (DEELCPN) patrols will inspect the construction sites if the 
construction activities are in compliance with the approved site specific safeguards documents.  
 
The Borrower has some experience with the World Bank Safeguards policies’ requirements through several past and 
ongoing Bank funded projects. The proposed project will build on this experience and the 3 standalone safeguards 
instruments (ESMF, IPMP & RPF) include provisions to further strengthen the capacity of the various stakeholders. 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, 
with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders identified are:  
• The Steering Committee (SC) : The Steering Committee will monitor the registry and budgeting of the 
environmental and social due diligence from the Work Plan and Annual Budget (WPAB) ; 
• The Project Management Unit (PMU):  The PMU will ensure that environmental and social aspects and issues 
are taken into account in the implementation of project activities. The PMU should benefit from capacity building in 
the implementation of the project;  
• The Environmental Assessment and Pollution and Nuisance Control Directorate (DEELCPN): it will review and 
approve the environmental classification of sub-projects and also approve  the Environmental and Social Impact 
Notices (ESIN). It will also participate in the external monitoring; 
• The research institutions will provide technical manuals of research findings and ecological monitoring of 
some activities. They will also participate in the preparation of manual of good agricultural practices. 
• The National Agency for Rural Development Support (ANADER) will be responsible for extension of good 
agricultural and environmental practices in the area; 
• The Department of Fisheries and Aquaculture Development will take care of the environmental and fish 
production monitoring; 
• Decentralized Technical Services (DTS or « STD » in French) : The STDs are composed by the Regional an 
Departmental Directorates of Ministries in charge of agriculture, of animal resources, of Health, of Environment. These 
regional and departmental directorates of the project's intervention zones will be associated to all activities 
implemented in their range and zones of action during and after the Project;  
• Municipalities :They will participate in environmental and social monitoring through their municipal technical 
services ; 
• The Regional Committees of Actions (CRA), the local Committees of Actions (CLA), the Departmental 
Committees of Actions (CDA), the National Council of Concertation of Rural Producers of Chad (CNCPRT), Asssociations 
of Farmers, Breeders and Fishermen. All these structures will also be involved in the implementation of the ESMF of 
the Project (identification of sub-projects, screening, etc.); 
• Construction companies :  They will be responsible for the implementation of the Site-ESMFs and the drafting 
of implementation reports of these ESMFs through their Environmental Expert ; 
• Owner’s Engineer : The Environmental Expert within their organization will be responsible for the day-to-day 
monitoring of the implementation of the site-ESMF and the drafting of an environmental and social monitoring report 
to submit to the Project Management Unit (PMU); 
• NGOs: In addition to social mobilization, they will participate in the sensitization of populations and the 
monitoring of the implementation of the ESMF interpellation of the principal actors of the Project. 
  
Throughout the entire process of project preparation, transparent and engaging stakeholder participation 
consultations were organized in the project intervention areas. The key concerns raised by the local stakeholders are 



 

The World Bank  
Climate Resilient Agriculture and Productivity Enhancement Project (P162956) 

 

 

  
Jan 04, 2018 Page 14 of 18  

 

related to land degradation issues that affect their livelihood, mainly the reduction of arable lands due to water 
erosion and silting of lowlands, lack of access to finance, and need for capacity building to improve agricultural 
practices. They have been incorporated in the project design (protection of watersheds from erosion and secure 
irrigation potential, Farmers 
Field School program, matching grant facility, etc.). Since stakeholder consultation and participation is an iterative 
process, it will be pursued and sustained throughout the project lifespan. 
As part of the ESMF, the IPMP and the RPF, in addition to the series of intensive local stakeholder meetings (open 
and/or focus groups discussions), a national stakeholders’ workshop was organized by the Client on to share the 
results of the safeguards instruments, mainstream ownership and seek inputs from the stakeholders. The 3 
standalone safeguards instruments, approved by the DEELCPN as result of this national stakeholders’ workshop, have 
been submitted to the Bank for final approval. They have been disclosed both in-country (Feb 23, 2017) and at the 
InfoShop (Feb. 22, 2018) prior to appraisal. The ESMF describes a comprehensive consultation and participation 
mechanism and disclosure during subprojects 
preparation. 
 
 
B. Disclosure Requirements  

 
OPS_EA_DISCLOSURE_TABLE Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other 

Date of receipt by the Bank Date of submission for disclosure 
For category A projects, date of 
distributing the Executive Summary of 
the EA to the Executive Directors 

19-Jan-2018 22-Feb-2018  

   

"In country" Disclosure   

   Chad 
  23-Feb-2018 

Comments 
 

   
OPS_RA_D ISCL OSURE_T ABLE  

 

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process 

   

Date of receipt by the Bank Date of submission for disclosure  

19-Jan-2018 22-Feb-2018  

   

"In country" Disclosure   
   Chad 
  23-Feb-2018 

Comments 
 

     



 

The World Bank  
Climate Resilient Agriculture and Productivity Enhancement Project (P162956) 

 

 

  
Jan 04, 2018 Page 15 of 18  

 

OPS_ PM_D ISCL OSURE_TA BLE  

 

Pest Management Plan 
 
Was the document disclosed prior to 
appraisal? Date of receipt by the Bank Date of submission for disclosure 

Yes 19-Jan-2018 22-Feb-2018 

   
"In country" Disclosure   
   Chad 
 23-Feb-2018 
 

Comments 
 

  
OPS_PM_ PC R_TAB LE  

 

If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to 
be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.  

If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why: 

 
 
 
 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project 
decision meeting)  

 
OPS_EA_COMP_TABLE OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
  
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes   
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report? 
Yes   
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan? 
Yes    

OPS_ PM_C OM P_TA BLE  

 

OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
  
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes   
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes   
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or PM?  Are PMP requirements included in 
project design?  If yes, does the project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Yes   

OPS_ PCR_C OM P_TA BLE  

 



 

The World Bank  
Climate Resilient Agriculture and Productivity Enhancement Project (P162956) 

 

 

  
Jan 04, 2018 Page 16 of 18  

 

OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources  
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes   
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes    

OPS_IR_ CO MP_TA BLE  

 

OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 

 
 

Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes  
 

 

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager review the plan? 
Yes  
 

 

 

 

      
OPS_ PDI_ CO MP_TA BLE  

 

The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 

 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for disclosure? 
Yes   
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language that are understandable 
and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs? 
Yes  

 
 
All Safeguard Policies 

 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of 
measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 

  
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost? 
Yes 

  
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures 
related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 

  
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately 
reflected in the project legal documents? 
Yes 

 
 
 

CONTACT POINT 

 

  World Bank 



 

The World Bank  
Climate Resilient Agriculture and Productivity Enhancement Project (P162956) 

 

 

  
Jan 04, 2018 Page 17 of 18  

 

 

Amadou Ba 
Senior Agriculture Economist  

 

Ziva Razafintsalama 
Senior Agriculture Economist 

  

 

  Borrower/Client/Recipient 
 

Republic of Chad 

 

 

 
 

  Implementing Agencies 

 

Ministry of Agriculture, Irrgation and Equipment 

Abdelkhadir Kiboro 

General Secretary, MAIEA 

bordaba2001@yahoo.com 
 

 

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT 

 

The World Bank 

1818 H Street, NW 

Washington, D.C. 20433 

Telephone: (202) 473-1000 

Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects  

 

 

APPROVAL 

 

Task Team Leader(s): 
Amadou Ba 
Ziva Razafintsalama 

 

  Approved By 

Safeguards Advisor:   

Practice Manager/Manager: Marianne Grosclaude 28-Feb-2018 

Country Director: Francois Nankobogo 02-Mar-2018 
 

    

http://www.worldbank.org/projects


 

The World Bank  
Climate Resilient Agriculture and Productivity Enhancement Project (P162956) 

 

 

  
Jan 04, 2018 Page 18 of 18  

 

 
 
 



