














































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
CHAD Skills Development for Youth Employment and Competitiveness Project (P164297) 

 
 

  
Apr 12, 2019 Page 1 of 23  

     

 
 
 
      

 

Combined Project Information Documents /  
Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (PID/ISDS) 

 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 21-May-2019 | Report No: PIDISDSA24795 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

P
u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d



 

The World Bank  
CHAD Skills Development for Youth Employment and Competitiveness Project (P164297) 

 

 

  
Apr 12, 2019 Page 2 of 23  

 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Chad P164297 CHAD Skills Development 
for Youth Employability 
Project 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA 15-May-2019 20-Jun-2019 Education 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Republic of Chad Ministere de l'Education 
Nationale et de la 
Promotion Civique, 
Ministere de la Formation 
Professionnelle et des 
Petits Metiers, Ministere 
de l'Economie et de la 
Planificatin du 
Developpement 

 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
The project development objective (PDO) is to (i) improve access to skills training and labor market outcomes for 
project beneficiaries; and (ii) strengthen the technical and vocational education and training (TVET) system in Chad 

 
Components 

Expanding Access to Skills through Improved Technical and Vocational Education 
Employment Support for Youth and Improved Entrepreneurship Opportunities 
Improving TVET System Governance and Institutional Capacity Building 
Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation 

 
 

PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
   

SUMMARY-NewFin1  
 

Total Project Cost 50.00 

Total Financing 50.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 50.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 



 

The World Bank  
CHAD Skills Development for Youth Employment and Competitiveness Project (P164297) 

 

 

  
Apr 12, 2019 Page 3 of 23  

 

 
   
DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 50.00 

          IDA Grant 50.00 

    

Environmental Assessment Category 

B-Partial Assessment 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate     
 
 
B. Introduction and Context 

 
Country Context 

 
1. Chad is sparsely populated, with only 13 million people, and vast in size (being more than 1 million km²). 
It is a low-income country, with a gross domestic product (GDP) per capita of about US$823 in 2018, and, has 
among the lowest human development indicators in the world. The country is divided into 23 regions located in 
three main geographical zones: a desert zone in the north, an arid Sahelian belt in the center, and a more fertile 
Sudanese savanna zone in the south. It faces adverse climate conditions including prolonged droughts in some 
areas and yearly flows in others, as well as wind erosion, and desertification, leading to recurrent food crises, as 
well as population displacement. Combined with security risks due to political instability and transit through Chad 
by terrorist groups such as Boko Haram, and al Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM), as well as an uptick in 
migration, urban populations are projected to reach nearly 6 million by 2030, or 27 percent of the total population. 
Chad is home to an estimated 450,000 displaced people, the large majority of which are refugees1.  
 

2. The economy is largely dominated by agriculture and extractive industries, mainly oil. However, the 
recent fall in oil prices has had a dramatic impact on an economy in which oil accounted for 30 percent of total 
GDP and 70 percent of Government revenues in 2017. Almost half (47 percent) of the population was living under 
the national poverty line in 2011, the most recent year for which poverty numbers are available. The high level of 
poverty is accompanied by low human development, and Chad currently ranks 157 out of 157 in the recent World 
Bank Human Capital Index (HCI) with an index estimated at 0.29 meaning that Chad is losing 71 percent of its 
potential productivity. Life expectancy at birth is 51.9 years, expected years of schooling is 7.3 years, and mean 

                                                           
1 Based on the UNHCR definition refugees are people who are recognized as refugees under the 1951 Convention Relating to the 
Status of Refugees or its 1967 Protocol, the 1969 Organization of African Unity Convention Governing the Specific Aspects of 
Refugee Problems in Africa, people recognized as refugees in accordance with the UNHCR statute, people granted refugee-like 
humanitarian status, and people provided temporary protection. Asylum seekers--people who have applied for asylum or refugee 
status and who have not yet received a decision or who are registered as asylum seekers--are excluded. Country of asylum is the 
country where an asylum claim was filed and granted. 



 

The World Bank  
CHAD Skills Development for Youth Employment and Competitiveness Project (P164297) 

 

 

  
Apr 12, 2019 Page 4 of 23  

 

years of schooling stands at just 2.3 years. Education attainment is highly unequal with people in the wealthiest 
quintile having an average of 6.7 years of schooling, compared with 1.0 for those in the poorest quintile. 

 

3. Two thirds of the population are less than 25 years old and the proportion of young people will continue 
to increase dramatically in the coming years. Those under the age of 24 will continue to grow faster than the rest 
of the population through 2050 creating an even bigger “youth bulge.” The growing population and increasing 
dependency ratios are challenging for increasing employment, improving productivity, and adequately providing 
public services. The high population growth rate alone will result in extreme pressure on the health and education 
sectors, requiring a continuous increase in expenditures just to maintain coverage. The “youth bulge” will lead to 
a sharp rise in the number of young people seeking employment, and urbanization will push and increasing 
proportion of these youth to seek employment outside of the agricultural sector, though this increase is slow, and 
the majority will remain in informal work in agriculture.  

Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 

Sector Context  

4. Low education and literacy levels are severe constraints to a productive labor force. The education 
system in Chad is subdivided into early childhood education (almost inexistent, gross enrolment rate (GER) of 2%), 
six years of primary education, four years of lower secondary education, three years of upper secondary 
education, and higher education. However, according to the DHS 2014-15, almost half (46 percent) of primary-
school-age children in Chad did not attend school. Stark gender and regional inequalities remain, with a gender 
parity rate at 0.75. For those who do attend school, low learning outcomes are a perennial challenge, with only 
15.7 percent of sixth graders equipped with sufficient competency in reading according to the 2014 PASEC results. 
The low supply of science and technology skills is particularly acute, with just 67 girls nationally enrolled in 
mathematics and science tracks in the last year of upper secondary – or 0.1 percent of the total baccalaureate 
candidates.  
 

5. While the unemployment rate for the working age population is low in Chad (as in other parts of SSA), 
the youth unemployment rate is notably higher. It was estimated at around 9 percent for both 2016 and 2017 
with young women more likely to be unemployed (at a rate of 10.6 percent). Comparatively, the working age 
population unemployment rate is estimated at 5.8 percent in 2017 up from 5.7 percent in 20162. Educated youth 
and youth in urban areas appear to be more likely to be unemployed, and if Chadians are working, the quality of 
their jobs tends to be low.  According to ECOSIT 3 data, more than 35 percent of the working age population is 
underemployed, especially in rural areas (36.4 percent, compared to 27.2 percent in urban areas). 

 

6. A high concentration of the labor force in self-employed informal and low-productivity operations. Most 
of the workers are in the informal sector which represents 95 percent of the workforce. Jobs in the informal sector 
are highly vulnerable, with low earnings, and low dependability. Even outside of agriculture, 60 percent of jobs 
are in the informal sector. Of the 400,000 informal establishments outside of agriculture, most are engaged in 
trade and repair of vehicles or equipment, followed by manufacturing of food and beverages.  As above, 
underemployment remains a major challenge. Within the informal sector 39.2 percent of the workers in the non-
agricultural sector are estimated to be underemployed vs. 40.2 percent for agricultural workers.  

 

                                                           
2 See World Development Indicators 2018.  



 

The World Bank  
CHAD Skills Development for Youth Employment and Competitiveness Project (P164297) 

 

 

  
Apr 12, 2019 Page 5 of 23  

 

7. The agriculture sector employs 80 percent of the Chadian workforce and accounts for 52 percent of 
GDP. It is also the second largest source of export income for the country after oil. The Government has, among 
other actions, prioritized the industrialization of agriculture with the aim of boosting exports to diversify the 
economy, but the sector is struggling to modernize and remains largely dependent on weather conditions3. Family 
farming often has low productivity and profitability and lacks resilience to shocks. While lack of equipment and 
technology contribute to low productivity and profitability, low education levels and lack of skills are also key 
determinants. Support for more productive self-employment and diversification of rural livelihoods is critical to 
supporting the high proportion of vulnerable rural Chadians.  

 

8. A multi-tier system of technical and vocational education and training (TVET) exists, with several 
institutions that focus on providing differing levels of skills but is complex and poorly coordinated. Students at 
the lower secondary level can seek a DFFTP (Diplôme de Fin de Formation Technique et Professionnelle) which is 
awarded after two years of vocational study at a technical college. Students who pass the exit examination at the 
end of the lower secondary cycle can also enroll in a three-year program taught in a lycée technique, leading to 
the degree of BT. Students who successfully complete middle school can also seek a BEP degree which can be 
obtained with two years of technical or vocational training in a college technique following successful completion 
of middle school. The technical and vocational education sector includes two industrial technical high schools, 
four industrial technical secondary schools, twenty-one high schools specialized in commerce. In addition to these 
institutions there are eighteen apprenticeship and training centers with varying levels of capacity, which tend to 
focus on shorter term training.  
 

9. Although TVET and skills development efforts are a critical pathway for improving the stock of skilled 
workers for market relevant jobs, the subsector has suffered from numerous challenges which undermine their 
potential. These include the following:    

 

(a) Unsustainable Funding.   Public technical and vocational training institutes receive funding from 
multiple resources, including a payroll tax on private businesses and a tax on foreign workers, but little 
coordination exists among these groups, and allocations do not rely on formal criteria related to needs or 
priorities. In many cases equipment, basic inputs such as electricity, raw materials, and ventilation are 
outdated or non-existent within centers. Further, centers lack autonomy, have no way to generate 
additional revenue, and lack basic governing procedures at the institutional level.  
(b) Low enrollment. TVET centers have extremely low absorptive capacity despite demand and do 
not make use of efficiency measures in scheduling and shifting to maximize space and enrollment. In the 
school year 2014 - 157,042 students were enrolled in technical colleges, and 1,039 in vocational schools. 
The majority of students (5,563 students or 78.3 percent) chose the technical commercial schools while 
the remaining 21.7 percent enrolled in the technical and industrial streams. Private institutions account 
for 27 percent of total enrollment. 
(c) Lack of diversity and access. Access is particularly limited for Chadians living in rural areas, as well 
as women both in rural and urban areas. Furthermore, inclusion measures for participants with 
disabilities, even very basic ones, do not exist within the centers. Just 1.5 percent of enrollment at the 
secondary level is occupied by rural Chadians, given that the centers are concentrated in major cities and 
there are few offerings focused on key sectors such as agriculture,4 and the female imbalance is acute 

                                                           
3 Agriculture Sector Review Report (ASRR) 2017.  
4 N’Djamena is home to 37 percent of the TVET institutions and 48 percent of the sector’s students. In Moundou, the country’s 
second largest city, these numbers stand at 9 percent and 18 percent respectively. 



 

The World Bank  
CHAD Skills Development for Youth Employment and Competitiveness Project (P164297) 

 

 

  
Apr 12, 2019 Page 6 of 23  

 

(except for the commercial streams5. Girls accounted for only 5 percent of the total 2,518 enrollees in the 
industrial streams of the TVET institutions and there are extremely small numbers of female teachers and 
no female directors in any of the TVET institutions.6  
(d) Limited relevance and low quality. The key factors driving low quality are (i) program offerings 
do not appear to be driven by employment offerings and do not result in required skills for employment7; 
(ii) equipment is outdated or nonexistent, and hands-on application is often not possible; and (iii) poorly 
trained trainers and staff as well as outdated heavily theoretical curricula diminish the quality of training 
to students.   
(e) Lack of industry involvement. AFD is supporting development of standards which were previously 
non-existent or defunct, however there remains very little input from industry on training design. Further, 
for entrepreneurship and self-employment, even though these remain the main sources of employment. 

 

Institutional Context and Government Strategy  

 

10. The technical and vocational training sector is highly fragmented in terms of both service delivery and 
financing. At least seven ministries intervene in one way or another in the training sector. The three main 
ministries are (i) the Ministry of Vocational Training and Micro Commerce (Ministère de la Formation 
Professionnelle et des Petits Métiers, MFPPM); (ii) the Ministry of National Education and Civics Promotion 
(Ministère de l’Education Nationale et de la Promotion Civique, MENPC); and (iii) the Ministry of Higher Education, 
Research and Innovation (Ministère de l’Enseignement Supérieur, de la Recherche et de l’Innovation, MESRI). Each 
of these ministries manages training centers or schools which deliver diplomas or certificates to its graduates. 
However, many other ministries also manage training schools and centers in their specific sector without any 
relationship to the three major ministries. The Ministry of Civil Service, Labor, and Social Dialogue manages eight 
training centers and the Ministry of Agriculture has 35 centers. The Ministries of Health, Justice, Livestock, Post 
and Telecommunications, and Youth to name a few all manage technical and vocational centers.   
 

11. The National Development Plan (2017-2021), aims at developing Chad into an emerging regional 
country by 2030. It champions the four strategic objectives of (i) strengthening of national unity; (ii) strengthening 
good governance and the rule of law; (iii) the development of a diversified and competitive economy; and (iv) 
improving the quality of life of the Chadian population. As part of this approach, there is an emphasis on improved 
human capacity development and specifically improvement of technical and vocational education through 
Outcome 4.2.2 which stipulates that the actions planned to improve the sector are: (i) building the human and 
material capacities of institutes of technical education; (ii) improving governance of the sector; (iii) improving 
access to, and the fairness and quality of, technical training centers; and (iv) vocational training centers; and (v) 
building the capacities of human resources.  

 

12. President Idriss Deby, reiterated the importance of education and youth employment, following the 
new constitution, in a speech in May 2018, in which he presented the country’s commitment to human capital 
development. This includes significant education reforms which aim to connect education to the world of work, 

                                                           
5 Technical commercial streams graduate students in fields such as management, commerce, or business. 
6 According to 2017-18 institutional annual reports there was one female out of 26 teachers (or 3.8 percent) and 10 females out 

of 70 teachers (or 14.3 percent) in the TVET school of Moundou (CETIM) and N’Djamena (LETIN) respectively 

7 Opportunities in areas such as agriculture, forestry, and fishing, even though they are the main sub-sectors of employment are 
rarely offered.  



 

The World Bank  
CHAD Skills Development for Youth Employment and Competitiveness Project (P164297) 

 

 

  
Apr 12, 2019 Page 7 of 23  

 

ensure that skills development of young people is responsive to the most pressing needs of the country especially 
in the critical sector of agriculture, and ensuring more and better job opportunities for young women and men.  

 

13. The specific policy objectives for Technical and Vocational training are further outlined in the 2017 
National Employment and Training Policy, and the 2014 Interim Strategy for TVET which is not yet validated. 
These strategic documents main objectives are to equip young and adult Chadians with the necessary skills to find 
decent jobs or create their own jobs in the growth sectors. To that end, the Government is cognizant of the 
necessity to reform the technical and vocational training sectors by improving its quality and creating stronger 
links with the private sector. The system will also need to improve its absorptive capacity to be able to train even 
a small share of the massive number of youths that will enter the labor market during the next decade, estimated 
at 2.5 million. Without comprehensive and profound reforms, the sector is very unlikely to be able to deliver the 
expected results. 

 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
Development Objective(s) (From PAD)  
The project development objective (PDO) is to improve access to quality skills training; and labor market outcomes for 
project beneficiaries and to strengthen the technical and vocational education and training (TVET) system in Chad 
 

Key Results 
 

Type Objective Indicator  

PDO Indicator 1 (core) Improve access to skills training for project 
beneficiaries  

Total beneficiaries of job focused 
intervetions (gender disaggregated)  

PDO Indicator 2  Improve labor market outcomes for project 
beneficiaries 

Share of beneficiaries of skills 
development programs who are 
employed within 6 months of 
completion 

PDO Indicator 3 Strengthen the technical and vocational 
education and training (TVET) system  

Number of CFTPs and TVET centers 
that have a functioning board of 
directors 

 
 
D. Project Description  

 
14. To improve skills, employability, employment prospects, and labor market outcomes for its youth Chad 
will need to adopt a multi-pronged strategy: (i) improve the quality of its general education especially the pre-
primary and primary cycles (PARSET2 is focused on primary education); (ii) improve the quality and relevance of 
its formal technical and professional skills formation system which will lead to higher quantity and better 
employability; and (iii) support the skills acquisition system for those in the informal sector or out-of-school. The 
project is designed to support these through four components. Component 1 will support the expansion of 
quality training opportunities by strengthening the public sector system, while Component 2 aims at improving 
the school to work transition for those in secondary technical or post-secondary education and bringing training 
opportunities to out-of-school youth and those living in rural areas. The main objective of Component 3 is to 



 

The World Bank  
CHAD Skills Development for Youth Employment and Competitiveness Project (P164297) 

 

 

  
Apr 12, 2019 Page 8 of 23  

 

strengthen the governance of the TVET public system which will have medium to long term impacts on the 
system’s ability to deliver quality training and make quality improvements implemented by the project self-
sustaining. Lastly, component 4 will focus on the project management and instilling a culture of monitoring and 
evaluation.  

 

Component 1. Expanding Access to Skills through Improved Technical and Vocational Education 

(US$14.7 million) 

 

15. This component aims to improve access to training and improve the overall quality of vocational 
training to meet the needs of the of the Chadian economy in sectors with high labor potential. This objective 
will be achieved through two sub-components: i) creation of a new model Centre de Formation Technique et 
Professionnelle (Center of Technical and Professional Training -CFTP), including the construction of the CFTP and 
the development of new management and training methods; and (ii) the improvement of the quality and 
upgrading of existing technical and vocational secondary schools in the industrial stream (Collèges and Lycèes 
d’Enseignement Technique et Industriel, CETIN and LETIN). Youth aged 14-29 will be targeted who meet the 
qualifications for entry into the newly created and restructured institutions and will benefit at least 30 percent 
females.  
 

16. Component 1 will roll out a new institutional management and operations model which utilizes industry 
linkages and reorientation of the programs around labor insertion for graduates. This includes adopting sector 
specific curricula currently under development with support from AFD and in-depth training of school managers 
and trainers to upgrade quality of teaching and institutional management. To this end multi-year performance-
based contracts (PBCs) will be signed between the government and targeted institutions which incentivize 
improved relevance, quality, access, and employment outcomes. Greater autonomy of training institutions and 
several sector reforms are required to create an enabling environment for this results-based management and 
operations model, which will be supported under Component 3.  

 

Sub-component 1.1 Improving Access to Quality Skills through the Creation of a new CFTP and 

Expanded Opportunities through preexisting CFTPs (US$5.3 million) 

 

17. The construction of a new CFTP will be funded by the project. The new institution will incorporate the 
new pedagogical and management models including participation from the private sector. The site for the center 
will be X.  
 

18. The project will finance development of the PBC between the CFTP and Ministry which elaborate clear 
targets namely: (i) the establishment of a Board of Directors; (ii) a minimum private sector and civil society 
participation of 40 percent in the Board of Directors; (iii) number young people registered by specialty area; (iv) 
the share of girls enrolled; (v) the share of enrollees participating in dual-training programs; (vi) number of 
graduates certified ; (vii) monitoring of graduates’ insertion in the labor market; (viii) effective in-service training 
of trainers; and (ix) the implementation of a new financing model. The performance contracts will be monitored 
by the MFPPM and each CFTP through their own monitoring and evaluation systems. They will also be supported 
by PARSET2 monitoring and evaluation specialist. 



 

The World Bank  
CHAD Skills Development for Youth Employment and Competitiveness Project (P164297) 

 

 

  
Apr 12, 2019 Page 9 of 23  

 

 

19. Main activities: this sub-component will finance the construction of a new CFTP and the following 
activities through the PBCs: (i) the development and implementation of new pedagogical models and curricula; 
(ii) new administrative management involving the private sector; (iii) strengthening of the professional and 
teaching competencies of trainers; (iv) the provision of relevant equipment; (v) the purchasing of adapted 
textbooks; (vi) rehabilitation of existing infrastructures and equipment; (vii) information and sensitization 
campaigns to attract more female students; and (viii) governance reform and institutional financing. 

 

Sub-component 1.2 Rehabilitation and upgrading of Lycees Techniques et Industriels (US$9.4 million) 

 

20. The project will support the reform and upgrading (modernization) of two to four collèges and lycées 
techniques et industriels through performance-based contracts to improve the quality of service delivery and 
the efficiency and effectiveness of the LETINs. These institutions currently offer courses in construction, 
electricity, and automotive, among others. The institutions are characterized by outdated equipment, limited 
hands-on and relevant training, heavily theory based teaching, and weak links with the private sector. The aim is 
to focus the course offerings, improve the management of the schools, strengthen practicum-based teaching and 
learning, introduce entrepreneurship and non-cognitive (socio-emotional) skills development8, and improve 
linkages with related industry to better prepare graduates for employability, in addition to upgrading of hardware. 

 

21. The project will provide support for the preparation of operational manuals regarding the management 
of TVET schools, performance monitoring, relationship with the private sector relations and the preparation of 
regulatory texts. Technical assistance will be recruited to support the teams responsible for the management of 
TVET schools and the ministerial directorates in charge of technical education and vocational training.  

 

22. Technical auditors will be recruited to conduct an external evaluation of each performance contract and 
certify the level of achievement of the expected results. The technical audit report will be used to determine the 
amount of funds to be allocated for the following year. 

 

23. Main activities: this sub-component will finance the following activities through the PBCs: (i) the 
development and implementation of new pedagogical models and curricula (in coordination with AFD programs); 
(ii) new administrative management involving the private sector; (iii) strengthening of the professional and 
teaching competencies of trainers; (iv) the provision of relevant equipment including for ICT; (v) the purchasing of 
adapted textbooks; (vi) rehabilitation of existing infrastructures and equipment; (vii) information and sensitization 
campaigns to attract more female students; (viii) governance reform and institutional financing; and (ix) study 
tours for all relevant actors especially at the central level, directors, and a select number of teachers. The sub-
component will also finance technical assistance to the TVET school to help them navigate through the 
institutional changes envisioned in the project and improve their financial management capacity. 

 

Component 2. Employment Support for Youth and Improved Entrepreneurship Opportunities (US$24.4 

million) 

                                                           
8 Add footnote on socio-emotional skills here.  



 

The World Bank  
CHAD Skills Development for Youth Employment and Competitiveness Project (P164297) 

 

 

  
Apr 12, 2019 Page 10 of 23  

 

 

24. This component seeks to provide first work experiences, and skills relevant to labor market demands, 
including entrepreneurship training, to youth. Targeted young people may have completed the full education 
cycle or dropped out of the school system prior to completion. The objective is to provide quality hands-on job 
training and entrepreneurship training, to improve employability, employment prospects, and ultimately 
livelihoods. This would include (a) internships for skilled graduates in their prospective professions; (b) 
apprenticeships; and (c) entrepreneurship for agricultural development. Apprenticeships and entrepreneurship 
approaches focus heavily on unskilled workers given that they are the most promising approaches to helping the 
large scale of low-skilled individuals within Chad transition into employment/self-employment.  

 

Table 1: Summary Overview of Sub-components 
Sub-component Beneficiaries Duration of Program Implementing Agency 

2.1 Internships to improve 
school-to-work 
transition 

6,000 youth aged 15 to 29 
registered in CFTPs, LETINs, 
or university 

6 to 12 months ONAPE and CNPT 

2.2 Expanding 
opportunities for 
apprenticeships 

7,500 out-of-school youth 
aged 15 to 39 with limited 
education and who are not 
in a wage job 

6 to 24 months 
depending on the trade 

FONAP, MFPDS 

2.3 Agricultural 
entrepreneurship 

8,000 out-of-school youth 
aged 15 to 39 living in rural 
areas and mostly engaged 
in the agriculture sector 
either wage worker or self-
employed 

Up to 6 months ONAPE and local NGOs 

 

Sub-component 2.1 Internships to Improve School-to-Work Transition (US$6.8 million) 

 

25. The internship program aims to improve the employment outcomes of graduates transitioning from 
secondary or post-secondary general education and TVET institutions into the labor market. Chad’s educational 
system does not have sufficiently strong linkages with the private sector to facilitate the immersion of young 
graduates in enterprises during their time at school or following their graduation. The subcomponent aims to 
address this practical skills gap of current graduates, while simultaneously reorienting the TVET institutional 
approach to focus on employment.  

 

26. Internships will last 6 months during which the internships are funded fully by the project. After the first 
6 months, the contract will be renewable for another 6 months, at which point the intern would be partially funded 
(50 percent) by the enterprise. Internships could for example include placements in hotels, healthcare, other 
service sectors, and construction firms which have been shown through data from ONAPE to recruit the highest 
numbers of workers. After one year, the intern then becomes eligible for recruitment, at which point the company 
would be wholly responsible for funding. The number of interns a company can hire over the course of the project 
and at any point in time will be limited (with optimal limit to be determined) to avoid abuse of the system by 
companies, as well as limits on the number of trainees a company can take without hiring any. The monthly 



 

The World Bank  
CHAD Skills Development for Youth Employment and Competitiveness Project (P164297) 

 

 

  
Apr 12, 2019 Page 11 of 23  

 

internship stipend amount will not exceed 60,000 XOF with girls receiving a higher stipend to cover for potential 
day care cost. 

 

27. Main activities: The sub-component will finance (i) employment and internships recruiting camps in 
technical schools, training centers, and universities jointly hosted by ONAPE and the private sector, (ii) 
communications campaigns and partnership building in private companies; (iii) internship payments that include 
stipends, accident and medical insurance coverage, and (iv) technical assistance to ONAPE to implement the 
program and setup a website and the support to its decentralized branches outside of the capital city. 

 

Sub-component 2.2 Expanding Opportunities for Apprenticeships (US$9.2 million).  

 

28. An apprenticeship scheme will be developed to facilitate improved labor market integration for youth 
through a dual apprenticeship program which combines adapted training programs with on-the job training 
opportunities with craftspeople and professionals. Dual training refers to a combination of practical, on the job 
training, and theoretical education to ensure an optimal blend of theory and practice. Training programs will 
combine practical training and theory with an emphasis on hands-on experiences in various types of workshops. 
Training in training institutions will constitute 25 percent of the program, with 75 percent focused on hands-on 
practical application, and will be targeting to youth with a minimum level of education. Additionally, training in 
functional literacy, numeracy and life skills will be coupled with the job specific training to improve employability. 
 
29. To encourage female participation the project will pay a higher stipend to girls especially those with 
children who need to pay for day care costs. The payment of the stipend will depend on attendance. The project 
will also encourage girls to join male-dominated trades which provide better employment prospects and higher 
earnings in the labor market through a targeted sensitization campaign. 

 

30. Main Activities: the sub-component will finance (i) training fees for the training providers and master 
craftsmen; (ii) stipends for the trainees paid via mobile money; (iii) training in functional literacy and numeracy 
and life skills by qualified training providers; (iv) a defined package of materials and equipment including all 
necessary protections, (v) accident and medical insurance coverage for apprentices; (vi) costs associated with 
training of trainers, upgrading of skills of apprentice instructors, (vii) costs associated with selection and placement 
of apprentices; (viii) development of new training guidelines and the design and implementation of the regulatory 
and operational framework for the apprenticeship program; and (ix) an institutional and organizational audit of 
FONAP as well as monitoring and evaluation. 

 

Sub-component 2.3 Development of Agricultural Entrepreneurship (US$9.0 million) 

 

31. The sub-component will aim to provide entrepreneurship training to youth in rural communities to 
improve livelihoods. The goal is to provide necessary skills for addressing constraints related to (i) lack of 
entrepreneurship know-how (equipping small scale farmers with knowledge to diversify options and ideally 
transition out of subsistence farming); ii) community organizing along agro-value chains (i.e. building the value 
chain so that it is possible to grow, harvest, transform products, and get them to markets) and (iii) limited means 



 

The World Bank  
CHAD Skills Development for Youth Employment and Competitiveness Project (P164297) 

 

 

  
Apr 12, 2019 Page 12 of 23  

 

of food processing (i.e. loss of mangos during mango season due to limited technical skills and small scale 
equipment which result in not being able to transform/conserve them).  The approach is consistent with the large 
numbers of youth who remain in rural communities in Chad, and the majority of workers who are engaged in 
informal employment in the agriculture sector.  

 

32. Linkages between producers and sources of financing will be critically important and will be facilitated 
by connecting promising small-scale agriculture entrepreneurs with micro-loans via ONAPE. ONAPE has prior 
experience providing micro-lending to agriculture entrepreneurs, thus the program will build on the current 
mechanism, improve capacity and scale the approach. 

 

33. Main Activities: The sub-component will finance (i) a campaign to promote training activities and 
agriculture as a viable livelihood; (ii) the development of the training modules; (iii) delivery of training sessions via 
contracted local NGOs; (iv) training of trainers; (v) agriculture micro-loans through the existing ONAPE financing 
mechanism; and (vi) monitoring and evaluation. 

 

Component 3. Improving TVET System Governance and Institutional Capacity Building (US$5.9 million) 

 

34. This component is designed to strengthen the TVET system which suffers from weak governance and 
chronic underfunding.  Given the relative neglect of the sub-sector, the sustainability of the project depends on 
the capacity of the collèges, lycées, and CFPT to self-finance their activities.  It is critical that the status of these 
schools is revised to provide them with more autonomy and allow them to generate revenue, and flexibility to 
spend it.  Thus, a new regulatory framework will be necessary as is improved institutional and management 
capacities of the ministries and institutions involved in project implementation and project execution.  
 

35. This component will also build the leadership and management capacity of CFTP and TVET school 
directors to improve service delivery and implement a new finance model. TVET schools have often very low 
teacher-student ratios and teachers are underutilized - working less than 12 hours per week on average. Re-
organizing school calendars, better planning the use of classrooms and workshops, and organizing dual-training 
could substantially increase the number of students the institutions receive without jeopardizing its quality. To 
provide more training opportunities to the youth restructuring the current  financing model which currently 
operates using several uncoordinated sources of funding is critical. Rethinking the highly fragmented nature the 
training fund and address the financing challenges and the fractured nature of the skills development sector in 
Chad in terms of both service delivery and financing is also necessary.  

 

36. Because the reforms envisioned in this component are necessary for the public sector TVET to perform, 
their effective implementation will condition disbursement for the activities in Component 1. As noted earlier, 
if the CETIN, LETIN, and CFTP continue to operate under the current model i.e. with no public financing, no 
possibility to generate own funds, no cooperation with the private sector, and an outdated governance structure 
with little accountability it is very unlikely that any investment in this system will be sustainable. New equipment 
will become old and rusty because of lack of maintenance funds, teachers will quickly revert to theory-only 
teaching because they would lack the necessary material for labs. 

 



 

The World Bank  
CHAD Skills Development for Youth Employment and Competitiveness Project (P164297) 

 

 

  
Apr 12, 2019 Page 13 of 23  

 

37. Main Activities: this component will finance (i) TA to revisit the TVET national strategy and the national 
employment policy; (ii) roundtable and national consultations around the revised strategy; (iii) training of CFTP 
and TVET institutions’ staff; (iv) capacity building activities of selected training institutions, government 
departments, private sector associations, and employment agencies; (v) south-south exchanges through study 
tours; (vi) the revision of the national strategy of technical and vocational education and training, (vii) revision of 
the national employment policy; (viii) ONAPE’s capacity building to manage a website and generate databases to 
match supply and demand sides; (ix) national awareness campaigns that promote TVET and especially girls in 
TVET; (x) a study on the supply of training in Chad; and (xi) organizational and institutional audits of ONAPE, 
FONAP, and other important institutions. 

 

Component 4. Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation (US$5.0 million) 

 

38. This component will support the Project Coordination Unit (PCU), M&E activities, and capacity building 
activities associated with the implementation of the project. PARSET2’s PCU which has successfully managed 
several projects is retained to manage the project. The PCU will be responsible for overall coordination and 
implementation of project activities, as well as financial management (FM) and procurement. The project would 
finance the salaries of PCU staff, operational costs and the cost of equipment. Additionally, this component would 
cover specific technical assistance (TA) and capacity building needs for project implementation, and M&E 
(including third party validation, surveys, and impact evaluations). The proposed capacity building activities under 
this component could include: (i) trainings, study tours, and other initiatives to enhance the capacity of relevant 
ministry or agency staff to implement, coordinate, and monitor their programs; and (ii) capacity building of TVET 
institution administrators to increase their capacity to design surveys, conduct tracer studies and utilize the data 
for analysis and action.  

 

39. Assessment activities – including, impact evaluations and beneficiary surveys of interventions under 
component 2, as well as support to the Gender Innovation Lab which will work with local institutions to carry out 
statistical analysis/employment surveys/labor studies/etc. monitoring of youth and follow-up activities during 
internships, survey of youth after the completion of the internships, apprenticeships, and entrepreneurships. 
There will also be at least two impact evaluations embedded in the project. This includes working with the Gender 
Innovation Lab to evaluate the impact of the inclusion of socio-emotional in the skills training program on labor 
market outcomes such as likelihood of wage employment, self-employment, or net income. There will be a special 
focus on rural areas and girls. 

 

 

Project cost and financing  

Table 3: Project cost per component and financing source 

Components/Sub-components Project cost 
US$ million 

Percent IDA 
Financing 

Component 1 Expanding Skills Development through Improved Technical and 
Vocational Education 

14.7 100 

Sub-component 1.1: Creation of new CFTPs and Expanded Opportunities through 
preexisting centers 

5.3 100 

Sub-component 1.2: Rehabilitation and upgrading of Lycées Techniques et Industriels 9.4 100 



 

The World Bank  
CHAD Skills Development for Youth Employment and Competitiveness Project (P164297) 

 

 

  
Apr 12, 2019 Page 14 of 23  

 

   

Component 2: Employment support for Youth and Improved Entrepreneurship 
Opportunites 

24.4 100 

Sub-component 2.1: Internships for improved school-to-work transition 6.8 100 

Sub-component 2.2: Expanding Opportunities for Apprenticeships 9.2 100 

Sub-component 2.3: Development of Agricultural Entrepreneurship 9.0 100 
 

  

Component 3: Improving TVET System Governance and Institutional Capacity Building 5.9 100 
   

Component 4: Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation 5.0 100 
   

Overall Project 50.0 100 

E. Implementation 
 

Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 
 
40. The project will be implemented over a five-year period. The proposed closing date is October 31, 2024. 
The Ministry of National Education and the Promotion of Civics (Ministère de l’Education Nationale et de la 
Promotion Civique, MENPC) and the Ministry of Vocational Training and Micro Works (Ministère de la Formation 
Professionnelle et des Petits Métiers, MFPPM) will be the main implementing agencies for the project. 
 
41. Steering Committee (SC). A system-wide Steering Committee (SC) will be established to provide 
guidance to the project on an annual basis. The representative of the MFPPM will be the President of the SC and 
the representative of the MENPC will assume the Vice-Presidency. The SC will have representatives of MEPD, the 
Ministry of Higher Education, Research, and Innovation (Ministère de l’Enseignement Supérieur, de la Recherche 
et de l’Innovation, MESRI), the Ministry of Finance and Budget (Ministère des Finances et du Budget, MFB), the 
Ministry of Civil Service, Work, and Social Dialogue (Ministère de la Fonction Publique, du Travail et du Dialogue 
Social, MFPTDS), the Ministry of Youth Promotion, Sports, and Employment (Ministère de la Promotion des 
Jeunes, des Sports, et de l’Emploi, MPJSE), the Ministry of Production, Irrigation, and Agricultural Equipment 
(Ministère de la Production, de l’Irrigation et des Equipements Agricoles, MPIEA). It should also include 
representatives of civil society and private sector. 

 

42. At the annual meeting, the MENPC and MFPPM with support from the PCU will provide results for the 
year and will set out its intended results and necessary resources for the following year. The annual meeting 
will be done before the end of September of each year to ensure that the decisions taken by the Steering 
Committee are reflected in the budget submission for the following year. The first meeting of the Steering 
Committee is expected to take place in November 2019 (the second in September 2020) while the first annual 
work plan will be devised by the preparation team with the support of PARSET2. 

 

43. The PCU will be responsible for daily project coordination, as well as the administration of the financing: 
procurement, financial management, disbursement, monitoring, reporting and evaluation, environmental and 
social safeguards. The PCU is already staffed with a qualified Project Coordinator, Procurement Specialist, 
Financial Management Specialist, Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) Specialist, and Accountant. PARSET will be 
required to hire a team of engineers who will help oversee the CFTP construction and the rehabilitation program 
of the lycées and collèges d’enseignement technique et industriel. In addition, the DPEF will add a full-time 
Safeguards Specialist to ensure that the environmental and social safeguards requirements are met. Technical 
implementation of the Project will be the responsibility of each concerned department within the MENPC, 



 

The World Bank  
CHAD Skills Development for Youth Employment and Competitiveness Project (P164297) 

 

 

  
Apr 12, 2019 Page 15 of 23  

 

MFPPM, MFPTDS, and MEPD. Detailed project implementation mechanisms will be provided in the Project 
Implementation Manual (PIM), which will be completed by effectiveness. 

 

44. The role of the Steering Committee is to provide guidance and advice for strategic direction of the 
project and approve annual budget and action plan. In those cases where specific action is needed to address 
issues that go beyond the scope of any single ministry, the president of the Steering Committee can bring together 
the relevant parties to find solutions to problems that are inter-ministerial in nature, which may be presented to 
the Steering Committee, if necessary. 

 

45. The following implementation arrangements will be established. No more than three months after 
project effectiveness, each relevant MENPC and MFPPM director will nominate focal points who will be heads of 
components and sub-components who will work with the PARSET2 coordinator and the M&E specialist to convene 
the appropriate Government officials to finalize the work plan for each component. These will be key contributions 
to the overall project work plan to be developed by the project coordinator under the guidance of the Steering 
Committee which will be discussed with MENPC and MFPPM and communicated to the Bank. Thereafter, once a 
quarter, the PCU will report on progress to the MENPC and MFPPM as well as key development partners within 
the LEG and will share the work plan for the following three months. 

 

46. Annual reviews will be held in November/December of each year, bringing together all key stakeholders 
in the system. At those reviews, the MENPC and MFPPM officials will provide updates on the status of the technical 
and vocational education and training sector, including information regarding the start of the school year 
(enrollments, recruitments, trainings, and so on). Each functional/central directorate will present its results, and 
each regional directorate will do the same. The arrangements will be formalized in the project implementation 
manual. More details on the project implementation arrangements can be found in Annex 1. 
 
 
 .    
F. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 
 

 
G. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 
 

Kristyna Bishop, Social Specialist 
Bougadare Kone, Environmental Specialist 
Mamadou Diedhiou, Social Specialist 
Aurelie Marie Simone Monique Rossignol, Environmental Specialist 

 
 
 



 

The World Bank  
CHAD Skills Development for Youth Employment and Competitiveness Project (P164297) 

 

 

  
Apr 12, 2019 Page 16 of 23  

 

SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

Due to the civil works inherent to constructions 
and/or rehabilitation civil works activities of 
schools/centers, the potential social and 
environmental risks of the proposed project are 
expected to be moderate and mostly site-specific, 
with no significant or long-term negative risks and 
impacts, which are foreseen to be easily 
manageable; typical of category B projects. 
  
Since project’s physical footprint is presently 
unknown and would so be prior to appraisal, in 
compliance with OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental 
Assessment) core requirements, the Borrower will 
prepare, consult upon and publicly disclose – both 
in-country and on the world Bank’s website, prior to 
appraisal, an environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF) to guide the way that potential 
negative environmental and social risks and impacts 
of future sub-projects will be identified and 
mitigated during project implementation.  If, during 
project preparation/implementation, any project 
specific site is known before appraisal, a site-specific 
an Environmental and Social Impact Assessments 
(ESIA)/Environmental and Social Management Plans 
(ESMP) will also be prepared, amply consulted upon 
and publicly disclosed, both in-country and on the 
World Bank website prior to appraisal the physical 
start of civil works  

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No  

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 No  

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No  

Pest Management OP 4.09 No 

The project comprises no activity which may induce 
the purchase and/or the use of pesticides or related 
chemicals. The project will not finance pesticides 
acquisition or distribution. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 

This policy is triggered because of the nature of 
possible civil works to be financed under component 
1 – more precisely under sub-component 1.2 which 
might lead to the unearthing of such potential 
physical cultural resources (PCR).  Nevertheless, it is 



 

The World Bank  
CHAD Skills Development for Youth Employment and Competitiveness Project (P164297) 

 

 

  
Apr 12, 2019 Page 17 of 23  

 

highly unlikely that any physical cultural resources 
will be impacted; nonetheless, the existing a  
“Chance finds procedures” will be embedded in the 
ESMF to ensure that these aspects will be taken into 
account an adequate management of PSRs during 
project preparation and implementation. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 
The policy is not triggered as there are no 
Indigenous People in project targeted areas. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

The project has triggered OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary 
Resettlement) to enable the project to better tackle 
issues related to land acquisition, including 
economic and physical displacement. Since the 
project footprint is yet to be known, the Borrower 
will prepare project has updated the a Resettlement 
Policy Framework  (RPF) for each participating 
country. The RPF sets out the policies, principles, 
institutional arrangements, likely categories of 
affected people, eligibility criteria and categories, 
compensation rates, methods of valuing affected 
assets, community participation and information 
dissemination, Grievance Redress Mechanism and 
effective monitoring and evaluation. The RPF will be 
amply consulted upon, and once cleared by the Bank 
it will be publicly disclosed both in-country and at 
the WB’s external website prior to appraisal.  
 
 Further, when investment sites lead to land take 
that causes economic and/or physical displacement, 
the borrower will prepare a site-specific 
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP). Since the 
resettlement process is meant to be inclusive to 
encompass vulnerable social groups and guarantee 
that they receive fair and equitable treatment, the 
corresponding site-specific RAPs, wherever deemed 
necessary, will be consulted upon, cleared by the 
World Bank, and publicly disclosed both in-country 
and at the external WB’s website prior to the 
physical start of civil works  

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 
The project will not finance any activities related to 
the construction of dams nor affect operations of 
existing dams or affiliated reservoirs 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No The project will not affect international waterways. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No No activities are planned in any disputed areas. 

 



 

The World Bank  
CHAD Skills Development for Youth Employment and Competitiveness Project (P164297) 

 

 

  
Apr 12, 2019 Page 18 of 23  

 

 

KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project is focused on improving skills of the Chadian youth, with an emphasis on improving the public TVET 
system, instituting performance-based contracts, building capacity, improving the governance of TVET institutions, 
creating linkages with the private sector, improving monitoring and evaluation, etc. As such, these activities have little 
to no environmental impact. However, civil works will also be financed, such as the construction of technical and 
vocational training centers, and the extension and rehabilitation of secondary technical schools, within existing 
schools, the provision of fencing, access to clean water, adequate sanitation, and electricity for which the most cost-
effective and environment-friendly options (such as solar panels) will be given preference. Impacts from these 
activities could include work-related health and safety impacts; noise, dust, reduction of air and water quality; loss of 
tree/vegetation cover; etc. The short, medium- and long-term socio-economic impact of the proposed project is 
expected to be largely beneficial. The project has a low probability of inducing physical or economic displacement. Its 
intervention is mainly focused on existing secondary schools and vocational training centers except for the 
construction of one new model center. As there may be some unforeseen resettlement. Therefore, the project will 
prepare a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). The influx of male workers may increase the demand for sex. As a 
result, women in the project community may be subject to higher rates of violence. 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
Not applicable 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. 
Not applicable 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower 
capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
As the impacts from Project activities on the environment are expected to be moderate, the Borrower will prepare an 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF). The ESMF will be used by the implementing agency as a 
defined procedure and guidelines to screen each activity as it is proposed for financing. The ESMF will be used to 
prepare site-specific Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) which will include impacts, mitigation 
measures, a responsible entity and a budget for each mitigation activity. Given the Recipient’s limited but growing 
experience with implementation of environmental and social safeguards instruments, close safeguards supervision 
and implementation support will be carried out during the early stage of project implementation until adequate 
safeguards experience is developed. The PARSET2 engineer, in collaboration with the relevant directorate and regional 
office of the MFPPM, will supervise the implementation of the safeguards instruments discussed above. IDA 
supervision will focus on: (i) providing regular implementation support; (ii) carrying out field reviews of safeguards 
implementation; and (iii) monitoring safeguards implementation based on periodic progress reports.  
 
The short, medium- and long-term socio-economic impact of the proposed project is expected to be largely beneficial. 
The project has a low probability of inducing physical or economic displacement. Its intervention is mainly focused on 
existing technical secondary schools and vocational training centers. However, the construction of a new vocational 



 

The World Bank  
CHAD Skills Development for Youth Employment and Competitiveness Project (P164297) 

 

 

  
Apr 12, 2019 Page 19 of 23  

 

training center is planned in Sahr region. As there may be some unforeseen resettlement. Therefore, the project will 
prepare a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). The construction to be realized in this project are not large and the 
works will be realized by the local companies. Thus, the influx of foreign labor will be very limited, or-existent. 
Nevertheless, the project will also set in place mechanisms to prevent Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and sexual based 
violence. The project will emphasize the importance of having internal prevention and response systems and policies 
(sexual harassment policies, anonymous reporting mechanisms) in place and building staff capacity to recognize and 
address these issues at the project level during implementation. Finally, a The GRM will be prepared, in consultation 
with stakeholders, including communities. A project level GRM is outlined in the RPF and ESMF. It is designed to be a 
mechanism that is trusted by all relevant partners including the project affected persons (PAPs), if it turns out that 
impacts happened in the implementation stage. It will facilitate the redress of any grievance and conflict that may 
arise from the Project. The PIU will be notified of any disputes in the project zone. Project field staff should work 
closely with the communities and the community leaders to clarify and resolve any misunderstanding that could give 
rise to conflicts. The PIU will develop a clear plan and procedures for the GRM, including complaint collection and 
processing procedures, reporting format, database/records specifications, and committee membership using 
guidelines provided in the RPF and ESMF. Public participation and consultation will be a key part of the process at all 
times to promote understanding and prevent unnecessary complaints and disputes.  
 
IDA supervision will be carried out by field-based Bank technical staff, complemented by specialist consultants as 
necessary, during regular biannual supervision missions and during interim technical safeguards missions that will 
respond to emerging issues. Monitoring will be based on ESMF activities. It will also be an occasion to discuss the 
project safeguard requirements with the Recipient, including management plan and reporting requirements. 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, 
with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
During the preparation of the ESMF and RPF, the Borrower held consultation with several public TVET institutions and 
communities located in the regions that will be targeted by the project such as Moyen-Chari, Sahr, and Moundou as 
well as in N'Djamena. The Borrower met with TVET schools directors, teachers, and students. Further consultations 
will be held before appraisal and will specifically ensure that vulnerable groups, like women, refugees, etc. are 
included 
 
 
B. Disclosure Requirements  

 
OPS_EA_DISCLOSURE_TABLE Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other 

Date of receipt by the Bank Date of submission for disclosure 
For category A projects, date of 
distributing the Executive Summary of 
the EA to the Executive Directors 

22-Mar-2019 15-May-2019  

   

"In country" Disclosure   

   Chad 
  14-May-2019 

Comments 
 

   



 

The World Bank  
CHAD Skills Development for Youth Employment and Competitiveness Project (P164297) 

 

 

  
Apr 12, 2019 Page 20 of 23  

 

OPS_RA_D ISCL OSURE_T ABLE  

 

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process 

   

Date of receipt by the Bank Date of submission for disclosure  

01-Apr-2019 15-May-2019  

   

"In country" Disclosure   
   Chad 
  14-May-2019 

Comments 
 

       
 
 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project 
decision meeting)  

 
OPS_EA_COMP_TABLE OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
  
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
   
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report? 
   
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan? 
     

OPS_ PCR_C OM P_TA BLE  

 

OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources  
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
No   
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse impacts on cultural property? 
No    

OPS_IR_ CO MP_TA BLE  

 

OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 

 
 

Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes  
 

 

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager review the plan? 
 
 

 

 

 
      

OPS_ PDI_ CO MP_TA BLE  

 

The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 

 
 



 

The World Bank  
CHAD Skills Development for Youth Employment and Competitiveness Project (P164297) 

 

 

  
Apr 12, 2019 Page 21 of 23  

 

Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for disclosure? 
   
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language that are understandable 
and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs? 
  

 
 
All Safeguard Policies 

 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of 
measures related to safeguard policies? 
 

  
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost? 
 

  
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures 
related to safeguard policies? 
 

  
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately 
reflected in the project legal documents? 
 

 
 
 

CONTACT POINT 

 

  World Bank 
 

Waly Wane 
Senior Economist 

  

 

  Borrower/Client/Recipient 
 

Republic of Chad 

 

 

 
 

  Implementing Agencies 
 

Ministere de l'Education Nationale et de la Promotion Civique 

Dibe Galy 

Directeur General 

galydibe@yahoo.fr 
 
 

 

Yassir Tidjani 



 

The World Bank  
CHAD Skills Development for Youth Employment and Competitiveness Project (P164297) 

 

 

  
Apr 12, 2019 Page 22 of 23  

 

Directuer Enseignement Technique 

yassirtidjani@yahoo.fr 
 
 

 

Mahamat Barka Adams Al-Boukhari 

Coordonateur PARSET2 

barka_adams@yahoo.fr 
 
 

Ministere de la Formation Professionnelle et des Petits Metiers 

Padja Ruth Madjidian 

Ministre 

madjidianruth@gmail.com 
 
 

 

Chantal Mounoubai 

Directrice Generale du Ministere 

chanmounou@yahoo.fr 
 
 

Ministere de l'Economie et de la Planificatin du Developpement 

Houle Djonkamla 

Directeur General 

houle.djonkamla@gmail.com 
 
 

 

Dorim Bernard 

Directeur de la Cooperation au Developpement 

dorimbernard@yahoo.fr 
 

 

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT 

 

The World Bank 

1818 H Street, NW 

Washington, D.C. 20433 

Telephone: (202) 473-1000 

Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects  

 

 

APPROVAL 

 

Task Team Leader(s): Waly Wane 
 

http://www.worldbank.org/projects


 

The World Bank  
CHAD Skills Development for Youth Employment and Competitiveness Project (P164297) 

 

 

  
Apr 12, 2019 Page 23 of 23  

 

  Approved By 

Safeguards Advisor:   

Practice Manager/Manager: Meskerem Mulatu 20-May-2019 

Country Director: Francois Nankobogo 21-May-2019 
 

    
 
 
 
 
 
 



