














































World Bank Document


Page 1 of 11

COMBINED PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENTS / INTEGRATED 
SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET (PID/ISDS)  

ADDITIONAL FINANCING
Report No.: PIDISDSA19546

Date Prepared/Updated: 24-Nov-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION

  A.  Basic Project Data

Country: Western Africa Project ID: P158983
Parent 
Project ID 
(if any):

P122065

Project Name: Additional Financing for West Africa Agricultural Productivity Program 
(WAAPP- 1C) (P158983)

Parent Project 
Name:

West Africa Agricultural Productivity Program APL (WAAPP-1C) (P122065)

Region: AFRICA
Estimated 
Appraisal Date:

15-Nov-2016 Estimated 
Board Date:

06-Jan-2017

Practice Area
(Lead):

Agriculture Lending 
Instrument:

Investment Project Financing

Borrower(s): Ministry of Agriculture
Implementing 
Agency:

Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Agriculture Livestock and Fisheries, 
Ministry of Agriculture

Financing (in USD Million)
Financing Source Amount
International Development Association (IDA) 60.00
IDA Credit from CRW 8.00
Total Project Cost 68.00

Environmental 
Category:

B - Partial Assessment

Appraisal 
Review 
Decision (from 
Decision Note):

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate

Other Decision:
Is this a 
Repeater 
project?

No

P
u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d



Page 2 of 11

B.   Introduction and Context

Country Context
African agricultural development acquired new momentum when, in January 2014, the African 
Union adopted the Malabo Declaration on Accelerated Agricultural Growth and 
Transformational➢❬¢ in which African Heads of States and Governments recommitted 
themselves to the Comprehensive Africa Agricultural Development Program (CAADP) principles 
and values to uphold the 10 percent target for public spending on agriculture, to double 
agricultural productivity, and thus to sustain annual growth in agricultural GDP at 6 percent or 
higher. 
 
During the same period, there was a renewed commitment of development partners to engage and 
invest in the agricultural sector. Several initiatives are being launched, including from the United 
Nations, the African Development Bank and the World Bank. The United Nation adopted the new 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDG), and the second of the seventeen proposed SDGs is to end 
hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition, and promote sustainable agricultural. The 
African Development Bank launched (Feed Africa: Strategy for Agricultural Transformation in 
Africa, 2016-2025) which aims to end hunger and rural poverty in Africa in the next decade. 
Also, the World Bank has committed itself to twin goals: eliminating extreme poverty by 2030 
and boosting shared prosperity, measured as the income of the bottom 40 percent in any given 
country.
Sectoral and institutional Context
One of the main challenges in West Africa is satisfying the demands of a rapidly growing 
population that is expected to increase from 300 million in 2011 to about 500 million by 2030. 
The 2008 food, fuel, and financial crisis has demonstrated the need to base food security in West 
Africa on the utilization of the region's huge agricultural potential, as this option would 
simultaneously contribute to economic growth and reduction of poverty. Moreover, meta-analyses 
conducted by International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI) have shown that the benefits 
from productivity growth attributed to agricultural research exceed their costs by a factor of 10 or 
more whereas high rates of return on investments in science for agriculture, to the order of 40-60 
per cent, have also been consistently proven. 
 
Gains from smart investments in agricultural R&D were amply demonstrated by WAAPP impact 
analysis completed under the first phase of WAAPP in Mali, Senegal, Ghana, Cote d➢❨ Ivoire 
and Guinea. The analysis found that: (i) WAAPP beneficiaries have increased their yields and 
income by at least 30 percent over the control group; (ii) most of these gains resulted from the 
adoption of new varieties, improved crop management practices and improved small scale food 
processing technologies; and (iii) the immediate pathways exist to achieve rapid growth in 
agriculture through greater focus on productivity enhancement using a regional integration 
approach. The analysis also showed that program beneficiaries experienced a reduction in hunger 
by half and also improved their nutrition standards.

C.  Proposed Development Objective(s)

Original Project Development Objective(s) - Parent
To generate and accelerate the adoption of improved technologies in the participating countries' 
top agricultural commodity priority areas that are aligned with the sub-region's top agricultural 
commodity priorities, as outlined in the ECOWAP.



Page 3 of 11

Key Results 
As it concerns the achievement of the WAAPP in the targeted countries, as of October 2016, the 
project has reached in the four countries a total of more than 1 million direct beneficiaries 
(1,153,000), about 26 technologies have been generated by the NCOS in Benin and Niger and the 
rice research system in Guinea, close to 1.1 million hectares (1,083,000) have been covered by the 
new technologies and more than 650,000 producers/processors have adopted at least one new 
technology. The disbursement performance of the project is also satisfactory; more than 96 
percent of the parent project (WAAPP-1C) financing is disbursed, and an action plan is being 
implemented which will ensure full disbursement by the current closing date of December 2016.

D.  Project Description

The AF will build upon the achievements of the original project to complete, consolidate and 
expand project activities. Therefore there will not be change in the project development objective 
and component structure as well as or safeguard category. The proposed AF will also continue to 
use the implementation arrangements and technical design of the original project. 
However, the primary focus of the AF will be to scale up the adoption the innovations and 
technologies generated by the WAAPP (more than 174 technologies have been released by the 
Program to improve agricultural production, post harvest, processing and mechanization). Thus 
the AF will add a particular focus on marketing of these technologies and innovations in order to 
scale up their adoption and to increase food availability in the sub region, and thereby contribute 
to poverty alleviation and agricultural growth. And since some of these technologies have 
different level of marketability and their scope for adoption also varies markedly the AF will 
among others, include the contracting of a private firm/NGO by CORAF/WECARD to design a 
technology marketing strategy and a technology marketing specialists in each country to 
implement an action plan for the commercialization of the technologies. In this framework the AF 
will finance incubation centers and seed money for job creation for greater citizen engagement, 
youth and women, and provide incentives and mechanisms to actively involve the private sector 
and mobilize some of their resources for the development of the targeted value chains. 
 
And in order to take the above scaled-up activities of the AF into account, the project➢❨ s Results 
Framework will be updated to review the targets of the indicators and also include the new 
indicators on job creation/employment, nutrition, citizen engagement and private sector 
participation. In addition the closing date of the original project will be extended to correspond to 
the duration of the AF. The Risk ratings have been updated to reflect experience gained during 
implementation of the original project.

Component Name
(a) Component 1: Enabling Conditions for Sub-regional Cooperation in the Generation, 
Dissemination, and Adoption of Agricultural Technologies.
Comments (optional)
The AF will: (i) upscale the implementation of common regulations and strategies developed 
under the parent project; (ii) support the development and implementation of a regional strategy 
and national action plans to address the issues of nutrition and food safety in collaboration with 
FAO nutrition unit; and (iii) assist the countries in finalizing the setting up of their sustainable 
funding mechanism for technology generation and dissemination.



Page 4 of 11

Component Name
(b) Component 2: Strengthening National Centers of Specialization/Strengthening of the 
Research System
Comments (optional)
The component will finance: (ii) for Benin and Niger, the implementation of  their action plans to 
transform the National Centers of Specialization (NCOS) into Regional Centers of Excellence 
(RCOE) for agricultural research in maize and livestock, respectively; and (ii) for Togo and 
Guinea, which does not have an NCOS, the upgrading of their adaptive research systems to 
participate more actively in the network of the RCEO and bring and adapt in their countries the 
maximum technologies and innovations from the sub region.

Component Name
(c) Component 3: Support to Demand-Driven Technology Generation, Dissemination and 
Adoption.
Comments (optional)
The  component will finance: (i) financing through the competitive agriculture grant schemes the 
completion of the ongoing research and a limited number of new on-demand projects that may be 
commissioned; (ii) strengthening the regional technology market including organizing local and 
regional technology fairs; (ii) upscaling the adoption of existing technologies and innovations 
with a much greater emphasis on nutrition-sensitive and climate smart agriculture technologies 
that have high potential for accelerating job creation for youth and women (iii) implementing  an 
action plan to scale-up commercialization of the promising technologies to facilitate private sector 
investment and create more jobs for young agro-entrepreneurs; and (iv) strengthen the regional 
seed market and upscale the p

Component Name
(d) Component 4: Project Coordination, Management and Monitoring and Evaluation.
Comments (optional)
The Project will continue to finance the existing Project Coordination Unit (PCUs) in Togo, 
Niger, Benin and Guinea selected additional staffs and specifically a technology marketing 
specialist in each country.

E.  Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis (if known)

The project in each of these fours countries has a national coverage. Although it would be mainly 
developed in R&D centers, newly availed WAAPP technologies will also be expanded to new 
farmers own lands to ensure technologies contribute indeed to alleviate poverty and shared 
prosperity. These technologies would be gender sensitive and youth-driven as the project seeks at 
engaiging more women and youth as citizen for sustainable development.

F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

Abdoulaye Gadiere (GEN07)
Cheikh A. T. Sagna (GSU01)
Emeran Serge M. Menang Evouna (GEN07)



Page 5 of 11

II. Implementation
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 
 
The proposed AF does not foresee any changes in terms of implementation arrangements. The AF 
will be placed under the technical responsibility of the Ministry in charge of Agriculture in each of 
the participating countries and under the responsibility of CORAF for the regional level activities. 
The PCUs in each country and CORAF will therefore continue to coordinate project activities, 
prepare the Annual Work Program and Budgets (AWPB), organize the Implementation Support 
Missions (ISM) and ensure project Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E). The PCUs and CORAF have 
a solid track record for Social and Environmental Safeguards, procurement, financial management 
and M&E, which have consistently been rated satisfactory or moderately satisfactory throughout the 
parent project implementation. CORAF and each PCU will be strengthened with an additional staff 
who will be specialized in Technology Marketing and Commercialization. The Guinea PCU will be 
reinforced with additional staffs including two social and Environmental specialists (each with 
specific responsibilities), a financial management specialist, a procurement specialist and a technical 
expert. Implementation of the AF activities will also be supported by strategic institutional and 
technical partners, as well as service providers (other agencies, NGOs, CSO, etc.) who will be 
contracted through the: i) result-based MOUs for public service providers and other Projects and ii) 
result- based contracts for private service providers and NGOs.

III. Safeguard Policies that might apply

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment 
OP/BP 4.01

Yes The AF is a Category-B project due to the fact that 
potential social and environmental impacts are 
expected to be local, site-specific and easily 
manageable. Because it is a continuation of 
WAAPP-1C the ESMF has been updated, revised 
and adapted within the context of the focus of the AF 
on scaling up technology adoption which follows the 
same line of intervention of the parent project. The 
ESMF includes further provisions for capacity 
strengthening at all levels for the successful 
implementation of the project safeguard measures, in 
compliance with national and Bank safeguard 
policies. The updated version of the ESMF was 
reviewed, cleared by both CORAF and World Bank 
and then disclosed simultaneously both in CORAF 
websites and at the InfoShop on November 18, 2016.

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 No The AF is not supporting any agricultural sites near 
wetlands, mangroves, or other critical habitats . It 
will work on improving productivity on existing 
developed land.

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No The AF is not supporting any extension of cropping 
area and therefore no damage of forests is expected. 



Page 6 of 11

It will develop its activities on land already under 
exploitation.

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes The AF will scale up the parent project 
achievements. The initial PMP was revised, updated 
and adapted to reflect the AF interventions and set 
forth the basic principles each member-country 
would follow to adequately handle the possible usage 
of pesticides, particularly as the AF will focus on 
dissemination of agriculture technologies. Upon 
completion, the updated version of the  PMP was 
reviewed, cleared by both CORAF and World Bank 
and then disclosed simultaneously both in CORAF 
websites and at the InfoShop on November 18, 2016.

Physical Cultural Resources 
OP/BP 4.11

No The project will not finance activities that threaten 
culturral ressources.

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 
4.10

No There are no indigenous peoples in the project area.

Involuntary Resettlement OP/
BP 4.12

Yes The AF is a category B project due to the fact that 
foreseen social and environmental impacts are 
expected to be local, sites specific and easily 
manageable.  OP/BP 4.12 is triggered for Guinea 
only because  of the expected land acquisition, loss 
of assets or loss of access to livelihoods support 
means upon which local beneficiary communities 
depend. To comply with OP/BP 4.12 policy 
principles and guidelines Guinea prepared a 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) on how to 
comply with the above mentioned land use/right 
issues. Upon completion, the RPF was reviewed, 
cleared by both CORAF and World Bank and then 
disclosed simultaneously both in CORAF websites 
and at the InfoShop on November 18, 2016.

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No The AF is not involving any construction or 
rehabilitation of dams.

Projects on International 
Waterways OP/BP 7.50

No The AF does not affect or involve international 
waterways.

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/
BP 7.60

No The AF is not in a disputed area.

IV. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify 

and describe any potential large scale,  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Social (including Safeguards). The AF is expected to have no significant negative social impacts. 
Project beneficiaries are mainly small-scale farmers  in food crop production for national, regional 
and international markets - in which women play a critical role.The Project will work to ensure 



Page 7 of 11

that the circumstances of small-scale farmers, particularly women and youth, are accounted for in 
setting priorities. Adaptive research will be conducted in farmers➢❨  fields. Competitive grants to 
implement R&D will be open to producers➢❨  organizations and agribusiness associations and not 
only to research organizations. The Project will work with development operations and public/
private partnerships to scale up producers➢❨  use of technologies. 
 
As a Category B Project, the foreseen social impacts are expected to be local, mostly sites specific 
and easily manageable. The Involuntary Resettlement operational policy (OP/BP 4.12) has been 
triggered only or Guinea - where the project will cover new commodities and new intervention 
areas, because of the expected land acquisition, loss of assets or loss of access to livelihoods 
support means upon which local beneficiary communities depend. To comply with WB OP/BP 
4.12 policy principles and guidelines, Guinea has prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework 
(RPF) on how to comply with the above mentioned land use/right issues. The RPF was amply 
consulted upon and stakeholders feedback provided in the annexes of the documents. 
 
Environment (including Safeguards). The AF is expected to have a positive environmental impact 
through its support for agricultural technologies that promote better use of land and water 
resources. Potential environmental risks could include point and non-point pollution of water 
sources, other issues associated with the use of agricultural chemicals, and negative environmental 
impacts associated with the rehabilitation of irrigation or small-scale civil works on research 
stations. Research on transgenic crops is neither explicitly planned nor excluded. If it becomes part 
of the research agenda supported under the Project, it will proceed with social and environmental 
safeguards consultants with international good practice and the regulatory framework of the host 
country. In particular, such research must be done in accordance with the obligation of each 
country under international treaties to which it is a party, including the Cartagena Protocol on 
Biosafety (for Burkina Faso and Nigeria). Potential adverse environmental impacts associated with 
the NCoS activities will be of low intensity, minor, site specific, and handled under safeguard 
measures already in place for ongoing activities.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities 
in the project area:
NA

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse 
impacts.
NA

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an 
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
This is an additional financing to a project which was implemented during a 5 year period. During 
the parent project phase a close supervision of the implementation of safeguards measures were 
conducted by the social and environmental safeguards specialists of the World Bank. In addition 
each country and CORAF appointed social and environmental safeguard focal points in charge of 
ensuring that the social and environmental safeguards are well implemented and mitigation 
measures are also identified and implemented. A capacity building plan was also implemented 
including two regional training workshops and several country level workshops for all safeguard 
focal points. The recent ISM in June 2016 rated compliance with safeguards policies as 
satisfactory for the 4 recipient countries and indicates that both the safeguards focal points have 
the required knowledge and are playing a key role in ensuring that safeguards measures are well 
implemented. However, it was convened that each PIU will recruit/appoint one qualified 



Page 8 of 11

environmental safeguards specialist and one qualified social safeguards specialist, to improve the 
safeguards performance. The ESMF and the PMP have been updated, including a better 
clarification of roles and responsibilities for safeguards implementation among the PIU staff; this 
role distribution will be inserted in the Project implementation manual (PIM). An RPF has been 
developed for Guinea as recommended by the policy, since Guinea will be developing a variety of 
new crops which would probably need additional lands acquisition or encroachment of which. in 
public domain, would need a proper handing and payment of compensation to the recipient 
communities. All these documents include measures to ensure that safeguard requirements are 
being properly complied with.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure 
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
A comprehensive set of stakeholder were consulted during the preparation of the safeguards 
documents for the original project. Similarly, consultations were done during the preparation of 
the AF that included various beneficiaries, agricultural, social, and environmental, health agencies 
as well as some NGOs and other civil society agencies. Producers/processors and their 
organizations at the sub region levels (ROPPA) and at national levels were also consulted. 
Following the consultations the original safeguard documents were updated for the AF and each 
country organized a national stakeholder workshop to disseminate and validate the documents. 
Key issues and recommendations of the workshops were used to improve the safeguards 
documents. Recommendations from both the client and the Bank and from the stakeholders 
workshop have been reflected in the final draft of the ESMP, PMP and RPF.

B. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank 11-Nov-2016

Date of submission to InfoShop 18-Nov-2016
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors

"In country" Disclosure

Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process

Date of receipt by the Bank 11-Nov-2016

Date of submission to InfoShop 18-Nov-2016
"In country" Disclosure

Comments:
Pest Management Plan

Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal? Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank 11-Nov-2016



Page 9 of 11

Date of submission to InfoShop 18-Nov-2016
"In country" Disclosure

Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:

C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) 
report?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice 
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated 
in the credit/loan?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]
Is a separate PMP required? Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a 
safeguards specialist or PM?  Are PMP requirements included 
in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest 
Management Specialist?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or 
Practice Manager review the plan?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

Is physical displacement/relocation expected? 
 
 Provided estimated number of people to be affected

Yes [ ] No [ ] TBD [ ]

Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to 
assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of 
livelihoods) 
 
 Provided estimated number of people to be affected

Yes [ ] No [ ] TBD [ ]

The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the 
World Bank's Infoshop?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public 
place in a form and language that are understandable and 

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]



Page 10 of 11

accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies

Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional 
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of 
measures related to safeguard policies?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included 
in the project cost?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project 
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures 
related to safeguard policies?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed 
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in 
the project legal documents?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

V. Contact point
World Bank
Contact: Abdoulaye Toure
Title: Lead Agriculture Economist

Contact: Amadou Alassane
Title: Sr Agricultural Spec.

Contact: Erick Herman Abiassi
Title: Senior Agriculture Economist

Borrower/Client/Recipient
Name: Ministry of Agriculture
Contact: Adou Rahim Alimi
Title: Minister
Email: adourahim@gmail.com

Implementing Agencies
Name: Ministry of Agriculture
Contact: Abdoulaye Gouro
Title: Executif Director
Email: abdoulayegouro@yahoo.fr

Name: Ministry of Agriculture Livestock and Fisheries
Contact: Virginie Miguel
Title: Head of Center for Planners Development,Education&Training
Email: virginiemiguel3@gmail.com

Name: Ministry of Agriculture
Contact: Diallo Boubacar
Title: Head of Center for Planners Development,Education&Training
Email: bokardiallo@gmail.com



Page 11 of 11

VI. For more information contact:
The World Bank 
1818 H Street, NW 
Washington, D.C. 20433 
Telephone: (202) 473-1000 
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

VII. Approval
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Abdoulaye Toure,Amadou Alassane,Erick Herman Abiassi
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor: Name: Maman-Sani Issa (SA) Date: 20-Nov-2016
Practice Manager/
Manager:

Name: Simeon Kacou Ehui (PMGR) Date: 21-Nov-2016

Country Director: Name: Rachid Benmessaoud (CD) Date: 28-Nov-2016



