























































World Bank Document
Project infORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
APPRAISAL STAGE

Report No.:  PIDA646

Project Name Southern Agricultural Growth Corridor of Tanzania Investment 
Project (P125728)

Region AFRICA
Country Tanzania
Sector(s) Agricultural extension and research (75%), General agriculture, 

fishing and forestry sector (25%)
Theme(s) Rural markets (30%), Rural services and infrastructure (20%), 

Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (50%)
Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P125728
Borrower(s) Ministry of Finance & Planning
Implementing Agency Office of the Prime Minister
Environmental Category A-Full Assessment
Date PID Prepared/Updated 19-Jan-2016
Date PID Approved/Disclosed 20-Jan-2016
Estimated Date of Appraisal 
Completion

22-Jan-2016

Estimated Date of Board 
Approval

03-Mar-2016

Appraisal Review Decision 
(from Decision Note)

I. Project Context
Country Context
Tanzania has been experiencing high rates of economic growth. This growth has been driven by 
economic liberalization, sound macroeconomic policy management, and expanding public sector 
spending. Growth accelerated from an average of 3.5 percent during the 1990s to around 7 percent 
over the past decade.  Improvements in tax administration and provision of foreign aid created 
space for a significant expansion in public spending, which increased from less than 16 percent of 
GDP in 2000 to almost 28 percent in 2011. Inflation was low from 2000 to 2005, but picked up 
pace from 2006 to 2011. It was briefly in double digits, and has now settled back to around 7 
percent. Fiscal policy has been largely prudent accompanied by strong growth in tax revenues.  
However, the government needs to keep its debt and debt service to reasonable levels, reduce the 
growing deficits of certain parastatals, and manage the commitments under the public pension 
scheme. There are a number of recent developments (including discovery of natural gas) that are 
expected to contribute to Tanzania’s positive economic performance. Looking forward, the 
economy is likely to remain on its current growth trajectory in the near future. 


Notwithstanding the country’s solid economic growth record, poverty rates have not declined 
significantly. In November 2013, the government announced the new official poverty figures. The 
basic needs poverty level in Tanzania mainland has fallen from 33.34 percent in 2007 to 28.2 
percent in 2012. Rural poverty has declined from 39.4 percent to 33.4 percent over the same period. 
Despite impressive macro-fiscal performance, and decades of concerted efforts to lift rural masses 
out of poverty, agricultural incomes have grown slowly. Economic growth has been concentrated in 
urban areas and in capital-intensive sectors, such as the mining, communication, construction, and 
banking sectors. In comparison, the growth in agricultural value added has been less than two 
percent per worker. This growth in the agriculture sector has not been high enough to reduce 
poverty in rural areas, where more than 80 percent the country’s poor reside.  
Limited opportunities for commercialization are at the heart of small farmers’ problems in 
Tanzania. The majority of smallholder farmers sell little of their production. Approximately three 
quarters of all maize, and approximately half of all paddy, is consumed within the village in which 
it is produced. The expansion of smallholder production of these food crops, as well as a range of 
cash crops such as cotton, tea and coffee is undermined by low productivity, and high transport and 
marketing costs. New strategies for agricultural commercialization are needed. 
The top leadership of the country is strongly committed to share prosperity more widely, and 
recognizes the economic importance of agriculture for rural growth and poverty alleviation. The 
government at the highest levels has made transformation of agriculture a major national priority. 
Learning from the experience of other countries, the Tanzanian government has embarked on an 
ambitious program to strengthen agriculture value chains and integrate larger numbers of small-
scale farmers into these competitive trade partnerships. These initiatives target the transformation of 
large numbers of semi-subsistence producers to become successful commercial farmers. There is a 
market failure in service provision to these smallholders to enable them to link up with modern 
agriculture value chains (which enables them to acquire modern technologies and markets; and 
learn by doing); hence government is committed to correcting this market failure by incentivizing 
agribusinesses through matching grants. The matching grants would help underwrite the risks 
agribusinesses face in bringing in more smallholders into their value chains, and smallholders 
would gain from the experience of more targeted modern services and improved markets for their 
output.

  

Sectoral and institutional Context
Tanzania has witnessed an expansion in agribusiness investment with supply chain links with 
smallholder farming. A growing number of these agribusinesses are pursuing contract or out-
grower farming with smallholders. These include investments in out-grower sugar, tobacco cotton, 
sorghum, barley, cocoa, dairy and horticultural crops. Agribusinesses are experimenting with 
alternative strategies for strengthening this co-investment. 
 
The Government of Tanzania (GoT) recognizes that the private sector is a critical partner in 
delivering development benefits. Particularly when it is linked to smallholder production potential, 
it can provide an important engine of agricultural growth. In 2001, the government adopted a new 
Agricultural Sector Development Strategy (ASDS) targeting achievement of a green revolution in 
agriculture. To better implement this strategy, the government then prepared the Agricultural Sector 
Development Program (ASDP), highlighting the need for stronger public-private partnership to 
promote the commercialization of smallholder production. This commitment was reinforced in 
2009 with the signing of the Kilimo Kwanza (Agriculture First) resolution calling for greater 
investment in agriculture, and inclusive commercialization. 


The Southern Agricultural Growth Corridor of Tanzania (SAGCOT) Program was developed by the 
GoT to operationalize the Kilimo Kwanza. The SAGCOT Program, as articulated in its core 
document, the Investment Blueprint, highlights commitment to a strategy of joint public-private 
investment targeting the development of agribusiness value chains across the country’s southern 
corridor. In aggregate, the Blueprint proposes that a public investment of USD1.3bn can leverage 
an additional USD2.1bn in private investment in order to bring 350,000ha of agricultural land into 
commercial production over the next twenty years. Tens of thousands of smallholders are expected 
to become successful commercial farmers, more than two million people are to be lifted out of 
poverty and food security will improve. The primary emphasis of the SAGCOT Program is to 
expand partnerships between agribusinesses and smallholder farmers in building larger and more 
competitive value chains.   Agribusiness investors are sought who are willing to work 
collaboratively with smallholder communities to raise productivity and incomes. Early successes 
have been highlighted for sugar and rice, where out-growers have achieved higher levels of 
productivity and income compared with smallholders in neighboring regions. Similar examples are 
cited for tea and horticultural crop farmers.

II. Proposed Development Objectives
To support the adoption of new technologies and improved market access by small-holder farmers 
through expanding and creating partnerships between small-holder farmers and agribusinesses in the 
Southern Corridor of Tanzania.

III. Project Description
Component Name
Strengthening of SAGCOT Support Institutions (total USD14.33 million, IDA USD5.95 million)
Comments (optional)
This component will strengthen the capacity of SAGCOT Support Institutions in order to pursue 
their functions of information and data provision, support of investment planning and guidance, 
government/private sector intermediation, business enabling environment and investment 
promotion.  The component will support two institutions: 
 
(i) SAGCOT Centre  
(ii) Tanzania Investment Centre (Government institution)

Component Name
Strengthening Smallholder Business Linkages (total USD85.76 million, IDA USD55.65 million)
Comments (optional)
The objective of this component will be to link smallholder farmers to agricultural value chains. The 
component will: (a) expand the number of smallholders linked to agribusinesses in successful 
commercial partnerships; and (b) improve the benefits derived by smallholders and rural 
communities from these partnerships in the form of growth in agricultural productivity, income and 
employment. This component will comprise two sub-components: 
 
(i) Fund Management 
(ii) Matching Grants

Component Name

Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation (total USD8.41 million of which USD3.80 
million were provided by two Project Preparation Advances, IDA USD8.41 million)Comments (optional)
The component will establish project management and M&E systems and provide financing for 
salaries, office equipment, transportation and technical assistance services. Complementarities will 
particularly be sought with other IDA funded programs such as the Private Sector Competitiveness 
Project and the Agricultural Sector Development Program.

IV. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 75.00 Total Bank Financing: 70.00
Financing Gap: 0.00
For Loans/Credits/Others Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT 5.00
International Development Association (IDA) 70.00
Total 75.00

V. Implementation
The Project will be overseen by the Prime Minister’s Office (PMO). A Project Steering Committee 
(PSC) meeting quarterly and on specific demand has been established. It is chaired by the 
Permanent Secretary (PS) of the PMO, and amongst others comprises PS from key line ministries, 
the Chief Executive Officers of the TIC, SAGCOT Centre, SAGCOT Catalytic Trust Fund (CTF), 
Rufiji Basin Development Authority (RUBADA), and representatives from smallholder farmers. 
The PSC will: (a) ensure coordination and cooperation among all participating agencies; and (b) 
endorse annual work plans and budgets for all project-related activities. 
 
The PMO has proposed that the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) originally created for the IDA 
funded Private Sector Competitiveness Project be expanded to also coordinate the SAGCOT 
Investment Project. This PCU will have management oversight and reporting responsibilities for all 
components of the Project. This entity will integrate the financial and technical progress reports 
from each of the agencies being funded, and carry out the overall M&E for the Project. The PCU 
will also take overall procurement and financial management responsibility during the first six to 12 
months of the Project implementation until sufficient capacity has been built in the other 
implementing agencies (an assessment will be undertaken to assess the agencies capacity). The full 
staffing of this PCU as set out in the Operational Manual. All participating institutions will prepare 
annual work plans and budgets to be submitted to the PCU for approval by the PSC. 
 
IDA financing agreed with the Ministry of Finance that will flow to agencies other than the PCU, 
will be governed by subsidiary agreements acceptable to IDA (these agencies are the SAGCOT 
Centre and the SAGCOT Catalytic Trust Fund). These subsidiary agreements lay out the fund flow, 
implementation and reporting requirements of the two entities. Direct funding to these entities may 
only begin once these subsidiary agreements, and an associated set of fiduciary systems including 
financial management and procurement systems acceptable to IDA, are in place. It is estimated that 
this will take place in the first year of implementation. 
 
The SAGCOT Centre will be the responsible implementing agency for sub-component 1.1 activities. 
Funding for the SAGCOT Centre will be committed in parallel with other Development Partners 
(initially DfID and USAID) to support the operations of the Centre as a whole. A Memorandum of 



Understanding (MoU) has been signed on September 30, 2014 between the SAGCOT Centre, GoT, 
DfID, the World Bank, Norway, EU, and UNDP. The MoU states that the funding will be 
committed against an indicative five year budget, and against an approved annual budget agreed by 
the SAGCOT Centre Board.  
 
TIC will be the responsible implementing agency for sub-component 1.2 activities.  The TIC will 
directly implement these activities and be responsible for procurement, financial management, 
input/output and progress reporting.  In the first instance, procurement under the Project will be 
implemented by the PCU until such time as TIC has reinforced its procurement capacity. 
 
Component 2 will be implemented through the SAGCOT Catalytic Trust Fund. The institutional 
structure of the catalytic fund management is designed and specified in a Trust Deed. A Board 
comprising five members has been established. The Board has recruited an Executive Secretary and 
initiated recruitment of a Fund Manager, estimated to be selected soon after the approval of the 
Project.   
 
The grant application process under the Matching Grant Fund (MGF) will be managed by a 
professional and competitively recruited Fund Manager. The Fund Manager will periodically (at 
least twice a year) invite applications from eligible partnership between smallholders and 
established agribusinesses, and through a two phased process select those applications which satisfy 
the core criteria (benefits to smallholders, safeguard compliance, sustainability, etc.). The Fund 
Manager will have a specific duty to provide support to applicants, in particular to help ensure 
benefit flows to smallholders, and that smallholder interests are well represented in the application 
and the partnership. The final applications will be submitted to the independent Investment 
Committee to be appointed by the Board to review all grant proposals and make recommendations 
to the Board on those that warrant funding. The eligibility, selection process and implementation 
arrangements are detailed in the Trust Deed and further specified in the MGF Operational Manual. 
Grants will be funded on a reimbursement basis with expenses pre-financed by the investors and 
may be tranched. Grants payments made through the agribusiness may be allocated to the 
agribusiness investor, smallholders or some combination thereof, as requested in the application, 
and set out in the grant agreement.

VI. Safeguard Policies (including public consultation)
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖


