























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Benin: Gazetted Forests Management Project (P167678) 

 
 

  
Feb 28, 2019 Page 1 of 13  

     

 

 
 
      

 

Combined Project Information Documents /  
Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (PID/ISDS) 

 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 04-Apr-2019 | Report No: PIDISDSA26271 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Benin P167678 Benin: Gazetted Forests 
Management Project 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA 02-Apr-2019 31-May-2019 Environment & Natural 
Resources 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Economy of the 
Republic of Benin 

Ministry of Environment 
and Sustainable 
Development 

 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
To improve the integrated management of targeted GFs, to increase access of the main consumption cities to 
fuelwood produced sustainably, and to strengthen selected NTFP value chains for forest-dependent communities 

 
Components 

 

 
 

PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
   

SUMMARY-NewFin1  
 

Total Project Cost 75.00 

Total Financing 75.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 75.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 

 
   
DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 75.00 

          IDA Grant 75.00 

    



 

The World Bank  
Benin: Gazetted Forests Management Project (P167678) 

 

 

  
Feb 28, 2019 Page 3 of 13  

 

Environmental Assessment Category 

B-Partial Assessment 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate     
 
 

 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
B. Introduction and Context 

 
Country Context 

Benin is a coastal State in West Africa located in the tropical zone with a total surface area of 114,763 km². It is bordered 

by Togo (West), Nigeria (East), Burkina Faso and Niger (North), and the Atlantic Ocean (South).  In a politically stable 

and democratic regime for nearly 30 years, the Government of Benin (GoB) maintains a decentralized territorial 

administration comprising 77 municipalities (elected) in 12 departments. The population was estimated at 11.2 million in 

2017, of which 51 percent are women, 52 percent are 18 or younger, and 55 percent live in rural areas (national census, 

RGPH4). If the current growth rate of 3.2 percent per year is maintained, the population could reach 17.6 million by 2030. 

With a per capita income of just US$820 in 2016, Benin is among the poorest countries in the World.  The share of the 

population living below the national poverty rate was estimated at 40% in 2015, of which 63.5% earn less than a dollar/day 

(EMICov 2015).  Poverty rate is higher in rural areas (42%) than in urban areas (32%).  In 2014, youth (15-29 years old) 

unemployment rate was at 14.3% and the percentage of youth in the informal sector was 89.6% (ETVA 2014).  The 

country ranks 163 out of 189 on the UNDP Human Development Index (HDI) 2017. 

In addition to transit trade with neighboring countries, especially Nigeria, Benin’s economy relies heavily on agriculture 

(cotton, in particular). The agriculture sector is the second largest contributor to GDP (25 percent) and employs around 

70 percent of the labor force (15-64 years old)1. Benin's agriculture—primarily extensive, slash-and-burn—is one of the 

major drivers of deforestation and forest degradation.  

 
 

Sectoral and Institutional Context 

The Benin's forest areas are divided into two categories: 

                                                           
1 The informal economy represents 65 percent of GDP, engaging 90 percent of the labor force and more than 95 percent of the female labor 
force. Services and agriculture, accounting for approximately 50 and 25 percent respectively of total value added, are both dominated by the 

informal sector. The large share of services reflects Benin’s role as a transit and trade hub for landlocked countries in the north, primarily Niger 

and Burkina Faso, but also the large amount of informal re-export trade and commerce with Nigeria, which amounts to some 20 percent of GDP 

and 25 percent of government revenue. (Source: Benin CPF 2018) 

 

 

a) the Classified Estate Domain (CED), a national heritage belonging to the Central State, is managed 
by the Directorate General of Water, Forests and Hunting (DGEFC: Direction Générale des Eaux 

et Forêts et Chasse), the National Office for Wood (ONAB: Office National du Bois), and the 

National Center for the Management of Wildlife (CENAGREF), all three entities being under the 

authority of the Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development (MCVDD: Ministère du 

Cadre de Vie et du Développement Durable). The CED includes: (i) 46 Gazetted Forests (GFs), of 

which 39 (as well as seven Reforestation Perimeters) are managed by the DGEFC and seven 

managed by ONAB mainly for timber production for export; and (ii) two National Parks (Pendjari 

and W) with three hunting zones managed by the CENAGREF. 

b) the Protected Estate Domain (PED), which comprises the rest of the forest areas in the Rural 
Domain. The PED forests, authorized for multiple usages, including agriculture, are under the 

territorial jurisdiction of the municipalities and managed by the mayors under the supervision of the 

DGEFC. 

 

The forest policy (law 93-009 of July 1993) that governs the forest regime in the Republic of Benin was 

revised in 2012.  It is currently being updated with funding from the European Union to incorporate new 

guidelines for sustainable forests management and is expected to be submitted to Parliament approval by 

mid-2019. A number of policy and strategy documents have also been produced to improve the 

management of forest and natural resources, including the: (i) National Program for Sustainable 

Management of Natural Resources (2008); (ii) National Strategy for Rural Wood Markets (2008); (iii) 

National Strategy and Action Plan on Biodiversity 2011-2020 (2011) and (iv) National Strategy for Climate 

Change mitigation and adaption (2018). In addition, Benin has also ratified several international 

conventions relating to the management and conservation of forest resources. 

Despite this institutional context for management of the sector, the decrease of Beninese forest cover, 

particularly over the decade from 2007-2016, is concerning:  Benin’s national forest cover, estimated at 

8.12 million hectares in 2007 (70.4% of the national territory), fell to 7.9 million hectares in 2016 (68.5% 

of the territory), a loss of over 215,000 ha. If the current deforestation rate is maintained, the per capita 

forest area, which more than halved from 1.63 ha in 1980 to 0.87 ha in 1995, will fall even further, to 0.29 

ha by 2025 (MEHU/DGFRN 2012).  

The root cause of deforestation and forest degradation in Benin is the weak capacity of the Forest 

Administration to ensure management operations in Gazetted Forests. The Administration has personnel in 

the field who, although technically competent, lack adequate operational means to monitor the GFs. This 

presence in the field is limited by serious shortcomings in physical assets, most glaringly in forest rangers 

living quarters, which are in poor condition (lacking in access to water, electricity, means of 

communication). With surveillance being carried out sporadically and in half-measure, Gazetted Forests 

have become the theater of: (i) expansion of clandestine farms, which rely on extensive slash-and-burn 

agriculture; (ii) transhumance or the settling of herds in GFs; (iii) unregulated removals of fuelwood; and 

(iv) establishment of human settlements in GFs. 

The indirect causes of deforestation include increasing demographic pressure and climate change, the latter 

of which is slowing down the forest cover regeneration process and reducing biomass in the GFs through 

faster drying up and silting of streams, more frequent flooding, and increased soil erosion. 

 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
Development Objective(s) (From PAD)  


To improve the integrated management of targeted gazette forests, to increase access of the main consumption cities 
to fuelwood produced sustainably, and to strengthen selected NTFP value chains for forest-dependent communities. 
 

Key Results 

PDO Level Indicators 
(i) Forest areas under sustainable management (ha); 
(ii) Sequestration of CO2 in target areas (in metric tons/CO2 eq.);  
(iii) Wood energy plantations established for supply to the three major consumption hubs (ha); 
(iv) Communities adjacent to targeted GFs with increased access to income sources through NTFP 

value chains (number). 

(v) Direct beneficiaries (of which women); 
(vi) Satisfaction of beneficiaries (level of engagement, by gender and age per target area). 

 
 
D. Project Description  

The project will consist of four components: 
1) Support to Forests Governance; 
2) Integretaed Management of Gazetted Forests; 
3) Development of Selected Non-Timber Forests Products Value Chains; 
4) Project Management. 
 
E. Implementation 

 
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 

An Integrated Projects Management Unit (IPMU) will be responsible for the implementation of all WB-

financed environment, forestry and NRM projects, under the responsibility of the Ministry of Environment, 

and Sustainable Development, including West Africa Coast Areas (WACA), the GFM project and the 

upcoming Green Climate Fund (GCF) project.   

The current WACA PIU will be upgraded to an IPMU.  It will be composed of the following shared units 

by all projects under its responsibility: (i) Financial Management, (ii) Procurement, (iii) Safeguards, (iv) 

Monitoring & Evaluation, (v) Communication and (vi) administrative support, as well as a shared Steering 

Committee.  The shared Steering Committed will be in place before project effectiveness. These units will 

be strengthened as needed with fiduciary, safeguards, M&E and Communication staff to support the GFM 

project implementation.   

Each project under the IPMU will have a dedicated project coordinator and a Technical Assistant depending 

on the project workload. For the GFMP, the dedicated coordinator will be supported by an international 

top-notch forestry specialist. Both will be recruited competitively before project effectiveness.  

The Director General of DGEFC in his role as National Coordinator of the Government Forestry Program, 

will be the Director of the GFMP to mainly ensure synergies with that Program. The decentralized 

Technical Forests Management Units (CTAF) in the field will ensure technical execution of project 

activities.  The CTAF will report to the GFM project coordinator, who will in turn report to the General 

Director of DGEFC.  The headcount of CTAF employees has been increased by the Government to include 

personnel fully dedicated to project implementation, especially for timely implementation of production 

forests activities. 


F. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 

The project will be nationwide. 

 
 
G. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 
 

Abdoulaye Gadiere, Environmental Specialist 
Gertrude Marie Mathilda Coulibaly Zombre, Social Specialist 

 
 
 

SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The project will finance works for the physical 
demarcation of conservation areas, the restoration 
of selected urban GFs in major cities as urban parks. 
The operation under preparation will also support 
the development of timber production, fuelwood 
production as well as the Income Generating 
Activities(IGA)such as animal husbandry, vegetable 
gardening and Non Timber Forest Products(NTFP) as 
well. Such activities are most of the time, associated 
with potential adverse impacts on environment even 
though these impacts are considered as being 
moderate. However, the locations of specific 
investments will not be known with certainty prior 
to board approval. Consequently, an Environmental 
and Social Management Framework (ESMF) was 
developed ,reviewed, consulted upon and disclosed 
both in Benin and on the Bank’s website on March 
12, 2019. 

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No This policy is not triggered under this project. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

Activities related to the physical demarcation of 
conservation areas, the restoration of selected 
urban GFs in major cities as urban parks, the 
development of timber production, fuelwood 
production as well as the Income Generating 
Activities could impact negatively Natural Habitats if 



 

The World Bank  
Benin: Gazetted Forests Management Project (P167678) 

 

 

  
Feb 28, 2019 Page 7 of 13  

 

not well managed. The ESMF developed in line with 
OP4.01, includes a chapter related to Natural 
habitats  proper management during physical works. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes 

Some activities such as the agro-forestry, the 
physical demarcation of conservation areas, could 
also impact forests. In addition, the objective of the 
Government objective to increase the volume of 
timber produced annually from the current 65,000 
to 250 000 m3 through large-scale plantations in 
selected GFs (Alibori Supérieur, Ouémé Superieur, 
Dogo and Lama) in order to increase the sector 
contribution to the economy could lead to some 
forests overexploitation. A specific section focused 
on forest resources protection was developed and 
included in the ESMF. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The project will support adoption of agricultural 
intensification and agroforestry methods through a 
stocktaking of existing successful national and 
regionally employed agroforestry methods and 
agricultural intensification techniques in order to 
recommend those practices most suitable to the 
project target zones. For that reason the O4.09 is 
triggered. Consequently, a Pest Management 
Plan(PMP) was developed and included in the ESMF 
to guide any potential use of chemical products as 
part of the project. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 

The project intends to support the physical 
demarcation of conservation areas as well as IGA 
such  vegetable gardening. Such activities could 
induce excavations with potential cultural properties 
discoveries. In order to anticipate and to be sure 
that all the precautions were taken to protect and 
safeguard physical cultural resources, the ESMF 
includes a section on how to handle in a proper way 
chance finds of cultural assets within the project 
area. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 
There are no Indigenous People as per the definition 
of the policy in the project areas. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

No involuntary resettlement is anticipated. 
However, the demarcation of conservation areas 
could lead to the limitation of access of resources. 
To anticipate any issue related to these aspects,  the 
project has prepared a Process Framework. Once 
prepared, that document was reviewed, consulted 



 

The World Bank  
Benin: Gazetted Forests Management Project (P167678) 

 

 

  
Feb 28, 2019 Page 8 of 13  

 

upon and disclosed in Benin and on the Bank's 
website on March 13, 2019. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No The project will not finance dams nor rely on dams. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
The project is not expected to affect international 
waterways. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No The project will not be located in a Disputed Area. 

 
 

KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Overall, the Benin-gazetted forests management project aims at safeguarding gazetted Forests as well as restoring 
degraded areas. Based on that, it will induce essentially positive impacts. However, some activities such as the physical 
demarcation of conservation areas, the restoration of selected urban GFs in major cities as urban parks, the 
development of timber production, the fuelwood production as well as the Income Generating Activities(IGA)such as 
animal husbandry, vegetable gardening and Non Timber Forest Products(NTFP) might produce potential adverse 
impacts. However,such adverse impacts are expected to be moderate, site specific and manageable at an acceptable 
level. That is why the project is rated as a category B. 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
The Benin-gazetted forests management project aims to protect the forests by limiting significantly their degradation. 
This measure could involve  a reduction of the agricultural productions' yield by stopping the itinerant agriculture. The 
impossibility to expand henceforth farming areas in conjunction with demographic explosion could exacerbate land 
disputes.  
However, the project will support adoption of agricultural intensification and agroforestry methods through a 
stocktaking of existing successful national and regionally employed agroforestry methods and agricultural 
intensification techniques in order to recommend those practices most suitable to the project target zones.  
 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. 
N/A 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower 
capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
As the exact geographic locations of project specific interventions are not yet determined with certainty, the Borrower 
has developed two environmental and social safeguards instruments, namely an Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) including a Pest Management Plan,  in compliance with the triggering of  OP/BP 4.01 
(Environmental Assessment) and OP 4.09 (Pest Management)  and a Process Framework(PF) as per OP/BP 4.12 
(Involuntary Resettlement) triggering. 
Further to that, the ESMF includes two chapters focusing on Natural Habitats and Forests safeguarding. Both chapters 
make the project fully in compliance with the OP4.04 and OP4.36. Additionally, a section related to a procedure of 


 

“chance find” was also included in the ESMF in line with the triggering of the OP4.11. 
The ESMF lays out procedures for screening and mitigating impacts from construction and operation of the irrigation 
schemes, and includes the following: (a) checklists of potential environmental and social impacts and their sources; (b) 
procedures for participatory screening of proposed sites and activities and the environmental and social 
considerations; (c) procedures for assessing potential environmental and social impacts of the planned project 
activities; (d) institutional arrangements for mitigating, preventing, and managing the identified impacts; (e) typical 
environmental management planning process for addressing negative externalities in the course of project 
implementation; (f) a system for monitoring the implementation of mitigation measures; and (g) recommended 
capacity building measures for environmental planning and monitoring of project activities.  
 
The Pest management’s section deals with safeguard measures to be taken in the case of the use of pesticide to fight 
against agriculture predators. However, organic fertilizers and biological technics are supplies recommended to be use 
first. Moreover, that section sets up guidance and guidelines with the aim of protecting population health and 
environment integrity in promoting best practices. 
 
Specific ESIAs will be prepared for relevant activities before project implementation along with Environmental and 
Social Management Plans (ESMPs). The ESIAs will provide mitigation measures for all the potential impacts as a result 
of the triggering of the above-mentioned safeguard policies. 
The Process Framework will guide new modalities of gazetted forest as well as restored areas access and use of their 
resources. 
Responsibility and oversight of the Project’s overall compliance with national legislation and Bank safeguard policies 
will rest with the environmental and social specialists in the PIU, as the main persons in charge of project 
implementation and monitoring of safeguard aspects. They will be working in close collaboration with the national 
entity responsible for ensuring the compliance of the project’s activities with the national legislation namely 
ABE(Beninese Environment Agency). That government’s body will conduct periodic monitoring of project’s compliance 
with proposed mitigation. It also receive guidance and technical support from bank’s environmental and social 
safeguard specialist during implementation support missions or through sessions of training. 
 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, 
with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The populations who will be impacted by the project activities are mainly the rural communities. They are the forest 
owners, the farmers, the hunters, the coalmen and forest loggers. During the  project preparation, these various socio-
professional layers have been consulted. In addition, these consultations have concerned the Civil Society 
Organizations (CSO) such as  the NGOs opening in the environmental management and the natural resources fields , 
producers organizations, associations, private operators, deputies, etc. These meetings are held in the form of 
workshops, of meetings, meetings of work.  
After the preparation of safeguard instruments, a validation workshop with the participation of the ABE  and all the 
above-mentioned stakeholders was held on February,2019. At this occasion, comments and suggestions from 
participants were taken in both documents. 
 
 

B. Disclosure Requirements  

 
OPS_EA_DISCLOSURE_TABLE Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other 

Date of receipt by the Bank Date of submission for disclosure 
For category A projects, date of 
distributing the Executive Summary of 
the EA to the Executive Directors 

20-Feb-2019 08-Mar-2019  

   

"In country" Disclosure   
 

  
OPS_RA_D ISCL OSURE_T ABLE  

 

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process 

   

Date of receipt by the Bank Date of submission for disclosure  

20-Feb-2019 08-Mar-2019  

   

"In country" Disclosure   
   Benin 
  12-Mar-2019 

Comments 
 

     
OPS_ PM_D ISCL OSURE_TA BLE  

 

Pest Management Plan 
 
Was the document disclosed prior to 
appraisal? Date of receipt by the Bank Date of submission for disclosure 

Yes 20-Feb-2019 08-Mar-2019 

   
"In country" Disclosure   
 

 
OPS_PM_ PC R_TAB LE  

 

If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to 
be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.  

If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why: 

N/A 

 
 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project 
decision meeting)  

 
OPS_EA_COMP_TABLE OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
  
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes   
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report? 
Yes   
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan? 
Yes   

OPS_ NH_C OM P_TA BLE  

 

OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
  
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of critical natural habitats? 
No   
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the 
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank? 
No   

OPS_ PM_C OM P_TA BLE  

 

OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
  
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes   
Is a separate PMP required? 
No   
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or PM?  Are PMP requirements included in 
project design?  If yes, does the project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
NA   

OPS_ PCR_C OM P_TA BLE  

 

OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources  
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes   
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes    

OPS_IR_ CO MP_TA BLE  

 

OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 

 
 

Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes  
 

 

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager review the plan? 

 

 

  
OPS_F O_C OM P_TA BLE  

 

OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
  
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints been carried out? 
NA   
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these constraints? 
NA   
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include provisions for certification system? 
NA      

OPS_ PDI_ CO MP_TA BLE  

 

The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 

 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for disclosure? 
Yes   
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language that are understandable 
and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs? 
Yes  

 
 
All Safeguard Policies 

 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of 
measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 

  
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost? 
Yes 

  
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures 
related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 

  
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately 
reflected in the project legal documents? 
Yes 

 
 

