














































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Integrating Innovation for Rural Competitiveness in Honduras - COMRURAL II (P168385) 

 
 

  
Sep 14, 2018 Page 1 of 15  

     

 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 04-Nov-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSC25608 

P
u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d



 
The World Bank  
Integrating Innovation for Rural Competitiveness in Honduras - COMRURAL II (P168385) 

 
 

  
Sep 14, 2018 Page 2 of 15  

     

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Honduras P168385  Integrating Innovation 
for Rural 
Competitiveness in 
Honduras - COMRURAL 
II (P168385) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

LATIN AMERICA AND 
CARIBBEAN 

Jan 22, 2019 May 31, 2019 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Republic of Honduras Inversion Estrategica - 
Honduras (INVEST-H) 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The PDO is to improve access to markets and climate-smart practices and contribute to the economic inclusion of 
targeted beneficiaries in select agricultural value chains. 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 330.00 

Total Financing 330.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 150.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 150.00 

          IDA Credit 150.00 

Non-World Bank Group Financing 

     Counterpart Funding 30.00 



 
The World Bank  
Integrating Innovation for Rural Competitiveness in Honduras - COMRURAL II (P168385) 

 
 

  
Sep 14, 2018 Page 3 of 15  

     

          LOCAL: BENEFICIARIES 30.00 

     Commercial Financing 150.00 

          Unguaranteed Commercial Financing 150.00 

   
 

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B - Partial Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
1. High rates of poverty and inequality remain a persistent development challenge in Honduras. Poverty reduction 
in Honduras over the last decades has been slow compared to regional averages for Central and Latin America. Of 
Honduras’ national population of about 9.1 million people, 70 percent live at or below the national poverty line and about 
1 in 6 of the total population lives in extreme poverty (less than US$ 1.90 per day). Honduras’ rate of economic inequality 
is among the highest in Latin America, with a Gini Index of .50. World Bank data indicate that about 54 percent of income 
in Honduras is held by the highest-earning 20 percent of the population and only 3 percent of income is held by the 
lowest-earning 20 percent.  Unemployment in 2017 was estimated at 4.5 percent, with unemployment among youth at 
8.2 percent. 
 
2. The absence of a robust economic base for generating more and better jobs remains a central challenge for 
poverty and inequality reduction in Honduras.  Average earnings per worker vary widely across and within sectors in 
Honduras, with self-employment in agriculture as the least remunerative activity of all (average monthly earnings of  
L 2,404 per person in 2016, in contrast to formal wage work at an average of L 9,300). Informal work persists across all 
sectors (agriculture, industry, services) and in both urban and rural settings, and is characterized not only by low earnings 
but also by low quality and productivity, undermining GDP growth. Inclusive approaches to rural growth will require 
promoting diversification of rural incomes through combining formal and informal work, non-farm activities, and the 
intensification of agricultural activities.  
 
3. Honduras is considered significantly vulnerable to climate and weather events, with poorer populations in 
particular having a low capacity to cope and adapt. Honduras is seen as one of the countries most affected by extreme 
weather events and has increasingly felt the impacts of climate change, El Niño, and other weather-related events that 
have affected landscapes and infrastructure (communications, housing, public health, etc.). In 1998, Hurricane Mitch 
generated economic damages estimated at around 81 percent of GDP.  In addition, the 2015 drought season affected 1.3 
million people and small-scale farmers had an average loss of agricultural production of about 80 percent. Several 
underlying factors limit capacity to cope with these impacts, including a lack of means to recuperate lost assets, limited 
livelihood options, and lack of basic support services.  
 



 
The World Bank  
Integrating Innovation for Rural Competitiveness in Honduras - COMRURAL II (P168385) 

 
 

  
Sep 14, 2018 Page 4 of 15  

     

Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 

4. The agriculture sector continues to be a strong pillar of economic growth in Honduras.  Underpinned by 
favorable agro-ecological conditions, agriculture, forestry, and fishing together the sector grew by 10.7 percent in 2017, 
accounting for 12.9 percent of GDP (primary production only) and representing a 5-year peak in sector growth. This figure 
understates the importance of agriculture in the Honduran economy, however, as it does not reflect the many backward 
and forward linkages between primary agriculture and other sectors, both upstream and downstream. Based on 
experiences from other countries in the region, the contribution to Honduras’ GDP of its broader food and agriculture 
system would be about 1.5 times higher than that of primary agriculture alone. 
 
5. Notwithstanding strong agriculture sector performance in recent years, much more needs to be done given the 
scale of poverty and food and nutrition insecurity in rural areas. In Honduras, more than half of the poor, and two-thirds 
of the extreme poor, live in rural areas. Rural poverty is most heavily concentrated in the western and southern areas of 
the country, known as the “Dry Corridor” (Corredor Seco). The rural poor overwhelmingly rely on agriculture as their 
principal livelihood source, with an estimated 72 percent of agricultural families in Honduras engaged in semi-subsistence 
farming. This type of farming is typically characterized by low productivity and competitiveness, low revenue generation, 
and high vulnerability to shocks.  
 
6. Climate change and the increasingly frequent occurrences of extreme weather events are widely recognized as 
one of the most important risks affecting the Honduran agriculture sector. Honduras’ endowment of water, fertile soils, 
forests, and other natural capital is a central foundation for much of the country’s economic activity. However, the health 
of these resources is highly vulnerable to climate change, El Niño, and other weather-related events, as well as to 
environmental mismanagement. These vulnerabilities exacerbate rural poverty and food and nutrition insecurity.  
 
7. Investing in rural productivity, resilience, and innovation to boost export competitiveness will be a critical 
component of efforts in Honduras to reduce poverty and inequality. While the 2008 launching of the Dominican 
Republic–Central America Free Trade Agreement (DR-CAFTA) has increased access to foreign markets, it has also exposed 
rural producers to new and increasingly competitive markets. Honduras benefits from strong comparative advantages in 
the agriculture sector: proximity to major regional and international markets, and agro-ecological conditions favorable 
to diverse agricultural value chains that are capable of meeting market quality demands. 

 
8. The COMRURAL project is currently GoH’s flagship project for promoting agricultural competitiveness and 
exports in Honduras. COMRURAL, approved by the World Bank Board of Executive Directors in 2008 and extended 
through an Additional Financing in 2017, is widely recognized throughout Honduras for its success in linking smallholder 
farmers to domestic and international markets. This success has been achieved through support to commercial 
production and post-harvest value addition structured under the “productive alliances” model.  

 
9. The decade-long implementation of COMRURAL has shown that Honduras needs to work on several fronts to 
enhance its business-enabling environment and promote agribusiness development.  Regulations and financial services 
that enable and incentivize entrepreneurship in the agriculture sector have not been a subject of sufficient public-sector 
attention. The modernization of critical public services is required for governance and the agricultural business climate 
to be stronger. The National Service for Agri-food Health and Safety (SENASA: Spanish acronym) and the Sanitary 
Regulation Agency (ARSA: Spanish acronym) are also in need of modernization. The public sector in Honduras can 
significantly improve its efficiency and the returns of agriculture public expenditures, and there is a general need to 
redefine the spaces for public-private coordination and partnerships in agribusiness, potentially by drawing on the 
concept of “Maximizing Financing for Development” (MFD). 



 
The World Bank  
Integrating Innovation for Rural Competitiveness in Honduras - COMRURAL II (P168385) 

 
 

  
Sep 14, 2018 Page 5 of 15  

     

 
10. Poor agro-logistics has also shown to be a critical barrier to improving agricultural competitiveness in Honduras.  
Lack of adequate agro-logistics, both hard (infrastructure) and soft (services), is a major bottleneck. The 2018 World Bank 
Logistics Performance Index awarded Honduras an aggregate ranking (according to 6 dimensions of logistics over the 
period 2012 to 2018) of 106 out of 167 countries, based on evaluations by its international trading partners. Honduras 
ranked particularly low, including lower than the regional averages for Latin America, in terms of customs regulations 
and timeliness. Investing in the upgrading of agro-logistics infrastructure will be critical for enabling Honduran farmers 
to diversify into higher-value, often perishable agriculture products that cannot thrive under the country’s current agro-
logistics infrastructure. 

 
11. Harnessing recent innovations in technology and data collection will be critical for improving competitiveness 
and creating new employment opportunities. Developing countries around the world are improving the competitiveness 
of their products through well-established research programs as the basis to promote the use of innovation, big data 
analysis and the Internet of Things. Honduras ranks 129 on the information and communications technology (ICT) 
Development Index 2017 (out of 176 countries worldwide). According to the International Food Policy and Research 
Institute (IFPRI), the total agricultural research spending index is US$ 8.0 million and the spending as a share of 
agricultural GDP for Honduras is 0.17 percent, the lowest in LAC. Honduras’ rapidly growing Information Technology 
Services sector may position it well for developing similar agricultural “intelligence” services and other innovative 
platforms to modernize and innovate in the agriculture sector.  

 
12. The Government of Honduras (GoH) through the 2020 Plan has defined a new development strategy to promote 
the transformation and modernization of the agro-industrial and agribusiness sectors, showing a keen appreciation 
for needs on the ground as well as strong commitment to supporting agriculture sector development. A recent GoH 
exercise identified and prioritized value chains based on the commercial potential and the country’s comparative 
advantages, as well as their impact on the generation of new jobs and income for rural families. Primary value chains 
prioritized include: livestock (beef), avocado, soy, cocoa, coffee and specialty coffee, black and red beans, cashew, 
vegetables, pitahaya, tilapia, coconut and agro-forestry initiatives, which all together have a required investment 
program estimated at US$ 1,200 million. The development of these value chains requires a business model guided by 
private public initiatives, and GoH's vision for these value chains includes the generation of up to 120,000 new full-time 
jobs. 

 
13. GoH considers the continuation of the COMRURAL approach to be one of the pillars to support implementation 
of the 2020 Plan. As requested by GoH, the proposed project – informed by valuable lessons learned during 10 years of 
COMRURAL implementation – will help to fulfill the 2020 Plan objectives by expanding the “productive alliance” model 
to agribusiness initiatives in additional regions and value chains and deepening the participation of the private financial 
sector in financing small rural producers.  
 
Relationship to CPF 
 
14. The proposed project is in line with GoH’s vision and the with all the focus areas of the World Bank Group's 
Honduras Country Partnership Framework FY16-FY20 (CPF) Report No. 98367-HN, as discussed by the Executive 
Directors on December 15, 2015. The World Bank’s strategic engagement for reducing poverty and inequality in Honduras 
are structured into the following three pillars: (i) fostering inclusion; (ii) bolstering conditions for growth; and (iii) reducing 
vulnerabilities to enhance resilience. The proposed project will contribute to all three of these focus areas by supporting 
financial inclusion, technical assistance, and market access for small rural producers, improving the enabling conditions 



 
The World Bank  
Integrating Innovation for Rural Competitiveness in Honduras - COMRURAL II (P168385) 

 
 

  
Sep 14, 2018 Page 6 of 15  

     

for agribusiness and rural entrepreneurship, and reducing agriculture sector resilience to climate change and other 
weather-related threats. 
 
15. The proposed Project is aligned with the IDA18 overarching theme, “Towards 2030: Investing in Growth, 
Resilience and Opportunity” and with the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).  The Project will contribute to 
implementing several themes prioritized by the World Bank Group: (i) Maximizing Finance for Development, (ii) climate 
change; (iii) gender; (iv) jobs and economic transformation; and, (v) governance and institutions, which present specific 
development challenges in the case of Honduras.   

 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
The PDO is to improve access to markets and climate-smart practices and contribute to the economic inclusion of 
targeted beneficiaries in select agricultural value chains. 
 
Key Results (From PCN) 

 
The achievement of the project development objective would be measured through the following indicators: 
 

• Number of beneficiaries (farmers and agri-entrepreneurs) adopting climate-smart practices promoted by the 
project, disaggregated by gender, youth, Indigenous, Afro-descendants (“climate-smart” indicator) 

• New jobs created under subprojects financed by the project (“economic inclusion” indicator) 

• Percentage increase in the value of gross sales of agricultural enterprises based on implementation of the 
business plans approved in the first 3.5 years of project implementation (“access to markets” and “economic 
inclusion” indicator) 

• Percentage of rural producer organizations (RPOs) working under a productive alliance approach 24 months 
after first disbursement (“sustainability” and “access to markets” indicator) 

 
D. Concept Description 

 
A. Concept 
 
Description 

 
16. The proposed project is an Investment Project Financing (IPF), comprising an IDA credit of US$ 150 million that 
is expected to leverage an expected additional US$ 150 million in private commercial finance and US$ 30 million in 
Rural Producer Organization (RPO) contributions. The proposed IPF will be implemented over an 8-year period and 
modeled on the well-established success of COMRURAL. The total project cost is estimated to be US$ 330 million. 

17. The proposed project aims to improve access to markets and climate-smart practices and contribute to the 
economic inclusion of targeted beneficiaries in select agricultural value chains. Innovation, defined as approaches that 
are new and/or different for project beneficiaries, will play an important role in achieving this objective in the form inter 
alia of practices, technologies, and systems. Moving beyond a focus on specific value chain nodes or aspects, the project 
will promote competitive improvements along the full spectrum of backward and forward value chain linkages.  

 
Beneficiaries 
 



 
The World Bank  
Integrating Innovation for Rural Competitiveness in Honduras - COMRURAL II (P168385) 

 
 

  
Sep 14, 2018 Page 7 of 15  

     

18. The proposed project will benefit farmers and agri-entrepreneurs in the Honduran agriculture sector directly 
and indirectly. The direct beneficiaries will be: (i) members of the agricultural or agribusiness enterprises (formal groups, 
associations, or cooperatives of small/medium size producers and agri-entrepreneurs) participating in subprojects (about 
100,000 farmers and their families); and (ii) other agricultural enterprises (either other groups/cooperatives or private 
individual firms) participating as partners/allies in the proposed subprojects (as agro-processors, aggregators, 
wholesalers, traders, etc.) or providing essential services for their successful operation (e.g. the rental of agricultural or 
processing specialized equipment etc.) and receiving matching grant funds. The project will also have secondary 
beneficiaries: participating public sector agencies and their staff (the capacities of which will be strengthened and 
modernized by the project) and participating private commercial financiers (who will gain capacity through the project 
for engaging with the agriculture sector). The proposed project will also have indirect benefits for a much broader range 
of stakeholders in the agriculture sector through enhancing the overall agriculture sector business environment and 
through strengthening and modernizing the public entities that provide services to those engaged in the agriculture 
sector (nearly one million Hondurans). 

 
19. The project will be national in scope and will target select GoH-prioritized value chains. The institutional 
strengthening and business climate enhancing activities (as in Component 1) will have a national coverage. For 
Component 2, project interventions will be identified through a geospatial approach to prioritizing value chains and 
agribusiness initiatives by region. 

 

20. The PDO will be achieved through the following Components: 
 

21. Component 1: Support to the Modernization of Honduras’ Agribusiness Environment The purpose of this 
Component will be to contribute to the modernization and strengthening of select public sector services and institutional 
capacity to enable and promote competitiveness in the agriculture sector. This Component will finance works, goods, 
technical assistance, consulting and non-consulting services, and operational costs to support: (i) institutional 
modernization of the Secretariat of Agriculture and Livestock (SAG: Spanish acronym), National Service for Agri-food 
Health and Safety (SENASA: Spanish acronym), and Agency of Sanitary Regulation (ARSA: Spanish acronym) for the 
improved provision of public services and governance structures in the agricultural sector; (ii) operation of the National 
Agricultural Council and its technical unit, including for the provision and adoption of ICT and facilitate uptake of other 
innovative solutions for market intelligence, agro-climate systems, agro-finance, and agro-logistics to promote a better-
informed decision-making process for effective policy dialogue; and (iii) increasing the quantity and quality of the 
agricultural man-/woman-power required for enabling the agribusiness environment in project areas by supporting the 
modernization of agricultural technical training facilities, e-learning training programs, innovation labs and incubation 
centers, among others.  
 
22. Component 2: Support to enhance the competitiveness of agribusiness initiatives. The purpose of this 
Component is to support competitive agribusiness initiatives (“subprojects”) in prioritized agricultural value chains. This 
would be achieved through improving and expanding the productive alliances model, increasing complementarity 
between public and private investments, as well as expanding the participation of private commercial banks and micro 
finance institutions in financing small rural producers. Specifically, this Component would finance: (i) works, goods, 
technical assistance, and services for the selection, preparation, and implementation of selected subprojects by 
participating partners; (ii) incentives for the adoption of innovative agribusiness practices and technologies to improve 
productivity, market access, and climate resilience, and (iii) complementary investments in small-scale agro-logistics 
services and infrastructure. These subprojects will contribute to improved management of water resources in project 
activities, particularly in the Dry Corridor, to ensure the viability and sustainability of the agribusinesses that they support. 
A minimum threshold for women and youth participation will be determined, and separate procedures to promote the 



 
The World Bank  
Integrating Innovation for Rural Competitiveness in Honduras - COMRURAL II (P168385) 

 
 

  
Sep 14, 2018 Page 8 of 15  

     

inclusion of Indigenous and Afro-descendant communities as beneficiaries in more favorable conditions, and adapted to 
their sociocultural reality, will be included. In addition, the proposed project will target a minimum number of small 
farmers with sufficient potential to exit PROSASUR (which focuses on the extreme poor in the Dry Corridor) as well as 
bring in poor farmers beneficiaries from the social protection program mainly known as Vida Mejor. 
 
23. Component 3: Project management support.  This Component will finance the overall project management, 
coordination, and implementation. 

 

24. Component 4: Contingency Emergency Response (CER). This Component will provide immediate response to 
eligible emergencies. As such, in the event of such an eligible emergency (as defined in the Contingency Emergency 
Response (CER) Operational Manual prepared and adopted by the GoH), this Component would finance emergency 
activities and expenditures through the reallocation of funds from the Project. 

 
 
 
    

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
The project will be national in scope focusing on rural areas of Honduras. Priority agricultural products have been 

identified as coffee, cattle, cacao, avocado, cashew, leaf vegetables, fruit and non-traditional products, among others. 
The specific locations of the specific subprojects to be financed will not be known during the preparation of the project, 
but it is highly likely that indigenous peoples and afro-descendant communities may be present in the area of influence of 
the project, particularly in areas such as La Esperanza and Copan. There is a significant incidence of crime and violence in 
the country. This project will include private sector funds contributing to the co-financed resources for the project. In that 
regard, the environmental and social requirements will apply to all the funds administered under the COMRURAL II. 
 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
The main agency involved in the implementation of the project, INVEST-H, has experience implementing safeguards 

policies and World Bank procedures because of their implementation of the COMRURAL I and its additional financing 
project since 2007 (P101209). COMRURAL I has a tracking system for the subprojects, and beneficiary organizations are 
required to have environmental management plans. The environmental and social management capacity of INVEST-H, 
however, will be assessed during project preparation, and it is expected that the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) will be 
improved based on the results of the due diligence, strengthening their procedures and frameworks for monitoring 
environmental and social sustainability to enhance effective implementation and monitoring of the safeguards 
instruments that will be developed. 
 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 
Andrew Francis Drumm, Environmental Specialist 
Rodolfo Tello Abanto, Social Specialist 

 
D. Policies that might apply 



 
The World Bank  
Integrating Innovation for Rural Competitiveness in Honduras - COMRURAL II (P168385) 

 
 

  
Sep 14, 2018 Page 9 of 15  

     

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The aim of the project is to support the development 
of increased economic benefits for small farmers in 
particular, through the creation of strategic alliances 
with technical service providers, financial institutions 
and markets, and to increase agricultural productivity 
through capacity building and value chain integration. 
Component 1 activities are expected to mostly finance 
the rehabilitation of existing infrastructure and the 
acquisition of equipment for activities like the 
modernization public agricultural schools and public 
agricultural universities. Component 2 will fund 
agribusiness initiatives across the country, such as 
water harvesting and water storage, construction of 
small-scale irrigation and drainage schemes, on-farm 
irrigation technologies, low-cost pumping systems 
(including solar), the acquisition of agricultural 
machinery and vehicles the construction of modules to 
store agricultural products and the maintenance of 
vehicles, mounting structures, etc. The infrastructure 
to be funded is expected to be small-scale only. The 
overall impact of the project is expected to be positive 
and the foreseen activities are not expected to 
generate significant risk or irreversible adverse 
impacts. As such, based on the available information 
this project has been classified as Category B. 
 
Potential adverse environmental impacts include 
degradation of natural habitat, including forests, 
streams and rivers and health and safety of farmers 
through pesticide mismanagement. The main social 
impacts and risks of the project associated with OP 
4.01 are related to community health and safety, 
particularly in relation to health risks for local 
populations in areas surrounding the agricultural 
projects (including health impacts associated with the 
use of pesticides), as well as labor conditions, 
including those related to the working conditions of 
agricultural employees, including those in the supply 
chains, and the possibility of situations involving child 
and/or forced labor, migrant workers, and potential 
gender exclusion. 
 
To manage the impacts and risks of the project, the 
Borrower will prepare, prior to Appraisal, a Social 



 
The World Bank  
Integrating Innovation for Rural Competitiveness in Honduras - COMRURAL II (P168385) 

 
 

  
Sep 14, 2018 Page 10 of 15  

     

Assessment (SA), with a strategic focus on the 
agricultural sector, with an emphasis on the issues 
mentioned in the previous paragraph, and the 
identification of vulnerable and disadvantaged 
populations, with a gender, ethnic, and generationally 
sensitive approach. The SA will include potential risks 
related to threats to human security through the 
escalation of personal, communal or interstate 
conflict, crime or violence. The SA will build upon the 
SA prepared for the COMRURAL I project in 2007 
(P101209) and for its additional financing (2016). The 
SA will also identify and analyze the main social risks 
identified in the COMRURAL I project and its social 
management measures, incorporating the lessons 
learned in that operation. Agribusiness subproject 
allocation will be demand-driven and that subprojects 
will be selected during implementation. Since the 
specific locations and impacts of the subprojects 
cannot be clearly defined during project preparation, 
the Borrower will prepare an Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF), in consultation with 
stakeholders, to identify, manage and mitigate 
potential adverse impacts during implementation, and 
guide the preparation of specific EAs, SAs, and ESMPs 
for each of the subprojects to be defined during 
project execution. The ESMF will guide the 
strengthening of elements like a Grievance Redress 
Mechanism, gender strategy, labor influx, and the 
system to track the environmental and social aspects 
in the subprojects. The ESMF will include guidelines 
for the development of labor management procedures 
(to prevent forced and child labor) and community 
health and safety plans for the subprojects. The ESMF 
will also include a screening mechanism to assess the 
environmental and social impacts of the subprojects, 
and will exclude from project funding subprojects 
likely to cause irreversible or significant environmental 
or social impacts (Category A), excluding activities that 
would impact protected areas, key biodiversity areas, 
and other terrestrial and aquatic natural habitats. 
High-risk agribusiness activities, such as palm oil 
plantations, will be also excluded from the program. 
The ESMF will also incorporate criteria for the use of 
water resources, taking the analysis of watersheds in 
the analysis. The ESMF will also include a table of 
mitigation activities, implementation arrangements, 



 
The World Bank  
Integrating Innovation for Rural Competitiveness in Honduras - COMRURAL II (P168385) 

 
 

  
Sep 14, 2018 Page 11 of 15  

     

capacity building plan, and a monitoring and 
evaluation framework as well. The ESMF will also 
include a specific section describing the requirements 
for preparing the safeguard aspects of the CERC 
(Component 4), describing the potential emergencies 
and the types of activities likely to be financed and 
providing a preliminary identification of potential risks 
and mitigation measures associated with them, taking 
into account the Bank Guidance on Contingent 
Emergency Response Components. The ESMF will 
include the WBG EHS General Guidelines, and the 
specific Guidelines on Annual Crop Production 
 
The project will also promote the participation of the 
local communities and other relevant stakeholders, 
preparing and implementing a Stakeholder 
Engagement Plan (SEP), to guide the stakeholder 
engagement process throughout preparation and 
implementation, strengthening the existing 
Participation Plan. The SEP will build upon the Social 
Participation Plan prepared for COMRURAL I in 2007. 
The ESMF and SEP will be disclosed and consulted 
prior to appraisal. The disclosure arrangements will 
include virtual disclosure and availability of physical 
copies of such instruments in accessible locations. 

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No 
The project will not finance activities that are 
implemented by a private entity. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

Project activities will not involve significant loss or 
degradation of natural habitats. In fact, prioritization 
of investments in organic production will enhance 
positive impacts on aquatic habitats, particularly in 
areas that currently have issues with pesticide and 
fertilizer runoff. 
 
Any investment funded under the project will be 
screened for its potential to cause negative impacts to 
natural habitats under the ESMF procedures, including 
critical natural habitats. Any activity likely to cause 
irreversible or significant damages to habitats will be 
excluded from project funding.  

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes 

The ESMF will guide assessment of potential impacts 
of the planned productive investments upon forests. It 
will include a negative list of activities/impacts that 
could lead to degradation or conversion of forests to 
exclude them from financing. In general, the project 



 
The World Bank  
Integrating Innovation for Rural Competitiveness in Honduras - COMRURAL II (P168385) 

 
 

  
Sep 14, 2018 Page 12 of 15  

     

promotes use of agroforestry and silvo-pastoral 
practices on already cleared land. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The project finances agricultural activities expected to 
involve use of different types, quantities and 
management styles of agrochemicals or natural 
products/measures for pest management. The project 
will emphasize Integrated Pest/Crop Management 
through technical assistance. The ESMF will provide 
the necessary initial guidance for related screening 
and good practices. Procurement will screen any 
proposed purchases of agrochemicals to secure 
exclusion of red or yellow label chemicals and those 
prohibited by national regulations. During 
implementation, proposed business plans will be 
assessed in detail and managed based on good IPM 
practices. A Pest Management Plan (PMP) will outline 
the various elements of and actions needed to be 
taken to adequately address concerns during project 
implementation. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 

Project activities are not expected to involve any 
major civil works. No major movement of earth or 
excavation is anticipated, nor is it expected that 
natural features and landscapes with some level of 
cultural significance might be adversely impacted by 
the project. As such, it is unlikely that known physical 
cultural resources will be impacted. Nevertheless, as a 
precautionary measure, chance finds provisions will be 
included in the ESMF. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 Yes 

Given the presence of Indigenous Peoples such as 
Lenca, Maya- Chortis, Tolupan, Misquito, Pech, 
Tawakas o Sumos located in specific areas of the 
country, as well as afro-descendant communities, and 
considering that agribusiness subprojects will be 
demand-driven and will be selected during 
implementation, an Indigenous Peoples and Afro-
descendants Planning Framework (IPAPF), which will 
be prepared and disclosed as a standalone document, 
will define the guidelines for the development of 
separate procedures to promote the inclusion of 
indigenous communities as beneficiaries of the project 
in more favorable conditions, adapted to their 
sociocultural reality and with provisions to reduce the 
potential impoverishment risks for the indigenous and 
afro-descendant beneficiaries. The IPAPF will build 
upon the Indigenous Peoples Development Plan 
prepared in 2007 for the COMRURAL I project 



 
The World Bank  
Integrating Innovation for Rural Competitiveness in Honduras - COMRURAL II (P168385) 

 
 

  
Sep 14, 2018 Page 13 of 15  

     

(P101209) and for its additional financing prepared in 
2016. The SA to be prepared will include OP 4.10 
requirements specific for IPs and will to inform project 
design and preparation of the IPAPF. The IPAPF will 
define the criteria and procedures for the preparation 
of specific Indigenous Peoples and Afro-descendent 
Plans (IPAP), through open, fair and culturally 
appropriate processes, including free, prior and 
informed consultation processes leading to broad 
community support for the sub-projects. The IPAPs 
will assess the potential impacts to Indigenous Peoples 
and define the necessary mitigation measures, as well 
as provide information on practical ways in which the 
Indigenous Peoples and Afro-descendants can become 
project beneficiaries, and to ensure that they do so in 
a culturally appropriate manner. 
 
Gender considerations will also be addressed so that 
indigenous women and men are able to benefit from 
the project. The IPAPF and IPAPs will also identify 
culturally-specific mechanisms that can be adopted to 
address any grievances that may arise through project 
implementation, as part of the project’s Grievance 
Redress Mechanism. The IPAPF will be prepared, 
disclosed and consulted with Indigenous Peoples 
Organizations at the national and regional levels prior 
to appraisal. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

Project activities are not likely to involve involuntary 
resettlement. Subproject allocation will be demand-
driven and that subprojects will be selected during 
implementation. Since project locations are not know 
yet, the project will include a Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF) to guide the preparation of specific 
Resettlement Action Plans (RAP) or Abbreviated 
Resettlement Plans (ARAP) to address the cases of 
involuntary resettlement and land acquisition if they 
are identified during project execution. The RPF will be 
disclosed and consulted prior to appraisal as a 
standalone document, along with the ESMF 
consultation process. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 
Project activities will not involve dams and project 
activities will not rely on the performance of any dam. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

TBD 

The locations of Project activities is not yet known so it 
cannot yet be determined if activities will  take place 
in 
international waterways. 



 
The World Bank  
Integrating Innovation for Rural Competitiveness in Honduras - COMRURAL II (P168385) 

 
 

  
Sep 14, 2018 Page 14 of 15  

     

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
Project activities will not be located or take place in 
disputed areas. If an area were to be in dispute, it 
would not be eligible for financing under the project. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Jan 15, 2019 
 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Some environmental and social safeguards related studies and management instruments will be prepared during the 

project preparation process (October 2018 - January 2019), while others will be prepared after project approval. The 
safeguards instruments to be prepared alongside the project, and disclosed and consulted before the project’s appraisal 
process has concluded, are the following ones: SA, ESMF, SEP, IPAPF, and RPF. The safeguard instruments to be prepared 
after project appraisal or approval, when the subprojects have been preliminarily defined but before finalizing their 
approval process, are the following ones: SAs and ESMPs for each of the specific subprojects, which will provide the 
necessary information to determine if additional social management instruments, such as PMPs, IPAPs, RAPs or ARAPs, 
will need to be prepared. 
 
 

CONTACT POINT 

 

World Bank 

Augusto Garcia 

Sr Agricultural Spec. 
 

 

Borrower/Client/Recipient 
 

Republic of Honduras 

 

 

 
 

 

Implementing Agencies 
 

Inversion Estrategica - Honduras (INVEST-H) 

Marco  Bogran 

Director Ejecutivo 

mbogran@mcahonduras.hn 
 
 



 
The World Bank  
Integrating Innovation for Rural Competitiveness in Honduras - COMRURAL II (P168385) 

 
 

  
Sep 14, 2018 Page 15 of 15  

     

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT 

The World Bank 

1818 H Street, NW 

Washington, D.C. 20433 

Telephone: (202) 473-1000 

Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects  

 

 

APPROVAL 

Task Team Leader(s): Augusto Garcia 
 

  Approved By 
APPROVALTBL 

Practice Manager/Manager: Michael Morris 03-Nov-2018 

Country Director: Andrea C. Guedes 16-Nov-2018 
    
 
 
 
 

http://www.worldbank.org/projects


