























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Land Allocation for Social and Economic Development Project III (P171331) 

 
 

  
Jun 16, 2019 Page 1 of 10  

     

      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document (PID) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 28-Jun-2019 | Report No: PIDC27269 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Cambodia P171331  Land Allocation for 
Social and Economic 
Development Project III 
(P171331) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC Feb 28, 2020 Jun 19, 2020 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Kingdom of Cambodia Ministry of Land 
Management Urban 
Planning and Construction 
(MLMUPC), Ministry of 
Agriculture, Forestry and 
Fisheries (MAFF), National 
Committee for Sub-National 
Democratic and 
Development Secretariat 
(NCDDS) 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The project development objective is to help improve target beneficiaries' access to agriculture resources and selected 
infrastructure and social services in project communities. 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 100.00 

Total Financing 70.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 60.00 

Financing Gap 30.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 



     International Development Association (IDA) 60.00 

          IDA Credit 60.00 

Non-World Bank Group Financing 

     Counterpart Funding 10.00 

          Borrower/Recipient 10.00 

   
 

Environmental and Social Risk Classification Concept Review Decision 

High  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

 
1. Over the past two decades, Cambodia has undergone a significant transition, reaching lower middle-
income economy by raising its per capita income from USD 250 in 1995 to an estimated USD 1,230 in 2017. Driven 
by garment exports and tourism, Cambodia has sustained an average growth rate of 7.7% between 1995-2018, 
ranking sixth in the world1, among the fastest-growing economies in the world and has achieved impressive gains in 
poverty reduction. As global demand peaks in 2018, economic growth is estimated to have reached 7.5%, compared 
to 7% in 2017. Growth is expected to remain robust over the medium term. Growth was accompanied by a significant 
decline in poverty incidence, which dropped from 47 percent in 2007 to about 13 percent in 2013 thanks largely to 
high agriculture commodity prices globally as well as strong job creation in manufacturing and services. Around 3.6 
million jobs in industry and services were created over the past two decades. Cambodia’s growth has been pro-poor. 
The percentage of Cambodians living under the national poverty line fell from 47.8 percent in 2007 to 13.5 percent 
in 2014, according to official estimates. The Gini coefficient declined to 0.30 in 2014 from 0.34 in 2009. Cambodia 
has made significant progress in attaining the Millennium Development Goals. Since 1990, the country has more than 
halved extreme poverty and maternal mortality, achieved nearly universal primary education enrollment, and made 
significant progress in combating HIV/AIDS. Poverty reduction was particularly dramatic from 2007 to 2009, when 
poverty declined by 25 percentage points and 3.3 million people escaped poverty, owing in large part to an expansion 
of cultivated area and high international food prices which benefited both farmers and agriculture workers. 

2. Among the main drivers of growth have been exports of goods and services and foreign capital inflows. 
Since opening its economy to international trade and capital flows in 1992, Cambodia has become one of the East 
Asian countries most open to trade and foreign investment. Exports of goods and services grew at an average of 18 
percent during 1994-2017, with Cambodia ranking 4th in the world in exports during that period. Notably, its export 

                                            
1 World Development Indicators. Four countries that experienced a recession during this period are excluded.  


 

success is driven by a few products, with final garments and footwear accounting for nearly three-quarters of total 
exports and has been facilitated by preferential access to key markets. Cambodia is also among the top countries in 
the world in terms of attracting foreign direct investment (FDI), which has facilitated entry into some global value 
chains (GVCs).  
 
3. With an aspiration to become an upper middle-income country by 2030, Cambodia needs to strengthen 
its existing drivers, which are weakening, while building new drivers of growth. The end of the commodity super-
cycle, coupled with adverse weather shocks, have resulted in a sharp slowdown in agriculture growth. Meanwhile, 
Cambodia’s labor-intensive, export-oriented garment and tourism sectors are facing rising wages and greater 
competition from abroad. There is evidence that all merchandise export growth, tourist arrivals, as well as FDI into 
manufacturing have slowed during 2013-2017.  Moreover, the EU is considering the suspension of preferential 
market access for Cambodian exports under the Everything-but-Arms (EBA) scheme, which could mean tariffs of 
about 12 percent for Cambodian garment exports, threatening sector competitiveness. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 

 
4. Growth has also been driven by the country’s rich and diverse natural capital, which supports the 
livelihoods of millions of Cambodians. Agriculture, which depends heavily on natural resources and ecosystem 
services, contributed 27% of the annual gross domestic product (GDP) in 2018. More than five million people depend 
on agriculture and fisheries, to supplement their income and support their food security, and 88 percent of the 
population still relies on traditional biomass for cooking. Cambodians are also the largest consumers of freshwater 
fish per capita, with fish and other aquatic resources contributing to 37 percent of total protein consumption. 
Tourism, another engine of economic growth, is also becoming increasingly dependent on natural resources and 
environment. 
 
5. Going forward, Cambodia may not be able to rely on the same factors that drove strong growth and 
poverty reduction over the past two decades. In the case of agriculture, the outlook for commodity prices is not 
positive, and Cambodia’s scope for further gains in cultivated area is more limited nowadays, especially considering 
the need for environmental sustainability. Risks posed by the degradation of natural resources could affect economic 
sustainability. It is crucial to maintain and develop natural resources while strengthening climate resilience. Low 
prices for agricultural commodities along with rising salaries will require improvements in productivity to remain 
competitive. Given the continued importance of the agricultural sector to growth and poverty reduction, Cambodia 
will need to foster a gradual transformation of the sector through intensification, diversification, and value addition. 
The public sector could facilitate expanded irrigation, knowledge, and technology adoption in collaboration with the 
private sector and strategies of quality differentiation by enhancing systems for managing quality and food safety 
and introducing an overall coherent approach to ‘brand’ Cambodian food and agriculture.  
 
6. The benefits of economic growth and the reduction of poverty has not been shared equitably among 
Cambodian citizens. Disparities in income and access to opportunities remain, particularly in rural communities. 
Rural communities which are still heavily relying on land, forests, and other natural resources for their livelihoods are 
still faced with widespread poverty in rural Cambodia.  Landlessness and access to natural resources remains a 
problem. 
7. Inequality in ownership and/or access to productive assets such as land is a major concern because it 
implies the likelihood of a trend to growing inequality of production, income and consumption in the future. In the 
absence of dramatic expansion of off-farm employment or livelihood opportunities to absorb landless labor, the 

concentration of land in fewer hands implies a growing gap in the opportunities available to different types of 
households.  
 
8. Key reforms are needed for Cambodia to sustain pro-poor growth, foster country’s competitiveness, 
sustainably manage natural resource wealth and improve access to and quality of public services. Cambodia 
continues to have a serios infrastructure gap and would benefit from greater connectivity and investing in rural and 
urban infrastructure is essential.  
 
9. The Royal Government of Cambodia is making growing efforts to address landlessness and tenure 
insecurity, including increasing Indigenous Communal Land Titling (ICLT). Commune-based and national Social Land 
Concession projects, both Government and donor funded have been established, addressing rural poverty and 
providing a social safety net or retirement benefit for demobilized soldiers. Where accompanied by adequate 
infrastructure and service provision, these projects have shown to be able to provide sustainable livelihoods. 
However, needs (and demands) of landless and tenure-insecure population groups and the challenges in addressing 
them remain significant. Landlessness and poverty remaining an issue in rural areas. 
 
10. Under the original LASED and the second phase LASED II projects, participatory planning of agriculture 
and livelihood activities has progressively led to the adoption of good practices in agriculture production in the 
land recipient communities. 5,000ha of agricultural land are newly under perennial or annual crops, on 3,000ha 
beneficiaries apply improved production technologies that help raising incomes and protect natural resources.    
Accompanying investments in infrastructure, including the planned and ongoing support to small-scale irrigation 
schemes, have further increased sustainability of agriculture-based livelihoods, making sure products and production 
processes respond to market demands and are resilient to the short and long-term climate changes affecting the 
areas. At the same time, road linkages to and from the SLC areas benefit not only the direct land recipients but many 
more stakeholders that travel to and from the area, providing new business opportunities, decreasing transaction 
costs, and stimulating economic and social exchange.  A new, third phase and project would expand and extend 
activities and benefits to new target groups in new provinces.  
 

Relationship to CPF 
 

11. The Project supports the achievement of the World Bank’s twin goals to end extreme poverty and promote 
shared prosperity through its emphasis on expanding the benefits of poverty-targeted land distribution and 
infrastructure and service provision, as well as reduce climate risk vulnerability to a broader segment of the poor and 
marginalized population in rural areas.  The Project is also consistent with, and part of the World Bank Group’s Country 
Partnership Framework (CPF) for Cambodia 2019-2023 which received Board approval in May 2019.  Furthermore, it 
supports the objectives in the government’s Rectangular Strategy IV (RS4), particularly the objectives of poverty 
reduction, agriculture development, diversification and commercialization, and improving rural infrastructure and 
services. The project supports the achievement of Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 1 on eradicating extreme 
poverty and SDG 2 on preventing hunger and improving nutrition. 

 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
12. The project development objective is to help improve target beneficiaries' access to agriculture resources 
and selected infrastructure and social services in project communities.  

Key Results (From PCN) 


13. The key results that the Project would achieve include: 

 

• Tenure security for formerly landless or land-poor, and other marginalized groups or individuals, i.e. 
indigenous communities. 
Achievements would be measured by the number of registered land rights (including titles) and the area 
(ha) that was provided to beneficiaries.  

• Infrastructure and service provision in the project areas, benefitting not only the direct target group but 
supporting broader area development. 
Achievements would be measured by the number of people that live along newly built or upgraded 
roads and who benefit from improved connectivity and market access. 

• Sustainable, agriculture-based livelihood development for individuals and groups in the project 
communities. 
Achievements would be measured by increased incomes from farming, and improved food security (and 
nutrition) amongst the target beneficiary families.  

 
14. With a potentially nation-wide coverage, implementation will focus on the existing LASED provinces, plus 
the Northeastern Provinces of Mondulkiri, Rattanakiri, Stung Treng and Preah Vihear.  A total of 30-40 project sites 
(sub-projects) would be included, covering a total of approximately 10,000 -15,000 direct beneficiary households.  
Benefits from improved infrastructure availability and usage will accrue to a broader beneficiary group in the project 
areas. 

D. Concept Description 
 

Component 1: Social Land Concession (SLC) and Indigenous Communal Land Titling (ICLT) Investment 
Planning and Prioritization (approx. US$20million) 

 
15. This would continue support for: (a) participatory preparation and updating of SLC or ICLT plans for the new, 
and where necessary also existing sites, respectively; (b) identification, prioritization and planning of appropriate 
technology and infrastructure investments, including the collection of project baseline data at additional sites, and 
responding to increased monitoring requirements; and (c) processing of individual SLC land titles for eligible land 
recipients in the existing sites. Additional and adjusted activities would include (d) facilitating incorporation of climate 
smart/climate change resilience considerations, and where appropriate specific NRM protection in new and or 
existing land use plans for project areas; and (e) processing of communal land titles in areas where the project sites 
include indigenous communities with respective demands. 

Component 2: Land Preparation and Infrastructure Development (approx. US$50million) 
 
16. This would support the settling-in requirements as well as the required land preparation and prioritized 
infrastructure investments at new project sites. These include the: (a) provision of settling-in assistance to newly-
installed land recipients; (b) provision of initial land preparation assistance including a first cover crop; and (c) 
provision of productive/economic and social community infrastructure investments such as rural roads, small-scale 
irrigation systems, water supply and sanitation facilities, school buildings, teachers’ houses, health posts and 
community centers, among others. Based on the experiences in existing SLC areas and responding to the significant 
infrastructure gaps in rural areas expected to be encountered at the proposed new project areas, it is expected that 

the Project’s largest investments would be provided for rural climate resilient roads, with benefits of those expanding 
beyond the direct beneficiaries, including entire communes and areas.  With the substantial increase in project area, 
the absolute amount for infrastructure investments will be considerably larger than under LASED II.  The second 
largest item for project investments concerns water infrastructures, both for climate change resilient small-scale 
irrigation schemes or water reservoirs and for provision of safe water supply and sanitation.  

Component 3: Agriculture and Livelihood Development (approx. US$20million) 
 
17. This would primarily support the improvement of climate-change resilient agricultural production systems, 
livelihoods and food security of new land recipients, including facilitation and provision of support services and 
technical assistance. These would include support for: (a) community organizing and development; (b) provision of 
agricultural service and extension support following a pluralistic service provider approach; (c) establishment of 
farmer-managed demonstration plots and model farms; (d) establishment and/or strengthening of farmers 
organization, agriculture cooperatives, production and marketing groups and other community interest groups; and 
(e) provision of community fund to strengthen successful local initiatives. Agriculture and livelihood support would 
be adjusted, where applicable, to the specific sociocultural and biophysical environments of new project areas, in 
particular in IP areas. Promotion of nutrition-sensitive agriculture will be part of the training curricula prepared and 
implemented by MAFF and PDAFF.  Adaptation and expansion of existing MAFF materials on nutrition-sensitive 
agriculture production will be part of the support.  

18. The Project will build on the experiences with LASED interventions, which highlight the need of strong 
agriculture development support to quickly integrate farming systems into the local and wider economy, 
strengthening agriculture-based livelihoods and provide quick returns and strong incentives to land recipients.  
Taking into consideration that additional project locations under the Project will include areas in provinces with 
important natural habitats, the Project will incorporate in its agriculture and livelihood development plans activities 
for protecting private, communal and public lands.  Where applicable, community forestry activities will be supported 
alongside private agriculture activities.   

19. An additional focus of agriculture and livelihood development under LASED III will be a specific response to 
climate change challenges.  In order to (further) strengthen the resilience of agriculture and food systems in the 
existing and new sites under the Project, responses to short- and long-term climate changes will be an integral part 
of support.  This will particularly include irrigation and water management support, integrating site specific planning 
into ongoing or prospective broader area development approaches.  

Component 4: Project Management, Coordination and M&E (approx. US$10million) 
 

20. This component would support adjusted project administration and coordination activities. It would ensure 
in particular the timely and transparent flow of funds, procurement, auditing and reporting. It would also support 
project implementing entities at all levels (including the new provinces and new communes) to establish (where 
needed) and strengthen their fiduciary, administrative and reporting capacities. Clear assignments for procurement 
and FM responsibilities of each IA will guide effective an efficient implementation. Ministry of Land Management 
Urban Planning and Construction (MLMUPC) will be the executing agency, with participation from the Ministry of 
Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries (MAFF), National Committee for Sub-National Democratic and Development 
Secretariat (NCDDS) as implementing agencies for this proposed project.  They will carry out procurement activities 
at national level for their respective activities in the components and sub-components, respectively.  Communes and 
communities will carry out procurement activities at the sub-national levels if and as applicable.  

21. Specific attention and support would also be provided to adapt and strengthen the Project’s M&E system, 
and further expand and enhance the Project and SLC/ICLT-related management information system as input to the 
site planning and prioritization. Support would include technical assistance, training, incremental operating costs, 
vehicles and equipment, among others. 

    
 
Legal Operational Policies                                  Triggered? 

Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50 No 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60 No 

 
Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts 

 
The overall environmental and social risk classification is high. The screening of risks and impacts is based on discussion 
with the task team, consultations and observations undertaken during a mission, secondary data, and specialist 
experience with LASED II. 
 
The project will support the process for SLC and ICLT, establishment of sustainable infrastructure and livelihood systems 
including land preparation, provision of social and economic infrastructure, agriculture support and livelihood 
development. Restrictions on access to land and natural and cultural resources resulting from these activities may impact 
on nature-based livelihoods and tenure of vulnerable or marginal households and communities where decisions may not 
be managed in a participatory manner. While the project aims to deliver a range of benefits including economic 
development and community livelihood opportunities, project activities have the potential to generate significant social 
impacts, direct and indirect, due to the range of activities related to land consolidation, indigenous community lands, 
agriculture and infrastructure. The scale of the proposed activities, across sensitive locations (indigenous areas) and new 
focus on ICLT presents risks related to collective registration of indigenous communities’ lands.  
 
Nine of the standards have be screened as relevant. Standard ESS9 on Financial Intermediaries is not considered 
relevant. 
 
The implementing agencies have good competency in implementing projects in accordance with national requirements 
and World Bank Safeguards Policies but have less familiarity with and experience in delivering projects in line with the 
Environmental and Social Framework. Prior to project appraisal an Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) 
will be prepared which will take into account the need to ensure budget, staffing and operational arrangements for 
project environmental and social risk management. For new sites involving indigenous communities as sole beneficiaries, 
to understand and address project related risks and impacts, a social assessment will be prepared prior to appraisal to 
inform project design and project level social risk management framework, also to be prepared prior to appraisal. The 
assessment will inform revisions to existing social risk management frameworks and plans, including on stakeholder 
engagement, at both project and community level. 

 

 

