













































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Congo Commercial Agriculture Project (P159979) 

 
 

  
Mar 22, 2017 Page 1 of 25  

     

 

 
 
      

 

Combined Project Information Documents /  
Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (PID/ISDS) 

 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 15-May-2017 | Report No: PIDISDSA21309 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal. 

 

P
u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d



 

The World Bank  
Congo Commercial Agriculture Project (P159979) 

 

 

  
Mar 22, 2017 Page 2 of 25  

 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Congo, Republic of P159979 Congo Commercial 
Agriculture Project 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA 21-Mar-2017 06-Jul-2017 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Republic of Congo Ministry of Agriculture, 
Fisheries and Livestock 

 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
The project development objective (PDO) is to improve productivity of farmers and market access for producer groups 
and micro, small and medium agribusiness enterprises, in selected zones, and provide immediate and effective 
response in the event of an eligible crisis or emergency.  
 
 
Components 

Component 1: Direct support to producer groups and agribusiness MSMES 
Component 2: Improving public infrastructure and the business climate for commercial agriculture 
Component 3: Strengthening institutional capacities to support the development of commercial agriculture 
Component 4: Contingency emergency response 

 
 

Financing (in USD Million) 

 

Finance OLD 

Financing Source Amount  

International Development Association (IDA)  100.00  

Total Project Cost  100.00  
    
 

Environmental Assessment Category 

B - Partial Assessment 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the preparation to continue     
 
 



 

The World Bank  
Congo Commercial Agriculture Project (P159979) 

 

 

  
Mar 22, 2017 Page 3 of 25  

 

 
 
Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

1. The Republic of Congo (ROC) is sparsely inhabited, with a population of 4.4 million people 
and ranks among the least densely populated in the world (12.8/km

2
). The country has an   

urbanization rate of about 62 percent, with more than half of the population living in 

Brazzaville and Pointe-Noire, its two largest cities. Oil’s share of total GDP increased from 

56 percent in 2000-2004 to 66 percent in 2010-2014 and – despite the recent oil price decline 

– still accounts for more than half of GDP and more than 80 percent of total exports. 

Agricultural exports (palm oil, sugar, and cocoa) are stagnant and the country suffers from a 

rapidly deteriorating trade balance for food. ROC’s cereal import dependency ratio is 94 

percent
1
.  

 

2. ROC is highly endowed in natural resources, but with poor social indicators. The 
country is largely covered by the Congo Forest Basin, with 31 percent of its total surface area 

comprising cultivable land. The country is also endowed with significant hydrocarbon 

reserves with an estimated 1.6 billion barrels of oil reserves and with a proven 90 billion m
3
 

of natural gas, respectively the 4
th

 largest oil reserves and the 5
th

 largest natural gas reserves 

in Sub-Saharan Africa. In addition, the country is significantly endowed in mining ore such 

as iron, potash and magnesium. However, ROC’s key social indicators, notably health and 

education outcomes, as well as service delivery in these sectors, are much lower than 

countries with similar resource endowments, evidence of the Country’s inability to harness 

its potential into dividends for its citizens. 

 

3. High vulnerability of the economy and inequality. Despite steady GDP growth of 5 
percent over the past 10 years, ROC continues to suffer from high rates of poverty and 

inequality due to jobless growth. 63 percent of the population are self-employed in either 

agriculture or the informal services, with youth severely affected by unemployment. The 

unemployment rate for those aged 15-29 is 32.7 percent.
2
 The country has a Gini coefficient 

of 0.45 with a poverty incidence of 74.8 percent in rural areas against 32.3 percent in urban 

areas. Gender and disability have an indirect impact on poverty as women and disabled 

persons exhibit lower levels of education and employment opportunities. The ROC’s Gender 

Inequality country index is 137 out of 157 countries. Cultural division of labor and a 

preference for boys regarding expenditure on education often work against women. The 

malnutrition rate remains high (32 percent), with a total of 1.4 million people estimated as 

                                                           
1
 FAO food security indicators. Figure is from 2010. 

2
 Poverty Report Republic of Congo 2016 

Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here. 



 

The World Bank  
Congo Commercial Agriculture Project (P159979) 

 

 

  
Mar 22, 2017 Page 4 of 25  

 

malnourished
3
 and 31 percent of children stunted. Food and nutrition insecurity is driven by: 

(a) inadequate access to quality food; (b) poor hygiene practices and lack of awareness of 

food and nutrition requirements; and (c) unsafe food.    

 

4. Business climate and access to financial services. ROC was listed the 177
th

 country out of 

190 in the ranking of the World Bank Doing Business report 2017, which noted it takes an 

average of 50 days to register a business well beyond the regional average of 27.3. Access to 

finance is cited as the second highest constraint by businesses
4
. Bank credit to agriculture 

accounts for 6 percent of short-term credit and 17 percent of medium-term credit, and is 

focused primarily on the forestry industry
5
. Microfinance institutions are mostly focused on 

urban markets, and agriculture accounts for only 2 percent of Mutuelles Congolaises 

d’Epargne et de Crédit (MUCODEC)’s portfolio (the largest microfinance institution). Low 

penetration of financial services in rural areas, knowledge of the agriculture sector and 

collateral requirements limit access to credit for producer groups and micro, small and 

medium agribusiness enterprises (MSME).  

 

5. Private sector development. The private sector in ROC is largely fragmented with little or 
no structured public-private dialogue taking place to improve the enabling environment for 

business. The contribution of the private sector to growth is limited, as reflected by the level 

of private investments (excluding oil), which represents only 5 percent of GDP (against 14 

percent on average in Sub-Saharan Africa and 25 percent of GDP in Asia). Sectors with 

strong growth potential identified by the Government include transport services, 

agribusiness, forestry and mining. 

 

6. Environment. As part of its Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation 
(REDD+) agenda, ROC is developing an Emissions Reductions Program in the Sangha and 

Likouala departments. The government program seeks to access a variety of REDD+ funding 

sources like the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility (FCPF), the Forest Investment Program 

(FIP), and the Central Africa Forest Initiative (CAFI). ROC’s forests are at risk of 

deforestation due to mineral extraction, road development, illegal logging, agricultural 

expansion and charcoal collection. In addition, trends
6
 indicate that exposure to periods of 

intense rainfall has been increasing. ROC, in its recently submitted Intended Nationally 

Determined Contribution (INDC), has highlighted agriculture among its priority areas. 

Climate actions with regards to agriculture will embrace adaptation and mitigation through 

the promotion of agro-forestry plantations, an increase in the number of producer 

associations, and production of bioenergy. 

                                                           
3
 Undernourishment means that a person is not able to acquire enough food to meet the daily minimum dietary 

energy requirements, over a period of one year. FAO defines hunger as being synonymous with chronic 
undernourishment. Food Hunger Map 2015. 
4
 Enterprises Survey Report surveyed in 2009  

5
 The Republic of Congo ranks 118 out of 190 countries in access to credit according to the World Bank Doing 

Business report 2017. In rural areas, 58 percent of rural adults save, but only 8 percent do so in a financial 
institution. 
6
 Country Adaptation and Risk Profiles (Republic of Congo). 

http://sdwebx.worldbank.org/climateportal/countryprofile/home.cfm?page=country_profile&CCode=COG 



 

The World Bank  
Congo Commercial Agriculture Project (P159979) 

 

 

  
Mar 22, 2017 Page 5 of 25  

 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 

7. Agriculture, including forestry, employs about 40 percent of the labor force and contributes 
5 percent of GDP. Approximately 498,000 people are actively engaged in agricultural 

production, of which 70 percent are female. With an average rainfall of 1,200 mm per year 

and only 2 percent of the 10 million hectares of arable land exploited, the agricultural sector 

holds potential for growth. ROC has three types of agricultural production systems: (i) 

subsistence agriculture, mainly composed of small-scale producers farming 1 to 2 hectares 

per household, and accounts for 90 percent of agricultural output. Subsistence producers 

cultivate primarily staple crops such as plantain, cassava, ground nuts, maize, potatoes, 

beans, banana, and yam. Yields of these crops are lower on average than in other Sub-

Saharan countries mainly due to the poor quality of planting materials, the low use of 

fertilizer and the limited access to improved technologies and mechanization; (ii) urban and 

peri-urban agriculture is mainly composed of producers with small-scale gardens and semi-

modern commercial farms producing for urban consumers; and (iii) agro-industrial 

production systems, mainly monocultures geared towards export markets or niche urban 

markets. Apart from that of sugar cane, the production of traditional export and cash crops 

(e.g. coffee, cocoa, palm oil and rice) collapsed over the past couple of decades. A few large 

private agribusiness investors have recently started to invest again in these crops (including 

large-scale maize cultivation and the revival of palm oil and cocoa plantations). 

 

8. The cumulative effects of the different production systems have left an undeniable 
impact on the environment. Studies revealed that the sector contributes a total of 79 percent 

of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions
7
. Subsistence farming has promoted deforestation 

through slash and burn shifting cultivation techniques. As a result, particularly in the 

Province of Plateau, producers are experiencing: (i) earlier planting times and longer crop 

cycles; (ii) soil degradation, which makes some crops no longer suitable; and (iii) greater 

occurrences of flooding. Lastly, peri-urban vegetable and fish farming are competing with 

growing demand for water from urban dwellers. 

 

9. Gender in agriculture. Women are underrepresented in politics and higher levels of 
government, even though the Family Code protects them against racial, ethnic and sexual 

discrimination. Women earn less than men and are more likely to be self-employed as they 

do not have equal opportunities for accessing secondary education and paid employment. 

Labor market analyses show that gender employment gaps result from unequal access to 

education and skills training. Lack of education gives women limited power in business and 

social dealings with men, who typically are better educated. Women are customarily 

encouraged to focus on subsistence farming, family and child-rearing activities (fertility rate 

is high at 3.8 percent) and, as a result, 70 percent of the country’s agricultural workforce are 

women. Congolese women face additional barriers compared to men in accessing credit, 

agriculture inputs, land ownership and labor.   

 

10. Agricultural skills, competencies and jobs. Access to formal paid wage job is very limited 

                                                           
7
 CCKP’s Country Adaptation and Risk Profiles (Republic of Congo). 



 

The World Bank  
Congo Commercial Agriculture Project (P159979) 

 

 

  
Mar 22, 2017 Page 6 of 25  

 

for the youth who are more likely to be unemployed. If they manage to find a job, those aged 

15-29 are more likely to be employed by a household (15 percent) or by an SME (12 

percent)
8
. There is only one institute for higher education in agriculture, Ecole Nationale 

Supérieure d’Agronomie et de Foresterie (ENSAF), with approximately additional 7 

agriculture vocational skills training centers. They are under resourced and do not offer all of 

the relevant skills and entrepreneurship training. Internship arrangements with the private 

sector are difficult to organize and the capacity to train masters and doctoral students is 

limited. 

  

11. Demand for food is high and growing in domestic and regional markets. ROC is highly 
dependent on food imports, with a negative trade balance. Food imports increased from US 

$197 million to US$240 million between 2007 and 2013, and spiked to US$353 million in 

2011. Volumes of imported food in 2013 included 104,567 tons of wheat, 50,581 tons of 

palm oil, 45,878 tons of chicken meat, 41,541 tons of rice and 38,455 tons of wheat flour
9
.
 

The domestic cassava market is valued at US$ 174 million with some value addition already 

taking place. Cassava is consumed by 90 percent of the population. There is a high 

consumption of chicken at household level and consumption of other livestock products is 

expected to grow significantly, e.g. 80 million eggs and 15,000 tons of pork per annum by 

2020
10

. Demand for milk (and milk-based products) is high and growing. Fish consumption 

is at 24.4 kg per head per year, one of the highest in Africa. Other regional markets present 

sizable opportunities as well, for instance the Kinshasa market (over 12 million inhabitants) 

in the Democratic Republic of Congo, or other neighboring countries such as Angola, Gabon 

and Cameroon.  

 

12. Food safety concerns are huge and compounded by the absence of a food policy and 
regulatory framework. No analysis has been done to understand the national cost of food 

borne diseases (e.g. loss of human lives, cost of treatment and loss of income especially on 

poor households). Food safety issues from imports include: (i) food spoilage; (ii) absence of 

harmonized food and product standards; (iii) poor product quality (e.g. expired food, 

deceitful labelling and high levels of preservatives in food); (iv) limited coordinated national 

surveillance and inspection capacity; and (vi) no laboratories for food testing. In addition to 

the risks created by limited awareness amongst consumers and low levels of hygiene 

standards (e.g. unregistered food street vendors & unsanitary urban markets), additional food 

safety risks from domestic agriculture include: (i) the use of animal waste and sewage on 

crops as agriculture fertilizer; (ii) poor harvesting and post-harvest handling (raises risks of 

mycotoxins and aflatoxins); and (iii) unhygienic agricultural transport systems.          

 

13. Every segment across the agriculture value chain is characterized by under 
development and fragmentation. Most inputs are imported, at high cost with no quality 

assurance. Agricultural production is performed in a rudimentary, inefficient, low input-

output model making unit costs of production much higher than imported commodities. The 

                                                           
8
 Republic of Congo Poverty Assessment 2016. 

9
 FAOSTAT. 

10
 Plan de développement du secteur Agricole –PDSA département BRAZZAVILLE, Rapport SOFRECO CEAREPE. 



 

The World Bank  
Congo Commercial Agriculture Project (P159979) 

 

 

  
Mar 22, 2017 Page 7 of 25  

 

transport sector is managed by cartels that fix the transport prices, making it difficult for 

producers to transport commodities and processors to source primary material. There is only 

a few domestic agro-processing companies and the distribution and retail of food is done 

mostly through formal open markets, informal markets and small corner stores. There are 

only seven registered retail outlets (supermarkets) in urban areas selling mostly imported 

food.  

 

14. Commercial agricultural production is constrained by a multiplicity of factors. The 
competitiveness of domestic production – in value chains such as poultry, piggery, and fish 

for livestock, cassava and groundnuts for staple crops, and cocoa and palm oil for cash crops 

– is hampered by: (i) sector specific legislative and governance constraints (seed policies, 

land access, food safety policies and guidelines, taxes and registration procedures for the 

legal status of cooperatives); (ii) weak producer organizations (iii) non-existent agricultural 

extension and veterinary services and obsolete Research and Development (R&D) capacity;  
(iv) high costs of agricultural inputs (seeds, fertilizers, land, animal feed, credit); (v) an 

ageing and under skilled workforce; and  (vi) poor road and communication networks and 

costly logistics and energy services.  

 

15. A substantial number of smallholders have the potential to engage successfully in 
commercially demanding value chains.

11
 These producers are found amongst farms located 

outside cities and towns (urban and peri-urban) as well as within specific value chains (e.g. 

cocoa, palm oil).
12

 These producers work in groups but are often marginalized from higher-

value markets due to high unit costs of production, poor infrastructure and limited access to 

credit and technical assistance. Three main profiles have been identified in the ROC of SMEs 

that are currently operating in the agribusiness sector and could establish business 

relationships with producer groups for commercial agriculture: (i) suppliers of critical inputs 

(e.g. day-old chicks, veterinary medicine and technical assistance provided by 

Transcontinental Business Néerlandais (TBN) in Pointe-Noire); (ii) off-takers for agricultural 

products (e.g. tropical fruits to produce concentrate bought by Bayo in Brazzaville); and (iii) 

firms that are both input suppliers and off-takers (e.g. supplying cassava cuttings then 

purchasing of cassava for saka-saka processing by Agridec in Dolisie).    
 
 
 

                                                           
11

 M.H. Collion, Rural Productive Partnerships: An Inclusive Agribusiness Model for Overcoming Small-holder 
Market Barriers, World Bank, 2012. This finding is echoed by studies in Africa and Asia which indicate that 50-70% 
of farmers are unable to move out of subsistence (S. Ferris et alt., Linking Smallholder Farmers to Markets and the 
Implications for Extension and Advisory Services, MEAS Discussion Paper 4, 2014). 
12

 The Ministry of Agriculture holds a Registry of Farmer Cooperatives that totals 1,055 cooperatives nation-wide, 
out of which 25% (approximately 250) are estimated to be active according to a survey conducted by the Ministry 
in 2015.  According to records from ongoing projects (PDARP, PADE), there are approximately more than 500 
additional active producer groups that are not registered with the Ministry since they registered at the 
Department level or they decided to register as an Association with the Ministry of Interior instead. There are 
therefore approximately 800 active producer groups (associations/cooperatives) in Congo, totaling approximately 
16,000 smallholders. 



 

The World Bank  
Congo Commercial Agriculture Project (P159979) 

 

 

  
Mar 22, 2017 Page 8 of 25  

 

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 

 
 
Development Objective(s) (From PAD)  
The project development objective (PDO) is to improve productivity and market access for producer groups and micro, 
small and medium agribusiness enterprises, in selected zones, and provide immediate and effective response in the 
event of an eligible crisis or emergency.  
 
 
 
Key Results 

1. Direct beneficiaries, of which Female beneficiaries (Percentage) (Core); 

2. Average seasonal yield per standard area of specific crops among targeted farmers; and  

3. Increase in marketed production volume of raw and processed products by producer groups 

and MSMEs supported by the project. 

 
 

 
D. Project Description  

16. Key issues to be addressed. Through the support of the emergence and the revival of a 
competitive commercial agriculture sector, the project will address: (a) access to market 

with: (i) consistent supply of high volumes of quality produce meeting market requirements 
for commercial and industrial production; (ii) high quality value added agricultural products; 

(b) an enabling business environment with: (i) favorable legislation; (ii) a partnership 

framework for public-private dialogue between agricultural stakeholders; and (iii) an 

enabling institutional framework for private investors in the agricultural sector; and (c) an 

ecosystem of services that provide actors with: (i) appropriate inputs (feed for livestock, 

seeds, organic fertilizers, finance, processing technology, micro-irrigation equipment, etc.); 

(ii) a qualified workforce,; (iii) marketing infrastructure (logistics, agricultural feeder roads, 

storage); and (iv) access to water and electricity. 

 

Note to Task Teams: The PDO has been pre-populated from the datasheet for the first time for your 

convenience. Please keep it up to date whenever it is changed in the datasheet. 



 

The World Bank  
Congo Commercial Agriculture Project (P159979) 

 

 

  
Mar 22, 2017 Page 9 of 25  

 

17. Additional development challenges to be considered. The project will also help address 
nutrition and food insecurity by promoting producer groups’ access to nutrition and climate 

sensitive technology, agriculture extension services, and by supporting MSMEs to produce 

fortified and enriched foods in the market. Skills development and job creation for youth 

challenges (auto-employment, semi-permanent, temporary jobs, etc.) will be addressed 

through support to internship arrangements between institutes of higher learning and the 

private sector. 

The gender gap 

with respect to 

access to 

services, inputs 

and finance and 

ownership of 

economic 

resources will be 

reduced by 

promoting female 

producer groups’ 

access to 

matching grants. 

Female owned 

MSMEs will also 

be promoted 

through access to 

a tailored 

technical 

assistance 

package for 

women MSMEs 

(business 

leadership, 

entrepreneurship 

training, 

mentorship and networking support).  Targeting principles and the approaches by component 

are described in Box 1. 
 
 

A. Project Components 

Component 1: Direct support to producer groups and agribusiness MSMEs (IDA: US$25 million)  

18. Component 1 seeks to increase productivity and value addition along value chains, and 
improve food and nutrition security. Support provided under this component will be through 

a matching grant program financing technical assistance and productive investments to 

support production, marketing and processing activities. This component has two sub-

components. 

Box 1: Targeting Principles 

Two basic principles will guide project design: (i) an open menu approach with 

respect to the selection of value chains, subsectors and business opportunities; 

and (ii) a geographical concentration and targeting of project interventions where 

commercial opportunities and the need for support have been identified and 

expressed by market actors (producers, processors and others). The rationale for 

an open menu is to avoid excluding any potentially viable value chain and 

business opportunity. The project’s geographical focus will start where 

commercial agriculture has the strongest potential: the three main cities of 

Brazzaville, Pointe Noire and Dolisie and in the North of the country. In its first 

component, the project will directly support private sector initiative in agriculture 

by facilitating market access for producer groups and agribusiness MSMEs. 

Support to producer groups will follow a Productive Alliance approach through 

which these producer groups target new markets and seek to establish commercial 

relationships with buyers and off-takers. Support to MSMEs will focus on 

helping agribusiness firms to connect with specific off-takers and markets (both 

domestic and export), through  sound business plan development, supply chain 

development for sourcing quality raw materials, and access to know-how to 

improve processing techniques, relevant market information and/or equipment, 

etc.  

 

The second component will support public investments in agricultural service 

roads and other improved public infrastructure (e.g. access to electricity and 

water supply for agro-processing) selected based on the location (clustering) of 

the demand for sub-projects from producer groups and agribusiness MSMEs in 

Component 1. Producer groups and agribusiness MSMEs will need to identify 

(along with their expression of interest) if their value chain development activities 

are constrained by the lack of viable infrastructure. Activities in Component 2 

will also contribute to improving the business climate for commercial agriculture. 

Lastly, the project will support the strengthening of institutional capacities for 

commercial agriculture development in its third component. 



 

The World Bank  
Congo Commercial Agriculture Project (P159979) 

 

 

  
Mar 22, 2017 Page 10 of 25  

 

 

Subcomponent 1.1: Sustainable intensification and commercialization of crop and animal 

production (IDA: US$ 20 million)  

19. Objective and instruments used. This subcomponent will support producer groups in 
Productive Alliance arrangements with buyers and markets for increased production, value 

addition and improved marketing of their products. It will support the intensification of 

production and commercialization of products within supported value chains through 

technical assistance and financing of business plans using a matching grant scheme 

administered through a Productive Alliance approach.  

 

20. Productive Alliance approach.
13

 Productive Alliances will aim to develop the managerial 

and technical capacity of producer groups and help them implement business plans that 

include support for productive investment (access to inputs, production facilities, nutrition 

and climate-sensitive technology) and technical assistance (agriculture advisory, extension 

services and business development skills and practices). The project will also seek to 

strengthen existing business arrangements between producer groups and buyers and/or 

support new ones.  

 

21. Business plans. Producer groups will be supported to translate their vision and strategy into 
a business plan that clearly identifies specific markets, marketing plans and technical and 

financial needs. Business plans are expected to finance a series of investments (depending on 

market requirements, the supply chain and associated constraints), such as: (i) improved 

access to quality inputs (e.g. seeds, cuttings, chicks, fertilizer, feed, water through small 

pumped and piped irrigation systems, etc.); (ii) infrastructure and/or equipment for 

processing; and (iii) infrastructure and/or equipment to improve the storage and transport to 

reach target markets. Investments will systematically be accompanied with technical 

assistance to install and maintain the investment and to improve the producer group’s 

marketing skills and management of its business and finances. The matching grants, 

however, will be awarded based on a competitive process. Applicants will have to meet a set 

of eligibility criteria to present their business plan, which will then be assessed on the basis 

of additional relevant prioritization criteria
14

. In forest areas, application of REDD+ 

principles will for instance be a precondition for relevant value chains. Female producer 

groups will receive tailored technical assistance that will include business leadership 

networking support to enable them to access markets and manage business operations. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

                                                           
13

 See Annex 1 for more detail on the Productive Alliance approach. 
14

 See Annex 1 for more detail on the Matching Grant’s selection process.  



 

The World Bank  
Congo Commercial Agriculture Project (P159979) 

 

 

  
Mar 22, 2017 Page 11 of 25  

 

 

 

 

Figure 1: Productive Alliance Cycle 

 
 

 

Subcomponent 1.2: Development of agro-industrial activities (IDA: US$ 5 million) 

22. Objective and instruments used. This subcomponent will support the competitiveness of 
MSMEs involved in agribusiness, from input supply to the production, processing and 

distribution of agricultural products, as well as the delivery of agri-based services. These 

actors face efficiency challenges linked to the cost of processing, packaging and marketing 

their products. Efficiency gains in operations will result in higher quality agricultural 

products (nutritional and safety standards compliant), jobs (full, part-time and seasonal), and 

a secure market that rewards farmers with quality produce with higher prices. Female owned 

MSMEs will access a technical assistance plus package (business leadership, 

entrepreneurship training, with additional mentorship and networking support) to support 

them to bridge specific gender related challenges. This subcomponent will aim to allow 

MSMEs to have better access to training, equipment and skills they need to develop their 

business. 

 

23. Business plans. Agribusiness MSMEs will be able to apply for grants on a competitive basis 
through the same matching-grant scheme as the one described for Subcomponent 1.1. They 

will have to submit a business plan that identifies market demand for the firm’s products and 

services and shows returns on investment and financial sustainability of the firm’s 

operations, while clearly demonstrating that the investment contributes to addressing at least 

one of the following challenges: product upgrade, process improvement, new product 

development, volume increase, or reduction of the environmental footprint. The matching 

grants will cover technical assistance and equipment. Technical assistance will systematically 

accompany equipment requests to ensure the proper use and maintenance of the investment. 

Eligibility and prioritization criteria will be applied to maximize the transparency of the 

Promotion plans and 

activities targeting 

potential members of 

productive alliances. 

This process 

continues during the 

call for proposals 

phase.

Public calls for 

potential productive 

alliance partners (i.e. 

producer groups, 

input suppliers, 

buyers, etc.) to 

present business 

plans. 

The calls will be 

accompanied by a 

communications 

campaign, as well as 

field information and 

training workshops.

Evaluation of 

expressions of 

interest (EOI) from 

producer groups with 

the following criteria: 

(i) compliance with 

basic eligibility criteria 

and safeguards; (ii) 

location based on 

pre-identified areas; 

and (iii) commitment 

by producer groups 

to co-financing.

Producer groups, 

whose profiles are 

approved, receive 

technical assistance 

for the formulation of 

their business plan.

Groups that do not 

meet basic criteria 

receive capacity 

building support.

EOI and business 

plans identify public 

infrastructure gaps to 

help prioritize 

infrastructure support 

under Component 2.

5. Evaluation of 

proposals

Evaluation of the 

commercial, technical 

and financial 

soundness of 

business plans 

conducted by an 

independent entity. 

Safeguards 

evaluation and 

inclusion of mitigating 

measures, if required, 

are carried out by the 

project unit.

4. Formulation of 

business plans

3. Evaluation of 

expressions of 

interest

2. Call for 

proposals

1. Marketing 

strategy and 

promotion

6. Implementation

of business plans

Implementation of 

subprojects by 

producer groups, with 

systematic technical 

assistance to improve 

organizational, 

managerial, business 

and risk-management 

skills. 

Other agents (e.g. 

input suppliers, 

buyers, technical 

assistance providers) 

implement agreed 

measures separately. 



 

The World Bank  
Congo Commercial Agriculture Project (P159979) 

 

 

  
Mar 22, 2017 Page 12 of 25  

 

selection process and the sustainability of the investments made and assistance received
15

.  

  

Component 2: Improving public infrastructure and the business climate for commercial 

agriculture (IDA: US$ 45 million) 
24. This component aims to foster the development of commercial agriculture by lifting 

constraints in terms of infrastructure and business climate. This component consists of two 

sub-components:  

 

Subcomponent 2.1: Public infrastructure for the development of commercial agriculture (IDA: US$ 

37 million)  

25. Objective and instruments used. This subcomponent will contribute to the development of 
basic infrastructure essential for the promotion of commercial agriculture and the emergence 

of an agro-industry. It will include public investments in the rehabilitation and maintenance 

of the feeder road network and improved access to other public infrastructure (e.g. access to 

electricity and water supply for agro-processing, and other public infrastructure) in a targeted 

way.  

 

26. Prioritization criteria. High logistical costs and limited access to markets are major 
obstacles faced by the private sector. To address these important issues, the project will make 

a provision to ensure public investments in infrastructure: (i) are identified by the 

Government as infrastructure of a public nature; and (ii) are located in targeted geographic 

zones where producer groups and MSMEs promoting commercial agriculture development 

express interest in receiving Productive Alliance and / or MSME support (see Component 1). 

 

27. Sustainability of investments. Technical assistance will also be provided through this 
subcomponent to selected departmental councils to implement the new road maintenance 

strategy developed with the assistance of the Agricultural Development and Rural Roads 

Rehabilitation Project (PDARP) in order to make such maintenance more sustainable.  

 

Subcomponent 2.2: Governance and regulatory framework for commercial agriculture (IDA: US$ 8 

million) 

28. Objective and instruments used. This subcomponent aims to improve the legal and 
regulatory framework for commercial agriculture. It will do so by: (i) establishing and 

financing platforms for public-private dialogue on commercial agriculture at the 

departmental and national levels to identify needed reforms; (ii) providing technical 

assistance to draft the identified legislation and regulations; (iii) policy advocacy with 

parliamentarians (e.g. policy notes, sensitization, training); and (iv) conducting sensitization, 

dissemination and training activities toward relevant stakeholders (i.e. ministries and public 

institutions, producer groups, agribusiness MSMEs and other private sector actors, etc.) on 

drafted legislations and regulations pertaining to commercial agriculture. 

 

29. Public-Private Dialogue (PPD) on commercial agriculture. The project will build on the 
mechanism for public-private dialogue put in place with the support of PADE to start a 

                                                           
15

 See Annex 1 for more detail on the Matching Grant’s selection process. 



 

The World Bank  
Congo Commercial Agriculture Project (P159979) 

 

 

  
Mar 22, 2017 Page 13 of 25  

 

public-private dialogue specifically on commercial agriculture by providing technical 

assistance and budget support to set up and operate PPD platforms
16

 on commercial 

agriculture at the departmental and national levels. The platforms are expected to identify and 

contribute to building consensus around changes to legislation and practices that constrain 

commercial agriculture.    

 

30. Identified reforms. Some of the needed improvements to constraining legislation specific to 
commercial agriculture have already been identified with stakeholders and their drafting will 

be supported by the project. The legislation pertains to: (i) compliance with the Organisation 

pour l’Harmonisation du Droit des affaires en Afrique (OHADA) Uniform Act on 

Cooperatives; (ii) National Seed Policy in compliance with the norms of the Economic 

Community of Central African States (CEEAC); (iii) Rural Code to clarify and secure land 

access; and (iv) food safety policy and regulatory framework, standards and the certification 

of products
17

. 

 

Component 3: Strengthening institutional capacities to support the development of commercial 

agriculture (IDA: US$ 30 million) 

31. The objective of this component is to strengthen the capacity of public and non-public 
service providers involved in the implementation of project activities and / or supporting the 

development of commercial agriculture in the Republic of Congo. At the same time, it will 

ensure and oversee the successful management and implementation of the project, while 

making a provision to enable an immediate response in case of declared crisis or emergency. 

This component has three sub-components: 

 

Subcomponent 3.1: Capacity-building of institutions providing support to commercial agriculture 

(IDA: US$20 million) 

32. Objective and instruments used. The subcomponent will provide equipment, training and 
operating cost support to government and non-government actors that are necessary for 

commercial agriculture to succeed, including a number of technical departments of the 

Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries (MAEP).  

 

33. Targeted institutions. These capacity-building efforts will target institutions involved in key 
areas related to: (i) agricultural statistics services; (ii) the access to improved genetic 

materials; (iii) the implementation of the reform of the national public system for agricultural 

extension and advisory services; (iv) the agricultural vocational and higher education training 

systems; and (v) the policy framework for food safety, quality standards and product 

certification supported in Subcomponent 2.2
18

. 

                                                           
16

 When business practices and legislation identified by these sector-specific PPD platforms are economy-wide in nature (e.g. easing business 
entry and business exit, facilitating trade across borders, etc.), the project will share these inputs with PADE, which is better placed to address 
them. When identified reforms are specific to commercial agriculture, and if a strong consensus can be built with stakeholders from the public 
and private sectors around them, the project will provide support for their drafting through this subcomponent. 
17

 See Annex 1 for more detail on the reforms that have been identified. 
18

 A list of the institutions identified for capacity-building support includes: (i) the Studies and Planning Department 
of MAEP; (ii) the Ministry of Scientific Research and Technical Innovation through the Institut National de 
Recherche Agronomique (IRA) and the Centre National de Semences Améliorées (CNSA), among others; (iii) the 



 

The World Bank  
Congo Commercial Agriculture Project (P159979) 

 

 

  
Mar 22, 2017 Page 14 of 25  

 

 

Subcomponent 3.2: Project management, coordination and monitoring at national and provincial 

levels (IDA: US$ 10 million)  
34. This subcomponent will support project management, coordination, communication, 

monitoring and evaluation, adequate monitoring of the environmental and social safeguard 

policies, at the national level as well as at the departmental levels. Under this subcomponent, 

a strong fiduciary management system will be introduced and an effective monitoring and 

evaluation framework will be designed, which will not only monitor impact indicators, but 

will also ensure real time data collection that will facilitate the adoption of corrective 

measures in a timely manner and even attempt to integrate the data into the national 

agricultural statistics database.  

 

35. Through this subcomponent, the project will finance a baseline study, mid-term review study, 
final impact assessment, the recruitment of staff, consultancy services, the acquisition of 

property and equipment, and will support relevant seminars and training, as well as diverse 

operating costs to supervise the project activities. 

 
Component 4: Contingency emergency response (IDA: US$ 0.0M) 

36. This component will provide support for immediate response to an eligible crisis or 
emergency, as needed. A crisis or emergency eligible for financing is: an event that has 

caused, or is likely to imminently cause, a major adverse economic and/or social impact to 

the Borrower, associated with a natural or man-made crisis or disaster. Rapid disbursement 

of funds will allow the Government to request a reallocation of project funds to partially 

cover emergency response and recovery costs. This component will be triggered if: (i) the 

Government has determined that an eligible crisis or emergency has occurred and has 

furnished to the Bank a request to include said activities in the Contingency Emergency 

Response Component (CERC) for emergency response; (ii) the Government has prepared 

and disclosed all safeguards instruments required for said activities; (iii) the Borrower has 

adopted the CERC Operations Manual (OM) in form, substance and manner acceptable to the 

Bank. A specific OM for this component will be prepared detailing financial management, 

procurement, safeguards, and any other necessary implementation arrangements. While 

Components 1, 2 and 3 focus on pre-crisis disaster risk mitigation and climate resilience 

enhancement measures, Component 4 will help to strengthen the Government’s capacity to 

respond effectively to an eligible crisis or emergency. 
 
 
E. Implementation 
 
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 

37. The institutional arrangements proposed for this project, under the supervision of the 

                                                                                                                                                                                           
Cooperative Action Department of MAEP and Agricongo among others; (iv) the Ministry of Higher Education 
through the Ecole Nationale Supérieure d'Agronomie et de Foresterie (ENSAF), among others; and (v) institutions 
identified through the food safety reform supported in Subcomponent 2.2. See Annex 1 for more detail on the 
institutional capacity-building work of Subcomponent 3.1.    



 

The World Bank  
Congo Commercial Agriculture Project (P159979) 

 

 

  
Mar 22, 2017 Page 15 of 25  

 

Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries (MAEP), includes the following supervisory 

and implementation bodies: (i) a Steering Committee; (ii) a National Coordination Unit of 

the project (including a Matching Grant scheme); (iii) Project Implementation Units at 

departmental level; (iv) technical service providers (public, private, NGOs); and (v) financial 

institutions, which will render financial services to the private sector (producer groups, 

agribusiness MSMEs) (See Figure 2). 

 

38. Public service providers will participate in the project through the structures of the MAEP, 
The ongoing reform of MAEP and the introduction of specialized agencies is an opportunity 

for re-thinking and repositioning the role of public technical services, including agriculture 

advisory and extension services.  

Steering Committee (CP)  
39. A high level Steering Committee will be officially established before effectiveness. It will be 

chaired by the Minister in charge of Agriculture and composed of representatives of key 

project stakeholders (relevant ministries, private sector, and civil society including producer 

groups) in the project. The Steering Committee will be responsible for the strategic direction, 

operational oversight, communication and overall good governance of the project. 

 

National Project Coordination Unit (NPCU)  

40. It is proposed that the current PDARP national project coordination unit, with a proven track 
record in administrative and fiduciary management, be retained and strengthened to 

coordinate and manage the Commercial Agricultural Project. The NPCU will be responsible 

for project implementation, management, coordination, monitoring and evaluation, and 

supervision. The NPCU will rely on specific expertise, including the hiring of an independent 

firm contracted for the management of the matching grant program of Component 1.  

 

Project Implementation Units (PIUs) 

41. Four Project Implementation Units will be established at departmental level to support 
specific zones targeted by the project. They will ensure project activity monitoring and 

evaluation as well as receive and process complaints related to the implementation of the 

project in collaboration with the authorities and civil society.  
 
 

 
 
 .    
F. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 

The project envisages to target 3 main high potential agricultural zones as defined in the Schema National 
d’Amenagement du Territoire (National Spatial Master Plan). These are (i) agri-zone 1 South Corridor 
Brazzaville - Pointe Noire, (ii) agri-zone 2 Central Corridor Konda- Oyo-Lekye- Gambona, including special 
economic zone Oyo-Owando where fisheries and palm oil are being promoted; and (iii) agri-zone 3 North 

Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal. 

 



 

The World Bank  
Congo Commercial Agriculture Project (P159979) 

 

 

  
Mar 22, 2017 Page 16 of 25  

 

special economic zone Ouesso where cocoa, coffee and palm oil are being promoted. 

 
 
G. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 
 

Lucienne M. M'Baipor,Grace Muhimpundu,Claude Lina Lobo 

 
 
 

SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

Activities from Subcomponent 1.1: Intensification of 
Agricultural and Livestock value chains; 
Subcomponent 1.2: Development of logistic, trade 
and business services; and Subcomponent 2.1: 
Public Infrastructure for Agribusiness and Agro 
industrial Development are expected to impact 
environment and these impacts are evaluated to be 
moderate, localized and manageable; so the project 
is classified to the EA category “B”. And the 
Environmental Safeguards Policies triggered are 
PO/PB 4.01 "Environmental Assessment"; PO/PB 
4.04 "Natural Habitats"; OP/PB 4.09 "Pest 
management and pesticides"; PO/PB 4.10 
"Indigenous Peoples"; PO/PB 4.11 "Physical Cultural 
Resources"; OP/PB 4.12 "Involuntary Relocation"; 
PO/PB 4.36 "Forests"; OP/PB 7.50 Projects relating 
to International Waterways; PO/PB 17.50: Right of 
access to information. 
To ensure that any environmental issues by the 
project activities are appropriately addressed, the 
safeguard instrument elaborated according OP/BP 
4.01 is the Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF). This one is also designed to 
serve as a guide for developing ESIAs and ESMPs as 
needed, when the exact sites of sub-projects will be 
known. In particular, the ESIA will include a 
diagnostic of the project areas, potential 
environmental adverse impacts, potential issues 
related to labor influx, and mitigation measures to 
manage properly expected adverse impacts. The 
ESIA will highlight specific provisions that need to be 



 

The World Bank  
Congo Commercial Agriculture Project (P159979) 

 

 

  
Mar 22, 2017 Page 17 of 25  

 

included in construction/installation contracts to 
ensure that contractors’ ESMPs address relevant 
mitigation measures. 
The ESMF include specific sections to address all 
issues related to OP/BP 4.04 on Natural Habitats; 
OP/BP 4.36 on Forests and OP/BP 4.11 on Physical 
Cultural Resources. 
 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

OP/BP 4.04 is triggered to enable the project to 
perform the screening of the identified sites and 
their vicinities relative to natural habitats, the aim is 
to avoid project activities to create significant 
degradation of natural habitats. Project will also 
seek to identify appropriate conservation measures, 
follow-up, assessment and management of natural 
habitats within the project area. The Government 
will be encouraged to provide necessary information 
to the people and to provide them with the right 
incentives to protect and to support the 
conservation of natural habitats and to facilitate, if 
necessary, the rehabilitation of degraded habitats. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes 

This project could possibly impact the health and 
quality of forests or the rights and welfare of people 
and their level of dependence upon the interaction 
with forests, and it may lead to changes in the 
management, protection or utilization of natural 
forests or plantations. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

OP/BP 4.09 is triggered because the project supports 
activities that requires the use of pesticides, 
fertilizers, vaccines and other chemicals like in the 
production of eggs, of cattle feed and veterinary 
products in the poultry, goats, pigs, cattle, fish 
farming and aquaculture, and some projects 
activities will lead to a surge in the use of pesticides 
and fertilizers which can create negative effects on 
the environment. This policy supports the integrated 
pest control approaches. It identifies pesticides that 
can be financed under the project and develop an 
appropriate plan of pests to deal with risks. To 
comply with this policy a Plan of Management of 
Pests and Pesticides (PMPP) was prepared in 
separated document from the ESMF. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 
This policy, OP/BP 4.11, is triggered by the project 
because during implementation of project activities, 
it is possible to discover or to affect some cultural 



 

The World Bank  
Congo Commercial Agriculture Project (P159979) 

 

 

  
Mar 22, 2017 Page 18 of 25  

 

relics. The Physical Cultural Resources Policy aims to 
protect cultural resources, to avoid any significant 
conversion (loss) or degradation of these resources. 
To be in compliance with this policy, project has 
developed, into a separate document, the Physical 
Cultural Resources Framework (PCRF). 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 Yes 

Indigenous Peoples are found on a large part of the 
Republic of Congo’s rural territory, and a number of 
the areas visited under project preparation and 
evaluation phase are known to inhabit Indigenous 
Peoples (IPs). This includes the Cuvette (Oyo-
Owando), in the Sangha (Ouesso), and Plateau (Oyo, 
Gamboma). Since the project will be implemented at 
the national level, with specific zones of 
interventions yet to be identified (based on targeted 
crops, agribusiness, and in accordance to the 
national agricultural plan), the project has prepared 
an Indigenous Peoples Policy Framework (IPPF), 
which will establish the framework for consultation 
and inclusion of IPs in the project areas. The project 
will identify various IPs associations and IP 
communities in the selected zones as collaborators, 
as well as potential CSOs and local NGOs. Once the 
specific sites are known, an Indigenous Peoples Plan 
(IPP) will be development, and it would identify the 
targeted IPs, and ensure their inclusion as 
beneficiaries of project activities, in a culturally 
appropriate and inclusive manner. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

Activities suggested in Component 2, Subcomponent 
2.2 “Public Infrastructure for Agribusiness and Agro 
industrial Development”, may require acquisition of 
land. Due to low population density in rural areas, 
however, the risk of physical resettlement is 
minimal, although there may be potential economic 
displacement or loss of assets.  
The project has prepared the Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF) since the exact site locations are 
yet unknown, and eventually Resettlement Action 
Plans (RAP) or Abreviated Resettelement Action 
Plans (ARAP) will be prepared to mitigate potential 
negative impacts.  
This new project is to some regards an extension of 
the Agricultural Development and Rural Roads 
Rehabilitation Project (P095251, and Additional 
Finance P145627). The project established an escrow 



 

The World Bank  
Congo Commercial Agriculture Project (P159979) 

 

 

  
Mar 22, 2017 Page 19 of 25  

 

account of US $500,000 for resettlement 
compensation. Since the project did not require any 
land acquisition and therefore did not induce any 
resettlement (physical or economic displacement), 
no RAPs were prepared for the project. The funds in 
the escrow account remain unused, and the account 
will be transferred to the new project in order to 
fund potential compensation cases for the new 
Commercial Agriculture project.  
 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 
This Safeguard Policy is not trigged because no 
project activities involved in dams or located in their 
vicinities. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

Yes 

OP 7.50 is applicable to the Project because 
activities may have an impact on the Congo, 
Oubangui and Sangha river basins, all of which are 
international waterways. ROC is one of the riparians 
of the Congo-Oubangui-Sangha basin together with 
DRC, Central African Republic, Cameroon, Gabon, 
and Angola. The proposed Project covers primarily 
high potential agricultural zones around the main 
cities of Brazzaville, Pointe Noire and Dolisie, the 
south corridor along the national road from 
Brazzaville to Bouenza and Kouilou and the northern 
part of country, Sangha and Likouala. The planned 
rehabilitations of irrigation systems are very small in 
size. Most of these schemes will be located around 
the three big cities and markets of Brazzaville, Pointe 
Noire and Dolisie (using the rivers of Djoué, Niari, 
Kouilou … ), the country’s bread basket and where 
70% of the population live. The task team has 
carefully considered any potential impacts of the 
proposed investments, and because that: (i) the 
project will not cause appreciable harm to the 
riparian countries; and (ii) no activities are expected 
to have any adverse effects on the water quality or 
quantity, no notification is required under OP 7.50 
since the project deals only with micro/minor 
irrigation rehabilitation, and thus falls under the 
exception to the notification requirement under 
paragraph 7 (a) of the Policy. An exception memo 
has been prepared and was approved by the AFRVP 
on May 15, 2017. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No This Safeguard Policy is not triggered. 

 



 

The World Bank  
Congo Commercial Agriculture Project (P159979) 

 

 

  
Mar 22, 2017 Page 20 of 25  

 

 

KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
In agricultural development and infrastructure implementation, the expected negative impacts are inherent in 
deforestation and the loss of biodiversity; soil erosion, silting of rivers, degradation of water courses; pollutions and 
nuisances, the generation of construction waste, rubble and other demolition residues, disruption of activities on land 
rights, etc.  
In the operational phase, the risks relate to pollution and degradation of watercourses linked to the use of pesticides 
and fertilizers; pollution and nuisance due to solid and liquid waste from agricultural activities, pollution of the 
environment by sewage and solid waste disease, risk of accidents, risks (HIV / AIDS) and development of water-related 
diseases (malaria, bilharziasis), social conflicts related to local customs and practices; losses of land and socio-
economic income sources; influx of the population as a result of the installation of structuring facilities, strong 
pressure on land and water with increasing development.  
Terrestrial and aquatic habitats (wetlands) can be altered mainly during the start-up and implementation phase of 
agricultural. But globally, all these impacts are evaluated to be moderate, localized and manageable. 
 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
This project would increase agricultural productivity, enhance food security and nutrition. No adverse long term or 
indirect environmental or social impacts are expected. 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. 
There are no significant negative impacts of the project, designed on the contrary to have positive social and 
environmental impacts. No alternatives were therefore considered to avoid impacts. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower 
capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Based on experience gained through the implementation of the Agricultural Development and Rural Roads 
Rehabilitation Project, a Category B project, the capacity of the Implementing Agency housed in the Ministry of 
Agriculture to implement the Bank’s environmental and social safeguards policies is considered high. An 
environmental specialist has been included as part of the PIU core team, and the project will recruit a social specialist. 
The two specialists will monitor and supervise the environmental and social measures as recommended in the various 
safeguards instruments for the project. The current environmental specialist, as well as the Project Coordinator have 
both benefitted from the World Bank organized capacity-building initiative in November 2016.   
Finally, to manage and monitor safeguards implementation in a timely manner, the PIU will prepare quarterly reports 
of the implementation of the safeguards instruments. The Project will equally ensure that all the instruments (in 
accordance with OP 4.01, OP 4.10, OP 4.11 and OP 4.12) put in place and the Grievance Redress Mechanisms (GRMs). 
The project will monitor indicators set forth in the safeguards instruments. To this extent, the two safeguards 
specialists in the PIU, will closely collaborate with the M&E specialist in the PIU, and reflect the findings in the 
quarterly reports. 
An important lesson learned under the previous Agriculture project was the poor management of grievances. The 



 

The World Bank  
Congo Commercial Agriculture Project (P159979) 

 

 

  
Mar 22, 2017 Page 21 of 25  

 

mechanism as established in the safeguards documents were not appropriate or applicable to existing local structures. 
The PIU has drafted a new GRM to manage complaints ensuing from the new project.  
 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, 
with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders outside of government structures are agricultural producers, civil society, private sector (MSMEs 
and SMEs), Indigenous Peoples communities and representatives. Overall, the design of the project has been 
participatory at various levels, through consultation with the different stakeholders throughout preparation. This is 
complemented with additional consultations as part of the review of safeguards instruments.  Representatives of the 
national government formulated the design of the project, while regional governments, local authorities, and 
conservation actors provided inputs. The project will be implemented with the participation of local stakeholders. 
 
 
B. Disclosure Requirements  

 
OPS_EA_DISCLOSURE_TABLE Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other 

Date of receipt by the Bank Date of submission to InfoShop 
For category A projects, date of 
distributing the Executive Summary of 
the EA to the Executive Directors 

20-Mar-2017 31-Mar-2017 
 

   

"In country" Disclosure   

 

  
OPS_RA_D ISCL OSURE_T ABLE  

 

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process 

   

Date of receipt by the Bank Date of submission to InfoShop  

20-Mar-2017 31-Mar-2017  

   

"In country" Disclosure   
 

  
OPS_I P_DIS CL OSURE_TA BLE  

 

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework 

Date of receipt by the Bank Date of submission to InfoShop  

20-Mar-2017 31-Mar-2017  

   
"In country" Disclosure   



 

The World Bank  
Congo Commercial Agriculture Project (P159979) 

 

 

  
Mar 22, 2017 Page 22 of 25  

 

 

  
OPS_ PM_D ISCL OSURE_TA BLE  

 

Pest Management Plan 
 
Was the document disclosed prior to 
appraisal? Date of receipt by the Bank Date of submission to InfoShop 

NA 20-Mar-2017 31-Mar-2017 

   
"In country" Disclosure   
 

 
OPS_PM_ PC R_TAB LE  

 

If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to 
be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.  

If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why: 

All safeguards instruments were disclosed in country and on the Bank’s Infoshop prior to Negotiations (May 5, 2017). 
Any ensuing safeguard instruments (IPP, ESIA, RAP, and/or PSR) will also be publicly disclosed prior to implementation. 
The project team will ensure that all compensation and resettlement is completed prior to any civil works. 
 
 
 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project 
decision meeting)  
 
OPS_EA_COMP_TABLE OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
  
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
NA   

OPS_ NH_C OM P_TA BLE  

 

OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
  
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of critical natural habitats? 
No   
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the 
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank? 
Yes   

OPS_ PM_C OM P_TA BLE  

 

OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
  



 

The World Bank  
Congo Commercial Agriculture Project (P159979) 

 

 

  
Mar 22, 2017 Page 23 of 25  

 

Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes   
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes   
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or PM?  Are PMP requirements included in 
project design?  If yes, does the project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Yes   

OPS_ PCR_C OM P_TA BLE  

 

OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources  
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes   
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes   

OPS_I P_C OM P_TA BLE  

 

OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
  
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with 
affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes   
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager review the plan? 
Yes   
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social 
Development Unit or Practice Manager? 
NA   

OPS_IR_ CO MP_TA BLE  

 

OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 

 
 

Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
NA 
 

 

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager review the plan? 
 
 

 
 

 

  
OPS_F O_C OM P_TA BLE  

 

OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
  
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints been carried out? 
NA   
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these constraints? 
NA   
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include provisions for certification system? 
Yes    

OPS_ PIW _C OMP_ TABLE  

 

OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 



 

The World Bank  
Congo Commercial Agriculture Project (P159979) 

 

 

  
Mar 22, 2017 Page 24 of 25  

 

  
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes   
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal 
Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent? 
Yes   
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
Yes    

OPS_ PDI_ CO MP_TA BLE  

 

The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 

 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop? 
No   
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language that are understandable 
and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs? 
No  

 
 
All Safeguard Policies 

 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of 
measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 

  
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost? 
Yes 

  
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures 
related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 

  
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately 
reflected in the project legal documents? 
Yes 

 
 
 

CONTACT POINT 

 

  World Bank 
 

Amadou Oumar Ba 
Sr Agricultural Spec.  

 

Jean Edouard Albert Saint-Geours 
Economist 

  

 



 

The World Bank  
Congo Commercial Agriculture Project (P159979) 

 

 

  
Mar 22, 2017 Page 25 of 25  

 

  Borrower/Client/Recipient 
 

Republic of Congo 

 

 

 
 

  Implementing Agencies 

 

Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Livestock 

Henry Djombo 

State Minister 

pdarp_maep@yahoo.fr 
 

 

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT 

 

The World Bank 

1818 H Street, NW 

Washington, D.C. 20433 

Telephone: (202) 473-1000 

Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects  

 

 

APPROVAL 

 

Task Team Leader(s): 
Amadou Oumar Ba 
Jean Edouard Albert Saint-Geours 

 

  Approved By 

Safeguards Advisor: Maman-Sani Issa 15-May-2017 

Practice Manager/Manager: Dina Umali-Deininger 15-May-2017 

Country Director: Ahmadou Moustapha Ndiaye 16-May-2017 
 

    
 
 

 
 
 
 

Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here. 

http://www.worldbank.org/projects


