






















































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Kenya Marine Fisheries and Socio-Economic Development Project (MAFIDEV) (P163980) 

 
 

  
Jun 06, 2017 Page 1 of 13  

     

 

 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 13-Sep-2017 | Report No: PIDISDSC22230 


BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Kenya P163980  Kenya Marine Fisheries 
and Socio-Economic 
Development Project 
(MAFIDEV) (P163980) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA Jul 16, 2018 Nov 20, 2018 Environment & Natural 
Resources 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing The Republic of Kenya Ministry of Agriculture, 
Livestock and Fisheries 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The Project Development Objective is to improve management and increase value-addition of priority fisheries and 
aquaculture, and to strengthen access to livelihoods for coastal communities in Kenya. 

 

 Financing (in USD Million)      

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B-Partial Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

Finance OLD 

Financing Source Amount  

International Development Association (IDA)  100.00  

Total Project Cost  100.00  

    
 
 

 
 
Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
 


B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
 

1. Kenya’s economic growth has been robust over the past years. For the third consecutive year, economic activity has 
increased, reaching an estimated 5-year high of 5.9 percent in 2016, and once again placing Kenya among the fastest 
growing economies in Sub-Saharan Africa.

1
 Projections indicate continued growth with a rate of around 6 percent in 

2018 and 2019. Kenya’s population is estimated to grow equally fast, with an annual increase of 1 million.
2
 In 2015, the 

country’s population stood at around 46 million.
3
 Natural resources are the basis for livelihood and economic 

development. Agriculture, including forestry and fishery,
4
 represents a major economic driver and a dominant source of 

employment, having accounted for more than 30 percent of GDP in 2015.
5
  

2. The effects of sustained macroeconomic growth are translating into improved quality of life and poverty reduction, 
but inequality remains high. Between 2006 and 2016, poverty measured against the official national poverty line is 
projected to have dropped from 46 percent to 36 percent.

6
 Inequality, however, remains high. Kenya’s Gini coefficient 

stood at 48.5 in 2005.
7 

In remote and sparsely populated areas such as the north-eastern parts or the coastal areas, 
poverty rates can be as high as 80 and 60 percent, respectively. There is a growing rural-urban split, and the richest 10 
percent of the population receive 40 percent of the nation’s income.

 
 

3. In 2008, the Government prepared a long-term development strategy, Vision 2030, which aims to transform Kenya 
into a globally competitive middle-income country by 2030.

8
 The strategy has three pillars: an economic pillar that 

aims to achieve GDP growth of 10 percent per annum; a social and environmental pillar that aims to build a just society 
enjoying equitable social development in a clean and secure environment; and a political pillar that aims to build a 
people-centered, results-oriented, accountable democratic political system. Promoting equal opportunities across the 
entire Kenyan territory is key to realizing this vision.  

4. In an effort to narrow long-term, deeply entrenched regional disparities and to increase the responsiveness of the 
government, Kenya adopted a new Constitution in 2010. County governments now play the primary on-the-ground 
role in delivering services (in the agriculture, water, environment, urban, and health sectors), while the national 
government retains a policy-making, regulatory, and research role.  

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 

5. While the fisheries sector contributes less than one percent to GDP, it plays a significant role in employment 
generation, food security, and rural development. Fish production from inland fisheries, marine artisanal fisheries, and 
aquaculture, increased from 150,000 metric tons in 2010, to about 190,000 in 2014, with a market value of more than 

                                            
1
 World Bank (2017). Kenya Economic Update – Housing Unavailable and Unaffordable. April 2017, Edition No. 15 

2
 Ibid 

3
 World Bank (2017). World Development Indicators Database 

4
 Agriculture includes forestry, hunting, and fishing, as well as cultivation of crops and livestock production. 

5
 World Bank (2017). World Development Indicators Database 

6
 An updated national poverty line and measures will be published in 2017 based on the second Kenya Integrated Household Budget Survey 

completed in September 2016. Poverty incidence measured using the international extreme poverty line of US$1.90 per day (2011 PPP terms) was 
33 percent in 2006 and is projected to have dropped to 24 percent in 2016. 
7
 World Bank (2017). World Development Indicators Database 

8
 Government of the Republic of Kenya (2007). Kenya Vision 2030.  

US$250 million.
9
 Fish production from marine resources only, amounts to around 9,000 metric tons of catch annually.

10 

Imports and exports of fish products have also been increasing. Fish products were being imported and exported in the 
amount of US$15.5 million and US$39 respectively in 2013, compared to US$4.6 million and US$38.9 million, 
respectively, in 2010.

11
 The sector employs more than 2 million people directly and indirectly, working as fishers, 

traders, processors, suppliers, and merchants of fishing accessories, and thus serves the development and stabilization 
of Kenya’s rural communities, both coastal and riparian.

12
  

6. The artisanal marine fishery is recognized as one of the most important contributors to the food security of coastal 
villages, however, weak governance, particularly an unregulated fishing regime, has led to overexploitation and 
degradation. Fishing effort in Kenya’s marine waters is primarily directed inside territorial waters (i.e., 12 nautical 
miles), is largely artisanal and characterized by small crafts propelled by wind and paddles, and thus almost entirely 
restricted to the fringing reef and near-shore areas. The coastal region is among the least developed in the country, 
with more than 60 percent of the population living below the poverty line, and most relying on coastal and marine 
ecosystems for employment, livelihood and nutrition. On the other hand, Kenya’s Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ), which 
broadly extends 200 nautical miles from the coastline and covers a total area of 142,400 km

2
, is exploited mostly by 

distant-water fishing fleets, comprised mainly of purse-seiners and long-liners.
13 

Unrestricted access to fisheries in near-
shore waters, increased fishing effort driven by a growing population, and destructive fishing gear are destroying 
critical marine habitats and seriously affecting the state of fish stocks. Most nearshore fish stocks are considered fully 
exploited, and in many instances at levels that exceed Maximum Sustainable Yield (MSY), thereby contributing to 
economic overfishing. The World Bank and the Global Environment Facility (GEF)-financed Kenya Coastal Development 
Project (KCDP) has been supporting the development of Fishery Management Plans (FMPs) as well as stock 
assessments to improve the management of these inshore fisheries. However, the management plans are yet to be 
implemented and used by decision makers and other key stakeholders.  

7. Poor market access and lack of basic infrastructure are causing post-harvest losses, thereby reducing economic 
returns. Lack of appropriate post-harvest fish handling and preservation facilities increase transport time and thus the 
risk of spoilage, ultimately leading to low fish prices or wastage. In 2014, post-harvest losses were estimated at 2,700 
metric tons, representing about 30 percent of total landings for marine fisheries.  

8. The impacts of climate change further compound the challenges coastal communities are facing not only due to 
shoreline erosion, floods, and extreme weather events, but also because of their limited ability to adapt as a result of 
insufficient income and lack of basic infrastructure. In Kenya, 2.8 million people are estimated to live within 25 km of 
the coast, and this number is expected to increase to nearly 4 million by 2030. While the impacts of climate change on 
Kenya’s coast are not yet fully measured, or analyzed, marine and coastal ecosystems are expected to be affected as a 
result of rising ocean temperature, irregular rainfall, sea level rise, ocean acidification, changes in ocean current 
patterns, and more frequent and severe extreme weather events. 

9. With improved management and control, Kenya aims to increase the contribution from offshore fisheries to its 
economic development. Kenya is increasingly engaged in regional initiatives aimed at controlling Illegal, Unreported, 
and Unregulated (IUU) fishing, and in managing regional fishing efforts through its involvement in the IOTC, the 
Southwest Indian Ocean Fisheries Commission (SWIOFC), the African Union-Interafrican Bureau for Animal Resources 

                                            
9
 Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (2016). Fishery and Aquaculture Country Profiles: The Republic of Kenya 

10
 Ibid 

11
 Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (2016). Fishery and Aquaculture Country Profiles: The Republic of Kenya 

12
 Republic of Kenya (2014). Fisheries Annual Statistical Bulletin 2014. Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, and Fisheries – State Department of 

Fisheries 2014.  
13

 Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (2016). Fishery and Aquaculture Country Profiles: The Republic of Kenya 


(AU-Ibar), and FISH-I Africa.
14 

 With support from the KCDP, Kenya has recently established an advanced Vessel 
Monitoring System (VMS) in Mombasa, which will become fully operational once licensed vessels deploy the required 
on-board beacons to link with the base station at the State Department of Fisheries and Blue Economy (SDF-BE).  

10. More broadly, and driven by a growing population and the need for sustainable growth in ocean-related economic 
activities, the Government of Kenya (GoK) has made a strong commitment towards improving the management of its 
marine fisheries by embarking on a new approach – the Blue Economy. The blue economy approach aims to increase 
the number of livelihoods and level of income linked to the oceans, while concurrently conserving its resources and 
ecological integrity to ensure sustainability of the coastal/marine fisheries sub-sector.

15
 Sustainable management of 

fisheries stock, enhancing economic returns including through development of local semi-industrial fisheries, and 
improving coastal livelihoods are key focus areas of the GoK. Several State Departments were established through 
Executive Order No.1/2016, with the SDF-BE being tasked with coordinating economic ocean activity, which includes a 
comprehensive mandate to protect marine ecosystems. In addition, a new Fisheries Management and Development 
Act is currently under implementation, and a new national fisheries agency to bolster management of the fisheries 
sector, the Kenya Fisheries Service (KeFS), was established in September 2016. KeFS is in the early stages of becoming 
operational.  

11. The proposed project would support the GoK in implementing its blue economy agenda. MAFIDEV would scale up 
some of the successes of the KCDP. Furthermore, MAFIDEV would support the GoK in the operationalizing the KeFS, 
and help strengthening the marine fisheries and aquaculture-based livelihoods in coastal communities, by building on 
the benefits derived from the Hazina Ya  Maendeleo ya  Pwani (HMP), a coastal development fund providing grant 
support to demand driven community sub-projects which was established under KCDP. 

 
Relationship to CPF 
 

12. The proposed project is aligned with the Kenya Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) FY2014-2018
16

 as updated during 
the Performance and Learning Review in 2017, whose overarching goal is sustainable reduction in poverty and 
increased shared prosperity. Aligned both with Kenya’s Vision 2030 and its Medium-Term Plan, the CPS highlights three 
priority areas of engagement: (i) competitiveness and sustainability – growth to eradicate poverty; (ii) protection and 
potential – human resource development for shared prosperity; and (iii) building consistency and equity – delivering a 
devolution dividend. The project would directly contribute to the competitiveness and sustainability pillar of the CPS 
through development of a robust marine and coastal fishery economy, thereby addressing the government’s growth 
and poverty reduction strategies. By focusing on the coastal region, the project is expected to contribute to economic 
prosperity, employment, and livelihood of the coastal communities, where deep-rooted poverty and inequality are still 
a major concern for the government. 

 
 

                                            
14

 FISH-I is a regional Task Force to stop illegal fishing in the western Indian Ocean region 
15

 World Bank and United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs (2017). The Potential of the Blue Economy: Increasing Long-term 
Benefits of the Sustainable Use of Marine Resources for Small Island Developing States and Coastal Least Developed Countries. World Bank, 
Washington DC 
16

 World Bank. 2014. Country Partnership Strategy for the Republic of Kenya, FY2014–2018 (Report No. 87024-KE).  




C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 

 
 
The Project Development Objective is to improve management and increase value-addition of priority fisheries and 
aquaculture, and to strengthen access to livelihoods for coastal communities in Kenya. 

 
Key Results (From PCN) 

 
13. The key project outcomes are: 

 Index of captured indicator species (size, volume and fishing effort) (tbd) 

 Number of fishing vessels in Exclusive Economic Zone with valid licenses (#)  

 Total production of aquaculture in coastal areas (disaggregated by type of aquaculture) (metric tons) 

 Coastal communities with access to livelihood activities (number) 

 Increase value addition of catch of indicator species (tbd)  

 Share of targeted beneficiaries with rating ‘Satisfied’ or above on project interventions (disaggregated by 
gender)  

 
 
D. Concept Description 

 
14. The project objective will be achieved through targeted interventions grouped under the following proposed 

components. 

1) Component 1 – Governance and Management of Marine Fisheries and Aquatic Resources: Strengthening of 

marine fisheries and aquaculture governance is a critical element to increasing economic benefits from marine 

fisheries. This includes regulating fishing effort to enhance stock productivity and ensuring availability of reliable 

fisheries information for management decision-making. The proposed component would: (i) strengthen marine 

fisheries and coastal aquaculture governance; and (ii) minimize overfishing and destructive fishing practices, 

maintain or improve stock productivity, and enhance the integrity of associated ecosystems. The expected 
outcomes are: (i) improved institutional capacity of KeFS; (ii) improved FIS that supports management decision-

making; (iii) fisheries management measures implemented for four priority nearshore fisheries; (iv) functional (at 

least seven) joint Co-Management Areas (CMAs); (v) effective surveillance of Kenya’s EEZ; (vi) improved 

understanding of the status of stocks and fishing effort in priority fisheries; and (vii) regulatory framework for 

coastal aquaculture in place.  

2) Component 2 – Promote Investment in Marine Fisheries and Coastal Aquaculture: Most of Kenya's marine 

fisheries resources are close to, and in some cases beyond, maximum sustainable harvesting levels. Thus, in the 

context of enhancing overall economic benefits, there are limited options to increasing production sustainably. 

However, there is a greater scope to improve value addition of existing production, in particular through 

improved post-harvest handling, product development and better access to markets, as well as through 

aquaculture development. This potentially creates a space for private sector investment, which in turn will 

generate opportunities for community-level income generation. The objective of this proposed component is to 

Note to Task Teams: The PDO has been pre-populated from the datasheet for the first time for your convenience. 
Please keep it up to date whenever it is changed in the datasheet. 

 


promote efficient utilization and value-addition of the resources by increasing investment in the marine fisheries 

and aquaculture sector. The component objective will be achieved through facilitating sectoral value chain 

analysis and identifying opportunities for investment in upgrading and/or new processing facilities and marketing 

initiatives, targeting the full range of nearshore resources, industrial offshore tuna fisheries and aquaculture. Such 

facilitation of private sector investment may include enhancing the business-operating environment, potentially 

including relevant infrastructure improvements. The expected outcomes are: (i) improved fisheries-related 

infrastructure; (ii) stable growth in the total economic value generated by sustainable use of the fishery and 

aquaculture resources; and (iii) improved business environment for investments in the fishery and aquaculture 

sector.  

3) Component 3 – Strengthening Marine Fisheries and Aquaculture-based Livelihoods in Coastal Communities: 

Outside Mombasa and tourism centers such as Malindi-Watamu, Diani and Lamu Island, rural coastal 

communities in Kenya remain relatively poor, and would thus be a main target beneficiary group under the 

proposed project. Even the coastal tourism economy is highly vulnerable to fluctuating global economics and 

security challenges in East Africa; therefore, fisheries resources remain the critical livelihood resource for rural 

coastal households in Kenya. Since nearshore capture fisheries resources are already at, or in some cases beyond, 

maximum sustainable harvesting levels, as with private sector development under Component 2, opportunities to 

strengthen coastal households lie more in fisheries value addition, aquaculture production and other enterprise 

development, than in increasing effort on capture fisheries. Accessing these opportunities requires information 

and knowledge sharing, skills development and better access to credit. Strengthening coastal livelihoods is an end 

in itself. However, it also supports a positive feedback loop in terms of strengthening nearshore fisheries 

management. Fishers with more secure livelihoods are better able to engage in fisheries co-management 

initiatives, which, although in the short-term might involve reducing fishing effort and catches, in the medium to 

longer-term allow stock recovery, improved fisheries productivity and further improvements to coastal 

livelihoods. This proposed component would enhance the social and economic benefits that coastal communities 

derive from sustainable use of living marine resources. Expected outcomes are: (i) increased income of coastal 

households from project-supported enterprise development and value-addition initiatives; (ii) increased access to 

and repayment of credit among coastal communities; and (iii) project beneficiaries are distributed by gender and 

age in accordance with stated targets.  

4) Component 4 – Project Management: This proposed component would ensure efficient and effective 

implementation of project activities and fiduciary management. Project management including monitoring and 

evaluation, and safeguards management activities are supported under this component.  

 
 

 
 
    

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
The Project investments will be located in the coastal counties of Kenya, including Mombasa, Kwale, Kilifi, Taita Taveta, 

Lamu and Tana River. While the exact location of project interventions is not known at this stage, it is known that Kwale, 

Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal. 
 

     

Kilifi, Taita Taveta, Lamu and Tana River counties are home to Vulnerable and Marginalized Groups (VMGs) who meet the 
OP 4.10 criteria in terms of their language, culture, attachment to given lands and being subordinate to the more 
dominant communities among whom they live. The livelihood strategies of the VMGs within these counties range from 
nearshore fishing – the closer a community is located to the sea – to subsistence farming, livestock keeping and small 
scale businesses, the farther a community is from the sea. 
 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
The overall project implementation would be carried out by a Project Coordination Unit (PCU) in the State Department of 

Fisheries and Blue Economy (SDF-BE), Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, and Fisheries. The SDF-BE has been newly 
established, however, previously it existed as State Department of Fisheries and represented one of the implementing 
agencies of the KCDP. The PCU would hire environmental and social safeguards staff to be responsible for overseeing the 
implementation of safeguards instruments. The initial assessment finds the safeguards capacity of the future PCU to be 
rather limited, therefore a technical assistance, capacity building and monitoring environmental and social risks and their 
mitigation will be included as part of Component 4 design. 
 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 
Svetlana Khvostova, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 
Lilian Wambui Kahindo, Social Safeguards Specialist 
Ben Okindo Ayako Miranga, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 
 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The initial screening revealed that the project is likely 
to have negative environmental and social impacts, 
taking into account that the project activities include 
small and rehabilitation of large infrastructure, such as 
reconstruction of fishing port facilities in Mombasa, 
improvement of landing sites infrastructure, upgrading 
fish markets, small scale fish-handling and processing; 
and product development and packaging facilities. It is 
proposed that the project is assigned EA Category B. 
Given that the nature of the proposed project 
activities, including their design and location are not 
known at this point in time, the project would follow a 
framework approach to managing safeguards. An 
Environmental and Social Management Framework 
would be prepared and publicly disclosed before 
project appraisal. During project preparation, the 
team will identify initial investments ready for 
financing, for which subproject specific ESIAs (and if 
necessary RAPs) will be developed and also disclosed 
prior to project appraisal. Throughout the project 
implementation, each subproject will be screened for 




environmental risk and ESIA/ESMP will be prepared by 
the PCU. The preparation of the ESMF and ESIAs will 
be accompanied by a set of public consultations with 
the project stakeholders, which will be documented in 
the assessments. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

Most of the marine coastal area is classified with some 
form of protection, including several national parks. 
Some of the marine protected areas are under 
effective management as they were supported under 
Kenya Coastal Development Project (KCDP).  However, 
others are at various stage of degradation and in need 
for targeted activities to enhance management 
effectiveness including an active monitoring system. 
The project will design its investments to avoid 
negative impacts on environmentally sensitive areas 
and will work with relevant stakeholders, such as 
Kenya Wildlife Service, to enhance the management 
effectiveness of protected areas including the 
establishment of buffer zones and providing capacity 
building to the communities. The ESMF will include 
identification of risks and description of mitigation 
measures specific to avoidance and minimization of 
impacts on natural habitats. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes 

The Project may include some investments in some 
areas with potential negative impacts on mangroves 
while in other areas may benefits from restoration of 
mangroves. The ESMF will include specific provisions, 
including a TOR for a mangroves management plan, 
for cases where such impact is unavoidable. Project 
preparation will determine the potential impacts on 
mangroves, however the large scale impact is not 
anticipated. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 TBD 
 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 TBD 

It is unlikely that cultural resources will be impacted, 
however, the presence of objects of cultural heritage 
will be identified during screening as part of project 
preparation. The ESMF will include a sample chance 
find procedure to be adopted by the contractors. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 Yes 

Five of the six coastal counties targeted under the 
proposed MAFIDEV (i.e., Tana River, Lamu, Kilifi, Kwale 
and Taita Taveta) are home to Vulnerable and 
Marginalized Groups (VMGs) who meet the OP 4.10 
criteria in terms of language, culture, attachment to 
given lands and being subordinate to the more 
dominant communities among whom they live, as well 
as other Vulnerable Groups. Under the Kenya Coastal 



 
The World Bank  
Kenya Marine Fisheries and Socio-Economic Development Project (MAFIDEV) (P163980) 

 
 

  
Jun 06, 2017 Page 10 of 13  

     

Development Project (KCDP), a VMG Framework was 
prepared followed by a comprehensive Social 
Assessment (SA), which found that the livelihood 
strategies of the VMGs within these counties ranged 
from nearshore fishing, the closer a community is to 
the sea – to subsistence farming, livestock keeping and 
small scale trades, the farther a community is from the 
sea. The findings of the SA resulted in the 
development of a VMG Plan (VMGP) to mitigate risks, 
which was disclosed in December 2015.  
Activities under Component 1 of the proposed 
MAFIDEV will include regulating fishing effort to 
enhance stock productivity and ensure availability of 
reliable fisheries information for management 
decision-making. While this may result in medium- to 
long-term benefits, in the short term, it might 
negatively affect the livelihood strategies of the fishing 
VMG communities. Since the exact location of project 
interventions is unknown at this point in time and in 
order to continue addressing the livelihood needs, 
strategies and aspirations of the VMGs, the project will 
prepare a VMG Framework. The VMG Framework will 
build on the VMG Framework and SA developed under 
KCDP, accommodate lessons learnt, and be publicly 
disclosed in Kenya and in the World Bank Info Shop. 
Furthermore, the proposed MAFIDEV will build on the 
KCDP best practices and engage the VMGs at all stages 
of the project including at the project design stage.    
 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

Large scale involuntary resettlement and land 
acquisition are not expected to be required for the 
proposed types of investments, as the project expects 
to include rehabilitation of existing infrastructure or 
expansion of existing facilities. While resettlement of 
households can be avoided, in most cases, some 
economic displacement and restriction of access to 
resources is expected to be an impact for the project. 
Since the exact locations of project interventions are 
unknown at this stage, a framework approach would 
be adopted through which the project will develop a 
Resettlement Policy Framework to outline the types of 
compensation required for the project activities and 
guide preparation of the Resettlement Action Plans 
during project implementation. The project will also 
develop a Process Framework (PF) to establish the 
mechanism for compensation, participation, and 



implementation of improved management of 
nearshore and offshore fisheries. During project 
preparation, the PCU will identify initial investments 
ready for financing, for which subproject specific RAPs 
will be developed (if necessary) and disclosed prior to 
project appraisal. Throughout the project 
implementation, each subproject will be screened for 
resettlement risks and a RAP prepared by the PCU as 
necessary. The preparation of the RPF, PF and RAPs 
will be accompanied by a set of public consultations 
with the project stakeholders, which will be 
documented in these documents. Particular attention 
will be paid to the identification of vulnerable groups 
among the Project Affected Persons (PAPs), who may 
require special resettlement assistance during project 
implementation. Such PAPs and the nature of their 
vulnerabilities as well as the necessary support to 
them will be clearly documented in the RAP. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 
 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

TBD 
The policy may need to be triggered, which will be 
determined during project preparation. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 TBD 
The policy may need to be triggered due to Kenya’s 
maritime dispute with Somalia. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
May 31, 2018 
 

Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
The safeguards related studies are expected to be carried out from October 2017 through January 2018.  More details 

will be available after the first preparation mission which is likely carried out in Oct 2017. 
 
 

