














































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
NIGER - AGRICULTURAL AND LIVESTOCK TRANSFORMATION PROJECT (P164509) 

 
 

  
Mar 04, 2018 Page 1 of 18  

     

 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 06-Mar-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSC23726 

P
u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d



 
The World Bank  
NIGER - AGRICULTURAL AND LIVESTOCK TRANSFORMATION PROJECT (P164509) 

 
 

  
Mar 04, 2018 Page 2 of 18  

     

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Niger P164509  NIGER - AGRICULTURAL 
AND LIVESTOCK 
TRANSFORMATION 
PROJECT (P164509) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA Aug 13, 2018 Nov 15, 2018 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Plan Ministry of Agriculture and 
Livestock 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The Development Objective (PDO) is “to increase productivity and commercialization for selected agriculture and 
livestock value chains and strengthen the country’s capacity to respond to eligible crisis or emergency”. 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 100.00 

Total Financing 100.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 100.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 100.00 

          IDA Credit 100.00 

   
 

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 



 
The World Bank  
NIGER - AGRICULTURAL AND LIVESTOCK TRANSFORMATION PROJECT (P164509) 

 
 

  
Mar 04, 2018 Page 3 of 18  

     

B - Partial Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 
 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
 

1. Niger is a large, landlocked country in the arid and semi-arid Sahel region. The country’s 
population is estimated at over 22 million, half of it less than 15 years old and growing rapidly at about 
3.9 percent per year.. Two-thirds of the country is inhospitable desert, and more than 84 percent of the 
population is concentrated in the areas along the Niger River in the southwestern part of the country 
and along its long southern border with Nigeria. The climate is mostly arid; annual rainfall in 85 percent 
of the country’s area is less than 350 mm.  However, some areas in the south and along the Niger river 
get some 600 mm of rain, making rainfed agriculture with dryland crops possible. 
  
2. Niger’s political institutions have been strengthened since the restoration of constitutional 
order in 2011. The Government of Niger (GoN) is pursuing important measures to combat organized 
crime and terrorism and to promote the safety and property rights of its citizens. Military and law 
enforcement agencies have created new crisis response units, and border security has been 
strengthened in close collaboration with regional and international partners. As a result, both unrest in 
various zones of Niger and insecurity in the border zone with Mali have diminished. Nevertheless, the 
country continues to face significant risks related to domestic and regional instability, as well as 
organized crime and transnational terrorism. The rise of Boko Haram in Nigeria and the recent expansion 
of its operations to neighboring countries, including Niger, is cause for concern.  Further, there are now 
over 100,000 refugees from Nigeria in the Diffa region.   

 
3. Niger is a founding member of the Sahel Alliance, an organization that committed its members 
and development partners to combine their efforts and better coordinate their actions to create the 
conditions for sustainable growth and lasting peace.  It aims to achieve more effective aid coordination 
and enhance the support from development partners to the region, in order to more generally 
contribute to stabilizing the security situation and eradicating poverty, by developing solutions for rural 
areas, creating employment for young people, improving energy infrastructure and the fight against 
climate change, and strengthening governance. 

 
4. Since 2000 Niger has had a good track record for macroeconomic stability. It has embarked with 
some success on reforms to foster private sector-led economic growth, reduce its debt, and improve 
social indicators. Niger has significant mineral wealth, including uranium and gold, and has started 
exporting refined oil products. These three commodities account for approximately 70 percent of the 



 
The World Bank  
NIGER - AGRICULTURAL AND LIVESTOCK TRANSFORMATION PROJECT (P164509) 

 
 

  
Mar 04, 2018 Page 4 of 18  

     

country’s exports. However, despite improvements, Niger continues to face persistent, long-term 
development challenges linked to its large geographical size, home to a largely rural population often 
beyond the reaches of public services, where the bulk of the poor reside. 

 
5. Although poverty incidence is declining, Niger remains among the poorest countries in Africa, 
with an estimated average per capita gross domestic product (GDP) in current prices of US$420 in 2014, 
well below the average GDP of US$1,600 for Sub-Saharan Africa (IMF, 2017).  In the 2016 Human 
Development Index, Niger was ranked second to last out of 188 countries.  Despite a decline in overall 
poverty incidence, the rural poor became poorer relative to their urban counterparts during the 2005-
14 period. Their per capita consumption relative to that of the urban poor declined from 60 percent to 
43 percent. Lack of economic diversification, volatile agricultural growth, low access to physical and 
institutional infrastructure, and weak human capital base limits economic opportunities, especially in 
rural area. 

 
6. Food insecurity and malnutrition remain a challenge. Overall, growth of major food production 
was slightly less than the population growth over the period 1980-2011, with the increase in the food 
deficit being filled by imports. Malnutrition is a big challenge with. An estimated 2.5 million people in 
Niger are chronically food-insecure and unable to meet their basic food requirements even during years 
of average agricultural production. During periods of constrained access to food, millions more can 
quickly fall into acute transitory food insecurity. Over the past years, Niger made some progress on 
nutrition indicators, but the country still lags substantially behind other low-income countries and Sub-
Saharan African counterparts. Malnutrition accounts for more than one-third of child mortality in the 
country and 43 percent of children under five years old suffers from stunting and wasting. Malnutrition 
remains high due to a host of health, sanitation, and behavioral factors, worsened by recurrent food 
shortages.    

 
7. Niger is vulnerable to climate shocks, with drought being the most important risk in terms of 
frequency and impacts. A strong correlation exists between changes in gross domestic product (GDP) 
and the meteorological conditions, demonstrating the fragility of the economy to weather-related 
events, particularly in the agriculture sector.1 The food crisis resulting from the 2011 drought affected 
almost half of the country’s population. While uncertainty remains regarding longer-term climate change 
projections (2050-2100), short- and medium-term rainfall deficits will most likely continue to plague 
Niger’s agriculture sector, and the frequency and severity of droughts may remain the same or increase. 
The agriculture, forestry, and other land uses (AFOLU) sector accounts for 89 percent of total greenhouse 
gas (GHG) emissions, while the energy sector accounts for 9 percent. The national priority for the AFOLU 
sector in Niger’s Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC) relates to improving the resilience 
of the agriculture, animal husbandry, and forestry subsectors. For Niger, the adaptation options 
considered as top priority are those that will permit higher co-benefits with respect to climate change 
mitigation, particularly those good adaptation practices and techniques that will permit carbon 
sequestration and reduction of GHG emissions while improving productivity. Niger’s climate change 
strategy is based on the vision of climate-smart agriculture (CSA) and access to modern energy services 
for everyone in 2030.    

 

                                            
1 The 2013 World Bank agriculture sector risk assessment report indicated that Niger’s GDP growth rate dipped into 
negative territory eight times between 1984 and 2010, and drought was largely responsible. 



 
The World Bank  
NIGER - AGRICULTURAL AND LIVESTOCK TRANSFORMATION PROJECT (P164509) 

 
 

  
Mar 04, 2018 Page 5 of 18  

     

8. Women and young people are marginalized. The main factors that significantly impede the 
economic empowerment of rural women in the agricultural sector include: difficulties in accessing 
natural and productive resources, the overwork of rural women as they are in charge of both productive 
and reproductive/ household tasks, lack of women's leadership and decision-making, and limited access 
to information and education/ training.  Similarly, rural youth are mostly un-educated and lack 
professional qualifications. Their low social status and the difficulties they encounter to access economic 
opportunities limit their participation in decision-making at community and family level. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 

9. Agriculture (crops, livestock, and fisheries) is very important for the economy and employment. 
It represents more than 40 percent of the national GDP and occupies nearly 90 percent of the active 
population. The performance of the sector is unstable from one year to another because of its high 
exposure to agronomic, climatic, health, and more recently security risks.  The shocks that follow 
agricultural and livestock crises have a strong impact on household incomes,  the general budget  of the 
State and the growth rate at the overall Nigerien economy.  
 

10. Crop subsector.  Crop production is only possible in the relatively humid areas in the south-west 
of the country (an area of some 12 million hectares; about 10 percent of the national territory). 
Additionally, there are some 19 million hectares mainly pasture lands. Most crops are produced under 
rainfed conditions with low yields, including millet, sorghum, and other cereals (including coarse/feed 
grains), as well as legumes (cowpeas, groundnuts) in more modest amounts. The remainder of crop 
production grown by irrigated conditions, including rice and vegetables.  The yields of irrigated crops, 
however, are still below potential. The average size of a family farm unit is about 5 hectares, producing 
mostly for household consumption and little marketable surplus.  The production of food/feed grains, of 
which by-products are used for animal feeding (e.g. shredded millet/corn stalks) as extensive livestock 
production, is common to each farm and remains the customary production model. Agricultural 
productivity remains low largely because of a highly variable agro-climate from year to year with a 
constrained access to inputs such as certified seeds and fertilizers.  More entrepreneurial farmers are 
facing a weak financial market, limiting access to credit, and suffering from poor access to quality 
phytosanitary products, limited familiarity with modern production practices, and the difficulty of 
accessing urban markets due to lack of aggregation, and a lack of adequate transport infrastructure and 
transport means.  
 

11. Livestock subsector. It is a key sector of the Nigerien economy that contributes 13 percent to the 
national GDP and provides 7 percent of the country's export earnings. The national herd is estimated at 
more than 10 million cattle, 24 million small ruminants, and a little over a million and a half camels.2 
Three main types of livestock farming co-exist in Niger: (i) the "pastoral systems" characterized by animal 
mobility (extensive breeding systems for camels, small ruminants, and cattle), (ii) the traditional livestock 
farming systems practiced by villagers throughout the country, for ruminants and poultry, and (iii) 

                                            
2 Despite the mortality associated with successive pastoral crises, livestock numbers have been steadily increasing 
over the past ten years, rising from 11.5 TLUs in 2005 to 14.5 TLUs in 2012. [Tropical Livestock Units/Unités de bétail 
tropical (TLUs/UBT); a TLU implies a live weight of 250 kg]. The most significant increase involved cattle (+ 38 
percent) and goats (+ 22 percent). Equines and camels had the lowest rates of increase (4 and 7 percent, 
respectively). While the increase represents a larger potential food reserve, these animals also need to be fed in 
what is often a fodder-constrained environment. 



 
The World Bank  
NIGER - AGRICULTURAL AND LIVESTOCK TRANSFORMATION PROJECT (P164509) 

 
 

  
Mar 04, 2018 Page 6 of 18  

     

"improved livestock systems" (mainly semi-intensive and intensive peri-urban poultry and ruminant 
fattening). Other types of farming (quite marginal, but diversified) include beekeeping, rabbit breeding, 
etc. 
 

12. Fisheries subsector. National consumption of fish is only in the order of about 2 kg per inhabitant 
per year, implying a total demand of about 44,000 tons per year.  Production between 2012 and 2017 
fluctuated within a range of 27,000 to 47,000 tons.  Most of the catches from Lake Chad are exported to 
Nigeria (in smoked form).  Some fish are imported fresh or frozen from Mali, Nigeria, Senegal, Benin, and 
Côte d'Ivoire.  Potential for import substitution exists. There are currently about 70,000 people employed 
in this subsector, involving fishermen, processors, and traders, and the estimated contribution to GDP is 
about 0.7 percent. Previous projects financed by other donors have demonstrated that there can be 
relatively high fish productivity in ponds (more than 200 kg/ha/year in many ponds particularly for 
catfish, Carp, and Lake Chad perch).  Also, there exist some successful local initiatives for community 
management of fisheries. Fish output could be increased, including particularly with an expansion of 
aquaculture, while conserving fishery resources and the natural resources on which these are based.  Key 
actions would include investments in water management, particularly of excess water during the rainy 
season (continuing investments or similar to some of those under PRODEX) along with improved 
extension and transfer of technology.  
 
13. Extension and advisory services, support to processing and marketing, and availability of 
financing are weak. These constrain agriculture development.  Some of the factors explaining the weak 
status of extension are: weak human resources, limited research along with limited research and 
extension linkages, unclear extension messages, limited specialized services to support crop quality, 
animal health, and food safety; limited transport resources and operational budgets to visit farmers and 
their fields/livestock, and low use of information and communication technology (ICT). The above factors 
combine to limit effective coverage of crop and livestock extension to support production.  Similarly, 
bottlenecks in the various value chains limit support to value addition on production, such as with 
processing or packaging units of products of animal and vegetable origin, and the weakness of the inter-
professions.  However, opportunities exist as proven by private or professional initiatives regarding milk, 
dried meat, hides and skins, cowpeas, onions, sesame, nut-grass, etc. Finally, financing for the sector is 
lacking. Banks are reluctant to take risks to finance the agriculture and livestock operations, and micro-
finance institutions are weak. 
 

14. Significant water resources exist but are insufficiently used. The limited use of water is a major 
constraint for crop production.  It is estimated that only 1 percent of surface runoff and 15 percent of 
renewable groundwater are currently used, and that less than 30 percent of potentially irrigable land is 
currently irrigated.  Water resources consist of large surface water networks as well as large renewable 
groundwater reserves of around 2.5 billion m3, and 2,000 billion m3 of non-renewable water reserves. 
This water potential is underutilized. Only the Niger River flows permanently throughout the year, while 
five other large rivers feeding the Niger river flow only part of the year. There are also about a thousand 
ponds, including 175 permanent ones that are mostly used by livestock herders for watering their cattle.  

 
15. Other constraints for agriculture development include: (i) institutional, legislative and regulatory 
deficiencies (means and capacity of intervention of the State services, including some of its laboratories 
for analysis and diagnosis, unsuitable texts and/or not-applied data and unused monitoring/evaluation 
systems); (ii) low level of organization of sector actors (POs, unstructured IPs and other cooperatives 



 
The World Bank  
NIGER - AGRICULTURAL AND LIVESTOCK TRANSFORMATION PROJECT (P164509) 

 
 

  
Mar 04, 2018 Page 7 of 18  

     

without economic organization capacity); (iii) lack of technical and economic benchmarks on the 
intensification of farming and livestock systems; (iv) difficult access to advisory support (low coverage 
and weak messages of the extension network and local veterinary services) and quality production inputs 
(low access to improved seeds, livestock/poultry feed capacity limited and uncontrolled); (v) low genetic 
potential of the most common plant varieties and animal breeds or under-valued potential; (vi) 
inadequate investment and support for the sector (lack of industrial-scale infrastructure and outdated 
equipment for production, processing, storage, transport and marketing, low value of by-products); (vii) 
overexploitation and non-sustainable use of land resources; (viii) limited decentralization and land 
insecurity; and (ix) national system for preventing and managing crises (of climatic, sanitary, and 
commercial origin) that is not well adapted or developed.  

 
16. Main assets of the agriculture sector. These include: (i) a substantial potential for irrigated 
farming, (ii) the presence of a numerically large and diversified herd with untapped potential for 
increased productivity through animal health, feed, genetic improvements, and better husbandry 
practices; (iii) the presence of plant varieties and animal breeds recognized for their adaptive and 
productive potential in their agro-climatic environment; (iv) traditional know-how and good experience 
of producers in certain areas (flood recession cultivation, livestock fattening, artisanal milk production, 
poultry); (v) competitiveness of certain export sectors (onions, cattle/meat); and (vi) important sectoral 
contribution to the fight against poverty (the main source of household income), and to food and 
nutrition security. 

 
 

Relationship to CPF 
 

17. The proposed project is fully aligned with the Niger Country Partnership Framework (CPF) and 
the Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD). The proposed project is aligned with the CPF and SCD as it 
would contribute to poverty alleviation and improved food security through increased farm productivity 
and value addition in selected agricultural value chains, thus improving rural livelihoods. It would 
generate employment in general and in particular for women and young people in the targeted areas. 
The SCD underlines that “improving the productivity in agriculture remains a first priority for poverty 
reduction.”  The CPF has an overarching goal of empowering women, while engaging with men as allies, 
to bring down the unsustainable population growth rate in Niger and to enable development policies to 
succeed. In the medium term, reduced demographic pressures are expected to free up scarce public 
resources to fund services, such as health and education and enable further empowerment of women 
and girls in a self-sustaining virtuous circle. Within this overarching logic, the FY18-21 CPF, approved by 
the Board on April 10th, 2018, focuses on the importance of boosting agricultural productivity, 
diversifying exports, and raising incomes in the rural sector where 80 percent of the population live. 
Investments in the agricultural sector, including livestock and fisheries, are therefore essential, such as 
through the proposed project. Specifically, yields can and should be increased, including, for example, 
via use of more productive varieties, small-scale irrigation, agroforestry and intercropping, which the 
project would emphasize, while increasing the involvement of youth and women.  
 
18. The proposed project is also aligned with the Government’s sector strategy in support of 
agriculture and livestock.  The strategy is described in the Plan for Economic and Social Development II 
(PDES II), focused on "food security and sustainable agricultural development," implemented in 
particular through the 3N (“Nigeriens feed Nigeriens") Initiative. The Initiative aims to contribute to the 



 
The World Bank  
NIGER - AGRICULTURAL AND LIVESTOCK TRANSFORMATION PROJECT (P164509) 

 
 

  
Mar 04, 2018 Page 8 of 18  

     

overall overarching goal of eradicating hunger, while helping to improve the productivity and income of 
farming households, especially the most vulnerable. The approach is also intended to operationalize the 
Rural Transformation Program of the Sustainable Development and Inclusive Growth Strategy (SDDIC). 
It contributes to the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) adopted in 2015 by the 
United Nations World Assembly, including SDGs 2 and 1. The general orientation of the proposed project 
is also in line with the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Plan (CAADP), the ECOWAS 
Common Agricultural Policy (ECOWAP), and the Agricultural Policy of Africa (PAU; UEMOA). 

 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 

19. The Development Objective (PDO) is “to increase productivity and commercialization for selected 
agriculture and livestock value chains and strengthen the country’s capacity to respond to eligible crisis 
or emergency”. This objective is fully aligned with the Government's vision for agricultural and livestock 
development. 

 
Key Results (From PCN) 

 
20. Key performance indicators include: (i) increased productivity of project-targeted agriculture and 
livestock systems: this would be measured based on area irrigated and increased yields (kg per hectare 
or per head), including the reduction of losses due to the most prevalent animal diseases; (ii) incremental 
sales in targeted value chains, including for dairy/milk, cattle/meat, fish, poultry, onions, and niébé 
(aggregated over all the targeted value chains); and (iii) reduction in the Government’s response time to 
agriculture and livestock sector-related emergencies including sanitary crises. In addition, the following 
two core indicators regarding direct beneficiaries would be measured: (i) number of small-scale 
agriculture producers and sedentary livestock rearing and fish farming households benefiting from 
project interventions in the project-targeted production basins, particularly the vulnerable groups (e.g., 
women and youths); and (ii) beneficiary satisfaction rate with the quality of project-supported services, 
as a partial measure of citizens’ engagement in the Project. The detailed results framework would be 
developed during the course of preparation. Adequate provision would be made in terms of human and 
financial resources for the design of thorough M&E activities as part of project preparation. A baseline 
survey would be conducted to inform indicators regarding the reference situation at project inception. 
 

D. Concept Description 
 

21. The World Bank's Agriculture and Livestock Portfolio in Niger currently includes the following 
projects: (i) Export Promotion Project (PRODEX) which ended in October 2017 and for which an 
Implementation Completion Report is currently being  prepared; (ii) Additional Financing for the West 
Africa Agricultural Productivity Project, approved in 2017; (iii) Regional Support Project to the Sahel 
Irrigation Initiative/Project d’Appui Regional à l’Initiative pour l’irrigation au Sahel (SIIP/PARIIS) approved 
in December 2017; (iv) Climate-Smart Agriculture Project/Projet d’Appui à l’Agriculture Sensible aux 
risques Climatiques (CSA/PASEC) approved in 2016; (v) Sahel Regional Pastoral Support Project (PRAPS-
Niger) in operation since fiscal year 2016 to support pastoral livestock production; (vi) Phase 3 of the 
Community Action Program/Programme d’Actions Communautaires (CAP3/PAC3), with its recently 
approved additional funding in 2017 and scheduled to close  in December 2019; (vii) the Regional Disease 
Surveillance Systems Enhancement Project (REDISSE) is strengthening the national cross-sectoral 
capacity for disease surveillance and epidemic preparedness,;  (viii) a rural development policy operation 



 
The World Bank  
NIGER - AGRICULTURAL AND LIVESTOCK TRANSFORMATION PROJECT (P164509) 

 
 

  
Mar 04, 2018 Page 9 of 18  

     

being disbursed over 2017-2018 under IDA 18. This project will provide financial support for the 
implementation of the PDES II whose  objectives include “increasing rural productivity growth” and 
“supporting growth enabling sectors.” It has numerous actions planned, including in energy, mineral 
exploitation, financial sector, etc.; it also seeks to provide input subsidies and improve agricultural 
extension in pilot communes; and (ix) The Competitive and Growth Support Project, which is closing on 
March 31, 2019 and  includes the rehabilitation and upgrading of slaughterhouses and their respective 
environments for developing meat production. In spite of the above projects/investments, there still 
remains a significant gap in terms of the overall performance of the agriculture and livestock sectors.  
 
22. Scope of intervention and complementarity with other projects. The PIMELAN would capitalize 
on the lessons learnt and best practices by past and on-going Bank projects. The targeted production 
systems and activities would be complementary to those supported by other Bank-financed projects. On 
the crop production side, the project would focus on increasing irrigated production with a focus on 
onions, and horticulture production (tomatoes in particular); it would also focus on fodder production as 
a link to the livestock production. It would capitalize on the results of the Small Irrigation Project (SMP; 
closed in FY 2009) and PRODEX (closed in October 2017, which already built on SMP) as well as PASEC 
that focuses on climate-smart agriculture (CSA) and PARIIS that focuses on irrigation. Regarding livestock, 
the project would focus on sedentary livestock systems to enhance cattle and small ruminant production 
and meat processing, the milk and poultry value chains (meat and eggs), and fish farming and processing; 
it would complement PRAPS-Niger which focuses on pastoral systems. The PIMELAN would deal with 
value chains in an integrated manner; it would focus on processing and marketing activities downstream 
of production. It would also address as a major thrust the financing constraints of the sector through TA 
support to partner financial institutions (PFIs) and funding for matching grants to producers and other 
V/C participants, following mechanisms already used by other projects. It would also coordinate with IFC 
and complement on-going or planned IFC work on agri-business development. 

 
23. The proposed Project would be structured as an Investment Project Financing (IPF), funded by 
an IDA credit in the amount of US$100 million over a six-year period. The Project would have three 
interrelated components: (i) improving the quality of public and private services in support of agriculture 
and livestock; (ii) support to public and private investments for improved production, processing, and 
market access for selected agriculture and livestock value chains; and (iii) crisis prevention & 
management, and project coordination. The project would be complementary to the ongoing agriculture 
and livestock projects. 
 

24. Integrated value chain approach. The rationale for the proposed project is to boost productivity 
in the selected agriculture and livestock value chains (V/Cs). The selected V/Cs would be: (i) Crop 
production: irrigated onions and vegetables; and (ii) Animal production: cattle and small ruminant meat, 
cows, poultry, goat and camel milk, hides and skins, as well as fish farming. This project would adopt an 
integrated value chain approach for the selected V/Cs from production to marketing on the domestic 
and regional markets or export to international markets. It would support financing through small credits 
or grants for services and activities of entrepreneurs who are ready to engage in intensification of their 
production, development of value-added activities to primary production through diversification of 
processing activities, and the logistics between agricultural production and the market (including 
processing, storage, and transport). This would require the close involvement of Partner financial 
institutions. 

 



 
The World Bank  
NIGER - AGRICULTURAL AND LIVESTOCK TRANSFORMATION PROJECT (P164509) 

 
 

  
Mar 04, 2018 Page 10 of 18  

     

25. The project would address cross-cutting priorities.  The main cross-cutting priorities proposed to 
be addressed under the project are: (i) capacity-building of extension and advisory support for crop and 
animal production; of input supply services (including seeds, feed supplements, and genetics); and of 
veterinary services; (ii) land restoration and sustainable land management; (iii) empowerment of women 
and youth; (iv) climate change mitigation and adaptation; (v) public health and nutrition; and (vi) 
environmental and social safeguards. 
 
26. Preparatory activities. Before making a final choice of actions to be selected, preparation work 
would identify the difficulties and constraints to be considered to guarantee the success of the project 
through a detailed mapping of the sectors and locations already covered by other IDA projects and those 
of other partners. The authorities would determine whether the priority actions should relate to sectors 
and/or locations not supported so far, or the promotion and scaling up of sectors already supported and 
promising in terms of supply of the domestic and export market. Due to the diversity of beneficiaries, 
and therefore the needs that would ultimately be identified (in terms of production sectors but also of 
typology of actors), a selective approach would be preferred, with a preferential focus on women and 
young people (see below). 

 
27. There have been recent developments in the Agriculture Sector in Niger, such as the reform of 
agriculture extension services and facilitation of the policy environment for investing in the sector.  On 
August 2, 2017, three important decrees were issued. These created: (a) the National System of 
Agricultural Extension/Système National de Conseil Agricole (NSAE/SNCA); (b) the Promotion Agency for 
Agricultural Extension/l’Agence de Promotion du Conseil Agricole (PAAC/APCA); and (c) the Investment 
Fund for Food Security and Nutrition/Fonds d’Investissement pour la Sécurité Alimentaire et 
Nutritionnelle (IFFSN/FISAN). A Committee has been set up to help with the operationalization of these 
bodies and to develop a roadmap, including the preparation of procedural manuals, the recruitment of 
the DGs and the technical directorates, etc.  PIMELAN would provide support to make them fully 
operational and effective. 

 
28. The preliminary project description is presented below.  
 

Component 1: Improving the quality of services in support of agriculture and livestock--US$ 25 million  
 

29. The objective of this Component would be to increase the productivity of agriculture and 
sedentary livestock farming systems for selected crops and non-pastoral value chains (milk, meat, fish, 
poultry, onions, and niébé) through the strengthening of the capacity and efficiency of services which 
would provide more and effective support and advice to producers. In doing so, it would build sustainable 
human, institutional, and policy capacity for key public and private actors in the agriculture and livestock 
(including aquaculture) sectors, in order to improve crop and animal husbandry practices (and therefore 
output), including climate-smart agriculture (CSA) practices, as well as improved access and delivery of 
quality extension services (crop production, animal health, feed, and breeding), which would also help 
farmers to strengthen their resilience and adaptive capacity to climate-related hazards.  Activities would 
include:  
 

(a) Support to crop and livestock extension and advisory services in order to increase 
producers' knowledge and capacities to facilitate increased productivity. Knowledge 
developed under the West Africa Agricultural Productivity Programme (WAAP) would 



 
The World Bank  
NIGER - AGRICULTURAL AND LIVESTOCK TRANSFORMATION PROJECT (P164509) 

 
 

  
Mar 04, 2018 Page 11 of 18  

     

be disseminated to help reduce crop and livestock losses and contribute to improved 
public health; and involvement of extension services would help in finding synergies 
and complementarities with PRAPS-Niger, PASEC, and the SIIP. Support would include 
knowledge development for the selected crop and livestock value chains through 
increased transfer of Good Agriculture Practices (GAPs) by rolling out innovative 
extension models, such as livestock Farmer Field Schools (FFSs) and e-extension, 
diffusion of innovative technologies (including CSA, such as climate-resilient feed 
production and mitigation options), developing technical references, and providing the 
related training; provision of improved access to quality agricultural and zootechnical 
inputs (fertilizers, seeds, phytosanitary and sanitary products, food, genetics). 
Improved extension services are expected to increase producers’ awareness about 
climate change and improve their capacity to mainstream climate action; 

 
(b) Productivity and food safety enhancement via provision of specialized services to 

support crop quality, animal health, and food safety. The aim would be to increase the 
availability of and access to high-quality services and inputs for crop and livestock 
producers (including aquaculture). It would include crop and animal disease 
surveillance in order to improve the quality and hygiene of food of plant and animal 
origins, strengthening programs of animal prophylaxis (animal health/vaccinations) 
and fight against major pests and diseases, including prevention and management, 
weather monitoring, veterinary services enhancements and vaccination campaigns, 
quality control of crop and animal products, and seed and input certification.3 It would 
seek synergies and complementarities with PRAPS and REDISSE. Pest and animal 
health surveillance, together with weather monitoring, is expected to improve herd 
and crop resilience to climate-induced risks; and 

 
(c) Strengthening the policy planning and regulatory framework. This activity would aim 

at strengthening MoA&L’s efficiency and effectiveness by supporting policy 
formulation and developing the attendant legislation/regulations for improving the 
agriculture, livestock, and fisheries regulatory environment, and reducing distortions.  
This would include supporting the preparation of sector master plans, public 
investment plans, public expenditure reviews, support the establishment of 
agricultural and livestock infrastructures (establishment of service platforms at the 
level of the eight regions, according to approaches adapted to the target sectors, 
which would also include CSA options), and definition of food standards (quality and 
safety).  In order to support women’s empowerment and enhance agricultural 
productivity, the project would support policy development to expand women’s land 
rights and formally document their land claims to improve land access and tenure 
security for women.4 

                                            
3 This could involve the development of registers for plant and livestock varieties to help standardize food 
production and processing methods.  A livestock identification and registration system would help with disease 
mitigation and management from getting a handle on animal movements within the country.  It might be useful also 
to develop a phyto register to catalogue locally-developed seeds but also help with controls of invasive species (bugs 
and weeds). 
4  These proposed actions are fully in line with World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No.7199 by Prospere 
Backiny-Yetna and Kevin McGee, entitled: “Gender Differentials and Agricultural Productivity in Niger.” The paper 



 
The World Bank  
NIGER - AGRICULTURAL AND LIVESTOCK TRANSFORMATION PROJECT (P164509) 

 
 

  
Mar 04, 2018 Page 12 of 18  

     

 
Component 2: Support to public and private investments for improved production, processing, and 
market access for selected agriculture and livestock value chains—US$ 60 million  

 
30. The Component would promote public and private investment at all levels of the selected value 
chains of milk, red meat, fish, poultry, onions, and niébé (production, processing, storage, transport, and 
marketing) for the development of production, market access, and competitiveness. The objective would 
be to increase productivity (while adapting to climate change and allowing for reduction in GHG 
emissions) and to strengthen the competitiveness of the targeted sectors (including through processed 
product diversification) and facilitate market access for producers and breeders, and agro-industry. 
These activities would be aimed at supporting the intensification and modernization of cropping and 
sedentary livestock systems, as well as processing units in the selected value chains, with a view to 
reaching operators' critical sizes to increase profitability and generate jobs.  

31. The intervention principles would be the following: (i) supporting the enhancement of capacities 
of farmer, cooperative, and inter-professional organizations in the targeted sectors in order to allow the 
emergence of an improved, more competitive economic fabric; (ii) identifying pre-investment activities 
(commercial viability studies, capacity building of service providers) to prepare viable business plans for 
economic operators and improve access for project promoters to financing by partner financial 
institutions (PFI); (iii) improving market access by removing distortions and supporting aggregation and 
packaging/processing points for agricultural and livestock products; and (iv) financing public and private 
investments in all segments of the sectors targeted by the project (production, processing, upstream, 
and downstream) within the framework of Productive Partnerships, i.e. economic partnerships between 
producers and other operators of the value chains. 

 
32. Activities envisaged to strengthen value chains (VCs) could be as follows: strengthen the 
economic organization of operators (support for professional structures); facilitate the linking of supply 
and demand (structuring of supply, identification of markets, linking, and contracting prospects); conduct 
pre-investment and training activities for economic operators and private service providers, in order to 
identify viable business plans, and improve operators' access to PFI financing (development of financial 
products for livestock farming, training of PFIs in the agriculture and livestock sector, negotiation of 
agreements with PFIs to partially finance project promoters); and finance investment subprojects within 
the framework of Productive Partnerships in all segments of the targeted sectors (upstream, production, 
downstream) in the form of cost-shared grants that could finance inputs, services, training, equipment, 
and infrastructure. 

 
33. Possible windows for investment funding. Funding and co-financing of investments in the 
targeted VCs would likely be conducted through separate windows, such as: (i) Productive Partnership 
(PP) window: for larger investment sub-projects, requiring individual contributions in cash and PFI 
funding; these sub-projects could involve, inter alia, scaling up of small-scale irrigation with the use of 
solar energy instead of diesel pumps; (ii) medium-scale microproject (MP) window: for medium 
investments with combination of cash, PFI funding, and in-kind contributions; and (iii) small-scale 
microproject (MP) window: for small investments with in-kind contributions and no external funding 

                                            
explicitly recommended enhancing women’s tenure rights in order to improve agricultural productivity. It further 
recommended facilitating women’s access to and use of hired farm labor and facilitating its supervision, incl. by 
facilitating community-based child care. 



 
The World Bank  
NIGER - AGRICULTURAL AND LIVESTOCK TRANSFORMATION PROJECT (P164509) 

 
 

  
Mar 04, 2018 Page 13 of 18  

     

requirements. Under these three windows, women and youth would receive preferential treatment.  The 
most appropriate financing modalities, including lower and upper thresholds for different windows, 
would be determined during project preparation. 

 
34. Women and Youth. Possible types of investments, favoring women and youth where feasible, 
may include: (i) promotion of small-scale irrigation facilities and equipment in order to properly manage 
water for agriculture purposes. This would be done according to the National Small-Scale Irrigation 
Strategy developed (SPIN) in Niger. The activities to be carried may also include structures to 
manage/store excess water during rainy season; (ii) land tenure rights recognition/documentation in 
order to preserve existing assets and use rights and to avoid conflicts; (iii) land reclamation, upgrading of 
soil fertility and improving existing carbon pools (such as through rangeland management, agro-forestry, 
reduced tillage techniques, etc.); (iv) development of storage facilities (including cold chain and adapted 
to climate risks); and (v) marketing structures. 

 
Component 3: Crisis prevention & management, and project coordination--US$ 15 million  

 
35. The objective of this component is to develop mechanisms for preventing and responding to 
severe crises and emergencies in the agriculture and livestock sectors, including future extreme weather 
events and other climate risks, as well as to strengthen project coordination capacities within MoA&L. 
Accordingly, its proposed activities relate to: (i) crisis prevention and management, and (ii) institutional 
support and project management: 

(a) Crisis prevention and management: (i) support MoA&L’s capacity to deal with crises by 
providing equipment (computer hardware and software, office furniture, vehicles, etc.), 
training and resources for specialized studies and communication campaigns, and vaccines; 
(ii) develop and operationalize crisis prevention and management tools, including the 
organization of forums for crisis management at local and national levels (as well as 
participation in international crisis management forums in West Africa and the Sahel); and 
(iii) funding of an Contingency Emergency Response Component (CERC). In doing so, the 
project would help establish a Crisis Management Unit at MoA&L with the capacity to 
intervene quickly when needed through the provision of emergency funds for severe crises 
and institutional support.  
 

(b) Project coordination. This activity would support all PCU activities required to manage IDA 
funds, procure IDA-funded goods and services, conduct project M&E including Iterative 
Beneficiary Monitoring (IBM),5 and comply with safeguard mitigation measures.  It would 
provide training and equipment to modernize MoA&L operations (computer hardware and 
software, office furniture, vehicles, and so on) at the central level and in the field as needed 
for project activities. It would also support general awareness and sensitization campaigns 
about project activities.  

    

                                            
5 This activity would monitor beneficiaries of the project starting at the beginning of the implementation with the 
objective to improve project efficiency and increase beneficiary satisfaction and beneficiary engagement. IBM collects 
information on project implementation, even in insecure settings. It is light, low-cost, and rapidly complements 
project supervision. The approach is problem-oriented and provides feedback to project teams through different 
iterations with the aim of catalyzing improvements in project implementation. IBM collects data directly from 
beneficiaries but keeps data collection efforts to a minimum by relying on few research questions and small samples. 



 
The World Bank  
NIGER - AGRICULTURAL AND LIVESTOCK TRANSFORMATION PROJECT (P164509) 

 
 

  
Mar 04, 2018 Page 14 of 18  

     

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
The Project will be nationwide. However, during preparation it will be determined whether the focus will be on selected 

Communes in the eight regions, depending on the selection of value chains and the complementarity with other ongoing 
projects. 
 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
The Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock (Recipient) has considerable experience in implementing IDA-funded 

Agricultural sector development projects. This collaboration with the Bank has obviously provided the Ministry with some 
technical capacity with regards to the application of World Bank environmental and social safeguards policies; the 
development of appropriate safeguards mitigation instruments and their implementation and monitoring.  Staff of the 
Ministry have shown a great deal of understanding and implementing social and environmental safeguards measures on 
the ground. More recently, the Recipient successfully carried out the CAP3 microprojects in accordance with the WB 
environmental and social safeguard policies and the national environmental and social compliance requirements. This 
good standing trend will be continued and further mainstreamed as the Recipient will continue to receive guidance from 
the Bank’s Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists in the project team through supervision missions and virtual 
support to the Social and Environmental Focal Point. 
 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 
Cheikh A. T. Sagna, Social Safeguards Specialist 
Bougadare Kone, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 

 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The proposed project is categorized as B under this OP 
policy because its potential social and environmental 
risks are expected to be moderate and mostly site-
specific, with no significant or long-term negative risks 
and impacts. The potential environmental and social 
risks and impacts are mostly related to the use of 
fertilizers, pesticides and the increased GHG emissions 
due to the land-use change during agriculture cycles.   
Since the project physical footprint is presently 
unknown prior to appraisal, and in compliance with 
OP/BP 4.01 core requirements, the Borrower will 
prepare an Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF), consult upon and disclose it prior 
to appraisal.  The ESMF will be mostly building upon 
the existing PAC3 ESMF to guide the way that 
potential negative environmental and social risks and 



 
The World Bank  
NIGER - AGRICULTURAL AND LIVESTOCK TRANSFORMATION PROJECT (P164509) 

 
 

  
Mar 04, 2018 Page 15 of 18  

     

impacts of future sub-projects (following the positive 
list) will be identified and mitigated during project 
implementation. The ESMF will include social and 
environmental clauses to be observed by the farmers 
and herders, especially during project implementation, 
by which time most project activities footprints will be 
known.  If, during project preparation, any specific site 
is known before appraisal, Environmental and Social 
Impact Assessments (ESIA)/Environmental and Social 
Management Plans (ESMP) will be also be prepared 
and publicly disclosed, both in-country and at the WB 
prior to appraisal. 

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No  

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 No 
The policy is not triggered as the project will not 
support activities in areas where critical habitats may 
be threatened. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No 

The policy is not triggered because the project will not 
support activities related to forest exploitation or 
management or that might have potential adverse 
impacts on forested areas. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The project is not expected to finance acquisition, 
transport, distribution, disposal, storage or use of 
pesticides or similar chemicals that could threaten 
environmental and human health.  Nevertheless, OP 
4.09 is triggered because of the following related to 
the project: (i) livestock productivity enhancement via 
animal health, animal disease surveillance, animal 
health/vaccinations, and fight against pests, 
prevention and management; and (ii) farmers, for the 
agricultural productivity purpose, may use fertilizers 
and pesticides.  An Integrated Pest Management Plan 
(IPMP) will be prepared, consulted upon and publicly 
disclosed prior to appraisal. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 

This policy is triggered because of the nature of 
possible civil works to be financed under component B 
which might lead to the unearthing of such PCR.  
Nevertheless, it is highly unlikely that any physical 
cultural resources will be impacted; nonetheless, the 
existing “Chance finds procedures” will be embedded 
in the ESMF to ensure that these aspects will be taken 
into account during project preparation and 
implementation. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 
The policy is not triggered as there are no Indigenous 
Peoples in the project areas. 



 
The World Bank  
NIGER - AGRICULTURAL AND LIVESTOCK TRANSFORMATION PROJECT (P164509) 

 
 

  
Mar 04, 2018 Page 16 of 18  

     

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

The Policy is triggered as the proposed project 
activities will require acquisition of land that could 
lead to some losses of assets, losses or restriction of 
access to some sources of livelihoods, resulting in 
either a temporary or permanent involuntary 
resettlement of project affected persons (PAP). 
However, since the physical footprint of project 
activities areas are mostly unknown at this juncture 
and will very likely be unknown prior to appraisal, the 
Borrower will prepare, consult upon, and publicly 
disclose prior to appraisal a Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF). During project implementation, the 
screening process will further determine whether land 
will be acquired and whether a subproject-specific 
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will be required. If so, 
such a RAP would be duly consulted upon and publicly 
disclosed both in-country and on the World Bank 
website at the InfoShop prior to the physical start of 
project civil works. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 TBD 

The project may finance some water retention 
structures for excess water during the rainy season. 
This matter will be reviewed during the project 
preparation stage and pre-appraisal to assess whether 
or not OP/BP 4.37 should be triggered. The Policy of 
for now is to TBD until then. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
The project will not finance activities that will interfere 
with international watercourses; either in terms of 
water withdrawal or discharge of pollutants. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No The project intervention areas are not under dispute. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
May 31, 2018 
 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
The safeguard-related studies will be launched in early March 2018 and will be completed by May 14, 2018. 
 
 



 
The World Bank  
NIGER - AGRICULTURAL AND LIVESTOCK TRANSFORMATION PROJECT (P164509) 

 
 

  
Mar 04, 2018 Page 17 of 18  

     

CONTACT POINT 

 

World Bank 

Soulemane Fofana, Amadou Ba 

Senior Rural Development Specialist 
 

 

Borrower/Client/Recipient 
 

Ministry of Plan 

Iro Souley 

Director General 

Souleyiro@yahoo.fr 
 

 

Implementing Agencies 
 

Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock 

Boukary Diamoitou 

Secretary General 

Bdiamoitou@yahoo.fr 
 
 

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT 

The World Bank 

1818 H Street, NW 

Washington, D.C. 20433 

Telephone: (202) 473-1000 

Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects  

 

 

APPROVAL 

Task Team Leader(s): Soulemane Fofana, Amadou Ba 
 

  Approved By 
APPROVALTBL 

Safeguards Advisor: Maman-Sani Issa 28-Mar-2018 

Practice Manager/Manager: Marianne Grosclaude 17-Apr-2018 

Country Director: Siaka Bakayoko 07-May-2018 
    
 
 

http://www.worldbank.org/projects


 
The World Bank  
NIGER - AGRICULTURAL AND LIVESTOCK TRANSFORMATION PROJECT (P164509) 

 
 

  
Mar 04, 2018 Page 18 of 18  

     

 
 
 



