













































World Bank Document


PROGRAM INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 

APPRAISAL STAGE 

September 25, 2017 

Report No.:  AB7900 

 

Operation Name 

 

Region AFRICA 

Country Niger 

Sector Agriculture (30%); Extractives Industry (25%); Banking 

Institutions (5%); Energy (15%); Telecom (15%); and 

Governance (10%) 

Operation ID P163318 

Lending Instrument Development Policy Lending 

Borrower(s) THE REPUBLIC OF NIGER 

Implementing Agency MINISTRY OF PLANNING 

Date PID Prepared September 25, 2017 

Estimated Date of Appraisal October 17, 2017 

Estimated Date of Board Approval December 5, 2017 

Corporate Review Decision Proceed to Appraisal/Negotiations 

 

 Country and Sector Background 
 

1. Niger’s economy is undiversified, heavily relying on agriculture and the extractive 
industries. Agriculture is main driver of growth and accounts for 40 percent of GDP. The vast 

majority of Niger’s population and the poor live in rural areas and earn their living from 

agriculture. However, agricultural productivity is low due to very low uptake of modern inputs 

and poor extension services.  Niger has significant mineral wealth, including uranium and gold, 

and has started exporting refined oil products. These three products account for approximately 70 

percent of total export values. The extractive industry accounts for 10-15 percent of government 

revenue.  

2. Growth is volatile owing to frequent external shocks of different nature. Shocks 
impacting on the economy include security challenges, the Nigerian crisis, unfavorable weather 

conditions and commodity prices. Security challenges disrupted economic activities with 

growing social and humanitarian pressures linked to the flow of hundreds of thousand refugees 

and internally-displaced people. The economic downturn in Nigeria impacted export 

performance. Unfavorable weather conditions impacted agriculture, and depressed commodity 

prices adversely affected growth and revenue in the extractive industries.       

3. Although declining, poverty remains high, and is more pronounced in rural areas. Poverty 
incidence declined from 53.7 percent in 2005 to 44.5 percent in 2014. Despite the decline in 

overall poverty incidence, the rural poor became poorer relative to their urban counterparts 

during the same period. Their per capita consumption relative to that of the urban poor declined 

from 60 percent to 43 percent. Lack of economic diversification, volatile agricultural growth, 

P
u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d



low access to physical and institutional infrastructure, and a weak human capital base limit 

economic opportunities, especially in rural area. 

 

 Key development issues and rationale for Bank involvement  
 

4. A key objective of the Government of Niger is to focus on supporting rural growth, given 
the concentration of the poor in rural areas. Agriculture would be the leading sector supported by 

the government’s 3N initiative with a special focus on agro-industry, public investment in 

infrastructure and the social sectors. Niger is predominantly a rural economy and the majority of 

the population earn their living from agriculture. Agriculture is the main contributor to GDP but 

agricultural productivity is low compared to the secondary and tertiary sectors, to other countries 

in the region.1 The sector is handicapped by inadequate extension services,2 limited use of 

equipment and modern inputs, limited control of water, a weak organization of producers, and 

declines in soil fertility. Extremely low access to rural finance is identified as one of the key 

impediments to modern inputs, marketing channels and logistics—including inadequate storage 

facilities and ability to process agricultural products which also account for low productivity in 

agriculture. Strengthening of the links between the extractive industry and the local economy is 

also considered a key factor to rural growth. The greatest potential for the extractive industry 

social and economic contribution is in job creation either through local subcontracting and/or 

through the development of the informal mining sector, such as gold panning and small-scale 

mining. A framework needs to be established to formalize the local content in the sector and the 

artisanal mining sector needs to be formalized and better organized. Community development 

aimed at providing social infrastructure (roads, schools, hospitals, and mining cities) also 

enhances the benefits for the rural population. They provide an alternative to rural employment.  

5. Counterfactual analyses show that significant gains could be made if inefficiencies in 
infrastructure were fixed. Niger could grow by as much as 4.5 percentage points per capita if it 

expands and improves its infrastructure. Power would contribute around 1.51 percentage points 

to per capita growth if generation capacity and national access rates—which as of today are 

among the lowest in the region—were increased. ICT would also make an important contribution 

to economic prospects (1.31 percentage points), provided the mobile phone and Internet markets 

continue expanding.3 Creating a favorable environment for the private sector to invest in these 

sectors, improving access of the rural population to electricity and mobile/internet, and making 

sure that the NIGELEC, the state-owned company in electricity, remains financially viable are 

the main objectives of the Government.    

6. Niger’s domestic revenue is low, and is among the lowest in the WAEMU. One of the 
key challenges facing Niger is the need for increasing its tax revenue. First it will help continue 

financing Niger’s development challenges and avoid painful fiscal consolidation through cuts in 

expenditures as has been the case in the past years. Second, the current vicious circle of 

increasing public debt and interest payments represents a risk that would only be mitigated in the 

medium term under the assumption of a tightening fiscal stance. Government data show that tax 

                                                 
1
 Using WDI data, the GDP/worker ratio in Niger is half that of Sub-Saharan Africa. 

2
 République du Niger, and FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization). 2009. Analyse diagnostique du système 

d’appui conseil. Mise en place d’un dispositif intégré d’appui conseil pour le développement rural au Niger. 
3
 Source: Niger SCD – 2017. 



expenditures and exemptions from the investment code -only - increased from 0.5 percent to 0.9 

percent of GDP between 2014 and 2015. A World Bank study showed that for customs revenues 

only, over the five years from 2011 to 2016, exemptions represented 47 percent of customs 

revenue, on average, peaking at 54 percent in 2015.4  

7. Niger’s macroeconomic framework remains adequate for the proposed operation. Growth 
is expected to be moderate averaging 4.5-5 percent in 2017-19 driven by agriculture and mining. 

To contain the substantial fiscal deficit of 7.5 percent in 2017, explained partly by security-

related spending, the government has initiated a process of fiscal consolidation which aims to 

bring Niger in line with the WAEMU fiscal target by 2020. The tax revenue measures included 

in this programmatic series support this consolidation effort.  This risk of debt distress is 

moderate. The macro policy framework is underpinned by the continued implementation of the 

International Monetary Fund (IMF) Extended Credit Facility (ECF) program and the 

macroeconomic anchor offered by Niger’s membership in the West African Economic and 

Monetary Union (WAEMU). Downside risks predominate and are mainly related to the 

vulnerability and exposure of the economy to weather, security, Nigeria’s economy and 

commodity prices. 

 

 Proposed Objective 
 

8. The proposed operation is the first of a series of two development policy operations to be 
disbursed over 2017-2018 under IDA 18. The operation will provide financial support to Niger 

as the authorities implement the (Plan de Développement Economique et Social) PDES II .   

9. The proposed series is fully aligned with the government’s development strategy and 
priorities as articulated in the PDES II.  It is designed to advance a number of key PDES II 

objectives. Pillar 1 supports the PDES II ’s objective of “Food security and sustainable 

agricultural development” by focusing on agricultural productivity and the dissemination of 

context-relevant farming practices. The focus on the extractive industry in Pillar 1 supports the 

PDES II’s objective of “A competitive and diversified economy” by strengthening the linkages 

between the extractive industries with the rural economy. The focus on rural finance under Pillar 

1 and infrastructure under Pillar 2 supports the PDES II’s objective of “A competitive and 

diversified economy”. Pillar 3, supports the PDES II’s objective of “Governance, Peace and 

Security”.    

 

 Preliminary Description 
 

10. The program development objective (PDO) is to foster rural growth. This will be 
achieved through a series of cross-cutting reform measures grouped in two pillars. The first pillar 

is “Increasing rural productivity growth”. It aims to (i) enhance the use of modern inputs and 

improve access to extension services systems; (ii) strengthen the linkages between the extractive 

industries and the local economy, and; (iii) deepen rural finance penetration. The second pillar is 

“Supporting growth-enabling sectors”. It aims to (i) develop a framework favorable to ICT 

                                                 
4
 Draft: Informal trade and customs revenue losses in Niger, (2017). 



investment, mainly in rural areas; (ii) improve the financial and the technical performance of 

NIGELEC5, and; (iii) broaden the tax base by rationalizing tax expenditure and exemption 

regimes  

 

 Poverty and Social Impacts and Environment Aspects 
 

11. Many of the actions supported by the proposed operation are expected to have positive 
poverty reduction and welfare enhancement impacts. Improvements in the agricultural input 

supply chain (seeds and fertilizers) and on the extension service delivery will contribute to higher 

agricultural yields and therefore to improved food security while reducing economic 

vulnerability of rural households. Artisanal and small-scale mining (ASM) is an important source 

for jobs for the rural population, and a way for many to complement agricultural incomes. In 

particular, the development of community projects financed by the extractive industry will 

impact positively the rural population. In addition, enforcement of existing regulation in the 

extractive industry will allow the development of a strategy to address the social, health and 

safety issues that are currently encountered in the artisanal mining areas: the child labor, the 

dangerous and unhealthy working conditions resulting in frequent accidents (collapsing tunnels 

and pits), the absence of adequate personal protective equipment. Greater access to rural finance 

will help producers access more economic opportunities.  

12. The development of the electricity and ICT sectors will create small business 
opportunities while complementing other initiatives to improve rural welfare. Potential negative 

impact on the poor of the tariff adjustment is mitigated. The majority of the poor does not have 

access and use electricity. In addition, there is already a tariff system that protects to the poor. 

Nonetheless, a PSIA will be conducted during calendar year 2018 by the NECALEP to assess the 

impact of the electricity measures and inform the government policy in the sector. Access to 

internet and mobile through the USF will allow for the expansion of e-voucher supporting social 

protection and subsidy programs targeting the poor.    

13. Some actions supported by the proposed series are expected to have a positive impact on 
gender equality. The development of an action plan to better integrate Extractive Industries into 

the national economy envisages among other objectives the advancement of women in the sector. 

The formalization of the ASM will protect women and children for whom harsh working and 

living conditions are the norm The impact on gender of the prior actions on agriculture, rural 

finance, electricity and ICT will not be directly linked to the prior actions. However, their impact 

could benefit female-headed more proportionately given their more pronounced vulnerability if 

directed to hem. Increased access to electricity and broadband network is expected to benefit 

female-headed households who are more in need of new economic opportunities more 

proportionately. Similarly, the education and health reforms will allow the Government and 

public agencies to expand social services, which are critically important to women and female-

headed households.  

 

  

                                                 
5
 Societe Nigerienne d’Electricite (Niger electricity company). 



Environment Aspects  

 

14. The proposed operation is likely to have positive effect on the Niger’s environment, 
forests, or other natural resources. Unregulated or poorly regulated artisanal mining activities in 

the extractive industries have resulted in significant environmental destruction. Such adverse 

impacts have been considered by the Government which has prepared a Strategic Environmental 

and Social Assessment (SESA) to identify and address negative (enhance positive) 

environmental and social impacts along the entire mining value chain. The SESA provides 

strategic guidance for enhancing environmental sustainability and social equity of the sector as a 

whole and specific recommendations to be incorporated into national policies and programs. The 

formalization of artisanal mining is likely to reduce such adverse impacts on the environment. 

Similarly, a stronger regulation and control of the quality of agricultural inputs will reduce 

potential environmental risks borne by unregulated seeds or fertilizers. The prior actions 

supporting the development of ICT, rural finance and the social sectors are not likely to have 

significant impacts on environment and forests 

 

Tentative financing 

 

Source: ($m.) 

BORROWER/RECIPIENT 0.00 

International Development Association (IDA) 120 

Borrower/Recipient  

IBRD 

Others (specify) 

 

 Total 120 

 

 Contact point 
World Bank  
Contact: Luc Razafimandimby 

Title: Senior Economist 

Tel: (202) 458-9539 

 

Email: lrazafimandimby@worldbank.org 

 

Borrower 

Contact: Mr. Issa Issoufou  

Title:  Director General, Ministry of Planning   

Tel:    

Email: iissoufou.issa@gmail.com   

 

 For more information contact: 
The InfoShop 

The World Bank 

1818 H Street, NW 

Washington, D.C. 20433 

Telephone:  (202) 458-4500 

mailto:lrazafimandimby@worldbank.org


Fax:  (202) 522-1500 

Web: http://www.worldbank.org/infoshop 

 



