























































World Bank Document


PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
APPRAISAL STAGE

Report No.:  PIDA22127

Project Name MA-Large Scale Irrigation Modernization Project (P150930)
Region MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
Country Morocco
Sector(s) Agricultural extension and research (3%), Irrigation and drainage 

(80%), Public administration- Agriculture, fishing and forestry (1 
7%)

Theme(s) Rural services and infrastructure (67%), Water resource 
management (33%)

Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P150930
Borrower(s) Kingdom of Morocco
Implementing Agency DIAEA
Environmental Category B-Partial Assessment
Date PID Prepared/Updated 25-Mar-2015
Date PID Approved/Disclosed 26-Mar-2015
Estimated Date of Appraisal 
Completion

03-Apr-2015

Estimated Date of Board 
Approval

27-May-2015

Appraisal Review Decision 
(from Decision Note)

Appraisal was carried out from March 17 to 25.

I. Project Context
Country Context
Morocco has been on a steady path of growth in the past decades, which has proved relatively 
resilient in the face of the recent global economic slowdown. Growth averaged 4.8 percent over 
2001-12 compared to 2.8 percent in the 1990s, the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) per capita 
doubled from 2001 to 2012 reaching US$2,951, unemployment declined from 13.6 percent in 2000 
to 9 percent in 2012, and absolute poverty decreased from 15.3 percent in 2001 to 8.8 percent in 
2008. 
 
The Arab Spring that has swept the Middle East and North Africa (MENA) region in early 2011 
spurred a peaceful political transformation in Morocco. Morocco had engaged on a wide-ranging 
reform program, with the adoption of a new constitution through a popular referendum on July 1, 
2011. The new constitution lays the foundation for extended regionalization as a democratic and 
decentralized system of governance. It also contributes to improving the status of women through 
the adoption of the principle of gender equality and through provisions on increasing the 

participation of women in decision-making bodies. In November 2011, parliamentary elections 
followed the promulgation of the constitution, leading to the formation of a four-party coalition 
government that has embraced the constitution's principles and called for more social solidarity and 
inclusion.  
 
Inequality, poverty, and vulnerability remain important challenges in Morocco. A quarter of the 
population is still economically vulnerable (near-poverty). There are persistent disparities as 70 
percent of poverty is still rural, and most development indicators in rural areas lag behind urban 
areas, largely as a result of difficult geography, deteriorating infrastructure, poor access to basic 
services, and limited capital investments to improve labor value added and hence returns to self-
employment and contract labor. Ten percent of Morocco’s 13.4 million rural residents lived below 
the poverty line in 2011. Rural poverty exacerbates gender disparity with relatively higher illiteracy 
and primary school dropout rates for rural women, and higher infant and maternal mortality. 
 
Morocco has engaged in a dynamic process towards strengthening economic opportunities and 
social inclusion. Several high profile development programs (e.g. the second phase of the National 
Human Development Initiative, INDH) and new sectoral strategies in the areas of education, 
employment, and youth have been initiated. Nonetheless, additional efforts are needed to support 
the country-led reforms. The movements associated with the political transition and constitutional 
changes generate pressure on the Moroccan State for credible and faster reforms, notably in the 
areas of job creation and improvement of the quality of public services delivered.

  

Sectoral and institutional Context
Agriculture is central to Morocco’s economy, as evidenced by the strong correlation among GDP 
and agriculture GDP. Over the last agricultural campaign, thanks to favorable weather, the sector 
represented 15.6 percent of GDP, contributing the most to the country’s overall growth. The 20 
percent increase in agricultural production allowed Morocco’s GDP to jump from 2.7 percent in 
2012 to 4.4 percent in 2013. The agricultural sector represents a critical element in the country’s 
demographic and socio-economic situation, generating 40 percent of the jobs nationwide, mostly in 
rural areas where the majority of the poor live. The sector is largely composed of small farmers 
mostly dedicated to low-value agriculture, but also counts a limited group of dynamic and well 
performing large farmers with state-of-the-art technologies and well integrated into the national and 
international markets. The sector exhibits great gender disparities. Women’s work is typically 
unpaid (in 2003-04, 58 percent of cases; in 2008, 91 percent), or it is seasonal and unstable when 
remunerated (59 percent of cases in 2003-04; 84 percent in 2008). 
 
Irrigation increases both the level and stability of incomes in rural areas. Despite representing only 
16 percent of the cultivated land, irrigated agriculture contributes to about half of the agriculture 
GDP, 75 percent of agricultural exports, and 15 percent of overall merchandise exports. The 
country has 1.46 million ha of permanently irrigated land, 682,600 ha of which are part of nine 
Large Scale Irrigation (LSI) perimeters operated by nine public agricultural development agencies 
(ORMVA). ORMVAs are autonomous agencies under the supervision of the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Maritime Fisheries (MAPM), with the responsibility of constructing new irrigation 
schemes, rehabilitating and modernizing existing ones, ensuring Operation and Maintenance 
(O&M) of irrigation and drainage facilities, and providing extension services to farmers. The 
remaining area is shared between small and medium scale traditional irrigation schemes managed 
by Water Users Associations (WUA, 334,000 ha) and private irrigation (441,000 ha). Morocco is 



among the first countries with experience in irrigation Public-Private Partnership (PPP). In 2004, it 
launched the first successful irrigation PPP in the world, in the citrus production perimeter of 
Guerdane. Other PPP are at various stages of preparation (Azemmour Bir Jdid, Dar Khrofa, 
Chtouka). 
 
The ability of irrigated agriculture to continue to drive shared prosperity in Morocco is threatened 
by increasing water scarcity. Reduced rainfall, increased rainfall variability, reduced run off, 
groundwater depletion, and degradation of water resources have reached alarming levels. Annual 
renewable water resources total 22 billion m3, corresponding to 730 m3/inhabitant, which is below 
the United Nations’ threshold for indicating water stress (1,000 m3/inhabitant). The water deficit is 
estimated at around 2 billion m3. Climate change is expected to worsen this situation. Impacts of 
climate change are already visible in Morocco: the proportion of dry years increased by four times 
and surface water availability decreased by 35 percent between the period 1947-1976 and 
1977-2006. Water scarcity impacts irrigated agriculture in different ways: 
• In private irrigation, which largely relies on groundwater, reduced and more variable 
rainfall translates into groundwater overexploitation. The majority of the wells are neither 
registered nor monitored, and improvement in water pumping technologies and butane subsidy 
facilitate overextraction. Decreasing groundwater levels have a specific equity dimension, 
impacting at first smallholders with less capacity for drilling and pumping deeper.  
• In LSI perimeters, which rely on surface water, water scarcity translates into reduced 
volumes allocated to farmers and limits summer crops production. While agriculture remains the 
primary user of surface water, accounting for about 85 percent of the withdrawals, severe 
restrictions in irrigation have been common in the last 15 years. LSI perimeters in the Oum er Rbia 
river basin received, on average, only 60 percent of the water volumes they were designed for. 
These volumes were consistently lower than the water allocation stated in the Regional Masterplans 
for Integrated Water Resources Management (PDAIRE). Wherever possible, farmers in LSI 
perimeters have been making up for this shortfall by complementing water allocated by the 
ORMVAs with groundwater, bearing the extra pumping costs and further aggravating groundwater 
depletion.  
Farmers in LSI perimeters face structural constraints that limit the productive use of the scarce 
water resource. These include among others: collective water management, rigid water distribution 
rules, frequent shut-downs, unequal access to water, and land tenure issues. All of these constraints 
lock farmers in LSI perimeters into a low-risk and low return equilibrium in which they carry out 
low input, extensive farming focused on low value crops, and avoid more capital intensive 
strategies which allow for high value products and higher returns but bear higher risks in case of 
water deficiencies. 
 
LSI perimeters suffer from aging irrigation networks and poor Operation and Maintenance (O&M). 
The ORMVAs have limited budget to improve this situation. Recovery rates in Morocco are 
amongst the best in MENA, varying between 68 and 100 percent, with an average of 76 percent 
(2010). In some LSI perimeters, water tariffs are insufficient to cover the operation and 
maintenance (O&M) costs, and even more so the amortization costs, translating into the need for 
subsidies from the Government. Tariffs in LSI perimeters vary between 0.27 and 0.77DH/m3 
depending on the perimeters and the associated energy bill, compared to 1.30 to 1.80DH/m3 in 
perimeters managed through PPP. While there was an increase in O&M budget since 2009 (average 
2001-08: Tadla DH14.6 M, Doukkala: DH18.6 M; average 2009-13: Tadla DH31.1 M, Doukkala 
DH36.8 M), the allocation remains insufficient to meet the needs. Cost recovery rates in Morocco 
are amongst the highest in MENA, varying between, 68 and 100 percent, with an average of 76 

 percent. While the recovery of water bills should be improved in the LSI perimeters were 
the most important arrears are generated, this increase would not be sufficient to meet the financial 
needs of the ORMVAs. Consequently, a plan to increase water tariffs in LSI perimeters was laid out 
in 2011, but it sparked protests by farmers, which led the Government of Morocco (GoM) to 
postpone the measure. A political economy analysis of the irrigation sector reform, revealed that 
there is typically no capacity to pay problem, and that the main reason for farmers’ opposition was 
the lack of direct improvements in service quality associated with tariff increase. 
 
The GoM is putting in place incentives, investments, and institutional reforms to ensure greater 
returns at the farm and overall economy levels in light of increasingly restricted water resource. 
This is done through two synergic strategies: 
• The Morocco Green Plan (PMV) aims to double the agriculture sector’s value-added and 
create 1.5 million jobs by 2020, thus transforming the sector into a stable source of growth, 
competitiveness, and broad-based economic development. In addition to its transversal institutional 
and policy reforms, the PMV comprises two Pillars reflecting the dualistic nature of Moroccan 
agriculture: Pillar I targets commercial farmers and their integration into the national and 
international markets, while Pillar II targets small farmers mainly in marginal areas. Under both 
pillars, technology and organizational support is provided to implement an agri-food chain 
approach linking farmers to market. The Agricultural Development Fund (FDA), the GoM’s 
principal agricultural subsidy instrument, has been reformed and support measures aligned with the 
strategic directions of the PMV. Since PMV’s launch in 2008, production has increased by 45 
percent, agricultural exports have risen by 18 percent, and 77,000 permanent jobs have been 
created. 
• The National Plan for Saving Water in Irrigation (PNEEI) promotes more productive water 
use by introducing efficient irrigation technologies (mainly drip irrigation) on 555,000 ha of the 
country’s irrigated land by 2020, of which 335,000 ha in private farms and 220,000 ha in LSI 
perimeters. This process is supported though the FDA, with up to 100 percent subsidy for the 
adoption of drip and microsprinkler irrigation, and up to 70 percent subsidy for sprinkler irrigation. 
Since PNEEI’s launch in 2008, the adoption of drip irrigation has been proceeding at a fast pace in 
privately developed irrigation areas, with over 200,000 ha completed (60 percent of the 2020 
target). In LSI perimeters, conversion is ongoing on 57,000 ha only, due to the need for prior 
investments in the irrigation networks. The figure is expected to increase steadily in the coming 
future, considering that pre-feasibility studies in LSI perimeters have been completed for 100,000 
ha. While impacts remain to be observed, field experiments in Tadla demonstrated that agricultural 
water productivity (defined as value of produce per unit of water used) could be doubled by 
switching from the traditional surface irrigation to improved water management under drip 
irrigation. 
 
The Large Scale Irrigation Modernization project is fully aligned with the comprehensive reform 
process of Morocco. The project supports the ORMVAs of Tadla, Haouz, Doukkala and Gharb in 
providing farmers located in the LSI perimeters with an improved water service. This means 
individual access (rather than collective), on-demand (rather than on rotation), reliable (with faster 
re-establishment of the service in case of shut-downs), and equitable (in terms of flow and pressure 
across the irrigation network). Targeted farmers will be freed up of some structural constraints and 
have the opportunity to improve their farming choices, adopting improved irrigation technologies 
(mainly drip irrigation), which are more efficient in the use of the scarce water resource and better 
suited for high-value crops.


II. Proposed Development Objectives
The project development objectives are: (i) for targeted ORMVAs, to provide an improved water 
service to farmers, and (ii) for targeted farmers, to have better access to improved irrigation 
technologies.

III. Project Description
Component Name
Component 1: Improving the irrigation network infrastructure
Comments (optional)
Component 1 will construct pressurized irrigation networks to replace existing gravity networks and 
renovate existing pressurized irrigation networks. Under adequate management, the networks’ 
design will allow providing farmers with an improved water service, in line with the technical 
requirements of improved irrigation technologies. Activities include: (i) studies; (ii) technical 
assistance to monitor construction works; (iii) upgrading irrigation canals and constructing 
reservoirs; (iv) constructing feeder pipes and rehabilitating pumping stations; (v) constructing 
filtration stations; (vi) constructing distribution piped networks, or rehabilitating and extending 
existing distribution piped networks; and (vii) installing outlets and associated devices.

Component Name
Component 2: Supporting farmers’ access to improved irrigation technologies
Comments (optional)
Component 2 will strengthen farmers’ knowledge of and access to improved irrigation technologies, 
to allow them taking advantage of the improved water service provided by the ORMVAs. Farmers 
will become familiar with the advantages of the improved irrigation technologies, and will have 
easier access to financing opportunities to adopt them. Once the improved irrigation technologies is 
in place, farmers will receive irrigation advisory services, and their capacity to access, use, and 
maintain the irrigation systems will be strengthened. i Farmers will also develop better knowledge 
of their groundwater, where appropriate.

Component Name
Component 3: Supporting implementing agencies’ management of the irrigation network, and 
implementation of the project
Comments (optional)
Component 3 will strengthen the institutional capacity of the ORMVAs in operating and 
maintaining the irrigation networks, to ensure that new and improved networks are managed so to 
provide farmers with an improved water service, in line with the technical requirements of improved 
irrigation technologies. Component 3 will also support implementing the project. Component 3 
activities will include: (i) technical assistance to improve O&M of the irrigation network; (ii) 
training, technical assistance, computer equipment, and associated tools for project management; 
and (iii) implementation of the EMP; (iv) provision of equipment and infrastructure rehabilitation 
for DIAEA and ORMVAs.

IV. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 150.00 Total Bank Financing: 150.00
Financing Gap: 0.00
For Loans/Credits/Others Amount
Borrower 0.00


International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 150.00
Total 150.00

V. Implementation
The project will have five implementation entities. The ORMVAs of Tadla, Haouz, Doukkala, and 
Gharb will implement most of the activities. The Department of Irrigation and Rural Infrastructure 
(DIAEA) of the MAPM will implement one activity under Component 3 and will be responsible for 
overall project coordination, management, and reporting. 
 
The DIAEA and the ORMVAs are both experienced in managing World Bank-funded projects, the 
Oum er Rbia basin irrigated agriculture modernization project (PROMER, 2010-2016) being the 
most recent. Each ORMVA targeted by the project manages a LSI perimeter covering about 100,000 
ha. They have good technical and managerial capacity to implement large irrigation development 
and modernization projects. Training and technical assistance will be provided as needed.

VI. Safeguard Policies (including public consultation)
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖


