













































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 
 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 1 of 33  

     

 
     

 

Combined Project Information Documents /  
Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (PID/ISDS) 

 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 08-Dec-2017 | Report No: PIDISDSC21361 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

P
u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 2 of 33  

 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Haiti P162908 Resilient Productive 
Landscapes in Haiti 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

LATIN AMERICA AND CARIBBEAN 04-Dec-2017 28-Feb-2018 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Economy and 
Finance 

Ministry of Agriculture, 
Natural Resources and 
Rural Development 
(MARNDR), Ministry of 
Environment 

 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
The Project Development Objectives are: (i) to improve the adoption of resilience-enhancing agricultural and 
landscape management practices in selected sub-watersheds; and (ii) to enable the Government to respond promptly 
and effectively to an eligible emergency 
 
 
Components 

Strengthening of institutional and organizational capacities for landscape level interventions 
Investments to strengthen the establishment of resilient agricultural production and practices 
Project Coordination and Monitoring and Evaluation 
Emergency Response Mechanism 

 
 

Financing (in USD Million) 

 
 
FIN_SUMM_PUB_TBL 
SUMMARY 
 

Total Project Cost 26.21 

Total Financing 26.21 

Financing Gap 0.00 

 
   
DETAILS-NewFin3 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 3 of 33  

 

Total World Bank Group Financing 15.00 

     World Bank Lending 15.00 
 

Total Non-World Bank Group and Non-Client Government Financing 5.00 

Multilateral and Bilateral Financing (Concessional) 5.00 

 

Environmental Assessment Category 

B - Partial Assessment 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the preparation to continue     
 
 
Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
 
Baseline and business as usual 
 

1. Haiti is a densely populated island state, the third largest nation by area and population (10.4 
million) in the Caribbean and benefits from a rich economic endowment. Assets include proximity 
and access to major markets, a young labor force, a dynamic diaspora, and substantial geographic, 
historical, and cultural assets. The country possesses untapped markets and unmet demand for the 
private sector to explore, including agribusiness, light manufacturing, and tourism. Yet Haiti remains 
the poorest country in the Western Hemisphere and one of the poorest countries in the world, with 
a GDP per capita of US$820. Almost 60 percent of the population lives below the national poverty 
line with marked differences between urban and rural areas

1
, inequality is high, with wealth and 

economic opportunity concentrated around Port-au-Prince. Access to basic services is limited, 
particularly in rural areas, which has translated into low human development indicators (Haiti ranks 
168th out of 187 countries in the Human Development Index). 

 
2. Agriculture continues to play a dominant role in the Haitian economy, contributing over 20 

percent of GDP and most rural Haitians rely on agricultural production as their primary livelihood 
strategy. The agriculture sector also accounts for around 50 percent of overall employment, 66 
percent of employment in rural areas, and 75 percent of employment in low income households. 
Agriculture is the sole economic activity for 55 percent of the rural households, and involves more 

                                                           
1
 75% fall below poverty line in rural areas compared to 40% in urban areas 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 4 of 33  

 

than 70 percent of them. This production is critical for food security
2
, in a context where more than 

half of the population is affected by undernutrition (2016, FAO); around a third of the production is 
being used for subsistence

3
, while the rest of productions is sold generating much needed income. 

 
3. Climate change is significantly impacting agriculture and will increasingly do so in the future. 

Climate change is projected to manifest itself in Haiti the following ways:  a) increases in 

temperatures: it is likely that temperatures will increase by 0.8-1°C by the year 2030 and by 1.5-

1.7°C by the year 2060, with the highest increases expected in the months of June or July; b) 
decreases in precipitation: precipitation is expected to decrease by 5.9-20 percent by 2030 and by 
10.6-35.8 percent by 2060, with the greatest decreases also expected in the months of June or July

4
. 

This will affect agriculture in general, and subsistence agriculture in particular, which is primarily 
rain-fed and therefore highly vulnerable to rainfall patterns. A combination of increasing 
temperatures and decreasing precipitation, especially in June and July, is likely to impose 
particularly severe stresses on agricultural systems, especially given the highly-degraded nature of 
soils and vegetation in the target sub-watersheds.  

 
4. Haiti’s population and territory are extremely vulnerable to natural disasters and exposure is 

expected to increase as climate change impact intensifies. Haiti has the highest index of 
vulnerability to hurricanes (12,9 on a scale of 13) among small Low Income Countries (LIC) Island 
States and is the third country hardest hit by climatic events in the world

5
. Ninety-six (96) percent of 

the population is considered at risk. Climate change predictions for 2050 and beyond suggest that 
more than 50 percent of the total area of Haiti will be in danger of desertification largely due to 
climate variability and change. Extreme weather events, according to the Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change (IPCC)

6
, indicate that the Caribbean region is likely to be exposed in the future to 

more intense and frequent extreme weather events. On average, each disaster costs two percent of 
GDP per year, and occasionally much more (in 2008, tropical storms’ economic impact reached 15 
percent of GDP), and significantly affects the agriculture sector

7
. The country is highly mountainous 

with more than half of Haiti’s territory having slopes over 20 degrees, that centuries of 
deforestation have rendered particularly vulnerable to climatic events. Exposed agricultural fields 
which are now commonly exploited on slopes

8
 further exacerbates the issues. Deforestation, and 

inappropriate agricultural practices have produced predictable interlinked environmental and social 
consequences: the loss of topsoil, decreasing soil fertility, rain water run-off and depletion of 
aquifers, droughts, agricultural productive capacity decline, farmers’ losses of incomes and rural 
out-migration. In a context of climate change, extreme weather events and their average intensity 
and frequency are expected to increase, and will further accelerate land and population 

                                                           
2
 Undernutrition concerns more than half of the population (FAO)  

3
 Traditionally, rural Haitians take advantage of seasonal, nutrient rich productions, to complement their diet (fruits, vegetables, 

legumes, small livestock), yet this diversity is at risk due to the deterioration of natural resources that decreases the availability 
of many of these sources of supplementation. 
4
 http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/natc/presentations/haitipres.pdf   

5
 Global index on Climate Change, 2016 : from 1993 to 2012 the country faced 2 droughts, 1 earthquake, 31 floodings and 26 

tropical storms/hurricanes. 
6
 https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar5/wg2/   

7
 In the case of tropical storms, almost 50 % of damages and losses in productive sectors have been concentrated in the 

agriculture sector (PDNA, Feb 2017)  
8
 63% of agricultural land is on more than 20 degrees’ slopes, and 40% of cultivated land in mountains is on slope of more than 

50 degrees. 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 5 of 33  

 

vulnerability trend
9
 : identified climate related hazards in Haiti include flash flooding, salt water 

intrusion, drought, intense rainfall, landslides, severe soil erosion, and hurricanes
10

.  
 

5. Addressing intertwined human and ecological vulnerabilities requires a holistic landscape-level 
“productive” approach. The above-mentioned context provides a rationale for integrating a 
landscape approach within watersheds (or sub-watershed) in Haiti to address major soil erosion and 
water retention capacity, prioritizing interventions helping to reduce downstream impacts. 
Improving the natural resource base through the promotion of climate-smart productions and 
practices best adapted to the agro-ecological context

11
, and, as importantly, the capacity to 

generate sustainable incomes out of these, is expected to have a significant positive impact on 
agriculture and the many people who derive their livelihoods and income from, together with the 
provision of nutritious food, and jobs. It will also contribute to protect in a sustainable way 
communities at large against the risks of flash flooding and landslides linked to soil erosion and 
water runoff.  

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 

 
6. Agriculture in Haiti is beset with problems, despite its importance in local food security and 

contribution to GDP. Production is highly dependent on rainfall, with around five percent of farmers 
using irrigation. Most farmers have poor access to tools, machinery, and purchased inputs including 
improved seeds and fertilizer. Access to credit in rural areas is not a viable option either for poor 
farmers. In addition, there is little organization among producers and underdeveloped value chains, 
further compounded by a lack of rural infrastructure to access markets e.g. rural roads for 
connectivity with buyers, water storage and irrigation for production in dryer seasons and mitigation 
of drought impacts, food dryers and storage for reduction of vulnerability to prices volatility, 
reduction of post-harvest losses, , improved quality for better marketability as well as accessibility of 
nutritious food all year long. The lack of value addition along value chains, reliability and 
sustainability of sources of incomes for farmers generated from tree-crops and other types of 
resilient agricultural productions constitutes a major impediment to the maintenance and 
sustainable expansion of such systems. This also drives their choices towards higher demanded/less 
perishable productions, often at the expense of the environment (e.g. peanuts production on 
slopes, trees cutting for land expansion and/or cash generation with fire wood or charcoal 
production and sales), contributing to the vicious circle of land degradation and increasing 
population vulnerability. In addition, women play a major role in the post-harvest marketing of 
products in Haiti, and the improvement of these value chains is a critical factor for women’s 
economic empowerment, livelihoods and resilience, which offers opportunities for vulnerable 
population- such as women and youth- to increase rural income and jobs diversification.   
 

7. In a country that is already densely populated, steady population growth and land inheritance 

                                                           
9
 Based on available projections, major climatic changes expected to occur in Haiti include a reduction in rainfall of 6 to 20 

percent by 2030 and 11 to 36 percent by 2060. While annual precipitation is projected to decrease, the more limited rainfall 
events are expected to become more intense. Temperatures are also expected to increase by 0.8°C to 1.0°C by 2030, and by 
1.5°C to 1.7°C by 2060.  
10

 Source: Review of Current and Planned Adaptation Action: The Caribbean (Nov, 2011) 
11

 These would seek to improve the stability and quality of the soil substrate through measures such as agroforestry, live fences, 
hedgerows intercropping, vegetative wind breaks, soil vegetative cover, conservation tillage, among others. 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 6 of 33  

 

rules
12

 continues to put pressure on land, and drives land use changes. Haiti has 961 inhabitants 
per square kilometer of arable land, the highest pressure density on arable land in the Western 
Hemisphere. Farm sizes have shrunk dramatically over time: 85 percent of farms now have less than 
1 hectare. The main food crops produced are rice (in lowlands), maize, bananas, yams, cassava, 
beans, and millet, and main export crops include coffee and mangoes. Diversification has commonly 
been practiced by farmers as a risk-mitigation strategy (70 percent of farmers produce more than 4 
crops and 75 percent raise some livestock) but is becoming harder to implement in increasingly 
smaller plots. In addition, the traditional practice of creole garden (or “jardin creole”

13
) 

corresponding to small but highly diversified agro-forestry systems, providing fresh and nutritious 
food throughout most of the year among other benefits (high biodiversity, higher productivity linked 
to species associations, soil protection and quality), have tended to decrease to give way to annual 
crops. Yet these resilient systems are particularly adapted to face harsh topographic and climatic 
conditions and are now recognized as a typical climate-smart/agro-ecological best practices. 
Restoring these agro-forestry systems is however not affordable for the vast majority of farmers.   
     

8. The natural resource base and agriculture are linked by a negative feedback loop. Unsustainable 
farming practices such as agriculture on slopes and marginal areas, lack of agriculture conservation 
technologies, are driven by land pressure, low farmers’ education level, and poor farmers’ economic 
conditions. These have contributed to the severe degradation of around 85 percent of watersheds

14
 

with wide ranging impacts, namely on (i) yields -the depletion of the natural resource base and high 
exposure and vulnerability to extreme weather events have driven an average rate of decline in 
yields of between .5 to 1.2 percent per annum (World Bank, 2005). Stagnating or shrinking yields in 
turn further exacerbate land pressure, causing more degradation and deforestation; and (ii) on 
critical habitats such as mangroves

15
 -run off from denuded slopes and gullies leading to soil washed 

away and settling into valleys, rivers and eventually into the sea. Soil erosion caused by water, either 
as direct rainfall on the soil surface, or indirectly through gullies and channels, causes an annual loss 
of land for the whole country estimated at about 37 million metric tons (MT). This corresponds to an 
average loss of about 15 MT/ha/yr across the country. Without trees’ complex root systems to hold 
Haiti’s mountainous terrain in place, protect gullies from serious erosion and prevent water 
resources depletion, vulnerability of landscapes and people living on them is doomed to increase. 
Reducing poverty and building system resilience will require an integrated management approach 
that considers the complex interactions between the environment and agriculture and turns the 
negative- into a positive feedback loop.  Climate change is expected to increase these negative 
feedback loops. 
 

9. The unique challenge to building resilience in the Haitian Agriculture sector arises from the 
combination of climate change adding further stress to a system already engaged in a negative 
feedback loop between the agriculture production and the natural resource base.  As described 
above, the depleting natural resource base and lack of landscape level management increase the 
sensitivity of agricultural production and ecosystems to weather and climate events. Climate change 

                                                           
12

 All land is inherited bilaterally and equally between siblings, with arable land being usually divided immediately. 
13

 A Creole garden is a multi-storied agro-forestry system including a mix of perennial and annual crops, i.e. woody perennials, 
tree crops (i.e. bread fruit, mango, avocado, bananas, citrus, coffee), vegetable and staple crops, playing multiple roles, 
including household’s food security and providing ecosystems benefits 
14

 According to Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources, and Rural Development (MARNDR), 2016  
15

 Mangroves are essential for maintaining fish nursing sites, protecting coasts against storms, and lowland crops from soil 
salinization (e.g. rice production) which are ultimately important for livelihoods 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 7 of 33  

 

is expected to further amplify the exposure to such events. With both sensitivity and exposure set to 
increase, vulnerability will follow suit. The weather and climate events that today’s depleted natural 
resource base offers much reduced protection against are congruent with priority issues for 
resilience building in the climate change context: extreme events, drought, extreme rainfall events, 
etc. In each of these cases, the health of the natural resource base is a key determinant of farmer 
resilience. For example, the risk of drought is much reduced if the moisture retention capacity of 
soils is rehabilitated, micro-catchment areas include water storage facilities and water is being 
retained for longer periods in upstream forests. As a result, any effort to build resilience to climate 
change in Agriculture will need to take an integrated approach taking into account both sensitivity 
due to a diminished natural resource base and exposure due to climate change. 

 
Institutional context 
 
10. Ministry of Environment (MdE) and Ministry of Agriculture Natural Resources and Rural 

Development (MARNDR) recognize the interdependency between Natural Resources 
Management and Agriculture Production as well as the added stress imposed by climate change. 
In its policy framework 2010-2025, MARNDR identifies watersheds degradation as a major issue, and 
establishes the reduction of environmental vulnerability as a long-term objective requiring the 
protection of environment and natural resources. It also establishes the prevention and 
management of natural disasters as a priority

16
. In 2006, the Government submitted their National 

Adaptation Program of Action (NAPA, 2006) (Plan d’ Action National d’ Adaptation - PANA).  In this 
document, the Government lays out their most urgent risks from climate change and propose a way 
forward.  One of the key risks outlined is that of soil erosion

17
 and its relationship with the 

agriculture sector vulnerability. In a recent update of the National Action Plan against Desertification 
(2015), MdE establishes as one objective the collaborative development of management plans for 
the most vulnerable watersheds in the country. However, the operationalization of the Plans has yet 
to unfold. The need for stronger cross-sectoral collaboration is mutually recognized, but little 
concrete actions have taken place in a context of institutional weaknesses, absence of joint planning 
and insufficient budget to operationalize actions plans.  

 
11. In response to the country’s vulnerability to current climate variability and to climate change, there 

is a baseline of investments in this area: 

 World Bank (WB) financed Strengthening Hydro-Meteorological Services project (2015-2020, 
US$ 5 million), which aims to strengthen Haiti’s institutional capacity to provide hydro-
meteorological and climate information services customized to the needs of the civil protection 
and agriculture sectors, contributing to increasing disaster and climate resilience. The main 
counterpart agency is the Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources and Rural Development 

                                                           
16

 The MARNDR Triennial Plan for Relaunching Agriculture 2013-2016 also identifies as a strategic pillar the watershed 
integrated approach (ridge to reef). 
17

 “Haiti is a mountainous country whose peaks reach up to 2684 meters over altitude. Poor farming practices weaken the soil 
capital and weaken the productive capacity as they lead the arable land towards the sea Land erosion, under the effects of 
some natural factors. Drought, wind, rain and some anthropogenic factors: excessive deforestation and uncontrolled 
construction in urban areas leads to a country's land desertification processes. The vulnerability of the agricultural sector is 
closely linked to that of water and soil.  Climate change by acting on water resources also influence agricultural production. On 
the other hand, winds, floods, droughts have direct impacts on agriculture given the level of soil erosion leading to their 
aridity. In addition, a study conducted by the MOE (2000) argues that early in the second half of the 21st century, more than 
half of the area of land of Haiti will be at desertification risk due to climatic conditions.” 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 8 of 33  

 

(MARNDR). 

 WB financed Relaunching Agriculture: Strengthening Agriculture Public Services Project Phase II - 
RESEPAG II  (2012-2019, US$ 85 million) which aims to  (a) reinforce the capacity of the Ministry 
of Agriculture, Natural Resources and Rural Development to provide or facilitate access to 
services in the agricultural sector; (b) increase market access to small producers and food 
security in Selected Areas; (c) improve livelihood in areas affected by Hurricane Matthew; and 
(d) enable the Government to respond promptly and effectively to an eligible emergency. The 
project finances interventions in the North/North East, Centre, and South departments. It 
supports in particular a Farmer Subsidy scheme using various technical packages and 
implemented through individual vouchers to improve the adoption of improved agriculture 
inputs/technologies (with a particular emphasis on climate resilient production and practices) ; 
finances Farmer Field Schools as a vehicle to promote best practices (extension services 
mechanism) ; and a Market Support Facility, using matching grants to allow group of producers 
to add value to their productions (value chain development).  

 Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) financed Natural Disaster Mitigation Program II (2016-
2020, US$ 42 million), which aims to reduce rural economic losses through the improvement of 
climate risk management in selected watersheds. Some specific objectives include to: (i) 
increase capacities for adaptation to climate change and disaster risk management (DRM) in the 
agriculture sector; (ii) improve water and sediment conservation in selected gullies of priority 
watersheds; and (iii) reduce the risk of rural economic losses due to floods in targeted 
watersheds. 

 United States Agency for International Development (USAID) Reforestation Project (2017-2021, 
US$ 40 million), which aim is to reduce the threat of deforestation, improve resilience to 
economic and natural shocks, increase tree cover in targeted areas, and improve environmental 
governance and coordination. It will be implemented in northern departments. 

 International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) financed Projet Small Irrigation and 
Market Access Development Project in the Nippes and Goavienne Region (PPI-3) (2012-2017, 
US$ 13.2 million), which aims to achieve a sustainable improvement in the livelihoods 
and incomes of rural poor households, especially those belonging to the most vulnerable 
groups. Its specific objectives include: (i) increasing agricultural production sustainably through 
efficient water management and the consolidation of both collective and individual irrigated 
agriculture; (ii) improving the value of irrigated agriculture production and increasing farmers' 
access to markets and financial services in order to raise the incomes of the poorest families; 
and (iii) strengthening the planning, organizational and management capacities of grass-roots 
organizations in order to facilitate their access to markets and financial services. 

 Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) implemented with LDCF co-financing of the 
Strengthening Climate Resilience and Reducing Disaster Risk in Agriculture to Improve Food 
Security in Haiti Post Earthquake project (2012-2017, US$ 12 million), which aims to increase the 
resilience of vulnerable farmers including their livelihoods and agro-ecosystems against the 
impacts of climate variability and in the post-earthquake crises through integration of disaster 
risk management and adaptation practices in the agricultural sector and replication of more 
hazard resilient crop varieties and cultivation technologies. 

 UNEP implemented with GEF co-financing Program Ecosystem approach on the South Coast of 
Haiti (2015-2020, US$ 6.2 million), aims to strengthen the resilience of ecosystems in 
communities vulnerable to the impacts of climate change. This program advocates an integrated 
strategy encompassing all ecosystems and agricultural production areas from the mountains to 

https://www2.fundsforngos.org/category/democracy-and-good-governance/


 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 9 of 33  

 

the sea. The various components of the project will also try to address the whole issue of the 
destruction of the ecosystems of the Great South in a perspective of recovery and the fight 
against poverty. 

 French Development Agency (AFD) and European Union co-financed Project for Food Security 
(SECAL) (2013-2017, 15 million euros), which objective is to support agricultural sectors with 
high potential in southern Haiti, contribute to improving the food security of people in the South 
Department and generate additional revenue in the rural areas.  

 
12. Collaborative efforts are underway to boost the implementation of watershed approaches to 

strengthen the management of natural resources (wood, water, soil). In the context of the COP21 
process and resulting Paris Agreement, and in order to relieve the agriculture and population 
pressure on forests and landscapes, as well as adapt to the effects of climate change, a Haiti-based 
NGO, the J/P Haitian Relief Organization (J/P HRO), together with MdE and MARNDR, developed in 
2015 a proposal for a broad initiative – Haiti Takes Roots (HTR) – focused on watershed 
management and reforestation in key areas of Haiti

18
. Its objective is to facilitate engagement, 

coordination, learning, monitoring and synergies in a programmatic approach. This platform would 
be a conduit to operationalize Ministries’ plans, helping to bring key actors together around the 
issue, and establish long term strategies and mechanisms to sustain and implement its objectives. 
Supported by seed funding from J/P HRO and the French government, HTR has shaped its 
governance mechanisms

19
. The IDB and the WB participate in this initiative and more partners are 

expected to join. Two studies have been financed under the HTR umbrella by the WB together with 
J/P HRO to develop a participatory watershed management planning methodology and a post-
hurricane Charcoal and Arboreal Assessments

20
, contributing to the development of a body of 

knowledge and resources. The proposed Resilient Productive Landscapes Project (RPLP) is envisaged 
as a proof of concept under HTR aimed at being scaled-up in other (sub)watersheds of the country. 
For this reason, and in order to also benefit from the WB project management experience, J/P HRO 
has committed to provide a parallel financing of US$5 million to RPLP, which will be fully blended 
with IDA and the Global Environment Facility/Least Developed Countries Fund (GEF/LDCF) co-
financing. In this context, LDCF will leverage IDA and parallel financing resources to more 
systematically integrate the climate adaptation lens into productive-oriented interventions.  
 

13. RPLP builds on solid analytical work, as well as the lessons learned from other Global Environment 
Facility (GEF) funded and donor-funded project, including the World Bank’s own projects. Key 
lessons learned emphasize in particular the need for collaborative efforts including strong 
communities’ participatory engagement throughout a project process and continuous institutional 
commitment and support, as well as the necessary generation of revenues for farmers out of the 
supported investments. Since the 2010 Earthquake, the WB’s portfolio in Agriculture expanded with 
RESEPAG I and RESEPAG II,

21
 supporting MARNDR’s capacity to deliver public goods and piloting 

                                                           
18

 The mission of HTR is to contribute to a more rational management of Haiti’s natural, renewable through the management of 
watersheds, the restoration of soils, increasing forest cover, and the promotion of agroforestry – most notably in vulnerable 
watersheds – therefore breaking the vicious cycle of poverty and deforestation. 
19

 HTR shall be governed by a Steering committee chaired by the Prime Minister and supported by a Secretariat, a technical 
platform, a Monitoring and Evaluation Committee, a Geographical Platform, and a virtual Resource Centre; it will include 
members from concerned ministries, institutional partners, international organizations, civil society and private sector. 
20

  PROFOR-funded works to develop (i) a Resilient Productive Landscape Planning Methodology (P162352), and (ii) Haiti 
Arboreal Assessments - post- hurricane tree counting and charcoal assessment (P164024). 
21

 Relaunching Agriculture: Strengthening Agriculture Public Services Project – Phase II (P126744) is ongoing and will close on 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 10 of 33  

 

incentives schemes to support farmers’ improved productions through vouchers mechanisms and 
the strengthening of agricultural value chains through matching grants. RPLP would take advantage 
of the experience gained and use the same approaches, adjusted to the specificities of RPLP. On the 
environment side, the GEF co-funded several projects in Haiti and in the Caribbean, that focused on 
increasing the resilience of agriculture and ecosystems, and boosting food security through climate 
change adaptation. Several of these projects have also focused specifically on the Grand Sud 
(greater south area), given its increased vulnerability to climate shocks. While many of these 
projects were financially supported for the duration of the project, there was little effort to ensure 
that this financing was sustainable.     
 

14. In the context of Climate Change, sustainable financing over time is an important tool to address 
environmental and social vulnerability, and to support Climate adaptation and mitigate Climate 
Change impact. Ministries and other institutions in Haiti face significant financial resources 
constraints. Sustainability of short term programs have consistently been challenging. To address a 
similar problem faced by five other Caribbean islands, a GEF financed project, Sustainable financing 
and management of Eastern Caribbean Marine Ecosystem Project (P103470) (closed June 2016), set 
up and endowed a Caribbean Biodiversity Fund (CBF) mechanism to ensure sustainable financing 
over time to combat threats to biodiversity that arise through human, climate or other sources. 
Under the proposed Project, Haiti, which is an observer and has taken steps to become a full 
member of the CBF, would use LDCF financing (and co-financing from other donors) to join the CBF 
by contributing to the endowment, and establish a National Trust, which will enable Haiti to access 
long term sustainable financing for climate adaptation and biodiversity conservation into perpetuity. 
While the CBF has for various reasons retained this name, it will create a climate change adaptation 
window under RPLP to address climate change adaptation priority needs. This National Trust shall 
use the interests raised by the CBF from the LDCF funding to continue to fund sub-projects that 
would support primarily the sustainability of interventions financed under RPLP, and other future 
climate change adaptation related investments. The interest raised, however, will be off the total 
amount in the CBF (over US$34 million currently) to allow all the CBF countries to benefit from 
economies of scale. This longer-term source of predictable financing will mean that when a disaster 
strikes Haiti, the current practice of diverting government funding to address that crisis will not 
impact this fund. As such it presents a key long term stabilizing mechanism for addressing 
adaptation. 
 

15. The Project is consistent with the climate change action plan submitted to the UN Framework 
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), in the context of the Paris meetings in 2015 (Intended 
Nationally Determined Contribution – INDC)

22
. The Action Plan specifically names natural resource 

management within watersheds, use of agricultural technologies adapted to climate change, use of 
drought-resistant crops, soil conservation, reducing disaster risk in areas most vulnerable to 
drought, reforestation of upstream areas, as priorities for adaptation within the plan.  
 

16. It responds directly to strategic objectives laid out in the GEF Programming Strategy on 
Adaptation to Climate Change: Least Developed Countries Fund Special Climate Change Fund 
(June 11, 2014) and Haiti’s National Adaptation Program of Action (NAPA, 2006) by helping the 
country reduce its vulnerability to soil erosion, which are exacerbated through increasing volatile 

                                                                                                                                                                                           
December 31, 2019. 
22

 http://www4.unfccc.int/submissions/INDC/Published%20Documents/Haiti/1/CPDN_Republique%20d'Haiti.pdf 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 11 of 33  

 

climatic events (floods, cyclones, hurricanes) and human (agriculture) activity. The project will 
contribute to the LDCF strategy Objective 1 (Reduce the vulnerability of people, livelihoods, physical 
assets and natural systems to the adverse effects of climate change); Objective 2 (Strengthen 
institutional and technical capacities for effective climate change adaptation) ; and  Objective 3 
(Integrate climate change adaptation into relevant policies, plans and associated processes)

23
. The 

Project, using LDCF funds jointly with IDA financing and J/P HRO parallel financing, will (i) contribute 
towards building an increased awareness of climate change impacts, vulnerability and adaption, and 
directly reducing the vulnerability of farmers to climate change through investment in more resilient 
agricultural practices. These will occur in (sub)watersheds areas by financing climate-smart 
agricultural production practices (agroforestry, conservation agriculture, slope management, etc.) ; 
the project will also finance improvement of the product value chains to generate higher and more 
sustainable income, and reinforcement of climate resilient infrastructure assets ; (ii) support the 
enabling environment by strengthening institutional capacities to develop and implement sound 
cross-sectoral policies and action plans integrating climate change adaptation considerations in 
national and local level strategies ; access to and analyze geo-spatial and other climate related data 
to better address climate risks and inform decision processes ; and support a mechanism aimed at 
sustaining long term financing of adaptation technologies and practices; and (iii) it will provide 
extensive trainings programs to increase skills and knowledge tailored to the key stakeholders and 
audiences. RPLP will support the achievement of objectives set forth under the NAPA, which served 
as the basis for the plan submitted to the UNFCCC in 2015. The document weighted adaptation 
options based on their impact on vulnerable natural resources and groups, and ranked “watershed 
management and soil conservation” at the top (5 on a 1 to 5 scale).    
 

17. RPLP is consistent with the World Bank Group’s Haiti Country Partnerships Framework (CPF) 2016-
2019. Objective 1 of the CPF aims to enhance economic activities and income-generation 
opportunities, including in the agricultural sector through improving agricultural productivity by 
reinforcing the ability of farmer’s groups to bring quality products to market. RPLP will support value 
chains to access to new and better markets and reduce production risks while decreasing 
vulnerability to the effects of prices and climate shocks. The CPF’s Objective 2 targets improving 
disaster prevention and strengthening climate resilience through a number of avenues, including the 
analysis of land management practices and definition of entry points for investment in the 
promotion of resilient productive landscapes. RPLP will directly tackle the issue of improving disaster 
prevention, reducing the vulnerability to the adverse impacts of climate change, increase adaptive 
capacity to respond to the impacts of climate change, and strengthening climate resilience. It will 
target four sub-watersheds within hydrological zones hard-hit by Hurricane Matthew in the 
Department of Nippes, and help mitigate the impact of future extreme weather events.   

 
18. RPLP will work closely and coordinate actions with other development partners, especially 

through the HTR platform.  Given the challenges with fragmented donor contributions to all sectors 
in Haiti as identified by the CPF, the HTR platform will be important for the sector to bring all 
partners around critical development themes, and coordinate efforts for broader impact. In addition 
to ongoing projects mentioned above (see point 11) new projects with similar objectives are under 
development that RPLP will coordinate with. These include projects to be financed through IDB, 
AFD, and IFAD.  

                                                           
23

 Updated Results-Based Management Framework For Adaptation To Climate Change Under The Least Developed Countries 
Fund And The Special Climate Change Fund”, GEF/LDCF.SCCF.17/05/Rev.01 October 15, 2014 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 12 of 33  

 

 
 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
Development Objective(s) (From PAD)  
 

19. The Project Development Objectives are: (i) to improve the adoption of resilience-enhancing 
agricultural and landscape management practices in selected sub-watersheds; and (ii) to enable the 
Government to respond promptly and effectively to an eligible emergency. 

 
20. The crisis or emergency referred to in the PDO reflects a legal requirement that relates to the 

Contingency Emergency Response Component (component 4 of the Project).  
 

21. Selected areas for intervention. While Component 1 addressing institutional and organizational 
capacity would have a nationwide coverage, Component 2 would be implemented in selected sub-
watershed. In the process of selection of these sub-watersheds, specific aspects were considered: (i) 
Agro-ecological criteria; (ii) Socio-economic criteria; (iii) Environmental vulnerability criteria; and (iv) 
Institutional criteria. Using a ranking scale of 1 to 5 for each of these criteria to prioritize areas, and 
based on available funding from the Project, four sub-watersheds were selected. These are:  (i) Rivière 
Froide watershed; (ii) Petite Rivière de Nippes watershed; (iii) Piémont area and Baconnois Plain; and 
(iv) Bondeau sub-wastershed and its mangrove. They offer a diversity of agro-ecological conditions, 
yet geographically close, within the department of Nippes, under two municipalities.  

 
22. In the context of RPLP, resilience is defined as the ability of people, assets, and systems to resist, 

absorb, accommodate, and recover in a timely and efficient manner from climatic hazards without 
undermining its welfare, value, structure, and functioning, while also maintaining the capacity for 
adaptation, learning, and transformation in the long term. Resilient-enhancing agriculture and 
landscape management practices correspond to the group of technologies, practices and systemic 
approaches under the climate smart agriculture and landscapes framework of the Global Alliance for 
Climate Smart Agriculture. In the context of the RPLP, these include interlinked actions at diverse 
levels: at farm level; along food value chains; and, at landscape level.  

 
23. Landscape is defined as “an area large enough to produce vital ecosystem services, but small enough 

to be managed by the people using the land which produces those services” (FAO 2013). A landscape 
can contain various ecosystems, and human activities and institutions are viewed as an integral part of 
landscapes. Ecosystems services include soil health, essential for sustainable and productive 
agriculture; water retention; biodiversity conservation; carbon sequestration; renewable energy 
sources; among others. 

 

Project Beneficiaries 
 
24. Primary beneficiaries of RPLP will be smallholder farmers and communities living in the selected sub-

watersheds targeted by the Project that depend on agricultural production for their livelihoods. In a 
context of high poverty prevalence, extensive land use for agricultural production including on steep 
slopes including gullies, very small size plots, degraded or at risk for degradation, all farmers and 
communities can be considered vulnerable. They will benefit individually from improved agricultural 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 13 of 33  

 

production practices adapted to the agro-ecological context, improving soil conditions and becoming 
more resilient to extreme weather events, as well as from improved marketing conditions; and 
collectively from reduced soil erosion, improved water retention capacity, enhanced field level 
productivity linked to ecosystems services generated collectively and synergies created between 
differed production systems at the watershed level. 

 
25. Interventions will also benefit key actors along the agriculture value chains, including service and input 

providers, buyers, processors, and retailers. Lastly, it will benefit the national, regional and local 
institutions in providing with essential tools, knowledge, and management capacity of landscape level 
interventions. Direct beneficiaries would include: (i) producers who have benefited from the voucher 
mechanism (3,000 of which minimum 30% are female); (ii) Service Providers (100 of which minimum 
10% are female); (iii) members of producers’ groups that benefit from co-financing in selected value 
chains (800 of which minimum 50% are female); and, (iv) persons trained in Ministries and local / 
regional authorities (100). The total percentage of women is estimated on the basis of a weighted 
average.  In order to strengthen the role of women, they will receive preferential support to benefit 
from the Project’s interventions.  

 
26. Private sector. Investments of RPLP look at poor to extremely poor segments of the population. 

Access to rural credit is not an option for an already vulnerable population. In addition, changing 
practices, even if expected to provide longer term gains and reduction of vulnerability, involves an 
important level of risk in a context of frequent natural disasters, occurrence of pests, and markets 
uncertainties. No insurance mechanism exists either to cover for such types of high frequency, high 
impact types of risks. RPLP would therefore provide technical packages to producers (including 
knowledge/services and inputs on a one-off basis) required for them to move towards a less 
vulnerable category, and doing so in a concentrated manner in a determined area to produce the 
expected broader ecosystems benefits. The Project would strengthen the private sector actors related 
to agricultural production valorization, critical to develop economically viable and sustainable 
businesses as well as job opportunities; the voucher mechanism involves systematically private sector 
beneficiaries, which supply such inputs and services at market price. Matching grants for groups of 
producers or other actors along the value chains will also aim at filling access to finance gaps to 
increase agricultural production valorization. The Project will also work with the Ministries to 
strengthen their capacity to deliver on their public good mandates, and establish the enabling 
environment for supporting resilient landscapes management. 
 

27. Gender and Nutrition. RPLP acknowledges that women and men are not given the same opportunities 
towards climate adaption and raising of incomes. Women face supplementary constraints -such as less 
access to information, to assets, to credit, to inputs- that have to be taken into account. 
Mainstreaming gender and nutrition into the different investments and monitoring and evaluation 
(M&E) mechanisms will ensure that the Project will contribute to reduce gender gaps when building 
resilience and contribute toward improving food security. The Project will build on experience and 
knowledge developed through RESEPAG II Project, which will be facilitated by the fact that RPLP core 
actions to support climate smart practices adoption and value chains improvement will use similar 
instruments as RESEPAG II. Namely the design of selection mechanisms of beneficiaries and co-
financing rules for matching grants, the tailoring of participatory and training activities, including 
related to nutrition, and gender-disaggregated data collection in M&E and grievances, will be 
embedded into RPLP. In order to  address any possible outstanding  gender gaps in the areas of 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 14 of 33  

 

interventions,  further  analysis and gender planning will be conducted prior to Project 
implementation by the RESEPAG II gender specialist.   
 

28. Food Security co-benefits. Food insecurity is an important problem in Haiti particularly in rural areas 
that the Project will tackle at different levels. First, the promotion of activities contributing to the 
restoration of degraded areas and improvement of current practices in the different watersheds will 
have a positive impact on overall agricultural productivity as well as on the production of food of high 
nutritional value (mostly fruits and vegetables). Second, the Project will contribute to improve food 
security through the promotion of crop quality and diversity induced with agroforestry investments, 
named traditionally “jardins creoles” in Haiti.  The project expects to promote several types of fruit 
trees, such as breadfruit, coconut, mango, guava, banana, citrus, as well as vegetables and yam. In 
addition, the combination of such investments combined with small infrastructure and support to 
commercialization (through groups of producers, intermediaries, or small enterprises) within the 
entire value chain will therefore contribute to their greater accessibility, availability and thus 
affordability of food, creating more resilience of households toward food insecurity. Investments 
could be related not only to private but also institutional markets. The government has already been 
discussing with school feeding program in the area of intervention. Such intervention would seek to 
help increase the accessibility of nutritious local food to Haitian students and guarantee a stable 
market access to institutional markets for producers and groups. 
 

29. Climate change adaptation co-benefits. RPLP activities are expected to yield significant adaptation co-
benefits (as well as mitigation co-benefits described below). An initial assessment at concept note 
stage indicated that >80 percent of RPLP financing would achieve climate co-benefits. The below table 
summarizes expected adaptation co-benefits: 
 
Table1 Climate change adaptation co-benefits  
 

Current situation Project interventions (selection) Adaptation co-benefits 

Increasing vulnerability to climate 
change driven by: 
- Increased exposure to climate 

change impacts such as: droughts, 
extreme heat, flash floods etc. 

- Increasing sensitivity of production 
to climatic phenomena due to 
reduced resilience driven by a 
degrading natural resource base 

- Increased sensitivity due to a lack of 
adaptive planning capacity at the 
micro-catchment level 

- Increased sensitivity due to lack of 
cross-sectoral adaptive institutional 
capacity to take informed decisions, 
guide, report, and monitor 
interventions on the ground in 
function of a changing climate 

Capacity building: 
- Development of Master Plan for 

Resilient Landscapes Development 
- Intensive technical trainings within key 

line Ministries, at national and local 
level and other relevant stakeholders 

- Capacity building in cartography, 
satellite imaging data collection and 
analysis for climate modeling, , 
development and application of spatial 
decision support tools, forecasting and 
early-warning systems 
 

Investments: 
- Development of “technical packages” 

(including inputs, such as tree 
seedlings, seeds, stakes, fences; and 
services, such as grafting, and technical 
assistance)” adapted to specific agro-
ecological zones 

- Development of participatory 
investments plans identifying priority 
investments and their geographical 

Strengthening of resilience through 
fortification of natural resource 
base at landscape level: 

- Soil quality improvement in 
areas with high risks of erosion 

- Increased water retention 
capacity 

 
Reduced sensitivity of agricultural 
production & livelihoods to climate 
impacts: 

- Increased coverage of resilient 
agricultural practices, adapted 
to the topography and agro-
ecological context 

- Improved adaptation capacity 
of agricultural production 
through increased 
diversification of productions 
practices to increase resilience 

- Improved livelihoods with 
additional and more diversified 
incomes 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 15 of 33  

 

locations;  
- Development of participatory business 

plans based on specific vulnerability 
criteria (including ecosystems and 
livelihoods) to allow the 
implementation of climate smart 
productions and practices ; and  

- Set-up of Farmer-Field-Schools (FFS) for 
producers focusing on transferring 
knowledge and know-how on Climate 
resilient production systems and 
practices. 

 
Improved adaptive capacity: 

- Improved capacity for planning, 
implementing, monitoring, 
watershed-level interventions 
towards improved natural 
resources management and 
livelihoods. 

 
30. In terms of mitigation co-benefits, it is estimated that RPLP activities will lead to significant benefits 

compared to the baseline. A quantification of the Green House Gas (GHG) mitigation potential using 
the EX-ACT tool estimated that over a duration of 40 years (4 years for actual project implementation 
and 16 years for capitalization of its effects), the Project’s carbon emission reduction  is estimated at 
572,397 tons of CO2 equivalent (tCO2-eq), or 28,620 tCO2-eq per year. These benefits will principally be 
achieved through improved landscape management, in particular through the promotion of 
afforestation, agroforestry systems and perennial agriculture cultivars.  

 
Key Results 
 

31. The following PDO level results indicators have been identified: 
 

- Land area under sustainable landscape management practices (Ha) – Corporate Indicator - (target 
of 2,000 Ha) 

- Farmers adopting improved agricultural technology (number), of which female (in percentage) – 
Corporate Indicator - (target of 3,000 farmers) 

- Share of targeted farmers with improved market access (%) – (target of 40%) 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 16 of 33  

 

 D. Project Description  
 

32. RPLP is designed to restore ecosystem services at sub-watershed level to safeguard and enhance agricultural 
production, reduce vulnerability of economic and ecological systems to external shocks, and to strengthen 
capacities for the long-term sustainable management of those landscapes. The investment will result in the 
provision of environmental services, private and public goods, including enhanced watershed services 
encompassing soil conservation, hydrological services, and biomass supply.  

 
Maps 1 and 2 : Project area 

 

 
 
 
Project Alternative 
 

33. The approach used by RPLP builds on a rich set of lessons learned from past projects and evidence from analytical 
work. The Project will take a landscape approach and operate at sub-watershed level, combining a socio-



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 17 of 33  

 

economic and an ecological approach to landscape management.
24

 The Project’s interventions in the selected 
sub-watersheds will build on the results of two watershed management participatory planning exercises piloted 
within one of the selected sub-watersheds during Project preparation (Rivière Froide) that will be implemented in 
the entire area of the Project by effectiveness with the support of J/P HRO. The operationalization of these plans 
will consist in the development of sub-watersheds’ investments plans, that will be providing more detailed 
information related to each category of intervention offered by the Project with the volume of activities, types of 
instruments pre-identified during project preparation based on lessons learned and pilot participatory planning 
exercises (see Component 2), location and corresponding estimated budget.  

 
34. Resilience-enhancement from RPLP in the selected sub-watersheds will result from actions  to decrease the 

vulnerability of: (i) farmers linked to increasing soil degradation and subsequent continuous reduction of 
production capacity, and insufficient capacity to sell productions in a profitable and sustainable manner, including 
due to poor infrastructure condition; and (ii) landscapes, linked to the lack of holistic, participatory planning 
capacity, required to establish a common understanding of problems, propose solutions, prioritize actions 
expected to have the larger positive impact on ecosystems and populations in a defined sub-watershed, including 
interventions aimed at reducing soil erosion and enhancing water retention capacities in gullies as well as around 
natural springs, mostly through intensification of vegetative and tree cover, as well as small water harvesting 
infrastructure reducing water run-off.  
 

35. RPLP is designed to contribute to break the natural resources degradation/increasing populations’ vulnerability 
cycle in the selected sub-watersheds by taking an integrated approach. Based on geographic concentration, the 
Project will work at both farm- and community level to simultaneously raise production and productivity using 
more resilient, adapted agriculture practices to the hydro-geological context, which will directly contribute to 
rebuild the natural resource base; by protecting and restoring top soil cover in particular, the Project will improve 
water retention capacity, reduce erosion, enhance soil quality, which are required to counter the soil quality 
loss/productivity loss/increasing vulnerability cycle.  The Project will also work along the entire value chain from 
inputs via production to processing and marketing to ensure that the changes introduced result in income gains 
for farmers that are essential for Project sustainability. It will also support the construction or rehabilitation of 
small infrastructures considered critical to enhance landscape’s resilience (e.g. related to water management or 
improved access to markets), taking care of their quality to ensure the best possible resistance to adverse climatic 
conditions. 
 

36. It will also strengthen the institutional enabling environment and build capacity for landscape level governance 
and management at both national and local levels as well as delivering a proof of concept of the approach by 
investing into selected watersheds, to create the enabling conditions for subsequent scale-up. 
 

37. RPLP will include four components: (i) Strengthening of institutional and organizational capacity for landscape 
level resilience; (ii) Investments to strengthen the establishment of resilient agricultural production and practices; 
(iii) Project coordination, monitoring and evaluation; and (iv) Emergency Response Mechanism. The core of the 
investments and expected impact from RPLP shall be seen under Component 2 that will finance agricultural, value 
chains and infrastructure related activities to reduce land and farmers’ vulnerability in the four selected sub-
watersheds; while Component 1 shall establish the enabling environment for Component 2 to achieve its 
objectives and contribute to longer term implementation of sustainable productive landscapes approach by key 
institutions, in particular through the CBF mechanism to provide financing for climate adaptation into perpetuity.  

                                                           
24

 Landscape-level Land Management Efforts in Haiti. Lessons Learned from Case Studies Spanning Eight Decades. World Bank, 
2016 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 18 of 33  

 

 
Fig. 1: Theory of Change/Strategic Overview, Thematic Linkages and expected Achievements of  RPLP 

 
Component 1: Strengthening of institutional and organizational capacities for landscape level 
interventions (US$ 5.6 M total -US$ 1.4 M IDA and US$ 4.2 M LDCF- ; parallel financing of US$ 1.4 M 
from J/P HRO).  

38. This component will support national efforts to : create Agriculture/Environment joint landscapes policy and 
action plan towards resilient agriculture and ecosystems; fill skills and knowledge gaps required to implement 
respective mandates; foster partnerships and communication; strengthen institutional capacity to analyze climate 
related data for improved planning and climate related disaster risk prevention; fund the set-up of a National 
Trust Fund that will provide financing for climate adaptation into perpetuity through the CBF; and will also pave 
the way for Component 2 interventions that will rely on communities’ participatory planning exercises in all 
selected sub-watersheds. Specifically, the component will support:  
 

39. Sub-component 1.1. Institutional capacity building (US$ 2.6 M total -US$ 1.4 M IDA and US$ 0.8 M LDCF- ; parallel 
financing of US$ 0.4 M from J/P HRO). This sub-component would finance: (i) the development of a joint 
MdE/MARNDR Master Plan for Resilient Landscapes Development, building on respective policies and action 
plans

25
 and recent international commitments under Climate Change/Climate Adaptation global agendas 

(including NAPA and INDC implementation), establishing areas of synergies, joint action plan and related M&E, 
that will be field-tested under Component 2, and serve as a reference under HTR ; ii) intensive technical trainings 

                                                           
25

 Relation to policies and mandates from other relevant institutions shall be included as well, e.g. CIAT (Comité Interministériel 
d'Aménagement du Territoire).  

http://ciat.gouv.ht/
http://ciat.gouv.ht/


 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 19 of 33  

 

within key line Ministries, including MARNDR and MdE, at national and at local level with the branches of line 
ministries, as well as local governments and other relevant stakeholders (in the selected sub-watersheds), to carry 
out their mandate towards sustainable landscapes management; exchange visits in-country and abroad to share 
landscapes restoration and management experiences ; and students sponsorships for Masters degrees related to 
landscape /ecosystems /environmental fields ; iii) capacity building in cartography, satellite imaging data 
collection and analysis for climate modeling, , development and application of spatial decision support tools, 
forecasting and early-warning systems ; and establishing linkages with global networks of expertise in this field 
offering options to get high resolution Agro-Meteorological data. Informed by a background study supported by 
the WB, a set of dynamic decision support tools driven by geospatial and hydro-meteorological data were 
selected that would be supported by RPLP: soil health & erosion risk monitor; drought risk monitor. The creation 
of these tools would (a) help establish a baseline in project areas on critical variables and 2) inform project 
implementation at farm and landscape level. 

 
40. Sub-component 1.2. Support to national level sustainable landscape management approach to agriculture and 

watershed management (US$ 0.0 M total -US$ 0.0 M IDA and US$ 0.0 M LDCF- ; parallel financing of US$ 1.0 M 
from J/P HRO). Activities under this sub-component would be financed entirely through parallel financing from J/P 
HRO. They will aim at supporting (i) HTR, to develop/update its strategic and action plans, and operate its 
secretariat; (ii) the establishment, and operation of the National Committee for Climate Change in charge of 
steering, monitoring and reporting on activities to be implemented under the INDC; and (iii) the development of 
detailed participatory sub-watersheds management plans in the four selected sub-watersheds and their update. 
The development of these plans will follow the methodology piloted by J/P HRO, in close collaboration with 
MARNDR and MdE through the PROFOR study referred to in section I.B. They will serve as a basis for the 
development of detailed participatory business plans focused on RPLP interventions out of which the selection of 
investments financed under Component 2 will be made. The participatory sub-watersheds management plans will 
be completed by effectiveness of IDA and LDCF financing.     

 
41. Sub-component 1.3. Sustainable Financing of Resilient Productive Landscapes and Environmental Investments 

(US$ 3.4 M total - US$ 0.0 M IDA and US$ 3.4 M LDCF-). As indicated in section I.B, it would support the 
participation of Haiti in the CBF to benefit from financial resources towards climate adaptation and biodiversity 
conservation objectives into perpetuity. In the context of RPLP, it would specifically contribute to ensuring the 
long-term sustainability of interventions financed under Component 2. This sub-component would finance (i) 
remaining activities required to set up the National level Trust Fund to receive funds from the CBF on a yearly 
basis, complementing other donor’s contributions and (ii) an initial endowment of US$3 million to the CBF, 
earmarked for climate adaptation related interventions, complemented by a US$7 million endowment for 
biodiversity to be provided through the German Development Bank (KfW). It is estimated that the fund will take 
up to 3 years to establish and disburse funds. In the interim the other sources of project financing (IDA and J/P 
HRO parallel financing) will be used to support adaptation activities. Therefore, the establishment of the Trust 
Fund does not present delays to overall project implementation. 

 
Component 2: Investments to strengthen the establishment of resilient agricultural production and 
practices (US$ 12.1 M total -US$ 10.1 M IDA, US$ 2.0 M LDCF- and parallel financing of US$ 3.6 M from 
J/P HRO).  
 

42. This component will support individual farmers and communities within selected sub-watersheds to establish 
more resilient agricultural productions and practices, adapted to the agro-ecological contexts, and prioritized 
according to participatory planning exercises (under sub-component 1.2 and business plans under 2.2), supported 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 20 of 33  

 

by scientific expertise, in order to provide individual, and, to the maximum extent possible, landscape-level 
collective co-benefits from increased soil quality, water retention capacity and biodiversity. It will also support 
actions aimed at improving the revenues and livelihoods from better market access and improved food availability 
and nutritional quality, required to reduce people and, consequently, ecosystems’ vulnerability; and support the 
establishment or rehabilitation of small infrastructures supporting (i) and (ii) for increased farmers and landscape 
level resilience.   

 
43. Sub-component 2.1. Investments in resilient, sustainable agriculture and ecosystems (US$ 8.55 M total -US$ 6.55 

M IDA and US$ 2.0 M LDCF). This sub-component will support investments at individual and community levels 
that focus on increasing climate resilience of agricultural production systems in the selected sub-watershed. 
Specifically, the sub-component will finance (i) the development of a limited menu of “technical packages” 
(including inputs, such as tree seedlings, seeds, stakes, fences; and services, such as grafting, and technical 
assistance)” adapted to specific agro-ecological zones, and priority issues to be addressed, building on 
participatory planning documents, and experts inputs; (ii) the development of participatory investments plans 
identifying priority investments and their geographical locations, and costs to be financed out of RPLP under 
Component 2; (iii) the selection of beneficiaries according to participatory business plans based on specific 
vulnerability criteria (including ecosystems and livelihoods) and their access to one of these technical package 
over the course of the Project to allow the implementation of climate smart productions and practices ; and (iv) 
the set-up of Farmer-Field-Schools (FFS) for producers focusing on transferring knowledge and know-how on 
Climate resilient productions and practices (such as planting following contour lines, improved tillage, 
boundary/live fences planting for wind and water erosion protection, soil coverage, inter-cropping, agroforestry 
systems management, soil and water conservation and so on)

26
, as well as organizational and marketing 

approaches to add value to these productions (related to sub-component 2.2). This sub-component will use 
RESEPAG II experience with its farmer’s incentive scheme using a voucher mechanism, and be implemented with 
the support of an operator (consulting firm). It will also benefit from the registry of farmers being developed with 
the support of RESEPAG II. 

 
44. Sub-component 2.2. Intensification, diversification and commercial agriculture (US$ 2.85 M total -US$ 2.85 M IDA 

and US$ 0.0 M LDCF- ; parallel financing of US$ 1.1 M from J/P HRO). This sub-component will improve access to 
inputs and services from farmers, as well as marketing capacities and options, considered essential to ensure the 
profitability of investments, improve livelihoods and thereby contribute to sustain resilient landscapes. Under this 
sub-component, the Project will also seek to facilitate the mobilization of commercial credit both during and after 
project implementation. Before RPLP effectiveness, a market/value chains analysis for productions likely to be 
supported under sub-component 2.1, as well as an analysis of relevant inputs and services suppliers, would be 
carried out through J/P HRO financing. J/P HRO would also contribute to support these latter in order to meet 
expected quality and quantity of such inputs and services. This sub-component will both support (i) groups of 
producers within the selected watersheds to develop basic business plans identifying key inputs 
(equipment/services) to be financed under RPLP aimed at improving the quality and quantity of products sold to 
intermediaries or directly placed on markets ; and (ii) more advanced constituted groups of producers or small 
enterprises to increase their capacity to generate additional value to climate smart productions produced in the 
selected sub-watersheds (e.g. addressing logistics, agro-processing, reduction of food losses aspects), through 
improved business/marketing skills, as well as improved infrastructures and equipment to be financed through a 
matching grant mechanism. For this activity, the experience of the “Market Support Facility (MSF)” implemented 

                                                           
26

 The Farmer-Field-Schools will also be a vehicle to promote food diet-nutrition education which will be built from (i) the 
material being compiled in the context of J/P HRO arboretum, where a women repertoire of traditional plants used for 
medicine and diets is being created, and (ii) also re-use the food practice diet training developed under RESEPAG II. 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 21 of 33  

 

under RESEPAG II.  
 

45. The sub-component will also finance trainings that will provide more capacity in technical, financial as well as 
management and strategy, to improve market access -for inputs suppliers’ and services providers’ organizations, 
as well as producers and other actors along the value chains. The same operator as sub-component 2.1 would 
support the implementation of this sub-component to facilitate coordination between these complementary 
activities.  
 

46. Sub-component 2.3. Protection of infrastructure and watersheds (US$ 0.7 M total - US$ 0.7 M IDA and US$ 0.0 M 
LDCF- ; parallel financing of US$ 2.5 M from J/P HRO). This sub-component will finance works to: (i) protect 
/rehabilitate small public infrastructures (e.g. rural and access roads or tracks, river crossing structures) (ii) 
enhance water management in the selected areas (building small water harvesting infrastructures in gullies or 
slopes, rehabilitating small water catchments or small irrigation systems in plains). The activities to be carried out 
under this sub-component will be based on the investments plans developed in each of the selected areas. This 
stage would be followed by technical studies to inform the detailed scope and nature of works to be supported 
under the Project.  
 

47. Most of the works are expected to be simple, hence a community-based approach would be promoted using a 
labor-intensive workforce. This approach has been used various times by MARNDR successfully (including through 
RESEPAG II in response to Hurricane Matthew’s to restore some damaged infrastructures. A specific manual exists 
that would serve as a basis for RPLP. 

 
Component 3: Project Coordination and Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) (US$ 3.5 M total – 100% 
IDA).  
 

48. The objective of this component is to support Project coordination and M&E as well as all aspects of management 
(including fiduciary matters, knowledge management, communication, gender and citizen engagement as well as 
monitoring mitigation measures related to safeguards). It will finance staff costs, goods, equipment and vehicles, 
incremental operating costs, assessments and studies (including technical and financial audits), construction 
and/or rehabilitation of Project Implementation Unit offices and in general eligible expenses associated with the 
overall management of the Project implementation. It will also provide resources to monitor progress and 
evaluate results and impact. For this purpose, an impact evaluation baseline will be established by no later than 
year one of Project implementation. 

 
Component 4: Emergency Response Component (US$0 - only IDA if activated).  

49. A Contingency Emergency Response Component (CERC) with zero allocation will be created to allow the 
Government to respond quickly in case of an eligible emergency. If an eligible emergency occurs, the inclusion of 
this component would provide a conduit for the use of uncommitted funds from the unallocated expenditure 
category and/or allow the government to request the Bank to re-categorize and reallocate financing from other 
project components to partially cover emergency response via implementation of key activities by the appropriate 
agencies to respond to the emergency. The CERC could also be used to channel additional funds should they 
become available as a result of an eligible emergency. An Emergency Response Operational Manual, acceptable to 
the WB, will be prepared and adopted during the first year of project implementation and clearly outline the 
triggers, eligible expenditures and procedures for tapping into the CERC.   

 
 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 22 of 33  

 

E. Implementation 
             Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 

50. Joint Implementation, Project Duration and Geographic Coverage. The Project will be implemented 
jointly by the MARNDR and the MdE, with an expected duration of five years. This proposed 
duration (expected over calendar years 2018-2023) is set to allow a realistic timeframe for 
implementation. In terms of geographic coverage, four (4) specific zones have been selected based 
on detailed criteria (environmental, socio-economic, vulnerability, institutional, budget availability 
as well as relevance in view of proposed interventions).  
 

51. MARNDR and MdE Experiences. The MARNDR began implementing the US$5M RESEPAG I project in 
2009.  Within MARNDR, the Project will leverage the existing capacity – specifically on safeguards 
and fiduciary aspects – of the coordination unit currently supporting RESEPAG II and other donor 
projects. Conversely, MdE has no experience in the implementation of Bank-funded projects, and 
would develop its capacity building on MARNDR experience. The Project will collaborate closely with 
other development partners and receive parallel financing from the NGO J/P HRO.  
 

52. Implementation arrangements. It was agreed that the Project will be jointly implemented by 
MARNDR/MdE through one Project Implementation Unit; this latter would report to both Ministries 
through focal points nominated by the respective Ministers. The PIU will be split in two locations: at 
the Central Level (PIU-C or Unité de Gestion de Projet Centrale) based at Port-Au-Prince and at the 
local level (PIU-L or Unité de Gestion de Projet Locale) based at the Agricultural Communal Office 
(Bureau Agricole Communal – BAC) Anse-à-Veau, close to the areas of intervention. The two units 
will be staffed as needed (i.e. staff hired and paid for by Project resources and appointed civil 
servants by MARNDR/MdE paid for by the Government) with appropriate skills, taking into account 
existing human resources and arrangements as well as existing staff from active World Bank 
operations when relevant (i.e. RESEPAG II). All staff paid using Project resources will be hired on a 
competitive basis under terms of reference and qualifications acceptable by the World Bank. 
 

53. The PIU-C and PIU-L will ensure timely and effective coordination of activities in order to monitor 
progress towards PDO. The implementation arrangements will allow a joint technical coordination 
by MARNDR/MdE as well as capitalizing on the MARNDR’s existing capacity and experience with 
World Bank projects’ management, especially on the fiduciary aspects. In addition, the PIU-L will 
allow to coordinate with the local offices of MARNDR and MdE at Departmental and Communal 
levels, as well with the other local stakeholders. The PIU-C will be responsible for: (i) managing the 
project at national level, including financial management, procurement in accordance with World 
Bank guidelines and procedures, and M&E; (ii) finalizing the Project Implementation Manuel (PIM) 
before effectiveness; (iii) producing project progress reports; and (iv) project communication.  
 

54. Staffing. The PIU-C will be located at Port-Au-Prince and headed by one (1) General Coordinator. 
He/She will also coordinate aspects related to Component 1. Other members of the PIU-C will 
include the fiduciary staff: one (1) principal accountant and one (1) procurement specialist, receiving 
support from existing fiduciary staff from RESEPAG II. All PIU-C staff, including the General 
Coordinator, will be hired on a competitive basis and paid for by Project resources. Support Staff will 
also be hired. All other staff will be based in the field at the PIU-L in the BAC Anse-à-Veau and hired 
on a competitive basis and paid for by Project resources. Staff will include one (1) Coordinator in 
charge of Component 2 as well as one (1) communication & grievance redress mechanism specialist, 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 23 of 33  

 

one (1) environmental safeguards specialist, one (1) social safeguard/gender/citizen engagement 
specialist, one (1) M&E specialist. Support Staff will also be hired. In order not to delay the start of 
the Project, the recruitment processes of these specialists will be launched during the preparation 
phase with the preparation of Terms of References (TORs), and selection, using the existing 
RESEPAG II fiduciary team to manage the recruitment process according to WB rules. Under the 
LDCF Project Preparation Grant, a core team of two persons (technical and admin) should also be in 
place not later than February 2018 to support the MARNDR and MdE RPLP focal points carry out 
these tasks among others contributing to swift implementation post declaration of effectiveness.   
 

55. In terms of governance mechanisms, a Project Steering Committee – PSC will be created at national 
level and serve as a guidance and exchange body (Meeting Frequency: once a year) and endorse 
Annual Work Plan & Budget. The PSC will be co-chaired by MARDNR and MdE, and comprised of 
high level representatives of MARNDR, MdE, Ministry of Economy and Finance, Ministry of Interior, 
as well as co-financiers, Audubon Society, HTR, other key stakeholders including donors (with 
observer status). The detailed composition and mandate of the PSC will be provided in the PIM. PIU-
C General Coordinator will assure the role of PSC Secretariat. In addition, a Technical Committee – 
TC will be established and ensure regular follow-up on the implementation of RPL activities 
(Meeting Frequency: quarterly, in Nippes Department). The TC will be chaired by the General 
Coordinator of the PIU-C and comprised of local stakeholders and authorities (DDA, DDE, other 
relevant Directorates, Civil Protection Committees, Municipalities, CASEC, ASEC), selected sub-
watersheds communities’ representatives, private sector representatives, etc.).  
 

56. A detailed PIM will be adopted before Project effectiveness, which will incorporate all operational 
details at the national and local levels, including the implementation of technical activities, M&E, 
safeguard implementation and administrative and fiduciary procedures. It will include detailed TORs 
for key RPLP/PIU-C/PIU-L staff. A harmonized IRM Operational Manual for the management of the 
CERC will be prepared and validated no later than three months after the Project effectiveness. 
Detailed Project implementation arrangements are found in the PAD. 

 
Figure 2:  Project risk mitigation matrix  

 

Risk  Level Mitigation measure 

Environmental and Social risks:  
The project has substantial positive 
environmental benefits.  
Negative impacts are likely to be 
small and highly localized, and are 
largely related to the commune 
level infrastructure activities that 
will be financed under the project  

Moderate The ESMF contains a screening 
tool to screen out works that will 
have a significant impact on the 
environment as well as a table of 
potential environmental impacts 
and associated mitigation 
measures. Robust technical and 
monitoring team will be in place. 

 

Climate and Disaster Risk: 
Haiti is highly vulnerable to the 
negative impact of climate change.   

Highly vulnerable 
country 

Project is designed to address 
these risks including through an 
unallocated component to 
reallocate IDA in event of a 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 24 of 33  

 

specific disaster/emergency. 

 
 
 .    
F. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 

RPLP will be implemented in four sub-watersheds offering a diversity of agro-ecological conditions, yet 
geographically close, within the department of Nippes, under two municipalities : (i) Rivière Froide 
watershed; (ii) Petite Rivière de Nippes watershed; (iii) Piémont area and Baconnois Plain; and (iv) Bondeau 
sub-wastershed and its mangrove. 

 
 
G. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 
 

Nicolas Kotschoubey, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 
Asli Gurkan, Social Safeguards Specialist 
Felipe Jacome, Social Safeguards Specialist 
Robert H. Montgomery, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 

 
 
 

SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The project will have an overall positive impact on 
the environment. It will promote conservation 
agriculture, agroforestry, soil and water 
conservation, water harvesting, water stewardship, 
re-afforestation and sustainable livestock grazing. 
The negative environmental impacts will be small 
and highly localized.  Such impacts may be 
associated with the construction works that 
communes will be able to finance under the project 
(rural roads, small bridges, etc) and impacts may 
include noise, waste management, worker health 
and safety issues and so on.  Other negative impacts 
may be related to improper technology transfer (e.g. 
inadvertent propagation of exotic species, expansion 
of plantations in natural forests, water harvesting 
that impacts the water table) and so on. For these 
reasons, the project is a category B and all activities, 
including those that seem environmentally harmless 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 25 of 33  

 

would need to be screened.  The completed ESMF 
provides a screening tool as well as a table of 
possible impacts and mitigation measures.  Proper 
and timely supervision from the Bank will also 
ensure that these activities are adequately 
monitored by the Environmental specialist in the 
PIU. 
 
For the sub component on planning and policy 
development, the intention is for the project to 
promote sustainability; however, the risk that a well-
intentioned plan or policy has negative impacts is 
possible, and therefore the ESMF that will be 
prepared, and the Operations Manual, will include 
measures to ensure that all plans and strategies 
prepared under the project are sustainable; support 
the preservation, maintenance and rehabilitation of 
the environment; are publicly consulted during their 
drafting process; take into account cumulative 
effects; and include measures to strengthen 
environmental management.  
 
For the CBF, for which activities are not yet clearly 
defined, and to ensure that the project does not 
indirectly finance activities with negative 
environmental impacts, the project ESMF will also 
apply. The Operation Manual will include a measure 
to ensure that the CBF adopts the ESMF as part of its 
screening mechanism.  
 
 
On the social side, no major safeguards risks are 
expected. A potential risk may include delays in 
compensation related to land acquisition. The 
project will avoid or minimize land acquisition based 
on the lessons learned. RPF will include measures to 
deal with such potential delays in payments should 
land acquisition be necessary. Another potential 
social risk may be perceived inequities in the 
selection of beneficiaries. The Project will mitigate 
this risk by focusing on citizen engagement 
measures and robust grievance redress measures.  
 
Risks linked to labor influx are expected to be 
limited. They will be mitigated by prioritizing local 
labor and ensuring clarity on where laborers coming 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 26 of 33  

 

from outside will be hosted through their stay in the 
host community and ensuring that contracts are 
consistent with ESMF and RPF provisions. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

This project will improve and support natural or 
critical habitat by increasing tree and ground cover 
with appropriate natural vegetation. It will operate 
in mangroves, forests, wetlands and other natural 
habitats and therefore the policy is triggered. Where 
infrastructure is being built, the project will ensure 
that it does not denude natural areas or remove 
cover that can expose the soil to erosional forces. 
The project will have an overall positive impact on 
natural habitats, but will ensure through applying 
the ESMF that negative impacts such as improper 
technology transfer, introduction of alien invasive 
species, etc., is not financed. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes 

The project will finance activities related to forestry 
and improve, rather than cause destruction to forest 
cover.  Activities that involve conversion of natural 
forests or degradation of critical areas will not be 
financed. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

Given that the project involves significant 
interventions in agriculture, and that the 
improvement of crop production is an ultimate 
objective, it is likely that pesticides will be used.  The 
types of activities that may require pesticides 
include dissemination of technologies for 
sustainable agricultural intensification; forestry; 
agricultural storage programs; and livestock health 
programs. All pesticides that are disseminated or 
used under the project will comply with WHO's 
list/standards for acceptable pesticide use. An 
integrated pesticide management plan has been 
prepared by the project and the document will be 
disclosed prior to appraisal. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 

The project will not operate within or near known 
cultural or historical heritage sites. However, as a 
precaution, this OP is triggered in the event of 
chance finds of historical or cultural relics, which are 
numerous in Haiti, during works, soil sub-surface 
drilling or excavation. Chance finds language has 
been reflected in the ESMF. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 
The policy is not triggered because there are 
no groups in Haiti who meet the definition of 
IPs of OP 4.10. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes The policy is triggered given that the project will be 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 27 of 33  

 

funding the rehabilitation of existing rural 
roads/tracks, possibly new small infrastructures for 
water harvesting/storage which are usually placed 
along the roads or in gullies, as well as potential 
expansion of local offices of the Ministry of 
Agriculture. These construction works may require 
land acquisition leading to involuntary resettlement, 
including the loss of income sources and means of 
livelihood, such as the loss of fruit trees and crops. 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be 
prepared by the GOH with guidance from the Bank 
to address the triggering of OP 4.12. RPF will be 
consulted and disclosed by appraisal. Upon the 
identification of cases of involuntary resettlement, 
Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) or Abbreviated 
Resettlement Action Plans (Abbrev. RAPs) will be 
prepared, consulted and disclosed in accordance 
with the policy. 
 
Any activity that may potentially lead to changes in 
land-tenure agreements, result in the establishment 
of protected areas, or may cause restriction of 
access to natural resources will be excluded from 
the project. The environmental screening form, 
which will be part of the ESMF will also include 
questions on social risks and impacts. The PIU 
responsible staff received a training by the Bank on 
October 18 on how to screen OP 4.12 impacts. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 
The project will not finance any activities related to 
dams or the operation of dams.  The ESMF will 
screen out any dam-related activity. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
The project will not be on international waters as 
defined under this policy. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
The project does not take place in any Disputed 
Area. 

 
 

KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
On the environmental side, there are no large scale, significant or irreversible impacts.  The interventions are largely 
soil conservation, tillage, tree planting and other soil enhancing activities.  Where there may be investments in 
infrastructure, these will be restricted to low impact public infrastructures such as rural and access roads, small 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 28 of 33  

 

bridges for crossing rivers and water harvesting infrastructure.  Impacts will therefore be small and highly localized. 
Other negative impacts may be related to improper technology transfer (e.g. inadvertent propagation of exotic 
species, expansion of plantations in natural forests, water harvesting that impacts the water table) and so on.  These 
can be effectively screened out and monitored, reducing the risk associated with these activities. On the social side, 
there are no large scale, significant and irreversible impacts expected. 
 
The promotion of policy and plans under the project will promote sustainable development; however, the ESMF 
prepared for the project includes measures to ensure that policies and plans developed under the project do not have 
long term negative impacts.  
 
Also, activities undertaken by the Caribbean Biodiversity Fund, which will be capitalized by the project, will be subject 
to a screening mechanism derived from the Project ESMF in order to screen out any activities with considerable 
negative environmental impacts, or mitigate impacts to an acceptable level.  
 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
No potential indirect or long term environmental or social impacts are expected.  The environmental impacts will be 
small scale and limited in scope. The potential social impacts are described under OP 4.01 and OP 4.12. 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. 
In terms of the environment, the project focuses on improving the stability of slopes and enhancing the fertility of soils 
in Haiti by introducing trees, stabilizing vegetation and so on.  The types of vegetation to be considered will be 
carefully matched with the particular environment/climate related problem that is evident in a region. For example, 
one would plant deep rooted vegetation in some cases where slopes need to be stabilized.  These are the types of 
alternatives that have been discussed and will continue to be discussed throughout preparation.  In terms of financing 
infrastructure, the project focused on key infrastructure that would support climate resilience- for example, bridges to 
allow river crossings when the river level is high and so on. The chosen infrastructure (by the commune) will be 
screened to ensure that the type of infrastructure chosen does not have significant adverse impacts on the 
environment. 
 
On the social side, any activity that may potentially lead to changes in land-tenure agreements, result in the 
establishment of protected areas, or may cause restriction access to natural resources will be excluded from the 
project.  
 
Civil works to be financed under the project are expected to be mostly of small size, and efforts will be placed on 
minimizing any possible negative effect through solid preliminary studies  and screenings allowing to clearly identify 
areas of interventions, and ensuring the adequate design, use of appropriate construction materials, and construction 
techniques etc. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower 
capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The project team has prepared an ESMF, an IPMP and an RPF, which will be consulted and disclosed by appraisal.  The 
Ministry of Agriculture, MARNDR, the primary agency responsible for the implementation of the project, has managed 
other Bank-funded projects in the past and they have experience with Bank safeguards policies and instruments, 
especially on the environment side. MARNDR will be hiring a second safeguards specialist to monitor social risks and 
impacts under this project. The second ministry that will be involved in this project’s implementation, the Ministry of 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 29 of 33  

 

Environment, does not have familiarity or capacity to implement social safeguards policies.   However, they have been 
closely involved in the preparation of the ESMF, IPMP and RPF. The safeguards implementation will be the 
responsibility of MARNDR, which will house the safeguards specialists.  
 
In the event that involuntary resettlement cannot be avoided by the necessary works, the Bank team will support the 
PIU to develop and implement Resettlement Action Plans. The project will develop a citizen engagement plan and a 
Grievance Redress Mechanism. The GRM ensures that complaints received are promptly reviewed in order to address 
project-related concerns. Additionally, communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected by a 
World Bank (WB) supported project may submit complaints to project-level grievance redress mechanism or the WB’s 
Grievance Redress Service (GRS). 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, 
with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The primary stakeholders of this project are smallholder farmers and families living in the selected watersheds 
targeted by the project, that depend on agricultural production for their livelihoods. Other key stakeholders along the 
agriculture value chains are service and input providers, buyers, and retailers.  The national, regional and local 
institutions that play a role in the landscape management and agriculture services are also important stakeholders for 
this project.  
 
The Project team will conduct consultations with a group of these stakeholders at the regions, that are tentatively 
identified at this stage. The ESMF and RPF will be consulted by appraisal. with key local actors (such as local 
government staff, farmers’ organizations, regional representatives of Ministry of Agriculture and Environment) in the 
tentatively identified municipalities.  Once the sites are identified, further detailed consultations that will take place 
with direct beneficiaries during project implementation.  People affected by involuntary resettlement will be 
consulted on compensation and resettlement policies in accordance with OP4.12. 
 
 
B. Disclosure Requirements  

 
OPS_EA_DISCLOSURE_TABLE Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other 

Date of receipt by the Bank Date of submission for disclosure 
For category A projects, date of 
distributing the Executive Summary of 
the EA to the Executive Directors 

06-Nov-2017 09-Nov-2017 
 

   

"In country" Disclosure   

   Haiti 
  13-Nov-2017 

Comments 

 
   

OPS_RA_D ISCL OSURE_T ABLE  

 

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process 

   

Date of receipt by the Bank Date of submission for disclosure  



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 30 of 33  

 

06-Nov-2017 09-Nov-2017  

   

"In country" Disclosure   
   Haiti 
  13-Nov-2017 

Comments 

 
     

OPS_ PM_D ISCL OSURE_TA BLE  

 

Pest Management Plan 
 
Was the document disclosed prior to 
appraisal? Date of receipt by the Bank Date of submission for disclosure 

Yes 06-Nov-2017 09-Nov-2017 

   
"In country" Disclosure   
   Haiti 
 13-Nov-2017 
 

Comments 

 
  

OPS_PM_ PC R_TAB LE  

 

If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to 
be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.  

If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why: 

 
 
 
 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project 
decision meeting)  
 
OPS_EA_COMP_TABLE OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
  
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes   
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report? 
Yes   
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan? 
Yes   

OPS_ NH_C OM P_TA BLE  

 

OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
  



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 31 of 33  

 

Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of critical natural habitats? 
No   
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the 
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank? 
NA   

OPS_ PM_C OM P_TA BLE  

 

OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
  
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes   
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes   
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or PM?  Are PMP requirements included in 
project design?  If yes, does the project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Yes   

OPS_ PCR_C OM P_TA BLE  

 

OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources  
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes   
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse impacts on cultural property? 
NA    

OPS_IR_ CO MP_TA BLE  

 

OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 

 
 

Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes  
 

 

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager review the plan? 
Yes  
 

 
 

 

  
OPS_F O_C OM P_TA BLE  

 

OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
  
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints been carried out? 
NA   
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these constraints? 
NA   
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include provisions for certification system? 
No      

OPS_ PDI_ CO MP_TA BLE  

 

The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 

 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for disclosure? 
Yes   



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 32 of 33  

 

Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language that are understandable 
and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs? 
Yes  

 
 
All Safeguard Policies 

 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of 
measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 

  
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost? 
Yes 

  
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures 
related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 

  
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately 
reflected in the project legal documents? 
Yes 

 
 
 

CONTACT POINT 

 

  World Bank 
 

Caroline Aurelie Plante 
Senior Livestock Specialist  

 

Nyaneba E. Nkrumah 
Sr Natural Resources Mgmt. Spec. 

  

 

  Borrower/Client/Recipient 
 

Ministry of Economy and Finance 

Jude Alix Patrick  Salomon 

Ministre de L’Économie et de Finances 

deshommesronald@yahoo.fr 
 

  Implementing Agencies 
 

Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources and Rural Development (MARNDR) 

Carl Monde 

Focal point - MARNDR 

carlmonde@gmail.com 
 
 

Ministry of Environment 

Emmanuel  Philippe 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 33 of 33  

 

Focal Point - Ministry of Environment 

mangofil@gmail.com 
 

 

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT 

 

The World Bank 

1818 H Street, NW 

Washington, D.C. 20433 

Telephone: (202) 473-1000 

Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects  

 

 

APPROVAL 

 

Task Team Leader(s): 
Caroline Aurelie Plante 
Nyaneba E. Nkrumah 

 

  Approved By 

Safeguards Advisor:   

Practice Manager/Manager: Preeti S. Ahuja 08-Dec-2017 

Country Director: Michelle C. Keane 08-Dec-2017 
 

    
 

http://www.worldbank.org/projects


