













































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Odisha Integrated Irrigation Project for Climate Resilient Agriculture (P163533) 

 
 

  
Sep 11, 2018 Page 1 of 14  

     

 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 03-Oct-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSC23298 

P
u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d



 
The World Bank  
Odisha Integrated Irrigation Project for Climate Resilient Agriculture (P163533) 

 
 

  
Sep 11, 2018 Page 2 of 14  

     

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

India P163533  Odisha Integrated 
Irrigation Project for 
Climate Resilient 
Agriculture (P163533) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

SOUTH ASIA Nov 13, 2018 Jan 28, 2019 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Republic of India Odisha Community Tank 
Development and 
Management Society 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The Project Development Objective is to intensify and diversify agricultural production, enhance climate resilience and 
improve water productivity in selected cascades of Odisha. 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 235.74 

Total Financing 235.74 

of which IBRD/IDA 164.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) 164.00 

Non-World Bank Group Financing 

     Counterpart Funding 71.74 

          Borrower 71.74 

   



 
The World Bank  
Odisha Integrated Irrigation Project for Climate Resilient Agriculture (P163533) 

 
 

  
Sep 11, 2018 Page 3 of 14  

     

 

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B - Partial Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 
 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

1. Over the past ten years, India has seen strong economic growth - exceeding 7 percent per annum - driven primarily 
by robust private consumption, a resilient services sector, and a revival in some industrial activities. The reduced 
momentum in investment and exports notwithstanding, annual growth rates are still projected to average 7.5 percent per 
annum in coming years because of the diversity in the country’s drivers of growth and the vast scope for improvement in 
many areas.   

2. Alongside this growth, India has achieved significant progress in reducing extreme poverty - from 46 percent in 1993 
to 21 percent in 2011 (using the international poverty line of $1.90 per person per day in 2011 purchasing power parity). 
World Bank estimates point to continued reduction in poverty in more recent years, indicating that the country is on track 
to eliminating extreme poverty by 2030. Urban growth and rising labor earnings due to movement of labor from agriculture 
to non-farm work, an unprecedented rise in wages for unskilled labor, and demographic changes (e.g. a declining 
dependency ratio), underlie the rapid poverty decline.  

3. Over the past three decades, the economy has undergone a structural shift from agriculture as the dominant sector, 
to services and industry. Even then, agriculture continues to be essential for achieving India’s development goals, as the 
sector employs about 59 percent of the country’s total workforce, is a source of livelihood for 70 percent of India’s rural 
households, and is the main source of economic linkages in rural areas. In 2017, the sector contributed about 17 percent 
to the national Gross Domestic Product (GDP). While its contribution to the economy is likely to keep declining, agriculture 
will continue being the single largest contributor to employment and income of the rural population in the foreseeable 
future. 

4. Because of a complex web of policies and institutions that limit the performance of agricultural markets, diminishing 
returns to technologies that once sparked the green revolution, and suboptimal diversification among others, the 
agriculture sector continues to perform below its potential. Long-term agricultural growth has averaged about 3 percent 
per year1 and generally lags the growth rate for the larger economy. Sector growth is subject to large annual shocks, which 
as projected, are expected to be exacerbated by climate change. In addition, India’s agriculture has, for long, been based 
on an unsustainable resource-intensive model, predominantly characterized by inefficient use of water and land 
resources, and as an imperative, will have to shift to higher levels of resource use efficiency, given the country’s low per 
capita natural resource endowments2 and the projected impacts of climate change.  

                                            
1 With decelerating productivity growth of food grains. 
2 With annual per capita water availability of only about 1,000 m3, India is one of the most water-stressed countries in the world. 



 
The World Bank  
Odisha Integrated Irrigation Project for Climate Resilient Agriculture (P163533) 

 
 

  
Sep 11, 2018 Page 4 of 14  

     

5. Moving away from its long-running policy focus on raising agricultural output and improving food security, the 
Government of India has now prioritized the doubling of farmers’ incomes by 2022 and through a number of interventions 
e.g. the Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY) is also committed to accord high priority to improving water use 
efficiency - more crop per drop - in a focused manner3. 

 

Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
6.  Odisha ranks among the fastest growing economies in India, consistently growing at rates higher than the national 
average. Mirroring the national level, Odisha’s economic growth has been mainly driven by services (43.5 percent of GDP) 
and industry (36.6 percent of GDP). Between 2012 and 2017, per capita incomes in the State increased by 30 percent 
(from Rs. 47,632 to Rs. 61,678) and poverty reduced at an annual rate of 3.5 percent. Despite this good progress, Odisha’s 
per capita income still stands at only 75 percent of the national average.  

7. While Odisha’s economy has transformed from a predominantly agro-based economy, agriculture remains a key 
sector, providing employment and livelihoods to more than 62 percent of the State’s workforce, and contributing close to 
20 percent to its GDP. Indeed, a strong correlation exists between agriculture sector performance and overall state GDP, 
pointing to strong linkages between agriculture and other sectors. 

8. Like much of India, Odisha’s agriculture sector performance, relative to potential, is low. The officially reported 
compound annual average growth rate of 2.8 percent for the sector for the period 2011-17, is below the national average, 
and masks the highly volatile sector performance, which in reality is characterized by significant negative growth every 
alternative year. Consequently, because of low sector performance, Odisha ranks at the bottom in terms of annual farmer 
income (i.e. Rs. 16,884 per family), only outperforming West Bengal, where the average farmer income stands at Rs. 
11,748 per annum.4 

9. Among others, key constraints to the improved performance of Odisha’s agriculture sector include: (i) low 
productivity; (ii) limited diversification; (iii) high exposure and vulnerability to extreme weather events; (iv) access to 
reliable irrigation; and (v) dysfunctional or non-existing value chains for important crops. First off, average yields for major 
crops in Odisha still lag both those in neighboring states with comparable factor endowments and the national averages 
(Table 1), and are far below their potential5.   

 Table 1. Average Yields, 2016-2017 

Crop  

------------------------------Crop Yields (ton/ha)------------------------------ 

Odisha 
Andra 

Pradesh 
Madhya 
Pradesh 

Telangana West Bengal 
India 

Paddy 1.49 3.47 1.75 2.91 2.89 2.40 
Pulses 0.55 0.30 0.94 0.77 0.97 0.79 
Wheat 1.33 na 2.98 1.40 2.68 3.20 
Potato 12.00 14.92 20.07 25.96 26.16 21.51 

10. According to the findings of a State-level NITI Aayog Task Force on Agriculture6, these low farm-level yields are 
largely due to limited adoption of productivity enhancing technologies (including the use of improved germplasm), a 

                                            
3 PMKSY seeks to achieve convergence of investments in irrigation at the field level, expand cultivable area under assured irrigation, improve 
on-farm water use efficiency, enhance adoption of precision-irrigation and other water saving technologies (more crop per drop), etc. 
4 National Sample Survey Organization, 2013.  Situation Assessment Survey of Agricultural Households, All India Debt and Investment & Land 
and Livestock Holdings in India (January – December 2013) 
5 World Bank. 2014. Republic of India: Accelerating Agricultural Productivity Growth. Washington, DC.   
6 Government of Odisha, 2016. Rejuvenation of Agriculture: Recommendations of State NITI Aayog Task Force. 



 
The World Bank  
Odisha Integrated Irrigation Project for Climate Resilient Agriculture (P163533) 

 
 

  
Sep 11, 2018 Page 5 of 14  

     

degrading natural resource base, inadequate and mostly unreliable irrigation7,8, and weaknesses in the extension system.  

11. Due to several factors9, Odisha’s progress with respect to diversification – an important vehicle for agricultural 
growth - has been mixed at best, even against a backdrop of real shifts in consumer demand towards more diversified 
food baskets. While the net area devoted to rice showed some reduction between 2006 and 2015, the latest year for 
which comprehensive data sets exist, the total area devoted to food grains has been increasing. In fact, according to the 
Odisha Economic Survey of 2017-18 example, the areas under spices, vegetables, fruits, and floriculture - a proxy for 
diversification - declined by 20 percent, 6 percent, 9 percent and 12 percent, respectively, between 2014 and 201710. 

12. In addition, extreme weather events, largely droughts, and to a lesser extent, floods and cyclones, also continue to 
undermine Odisha’s agriculture performance and have been the principal driver of the volatility in sector growth. Figure 
1 for example, shows percent annual growth in rice production-the major crop - over five decades, and attests to the 
vulnerability of the State’s agriculture to the debilitating impacts of extreme weather events, which seem to occur with 
almost predictable periodicity.   

Figure 1: Percent annual  growth in rice production, 1962-201411 

 

 

13. While Odisha has a long history with the menace of drought – going all the way to the drought of 186612 - recent 
trends point to an increasing frequency13 as well as more agricultural areas coming under the ambit of droughts. As 
pointed out in the Odisha Climate Change Action Plan, this trend will be further amplified in the future due to climate 

                                            
7 About 2/3 of the State’s gross cropped area is rain-fed and depends on monsoon – a vast reliance on nature in an environment with highly 
skewed annual rainfall availability.  
8 Of the total cultivable area of 8.7 million ha in the State, irrigation potential has been developed for 2.96 million ha in Kharif and 1.48 million 
ha in Rabi season.  
9 A comprehensive understanding of which will be developed during preparation. 
10 Government of Odisha, 2018: Odisha Economic Survey of 2017-18. 
11 Data source: Government of Odisha, Status of Agriculture in Odisha, 2014-2015.  
12 Reputed to have caused the death of one third of Odisha’s population due to famine. 
13 From 1 in 5 years to 1 in 2 years since 2009. 



 
The World Bank  
Odisha Integrated Irrigation Project for Climate Resilient Agriculture (P163533) 

 
 

  
Sep 11, 2018 Page 6 of 14  

     

change14. With 2/3 of its gross cropped area under rainfed production and an insignificant use of groundwater, the State 
has few and inadequate instruments to mitigate against climate change-induced weather vagaries.  

14. Moreover, even when Odisha has relatively more water resources than many States in India, Irrigation 
development is low and below the national average.  Of the total cultivated area of 8.7 million ha, only 1.9 million ha (21 
percent) is under irrigation. Only 34 percent of the total irrigation potential of 5.5 million ha has been developed and 
groundwater use is negligible. With limited irrigation development and seasonally skewed rainfall, Odisha is not making 
the most out of every drop of water. In fact, estimates indicate that about 40-50 percent of available rainfall is lost as non-
beneficial evapotranspiration, a loss higher than the neighboring states. In addition, many of the irrigation systems have 
become victim to a vicious cycle of the build-neglect-rebuild. Operation and Maintenance (O&M) is not conduced 
systematically as a result of insufficient funds, the quality of irrigation services degrades and further undermines farmers’ 
willingness and capacity to pay for services. Arrangements for irrigation management have not been adapted to the 
requirements of recent developments, including the use of groundwater, adoption of more individual irrigation 
technologies, and the need to adopt a cascade perspective on irrigation management. 

15. Furthermore, remunerative and reliable markets in Odisha, a precondition for sustained agricultural growth are 
limited, mainly due to poorly functioning value chains. For example, supply chains for otherwise high-value commodities 
(e.g. spices, vegetables) are fragmented and uncoordinated, often involving multiple layers of intermediaries in some 
places, and completely no players in many other places. 

16. The Government of Odisha (GoO) has identified increasing production and productivity, reducing the vulnerability 
of agriculture to climate change, diversification towards high-value crops, rainwater harvesting and improving efficiency 
of water use, improved produce marketing, and addressing absentee landlordism inter alia, as important issues to be 
addressed to improve the performance of the agricultural sector and raise farmer incomes. The proposed project 
contributes to these efforts. The proposal is to support higher agriculture growth, more efficient water use, better quality 
and reliability of irrigation service delivery, and strengthen the resilience to climate change of production systems in six 
districts (see Table 2) in Odisha.  

17. Characterized by highly skewed and variable rainfall patterns15, a lack of perennial rivers, these districts depend on 
a cycle of dry seasons alternating with increasingly uneven and erratic monsoons for water. On average, they suffer from 
marginal drought one in three to five years, moderate drought in six to eight years, and severe drought one in thirty years. 
Among other reasons, the undulating physiography and the predominantly small-sized land holdings limit the technically 
and economically efficient development of centralized major and medium irrigation systems (reservoirs and canals) to 
serve these areas and, they therefore, generally have comparatively lower irrigation coverage than other parts of the State 
(Table 2).  

    Table 2. Irrigation potential created as a ratio of cultivated land 

Project District Ratio of irrigation potential created to total cultivated area 
Kharif Rabi 

Ganjam 0.74 0.29 
Kandhamal 0.30 0.38 
Kalahandi 0.55 0.70 
Nuapada 0.42 0.58 
Mayurbhanji 0.55 1.15 
Keonjhar 0.37 0.51 

                                            
14 Climate projections indicate that drier areas will become drier and flood prone areas will be subject to more flooding. Other problems such 
as pest and disease outbreaks are also likely to increase due to climate change. 
15 When it rains, eighty six percent of the rains fall in the monsoon period (June-October), while the remaining 14 percent occurs during the 
other 7 months of the year, from November to May. 



 
The World Bank  
Odisha Integrated Irrigation Project for Climate Resilient Agriculture (P163533) 

 
 

  
Sep 11, 2018 Page 7 of 14  

     

State average 0.62 0.72 

 
18. The districts therefore, have historically relied on water, stored in cascades of impoundments (tanks) for agricultural 
production and as a buffer against droughts. The tanks support livelihoods of over 300,000 households, most of whom 
are in the poorest quintile. Besides sustaining agricultural livelihoods, the network of tanks in these areas also serves other 
important purposes such as controlling and reducing the impacts of floods - when they occur-and recharging the 
groundwater table. Investing in these districts will also help meet a key policy objective of the GoO to more evenly spread 
the benefits of irrigation - currently confined to a few districts in the form of major and medium irrigation projects16.   

19. Specifically, the project will support sustainable and resilient intensification, judicious diversification17 to high-value 
commodities (especially during the Rabi season and for some areas under upland rice in Kharif), improved produce 
marketing and also incentivize and improve the quality of irrigation service delivery and the reliability of water supply to 
ensure a more efficient, productive and equitable distribution of water to beneficiary farmers throughout the year that is 
more responsive to the more demanding higher value crops. The project builds on the successes of an earlier Bank-
financed Odisha Community Tanks Management Project in bridging the gap between the then existing irrigation potential 
and actual irrigation coverage of selected tanks and expands the engagement further into institutional reforms and 
capacity strengthening for improved system performance, diversification and marketing of farmer produce. 

 

Relationship to CPF 
 

20. The India CPF (2018-2022) argues that for the country to maintain its trajectory of high growth and poverty 
reduction, it must: (i) embrace much more efficient use of the country’s resources, particularly water and land and address 
the impacts of climate change; (ii) foster inclusiveness both for poverty reduction and as a key condition for sustaining 
high rates of economic growth; and (iii) strengthen the agility, performance and responsiveness of public sector 
institutions. One of the three CPF focus areas (Focus Area 1) proposed for Bank engagement is “resource efficient growth” 
where one of the Objectives is promotion of a more resource-efficient, inclusive and diversified growth in the rural sector. 
The proposed project dovetails and is consistent with Bank support (to include inter alia, support to sustainable 
productivity gains, CSA practices, diversification, investments in irrigation and drainage for improved water use efficiency, 
value chains etc.) that is envisaged under this Objective.  

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
21. The Project Development Objective is to intensify and diversify agricultural production, enhance climate resilience 
and improve water productivity in selected cascades of Odisha. Project beneficiaries include small and marginal farmers, 
Water Users’ Associations (Pani Panchayats), farmer producer organizations, and other agro-entrepreneurs. Targeted 
investments will be undertaken to address any gender gaps as well as benefit other vulnerable groups. 

Key Results (From PCN) 
 

22. The project is expected to lead to increased average yields, increases in the range, volume and value of marketed 
agricultural output, more productive and efficient use of scarce water resources, a more reliable supply and a better 
quality of irrigation service delivery, and improvements in farmers’ capacity to adapt to climate change. Proposed key 
outcome level performance indicators include the following: (i) increase in productivity of selected agricultural 

                                            
16 Government of Odisha, 2013. State Agriculture Policy, Department of Agriculture, Bhubaneswar. 
17 Diversification in this context is defined as reducing the emphasis on food grains and increasing the share of high-value 
agriculture. This would be done taking cognizance of the overall country policy intent to shift rice production towards relatively 
more water abundant states like Odisha. 



 
The World Bank  
Odisha Integrated Irrigation Project for Climate Resilient Agriculture (P163533) 

 
 

  
Sep 11, 2018 Page 8 of 14  

     

commodities supported by the project (t/ha); (ii) farmers adopting improved agricultural technology (number); (iii) share 
of non-rice products in total production in project areas(percent); (iv) water users provided with new/improved irrigation 
and drainage services (number); (v) acreage under crops that are less water demanding (ha); (vi) productivity of water use 
(kg/m3), and (vii) number of direct project beneficiaries (disaggregated by gender).  

 
D. Concept Description 

 
23. Agricultural production system improvements (e.g. improving productivity, system resilience to climate change and 
resource use efficiency) and market development are known to reinforce each other and are therefore better pursued 
and accomplished together. The proposed project primarily seeks to improve and diversify farmer yields and production, 
improve water productivity and efficiency, build resilience to climate change risks, and improve market access for farmers 
who can generate a marketable surplus in selected districts in Odisha. Producing higher value and more diverse crops puts 
a high premium on the quality and reliability of irrigation service delivery, as they leave no room for water supply errors 
and the higher use of farm inputs significantly increases the stakes. Higher value horticulture crops generally use less 
water as compared to wheat, paddy, sugarcane and cotton. The conceptual framework underlying the proposed design 
therefore links efforts to promote adoption of CSA practices18, diversification and productivity increases, with 
improvements in incentives for technology adoption, quality of water service delivery and water resource management. 
The project will comprise three components as described below: 

Component 1: Climate-Smart Intensification and Diversification of Agriculture 

24. The objective of this component is to increase agricultural productivity, strengthen the capacity of organized farmer 
groups to cope or adapt to climate change stresses affecting crop production, and diversify production in Rabi in response 
to effective demand as expressed by pre-identified commercial off-takers or gleaned from other reliable market signals. 
Support under this component is proposed to be organized around two mutually inclusive, overlapping and reinforcing 
subcomponents. 

Subcomponent 1.1: Support to Improved Productivity and Resilience 

25. This subcomponent aims at supporting and incentivizing farmer adoption of technologies and practices that 
demonstrably deliver the triple-wins of increased productivity, improved resilience to climate shocks and reduced GHG 
emissions, as a co-benefit. The exact nature of technology support will be: (i) a function of the specificities of production 
environments and unique climate vulnerabilities19 in individual cascade; (ii) scaled to farmer capacities and endowments 
and (iii) based on the principles of response to market demand, good choice of improved germplasm, adequate plant 
nutrition, and effective pest and disease management. 

26. In this respect, project support is envisaged to go towards organizing farmers for technology transfer purposes (e.g. 
through farmer field schools), technology sourcing and demonstration, farmer training, improving availability and access 
to productivity enhancing and resilient germplasm by strengthening key segments in the State’s seed production and 
distribution system, and strengthening advisory service provision, currently plagued by weaknesses in the extension 
system - such as inadequate manpower and limited knowledge and skills.   

Subcomponent 1.2: Support to Diversification and Produce Marketing 

27. The objective of this subcomponent is twofold: (i) support farmers to reduce the current emphasis on food grains 

                                            
18 In this context, CSA practices are defined as practices that sustainably increase productivity and farmers’ income and build resilience to 
climate change, while reducing GHG emissions where possible and appropriate 
19 To be mapped for the target districts following approaches developed through a World Bank Non- Lending Technical Assistance to Support 
Implementation of Odisha State Climate Change Action Plan. 



 
The World Bank  
Odisha Integrated Irrigation Project for Climate Resilient Agriculture (P163533) 

 
 

  
Sep 11, 2018 Page 9 of 14  

     

(especially rice and wheat) while increasing the share of high-value agriculture (e.g. fruits, spices and vegetables) in their 
overall production structure; and (ii) improve produce marketing to increase incomes and reduce price risks associated 
with diversification. A successful shift in favor of more diversified production would not only generate faster productivity 
and superior incomes for targeted farmers, but will also result into improved nutrition security, help reduce the water 
footprint of paddy, foster biodiversity, and strengthen resilience of the production systems to climate change.  

28. Project support to diversification and improved marketing is proposed to follow productive alliance approaches, 
which bring together organized farmers, produce buyers, technical service providers and leverage private sector financing 
to address market imperfections and build competitive value chains for select commodities. In this respect, the project 
could provide funding for several activities, including but not limited to: (i) awareness creation of diversification among 
farmers; (ii) identification of competitive value chains; (iii) farmer experimentation with new crops and 
training/demonstration of relevant production technology; (iv) strengthening of farmers for collective action (including in 
production, aggregation, technology transfer, among others); (v) business plan development; and (vi) selected productive 
investments - as would be identified in the business plans. Project support to crop diversification will be based on 
agronomic/agro-ecological suitability, comparative advantage of specific cascades, and local, national or international 
market opportunities. To further diversify farmer income streams (a key adaptation strategy) and maximize the utility and 
productivity of water stored in the tanks, during preparation, the project will explore the feasibility of using the tanks for 
seasonal aquaculture.  

Component 2: Improving Access to Irrigation and Water Productivity  

29. Access to reliable irrigation is generally critical to enhancing crop productivity, building resilience to climate change, 
promoting diversification and access to markets. It is doubly important in the targeted project areas that are characterized 
by frequent droughts and highly variable rainfall availability. Bridging increasingly longer dry spells during Kharif and 
producing more demanding higher value and more diverse crops during Rabi when the stakes are higher and when there 
is no margin for water supply errors, puts a high premium on the quality of irrigation services.   

30. Among others, reliability of irrigation services and a more productive use of water resources in the project areas is 
weighed down by: (i) the poor condition of hydraulic assets- mainly due to deferred maintenance; (ii) limited knowledge 
and skills in water management - often inadequate to provide supplemental irrigation during Kharif season, and to cover 
water-stress conditions during Rabi; and (iii) weak arrangements for O&M. Additionally, most of the tank irrigation 
systems have been developed for rice cultivation and need to be adapted for a more diversified and more demanding 
cropping system.  

31. The proposed project aims to improve the performance of irrigation throughout the year and across cascades of 
selected tank irrigation systems through modernization of hydraulic assets, institutional reforms, and capacity 
strengthening. The objective is to use water more efficiently, reduce water losses and save water during Kharif season, 
and transfer these savings to Rabi season. Capacities for irrigation management (including the introduction of asset 
management) will be strengthened to provide higher quality services. In addition, the project will promote sustainable 
groundwater use to supplement scanty rainfall and mitigate increasing rainfall variability. Key outcome indicators include 
the productivity of water use ($/m3) and the number of water users provided with new/improved irrigation and drainage 
services (number). 

Subcomponent 2.1: Irrigation Modernization 

32. The project will invest in the modernization of hydraulic assets. To that end, a comprehensive water assessment will 
be conducted in the Project cascades to identify opportunities for reducing water losses and for transferring the savings 
to Rabi season. For each of these opportunities, the implications on downstream water use will be identified through 
preparation of a pre- and post-project cascade-wide water balance. Investments include strengthening of canal bunds, 
modernizing hydraulic canal structures, installation of field channels and sub-surface pressurized pipes, and developing 



 
The World Bank  
Odisha Integrated Irrigation Project for Climate Resilient Agriculture (P163533) 

 
 

  
Sep 11, 2018 Page 10 of 14  

     

groundwater extraction. The project will also help farmers access subsidies at central and state level for the promotion of 
pressurized irrigation at chak level. In line with GoO’s intention, where feasible, the project will finance investments 
through DBOTs on a Hybrid Annuity Basis. 

Subcomponent 2.2: Irrigation Management 

33. Crop diversification and intensification require a higher quality of irrigation service delivery to meet the 
requirements of more demanding crops. Traditional arrangements for irrigation management often lack the capacities 
and incentives to deliver these improved services. The project will pursue institutional reforms and pilot the use of private 
(publicly funded) operators that will be incentivized to deliver high performing irrigation and O&M services through DBOT 
contracts on a Hybrid Annuity basis – in conformity with GoO’s intentions.  

34. The Project will promote conjunctive management and sustainable use of both ground- and surface water resources 
by improving groundwater monitoring linking these with irrigation scheduling decisions. The Project will also establish a 
surface and groundwater monitoring and benchmarking system and will (i) link these data to decision making on irrigation 
scheduling, and (ii) significantly improve citizen engagement in the management of irrigation systems.  

35. The project will strengthen capacities of farmers and Pani Panchayats through Farmers’ Field Schools and 
demonstrations, among others in modern irrigation technologies, improving irrigation efficiency and rational hydraulic 
asset management. The project will also introduce the allocation of investment resources on the basis of scheme 
performance (including abidance by agreed water allocation, meeting efficiency targets and cost recovery). Capacities will 
also be strengthened to improve the management and maintenance of hydraulic assets. 

Component 3: Project Management 

36. This component will strengthen capacities for project management, monitoring and evaluation (M&E) (including, 
inter alia, the areas of procurement and financial management) through the provision of goods, consultant services, 
training, and financing of incremental operating costs. This component will also develop a comprehensive management 
information and data collection and reporting system on key performance outputs and impact indicators through baseline 
surveys, participatory assessments, mid-term reviews and final evaluations. Staffing of the PMU will include a number of 
technical, financial management, M&E and safeguards (social and environmental) experts. Detailed implementation 
arrangements will be spelled out in the Project Operational Manual. (POM). Regular training of PMU staff will be organized 
to strengthen their capacities to implement the project. 

 
    

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
Odisha is located on the east coast of India along the Bay of the Bengal. The state has coastal line of about 450 km, and a 

geographical area of 155,707 sq. km which accounts for 4.87% of the total area of India. The state of Odisha can be 
divided into five agro-ecological zones: (1) The coastal plains, (2) The middle mountainous range – part of Eastern Ghats 
mountain range, (3) The rolling uplands, (4) river valleys, and (5) subdued plateaus. While the state has a wide network of 
river basins and sub-basins, it is mainly associated with 3 major river basins; Brahamani, Mahanadi and Vansadhara. 
Despite such diverse natural resource base, it’s agriculture sector has been performing well below its potential. Among 
key constraints to the improved performance of Odisha’s agriculture sector include: (i) low productivity; (ii) limited 
diversification; (iii) high exposure and vulnerability to extreme weather events; and (iv) dysfunctional or non-existing 
value chains for important crops. 
  



 
The World Bank  
Odisha Integrated Irrigation Project for Climate Resilient Agriculture (P163533) 

 
 

  
Sep 11, 2018 Page 11 of 14  

     

To address these concerns, the project will invest on repair and rehabilitation of about 600 tanks spread across the state 
to revive small holder farming. The interventions will include: improving the efficiency of water assets, modernizing the 
irrigation systems, enhancing agriculture productivity, promoting adaptive agriculture practices, enhancing fishery 
production,  and promotion of climate friendly agri-business practices. 
  
 
 

 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
Government of Odisha has recently completed a project of this nature, reflecting that the implementation capacity has 

already been established to address environment and social safeguard implications. The PMU is already in place, and the 
consultancy services for conducting ESMF, IPNM and TDP are already in place. Safeguard compliance tools needed are 
already available with the Government of Odisha to be used during the proposed project. 
 

 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 
Gopalaswamy Srihari, Social Specialist 
Anupam Joshi, Environmental Specialist 
Sharlene Jehanbux Chichgar, Environmental Specialist 

 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The physical investments under the project would 
include rehabilitation of existing water assets such as 
strengthening of canal bunds, modernizing hydraulic 
canal structures, installation of field channels, etc. 
where improper construction could result in adverse 
impacts. The investments under the climate resilient 
agriculture practices could result in positive impacts 
on the environment with effective planning and 
implementation. The project has been categorized as 
category B. There is no large scale, significant and/or 
irreversible impacts envisaged due to the proposed 
project interventions. An Environmental and Social 
Assessment (ESA) will be undertaken to identify 
environment and social issues of significance. Based 
on ESA, an Environmental and Social and Management 
Framework (ESMF) will be prepared toadress the 
requirements of a category B project, to manage risks 
and maximize environmental and social opportunities. 
Both the ESA and ESMF will take into account 
experiences and lessons from the previous project. 



 
The World Bank  
Odisha Integrated Irrigation Project for Climate Resilient Agriculture (P163533) 

 
 

  
Sep 11, 2018 Page 12 of 14  

     

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No No impact is expected due to project interventions. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

The rehabilitation and modernization of the tank 
system is likely to improve the water storage capacity 
and wetlands in the upper catchment. As the 
rehabilitation of tanks may impact natural resources 
including wetlands (if any). The ESA that  will help 
ascertain such impacts, and will develop a screening 
mechanisms that will help identify and avoid impacts 
on sensitive environmental habitats and important 
ecosystems. As details of the exact sites of the 
proposed investments are yet to be finalized, the 
ESMF would include all adequate measures for any 
negative effects on natural habitats. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No No activities impacting on forests will be undertaken 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The project will not directly finance pesticides, but 
improved irrigation efficiency and subsequent increase 
in crop productivity and diversification may induce 
pesticide use. The project will strictly use IPNM 
(Integrated Pest and Nutrition Management) 
approach. In addition, the ESMF will have a detailed 
local specific IPNM strategy for the project. This will 
reduce the reliance on chemical pesticides, include all 
measure for labour health and safety for pesticide 
application and usage, and guidance on training and 
demonstrations, that will be provided so that there is 
no significant adverse impact on the environment and 
public health. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No No impact is expected due to project interventions. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 Yes 

The state has a sizeable tribal population - 22.5% of 
the total population. In fact, Odisha is unique in having 
distinct tribal areas enshrined under the 5th Schedule 
of the Indian Constitution. At this stage, investment 
plans and locations are not known, and therefore, a 
Tribal Peoples Planning Framework (TPPF) will be 
prepared. Subsequently, sub-project specific Tribal 
Development Plans will be developed as and when 
sub-project locations are finalized. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 No 

The project does not anticipate any form of land 
acquisition or involuntary resettlement impacts as it 
would cover the existing  tank with a focus on repair 
and rehabilitation only. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 Yes 
No new dam construction will be  supported under the 
project. The project will rehabilitate and modernize 
the existing rainwater harvesting structures (known as 



 
The World Bank  
Odisha Integrated Irrigation Project for Climate Resilient Agriculture (P163533) 

 
 

  
Sep 11, 2018 Page 13 of 14  

     

Tanks and each having more than 40 Ha of command 
areas). Some of them would be having earthen 
embankments above 10 meters high, hence the 
project is triggered. 
This policy was triggered during the previous project, 
and a Dam Safety panel was put in place. The same 
Dam Safety panel will continue for this project under 
the technical guidance from the Chief Engineer, 
Central Designs Organization. The project will seek 
better coordination with the Dam Safety panel and 
support safety enhancement of the tank system as 
part of the tank rehabilitation. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
There is no evidence that the project would impact on 
any international water ways 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No Project areas do not fall in any disputed areas. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Mar 31, 2019 
 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
The Borrower has already engaged consultants who shall commence preparation of the safeguards instruments soon. 

They shall undertake ESA to prepare Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF), Tribal Peoples Planning 
Framework (TPPF), Integrated Pest Management Plan (IPMP) / Integrated Nutrient Management Plan (IPNM). These 
instruments are expected to be ready by March 31, 2019, or before appraisal and will be publically disclosed.  
The ESMF will provide essential baseline data, confirm policies that are triggered, assess likely impacts of the project 

interventions. The ESMF will also propose mitigation measures for any adverse impacts that may be envisaged through 
the design and construction phases of various interventions. Recommendations for strengthening institutional capacity, 
and estimate the budget required for the implementation will also be included. Assessments will be participatory with 
extensive consultations with all the stakeholders. 
 
 

CONTACT POINT 

 

World Bank 

Ranjan Samantaray, Abel Lufafa, IJsbrand Harko de Jong 

Sr Agricultural Spec. 
 

 

Borrower/Client/Recipient 



 
The World Bank  
Odisha Integrated Irrigation Project for Climate Resilient Agriculture (P163533) 

 
 

  
Sep 11, 2018 Page 14 of 14  

     

 

Republic of India 

Ms. Bandana Preyashi 

Director (MI) 

bandana.preyashi@gov.in 
 

 

Implementing Agencies 
 

Odisha Community Tank Development and Management Society 

Dr. Kamal Lochan Mishra 

Project Director (OIIPCRA) cum Additional Secretary to Govt, 

spuoiipcra.od@gov.in 
 
 

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT 

The World Bank 

1818 H Street, NW 

Washington, D.C. 20433 

Telephone: (202) 473-1000 

Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects  

 

 

APPROVAL 

Task Team Leader(s): Ranjan Samantaray, Abel Lufafa, IJsbrand Harko de Jong 
 

  Approved By 
APPROVALTBL 

Practice Manager/Manager: Mary Kathryn Hollifield 13-Sep-2018 

Country Director: Luc Lecuit 03-Oct-2018 
    
 
 
 
 
 

http://www.worldbank.org/projects


