






















































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Livestock and Fisheries Sector Development Project (P159382) 

 
 


Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 30-Oct-2016 | Report No: PIDISDSC19772 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Ethiopia P159382  Livestock and Fisheries 
Sector Development 
Project (P159382) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA Apr 24, 2017 Sep 05, 2017 Agriculture 

Lending Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Federal Ministry of Finance 
and Economic Development, 
Federal Democratic Republic 
of Ethiopia 

Ministry of Livestock and 
Fisheries 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
Increase livestock and fisheries productivity , commercialization and market access of targeted smallholders in Ethiopia. 

 

 Financing (in USD Million) 

 

Financing Source Amount  

International Development Association (IDA)  150.00  

Total Project Cost  150.00  

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B-Partial Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

 
SAFEGUARDS_TABLE_OPS Have the Safeguards oversight and clearance functions been transferred to the Practice Manager? (Will not be 
disclosed) 
No    
 
 

 
 
Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
 
1. Ethiopia is a large, landlocked, and diverse country. It is the 11th poorest country in the world by 
income per person, and home to Sub-Saharan Africa’s second largest population of about 92 million people, the 

vast majority of which are rural dwellers. The natural resources base remains the foundation for most 

livelihoods, and is subject to considerable climate risks. Despite past progress, a historic legacy of 

underinvestment still bears its mark as more than half of the adult population is illiterate and the country’s 

infrastructure deficits remains one of the largest in the world. Ethiopia is undergoing a faster demographic 

transition than the rest of Africa and the rapidly rising working-age population presents opportunities as well as 

challenges. 

 

2. Ethiopia has experienced a sustained period of rapid economic growth and progress towards the 
achievement of Millennium Development Goals (MDG), however it retains a very high poverty rate, high levels 

of chronic under-nutrition and continued vulnerability of households and communities.  The “development 

state” model, put in place following the overthrow of the repressive military regime in the early 1990s, has seen 

high levels of government-led investment in infrastructure, a commitment to decentralization of service delivery 

and devolution of authority and some liberalization of the economy.  While these reforms have progressed to 

different degrees, the impacts on the economy have been broadly positive, with strong and generally broad-

based economic growth averaging around 10 percent over the past 10 years.  

 

3. The services and agricultural based economy is relatively stable, but the private sector remains nascent. 
Agriculture accounts for most jobs and about 40 percent of output and exports. Services accounts for close to 

half of output and half of exports. Manufacturing shares of output, jobs and exports have remained stagnant at 

around five percent, but the sector holds the promise of a takeoff. The economy is relative stable though high 

inflation presents occasional challenges. Substantial external deficits arise largely as a result of very low exports 

and high public capital imports. Supported by a system of financial repression and other heterodox macro-

financial policies, Ethiopia has the third highest public investment rate in the world, but the sixth lowest private 

investment rate. This reflects a fledgling private sector with state owned enterprises dominating several key 

services sectors. 

 

4. Albeit from a low base, the country has seen solid progress on a range of human development 
indicators. Poverty in both rural and urban areas has been reduced substantially though remains high by 

international standards, with 78 percent of the population living below US$2 per day. Despite high levels of 

public resources channeled to the sector, the MDG targets for universal primary education would likely not be 

met, though gender parity is on course. With respect to health and nutrition, Ethiopia is on track to reach the 

child mortality, HIV-AIDS and malaria MDGs as a result of the expansion of health infrastructure and service 

delivery systems.  Under-nutrition remains a major challenge: despite reductions, levels of underweight and 

stunted children remain very high, and is prevalent in both food secure and food insecure districts and within all 

but the highest wealth quintile.  

 

5. The vision of the country, as expressed in the Growth and Transformation Plan (GTP, 2009/10 to 
2014/15), and in tvhe Second Growth and Transformation Plan (GTPII, 2015 to 2020) is to reach the level of a 

middle-income economy by 2025.  This is an ambitious goal, and would require the country to move to a higher 


 

growth trajectory and address persistent challenges including ensuring macro-economic stability, the lagging 

quality of social services, the weak capacity of the public sector and encouraging a higher level of private 

investment. Further opening of the economy would be vital to achieve increased productivity and 

competitiveness in the industrial and services sector and to achieve the government’s ambitious plans for 

agricultural transformation.  

 

6. The challenges of moving to higher growth need also to be set in the context of significant external and 
internal risks that may need to be addressed. External economic shocks could impact on growth, including the 

decline in prices for export commodities, while issues with neighboring countries could increase domestic 

instability, including tensions with Eritrea, instability in Somalia and South Sudan, and the on-going water 

related dispute with Egypt.  Internally, vulnerability to natural disasters, mainly drought, would continue to 

undermine development efforts, with trends suggesting an increase in rainfall variability. 
 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
7. The agricultural sector remains a dominant sector in Ethiopia and contributes significantly to economic 
growth. Although the Ethiopian economy is undergoing a structural transformation, (from agriculture to 

services), agriculture comprises 45 percent of total output and employs 78 percent of its labor force. In addition, 

the sector is a major contributor to export earnings, with over 80 percent of goods exports (including coffee). 

Despite its declining share in the economy, the agriculture sector is growing rapidly. Based on official statistics, 

the sector grew on average by 7 percent per year over the past 15 years. Although there is debate about the 

reliability of these figures, with some studies showing a slower growth rate, there is consensus that the sector 

grew at fast pace over the past decade. The key sources of growth include: (1) increased area under cultivation; 

(2) increased productivity, largely driven by large public investments in agricultural extension and rural roads 

among others, and (3) some advances in public policy including improvements in land tenure security. In 

addition to contributing to economic output and exports, agricultural growth correlates with poverty reduction 

through positive impacts on farming and non-farm rural economies.  

 

8. Livestock (including fisheries) is emerging as a priority focus area for the Government. It is as part of its 
ambitious plans under the GTP2, which would support the country to move towards middle-income status by 

2025. Despite the neglect and lack of attention to date, the livestock sector is seen as significant in achieving 

multiple goals of the government including: (i) contribution to overall economic growth, including an increase 

in the volume and value of exports; (ii) contributing to poverty reduction in both highland and lowland areas; 

(iii) contributing to improved food security and nutritional outcomes for rural and urban households; and 

(iv) supporting the country’s green growth priorities. In this context, the Government has laid the institutional 

and analytical basis for the sector with the creation of the new Ministry of Livestock and Fisheries (MoLF) in 

October 2015, and the recent approval of the Livestock Master Plan (LMP) based on a rigorous Livestock 

Sector Analysis.  

 

9. Ethiopia has 55 million head of cattle, 78 million goats and sheep, 28 million chickens and 5 million 
beehives. It has the largest livestock population in Africa and ranks fifth in the world

1
. In addition, there is 

potential to better utilize water resources to develop the fisheries and aquaculture sector. In spite of this 

potential, food, nutrition and livelihood securities remain a challenge for many households. Approximately 44 

      

10. Spurred by population growth, increasing urbanization and incomes, domestic demand for meat and 
dairy products continues to grow. The meat and dairy markets present huge opportunities for business, and 

increasing the availability of animal sourced products can address food and nutrition security challenges in 

Ethiopia. However, key challenges continue to undermine the performance and potential of the livestock sector. 

The sector as a whole is characterized by low production and productivity levels. For example, the average milk 

yield of Ethiopian cows is 1.5 kg per day, which is lower compared to other countries in the region such as 

Kenya (3.6 kg per day) and Rwanda (3.6 kg per day), and significantly lower compared to major milk producing 

countries such as China (7.8 kg per day) and the US (25 kg per day)
3
. Several factors undermine livestock 

productivity and production. Inadequate feeds, poor animal health due to disease prevalence, low livestock 

genetic make-up, weak adoption of improved livestock practices and weak livestock support services are major 

sources of low productivity levels. The public sector dominates livestock support service delivery, and service 

delivery systems for animal health, breeding, feed, finance and extension are weak.   

 

11. Livestock disease incidence is high and to limit its impact, especially economic losses for producers, 
animal health and veterinary services need to work more effectively both in terms of quality of service and 

institutional management. Often rural farmers are underserved -- one health post covers three Kebeles – and 

complain that service provided do not meet their needs. There are over 5000 health staff in the public sector and 

the private sector engagement is limited to urban and peri-urban areas.
4
 There is also dissatisfaction with the 

quality of drugs and vaccines available. The National Veterinary Institute produces 12-17 vaccines for 

transboundary and for some endemic animal diseases. Other vaccines are imported.  Counterfeit and 

substandard drugs are sold next to quality drugs and over 90 percent of animal drugs are imported.
5
 VDFACA is 

responsible for regulation and control of veterinarian vaccines and drugs but is a new agency and building 

capacity.     

 

12. Poor animal nutrition due to feed scarcity, quality and affordability is another key challenge to livestock 
productivity in Ethiopia.  In dairy, only 0.2 percent of cattle holders use improved feed

6
. Limited use of 

improved fodder production and underdeveloped feed preservation practices result in feed shortages in the 

highland mixed crop livestock system, while bush encroachment and rangeland deterioration due to lack of 

sustainable resource management  limit feed availability in pastoral and agro-pastoral areas. Overall, grassland 

coverage of Ethiopian land has been reduced from 30 percent (1980) to 12 percent (2000)
7
. This has 

significantly reduced the amount of roughage available for livestock feed. Extension work in feed has not paid 

significant attention to improved conservation and use of crop residue and by products. In addition, the 

imposition of a 60 percent VAT tax on imported feed pre-mix, concentrates and other inputs combined with 

high custom duties (53 percent) on feed mill ingredients significantly raises the cost of production
8
. These 

factors hinder the use of improved feed and fodder, limiting nutritional health and productivity of livestock.    

 

13. Over 90 percent of Ethiopia’s livestock population is of indigenous breeds (cattle 98 percent and poultry 
95 percent) with low productivity levels. For an average laying period, indigenous chickens lay on average 12 

                                            
2

eggs per hen compared to 107 eggs for exotic breeds
9
. Improving the genetic potential through crossbreeding 

and improving indigenous breeds is paramount in raising livestock productivity. The National Artificial 

Insemination Center (NAIC) produces and distributes semen at heavily subsidized cost ($0.23 cents per 

insemination)
10

. However, conception rates remain very low (less than 40 percent on average). AI service 

delivery is weak: producers often do not obtain the service at the right time and the NAIC collects and processes 

inadequate semen. There is a need for policy to encourage competition among alternatives AI service providers, 

while the national breeding policy focuses on guiding the choice of breeds and monitor breeding materials.  

 

14. Markets of livestock products are largely unorganized and fragmented. In dairy, only 2 percent of 
marketed milk supplied from the highlands is handled by the organized sector concentrated in urban areas. The 

rest is sold through informal channels, which are characterized by no licensing requirements, limited 

compliance with safety standards and high risks of contamination. For meats, there is inadequate control and 

inspection of abattoirs. Backyard production characterizes the poultry sector, yet the potential of backyard 

poultry remains untapped. Per capita consumption of milk and poultry in Ethiopia are low, compared to those in 

other East African markets
11

. However, Ethiopians regularly consume dairy products
12

, and the projected 

increase in demand in response to population growth, urbanization presents business opportunities in milk and 

meat markets
13

, especially opportunities that can include more women (e.g. milk and poultry).  

 

15. To increase the potential of the livestock product markets, including export of livestock products, 
several improvements are needed including, strengthening market linkages, increasing per capita consumption 

and greater awareness of the nutritional value of milk and livestock products, increasing value addition, and 

improving food safety and quality measures. Most of all, there is a need to rethink the roles of the public and 

private sectors: there is considerable scope to increase private sector investment in production, processing and 

service provision, while strengthening national programs’ capacity and government’s regulatory roles.   

 

16. The main elements justifying increased investment in the sector are as follows: (i) Ethiopia has the 
largest livestock population in Africa, which can be a major asset for economic growth, poverty reduction, 

improved food security and nutritional outcomes; (ii) the livestock sector is underperforming despite its 

enormous potential; (iii) public services to the agriculture sector have prioritized the crop sector over livestock. 

The main service delivery with respect to the feed, animal health and animal breeding has faced systemic and 

operational challenges limiting the sector to develop; (iv) low participation of the private sector in livestock 

sector limits private investments and opportunities for intensification and commercialization. Weak market 

linkages and high cost of basic inputs and low access to appropriate financial products are major features of the 

smallholder livestock systems; and (v) weak institutional capacity throughout the sector, including in private 

and public organizations is a further hindrance to the growth of the sector.  

17. It is in this context that the Government is now giving greater attention to the sector. The  Government 
of Ethiopia has recently completed the LMP, which provides an ambitious vision for the transformation of the 

sector. In view of this, there is a clear and strong rationale to design a livestock project to address the challenges 

of overall weak performance of the sector, limited access to quality livestock services and markets, limited 

participation of the private sector and institutional and policy gaps and challenges existing in the sector.   

                                            
9

18. Key guiding principles underpinning preparation of the proposed project include: 

a. The needs are long term and require policy and institutional reforms, coupled with public and 
private sector investments. The requested IDA support would therefore need to be positioned in a 

broader, longer term support to the sector. The proposed project, likely to have a six year timeframe, 

would aim to invest in addressing some immediate needs in the sector, while supporting key 

institutional building blocks for the longer term development of the sector. 

b. The team would aim to bring in leading global technical knowledge to the preparation process, 
including a close collaboration with the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 

(FAO), the International Livestock Research Institute (ILRI) and the World Organization for Animal 

Health (OIE). In this regard, it has been agreed with FAO that its staff would join the preparation 

team and provide substantive inputs for the project design process. 

c. The preparation process would seek to collaborate with IFC, IFAD and on-going WB-financed 
projects to ensure alignment and where appropriate to seek opportunities for more formal 

collaboration and/or co-financing. 

The project would engage with multiple stakeholders in the sector. From the Government side, this would 

stretch beyond the MoLF, and include further relevant Ministries and Agencies, including the Ministry of 

Natural Resource Management (MoNRM), Ministry of Trade, Ministry of Industry, the Agricultural 

Transformation Agency (ATA), etc., at both Federal and Regional levels. It would also include private sector 

participants and associations, and farmer/herder/professional representatives. 
 
Relationship to CPF 
 

19. The Ethiopia Country Partnership Strategy dated August 29, 2012 was completed at the end of FY16 
and the new Country Partnership Framework (CPF) is under preparation. It will be based on the Systematic 

Country Diagnostic (SCD), which was completed in March 2016. The SCD identifies the most critical 

constraints and opportunities facing Ethiopia to accelerate progress towards the WBG twin goals. It emphasizes 

the leading role that agricultural growth (including livestock) has had in driving the reduction of poverty. The 

predominance of agriculture as a source of income for the poorer households in Ethiopia suggests that growth in 

the sector will remain important for poverty reduction in the coming years. The SCD identifies eight binding 

constraints to the achievement of the twin goals, including poor market access for farmers and an uncompetitive 

private sector. These resonate with the aims of the LMP, which emphasizes the need for private sector 

investment with approaches that link livestock producers better to markets. Although still in draft, the new CPF 

will likely include objectives to develop the institutions, services and infrastructure to increase private sector 

engagement in the economy, and to increase agricultural and livestock productivity and commercialization. The 

project would be closely aligned to these goals, as it would aim to increase smallholder productivity and for 

selected products to improve the linkages for smallholders to value chains, and would support the improved 

functioning of these value chains. 

 




C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 

 
 
Increase livestock and fisheries productivity , commercialization and market access of targeted smallholders in 
Ethiopia. 

 

20. Strategic approach. The principal aim of the project is to support the government’s strategy for livestock 
growth and transformation as articulated in its GTP2 and LMP in adding value to the existing investments in 

support to the sector. It also supports the fisheries sector, not included on the LMP but newly added by the 

government as a clear priority. The proposed project would follow a dual approach of: (i) supporting immediate 

and long-term capacity building of the newly established MoLF and its strategic national programs; and (ii) 

targeting strategic commodity value chains through a comprehensive support to smallholder producers, in line 

with the government cluster approach.   

 
21. Direct beneficiaries. The primary beneficiaries of the project would include smallholder farmers 
inclusive of family, traditional and small-scale producers; smallholder farmers with improved husbandry 

practices; and producer organizations. Smallholder producers are being considered around four different levels 

of advancement (para. 23). Other direct beneficiaries would be: (i) livestock farmer’s organizations and their 

apex institutions; (ii) small and medium scale private livestock operators and enterprises; (iii) vulnerable groups, 

particularly women and youths; and (iv) livestock support services institutions, including public livestock 

research and extension services, NGOs, and service providers involved in the targeted livestock value chains in 

the project areas.  

22. Indirect beneficiaries. Secondary beneficiaries would include other livestock producers not directly 
involved with the project activities who would indirectly benefit from the national programs (e.g. improved 

animal diseases service delivery). Value chain actors (buyers, processors, and exporters) would benefit from 

increased provision of livestock products. On the consumption side, consumers in Ethiopia would benefit from 

increased and better quality of national animal sourced products supply. Other indirect beneficiaries would be 

livestock service providers, including private veterinarians, and inputs providers, including feed, veterinary 

medicines, and genetic material suppliers. 

23. Transformation pathway. In order to address the actors in holistic and systematic manner, the 
identification mission developed a transformation pathway for improved livestock productivity and 

commercialization. In this pathway, the project envisions the smallholder farmers to move through stages (Stage 

1: Smallholder farmer, Stage 2: stage 1 with improved husbandry practices, Stage 3: stage 2 organized into 

producer organizations and Stage 4: stage 3 in productive partnerships along the value chain) for them to 

achieve the goals of increased productivity, commercialization, and market access, in an inclusive and 

sustainable manner. Each stage requires a specific set of interventions tailored to the beneficiary present status 

in the transformation pathway. Therefore, the project would simultaneously intervene in all four stages of the 

transformation pathway, but with a differentiated focus: stage 1 and stage 2, where most of the Ethiopian 

smallholders are present, would require fundamental access to quality services, inputs and organization and 

management skills; stage 3 and stage 4, where fewer actors are currently present, would require more 

specialized support. Figure 1 below elaborates about the transformation pathway in more detail.  

24. Target Value Chains. The project would target three priority value chains considered strategic both for 
food security/national supply and for their potential for growth and innovation. The primary target value chains 

are: (i) dairy with small-scale mixed crop-livestock systems in wet highlands and dairy belts, including peri-

urban areas; (ii) poultry with small-scale broilers and layers systems in all highlands, urban and peri-urban 

production zones; and (iii) fish with improved inland fisheries and aquaculture in selected suitable areas. In 

addition, the project would support the red meat value chain nation-wide through its support to the strategic 

national programs on animal health, access to feed and traceability system, as well as through its direct support 

to the dairy value chain in small-scale mixed crop-livestock systems through specific income generating 

activities such as fattening. The latter would be supported through the capacity building of national programs.  

There is a strong rationale for the selection of the dairy, poultry, and fisheries and aquaculture value chains for 

the project. These commodities are important for the food and nutritional security of the country. Milk is a 

remunerative commodity which can have a significant impact on poverty alleviation efforts for the estimated 8 

million households in Mixed Rainfall Sufficient (MRS) and Mixed Rainfall Deficient (MRD) regions that have 

dairy cattle as primary livestock. In addition, improving the productivity of the dairy sector would have positive 

effect in reducing GHG emission intensity and climatic sustainability. Poultry meat and eggs are important 

sources of protein. Successful poultry interventions would enable the sub-sector to move to improved and more 

organized family poultry with semi-scavenging crossbreds, better access to services, inputs and markets, and 

expand its scale of more specialized dual purposes breeds, and layer and broiler operations. Such a 

transformation would contribute considerably to reducing poverty and increase national income. In addition, 

improving the productivity of the poultry sector would have positive effect on the feed conversion ratio (kg feed 

per kg product), and help meet the Climate Resilience Growth Economy target of increasing the share of 

chicken meat to total meat consumption from the current 5% to 27% by 2030, by substituting red meat with the 

chicken meat. This substitution can have environmental benefits as red meat comes from larger high-emitting 

ruminant. Fisheries and aquaculture are important to address the food and nutrition security. Fish is a 

remunerative commodity and can play a significant role in poverty alleviation efforts for the 100,000 

households who largely depend on fishing, with the potential to increase the number of households to half a 




million. Sustainable investment in fisheries would enable Ethiopia to exploit the ample potential of its 

renewable fisheries resources found in many lakes, reservoirs and rivers. Investors are eager to enter the 

aquaculture sub-sector. But some major hurdles including high quality fingerling and fish-feed production, need 

to be removed for such investment to actualize. 

 

25. Geographical targeting: The primary geographic focus area of the project would be the rural and peri-
urban areas of the highland regions where the dairy, poultry, fisheries and aquaculture value chains dominate. 

Furthermore, the project would follow the Government cluster approach and intervene in the existing or planned 

clusters of dairy, poultry and fisheries and aquaculture. This would enable the project to benefit from synergistic 

gains which might arise from other investment (infrastructure, private sector, etc.) coming in these clusters. 

Tentatively, the project might be implemented in the following regions/places in Ethiopia: Amhara, Addis 

Ababa, Oromiya, SNNR, Tigray, Harari, Benishangul Gumuz, Dire Dawa and Gambella. 

 
Key Results (From PCN) 

 
26. The following PDO level results indicators have been identified : 

(i) Number of direct project beneficiaries reached, disaggregated by gender (core indicator) and age 
group (18-35 yrs., representing the youth); 

(ii) Percentage increase of productivity of targeted small-scale productions (by selected commodity);  

(iii) Percentage increase in the sales of targeted small scale production (by selected commodity); and 

(iv) Beneficiary satisfaction rate with livestock services delivery systems supported by the project 
(disaggregated by gender and age group). 

 
D. Concept Description 

 

27. The project would be structured as an Investment Project Financing (IPF), funded by an IDA credit for 
US$150 million over six years (to be confirmed). At this stage, it was agreed with the Government to consider 

structuring the project around the following four components: (A) Strengthening National Programs; (B) 

Farmer’s Access to Productive Services, Inputs and Assets; (C) Farmer’s Access to Output Markets; and 

(D) Project management, coordination and monitoring and evaluation. This structure would be further reviewed 

and revised if necessary during the preparation period.    

28. The first component is crosscutting and designed to build immediate and long term human and 
institutional capacity of the key actors in the livestock and fisheries sector, as well as support key Strategic 

National Programs (SNPs), notably on animal health, feed and genetic [in order to improve the delivery of 

livestock services to small scale livestock producers]. The second component is designed to support sustainable 

productivity increase in the selected commodity value chains, through improved smallholders’ access to 

effective livestock and fisheries services, inputs and productive assets. The third component is designed to 

allow better access to markets for smallholders, through collective actions and productive partnerships, by 

supporting business linkages between livestock producer organizations and/or cooperatives, buyers and 

financial institutions and value addition at producer organizations/cooperatives levels where business 


 

opportunities exist. The fourth component would support implementation of the first three components and 

inform the project execution and performance monitoring, reporting and knowledge management. 

 

Component A: Strengthening National Programs.  The first component of the project would be designed to 

building immediate and long-term human and institutional capacity of the livestock and fisheries sector key 

actors, as well as supporting key selected strategic national programs (SNPs). In addition, this component 

could support the development of a contingency emergency response plan, to increase preparedness in the 

event of a crisis affecting the livestock sector (subcomponent A4). 

 

This component would have the following four sub-components:  

 

29. Sub-component A1. Policy development, investment planning and sector coordination. This sub-
component would strengthen staff capacity in the MoLF to carry out its core responsibilities of sector analysis, 

policy preparation and implementation, and sector monitoring and evaluation, and coordination. Activities 

could include: identification of short-and long-term training and education needs, improvement of the MoLF 

information system, development of a communication strategy and implementation plan to improve the relation 

between the ministry and key stakeholders involved in the targeted value chains, including private investors and 

financial institutions, supporting ongoing modernization and implementation of the sector legislation including 

the development of norms, quality and safety standards of inputs and animal sourced products.  

 

30. Sub-component A2. Sustainable animal health and advisory services. Strengthening Veterinary 
Services (VS) would enhance the government long-term capacity to detect and respond quickly to major disease 

outbreaks (PPR, CBPP, FMD, HPAI and NCD to name a few). It would further contribute to the control of 

‘diseases of production’ (parasitic, vector-born or bacteriological diseases) that negatively affect animal 

productivity. This component would build on the recent results from the OIE Performance of Veterinary 

Services pathway. In conjunction with the SNP2, it aims to promote partnership between the public authorities, 

the private veterinarians, and the associative actors, especially through: (1) re-focusing the official VS towards 

its core public functions, (2) scaling up of the sanitary mandate approach (delegating, under the oversight of the 

official VS, public tasks to private veterinarians), (3) progressive transfer of private tasks to the private and 

associative actors, and (4) supporting the veterinary statutory body (auto-control of the veterinary profession).  

 

31.  Strengthening Extension Services (ES), especially animal husbandry management practices, would 
require a transition from a public system of technical subjects delivery to a public-private system of 

comprehensive and adapted (basic or specialized) advisory services. In conjunction with the SNPs, the specific 

path for such a transformation would be defined during project preparation.  

 

32. Strengthening Producer Cooperatives (PCs), would be the necessary complement to the VS and ES, to 
improve the capacity of the smallholders in formulating their needs and evaluate the services they receive. 

Ultimately, the growth and transformation of the livestock and fisheries sector would require a strong and well-

balanced institutional tripartite: the Public, Private, and Cooperative sectors working together to deliver the 

fundamental functions of the sector. Support to the VS, ES and PCs would have a national coverage, although 

specific activities would be targeted towards the selected commodity value chains, in conjunction with 

subcomponent B2.  

   

33. Sub-component A3. Strategic national programs (SNP). Five major national programs were 
considered during identification. They would be further developed during project preparation.  

a. Animal identification, traceability and performance recording (SNP1) 
b. Animal health program

14
 (SNP2) 

c. National forage development (SNP3) 
d. Dairy-meat and poultry breeding program (SNP4) 
e. Sustainable fisheries management and biodiversity conservation (SNP5)  

 

The World Bank Group is supporting b) Animal health and d) Dairy/poultry breeding policy in the L-MIRE 

project. The proposed project will build on this work.   

 

34. Sub-component A4. Contingency emergency response (US$0 million). Following an adverse natural 
event that results in a major natural disaster, the government of Ethiopia may request the Bank to reallocate 

project funds to support response and reconstruction. This component would draw resources from the 

unallocated expenditure category and /or allow the government to request the Bank to re-categorize and 

reallocate financing from other Project components to partially cover emergency response and costs. This 

component could also channel additional funds should they become available as a result of an eligible 

emergency. Detailed operational guidelines acceptable to the bank for their implementation of the Contingency 

Emergency Response Plan, would be prepared during the first year of project implementation. Should this 

component be triggered, all expenditures would be made in accordance with paragraph 11 of OP 10.00 and 

would be reviewed and accepted by the Bank before any disbursement is made. In accordance with paragraphs 

11 and 12 of OP 10.00, this component would provide immediate, rapidly disbursing support to finance goods 

(positive list agreed with governments), works, and services needed for response, mitigation, and recovery and 

reconstruction.  

 

Component B: Farmer’s Access to Services, Inputs and Assets. The project would support smallholders’ 

access to critical knowledge and information, services and inputs, and investments (technologies and 

equipment) focusing on the three targeted commodity value chains of (1) dairy (dairy-meat in mixed crop-

livestock systems), (2) poultry (broilers and layers) and (3) fisheries (cultured-based fisheries and aquaculture). 

The project would link and work with Federal and Regional Agriculture Research Institutes to facilitate access 

to new technologies, innovations and management practices. 

 

This component would have the following three sub-components: 

 

35. Sub-component B1. Access to knowledge and information. This component would support capacity-
building activities of smallholders and their organizations on good management practices tailored to each 

selected commodity value chain, as well as on organizational skills towards the establishment of future and 

strengthening of existing producer organizations. It would design and pilot an information system accessible by 

smallholders and their organizations for the selected commodity value chain, in conjunction with SNP1.  

 

36. Sub-component B2. Access to services and inputs. This component aims to improve smallholders’ 

                                            
14

 During identification, the following five building blocks were discussed: (i) Creating a conducive and coherent policy environment; (ii) Strengthening diseases 

surveillance capacity; (iii) Strengthening diagnostic capacities and laboratories; (iv) Supporting diseases prevention and control programs; and (v) Including one health 

and food safety considerations. 

access to advisory services, animal health services, Animal Genetic Resources (AnGR) and quality forage and 

feed. While it complements sub-component A2, it focuses on each selected commodity value chain and would 

support the establishment of a public-private collaboration to develop a comprehensive (inclusive of all 

services) and differentiated (tailored to the level of advancement of the smallholder or his/her organization) 

system of service, input and advice delivery.     

     

37. Sub-component B3. Access to productive investments. This component aims to improve the 
smallholders’ access to investments linking smallholders and/or their organizations to public and private 

providers of basic equipment and new technologies, and to financial institutions. Production-oriented 

investments could include: feed production and processing, improved animal husbandry techniques, small-scale 

products’ collection or processing units/equipment, waste management systems to minimize greenhouse gas 

emissions, pollution and dissemination of pathogens, renewable energy (bio and solar energy) supply. To 

minimize a farmer’s risk of accessing improved technologies, the component would establish a matching grant 

mechanism to co-finance strategic investments, i.e. investment linked with the adoption of new technologies 

and practices associated with the SNP or investments aimed at increasing the participation of women and youth 

in the selected value chains.   

 

Component C: Farmers’ Access to Output Markets.  The project would support smallholders and their 

organizations to improve their access to output markets with a broader engagement of local entrepreneurs in the 

three priority commodity value chains. Depending on the beneficiary level of advancement in the 

transformation pathway, several options for project support would be explored further during preparation. 

Lessons from recent experiences in similar conditions would be considered. These include the existing USAID-

parallel financed AMDe and Livestock Market Development projects, which support improved market linkages, 

and regional initiatives such as the Hub Approach in Milk Collection Centers. The component would establish 

“Productive Partnerships” (PPs) between livestock and fisheries Producer Cooperatives (PC) and buyers (Agri-

Businesses: agro-industries, small and medium enterprises, etc.). These PPs would be supported through the 

provision of matching grants, contingent upon contractual arrangement between producers and buyers, and 

would facilitate access to rural financing for investing in various PC Sub-Projects (SPs). The selection criteria 

and mechanisms for PPs and SPs would be detailed during project preparation. The overall aim of this 

component is to create an enabling environment for direct and sustainable commercial relations between 

producers and buyers of products in the targeted value chains, and with Financial Institutions (FIs). 

 

This component would have the following three sub-components: 

 

38. Sub-component C1. Support to Producer Cooperatives (PCs). The sub-component would support the 
establishment of sustainable business relations between targeted PCs and Financial Institutions (FIs). To 

facilitate the involvement of FIs and the provision of adapted financial services, the subcomponent would 

support capacity building of PCs in the area of preparation of viable Sub-Projects (SPs). Capacity-building 

activities related to PCs’ business and administrative skills could be conducted in partnership with IFC through 

its Business Edge 
TM

 training system. Additional 

activities in support to PCs could include: (i) supporting market studies and surveys to characterize market 

opportunities and product requirements, organizing communication and dissemination campaigns to inform 

stakeholders about the project, and creating an online-based market information system; (ii) the establishment 

of a dialog platform between the government and key stakeholders, and (iii) mobilizing financial institutions 

(FIs) by negotiating a co-financing agreement for the SPs, and providing technical assistance on the design of 



tailored financial services and products to meet the financing needs of eligible SPs.  

 

39. Sub-component C2. Establishment of Productive Partnerships (PPs). This sub-component would 
promote partnerships between PCs and buyers of selected commodities (milk, poultry meat and eggs, fish). 

Financial Institutions (FIs) would be included in the PPs as they are expected to co-finance the sub-projects to 

be developed by the PCs. The partnerships would be based on the following principles: (a) agreement on 

product quality and characteristics; (b) quantity to be produced and bought; (c) modalities of delivery; (d) 

payment modalities and price; and (e) buyer’s contribution, such as Technical Assistance (TA), specific inputs, 

and arrangements for input reimbursement. 

 

40. Sub-component C3. Access to Financial Institutions (FIs). This sub-component would finance SPs, 
which have been developed by PCs under the Productive Partnerships established under sub-component C2. 

Based on a PC’s business plan, investment would cover collective investments through a Matching Grant aimed 

at improving the market reliability (commercial and safety standards) of the selected commodities. Collective 

investments would include post-productive investments (including processing technologies and facilities), as 

well as the associated technical assistance and training. A conditionality mechanism would be built into the 

Matching Grant to ensure that the Sub-Projects promote health and environmental services or at least do not 

generate negative externalities, and would be screened for potential adverse effects on the environment and 

public health. Selected SPs could be financed through a combination of an IDA-financing, a contribution from 

PCs, and short to medium-term credit provided by participating FIs. 

 

Component D: Project Management, Coordination, and Monitoring and Evaluation. The component 

would support project management at federal, regional, zonal and woreda level. In addition to routine 

functions, emphasis would be placed on a number of critical cross-cutting issues: 

 

41. Gender. The project would support the Government’s policy to mainstream the participation of women 
(both female headed households and women in male headed households) and youth into the livestock and 

fisheries sectors. This would include both targeted interventions (including support to women groups for 

appropriate enterprises) and ensuring inclusion in all project activities, backed up with an M&E system with 

disaggregated data.  

 

42. Nutrition. Although improved nutrition is not an explicit or measurable outcome of the proposed 
project, there would be many activities that would support aspects of the National Nutrition Program. For 

example, the support to the three selected commodity value chains would be coupled with extension/advisory 

services to increase households understanding of the high nutritional value and best uses of animal sourced 

foods (milk, meat, eggs and fish).  

 

43. Greenhouse gas emissions / Climate smart livestock (CSL). Livestock production critically 
contributes to the 3 outcomes of CSL: (i) it contributes directly and indirectly to food production and food 

security, (ii) it offers adaptation strategies, through assets diversification, coping mechanisms and water 

management, and (iii) it offers great potential for GHG emission intensity reduction and carbon sequestration. 

In terms of livestock production systems, Climate Smart Agriculture (CSA) translates into four essential 

objectives: resource use efficiency, reduced conversion of natural habitats into agriculture, buffering and 


 

connection to markets. Most technical and institutional interventions would have effects on more than one of 

the CSA outcomes. 

44. Capacity building. The design of the proposed project would include capacity building for a range of 
actors and organizations and through a number of approaches, including training. In a recent project (e.g. AGP 

1), the effectiveness of training was found to be relatively weak. A more focused and structured approach to 

capacity building would be developed for the project, drawing upon both good experience in Ethiopia (such as 

under the Productive Safety Nets Program or the Farmer’s Filed School in the Integrated Pest Management and 

forage development Programs) and international experience. This would emphasize strengthening core skills for 

delivering training and stronger processes for training needs assessment, continual training where appropriate 

and adequate follow up.  

 

45. Linkages and Coordination. The project would be one of the primary government program to support 
investments to achieve the strategic goals set out by the LMP. However, it would not function in isolation and 

coordination and complementarity with other initiatives would provide opportunities for increased impact. This 

is particularly important because Ethiopia is hosting a number of active projects in the sector –implemented by 

various ministries- that the new MoLF would have to monitor. Coordination mechanisms would need to be 

strengthened with a number of other on-going and planned programs, including the following IDA-financed 

projects and programs: Agriculture Growth Project 2, Productive Safety Net Program, Sustainable Land 

Management Program, and Regional Pastoral Livelihoods Resilience Project (RPLRP) and the WBG’s Ethiopia 

Livestock-MIRA project. 
 

 
 
    

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
Tentatively, the project might be implemented in the following regions/places in Ethiopia: Amhara, Addis Ababa, 

Oromiya, SNNR, Tigray, Harari, Benishangul Gumuz, Dire Dawa and Gambella 
 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
The MoLF is a new ministry with a significant capacity weakness. Therefore, efforts would be required throughout the 

project, in particular in the areas of safeguards due diligence. Given the institutional and management innovations that is 
expected from the project, three distinct value chains are targeted, including the newly supported fisheries sector, and 
the multiplicity of actors involved from the public, private and associative sectors, capacity constraints are likely to 
represent the biggest challenge of the project. To address these gaps, it has been proposed to formulate a capacity 
building strategy for the MoLF during the preparation phase. The Bank would undertake a safeguards capacity 
assessment as part of the project preparation, which would outline the detailed risks and mitigating measures. The 
project would further explore to provide systematic and regular training to targeted the Regions and Woredas as well as 
undertake regular supervision to ensure that challenges with regards to environmental and social safeguards are 
identified and addressed in a timely manner. Overall, the project will avoid where possible adverse impacts on people, 
land and other economic resources and on livelihoods; will prepare both a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and 

Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) to address potential scope of impacts, since the project sites 
are not known. The ESMF and RPF will be reviewed and cleared by the World Bank before it is disclosed publicly in 
Ethiopia and the Bank’s Info shop prior to project appraisal. Site specific Resettlement Action Plan and ESMPs, will be 
prepared, reviewed and cleared by the World Bank, as needed based on the guidance and standards set forth in the RPF, 
prior to implementation of any compensation actions or civil works. 
 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 
Chukwudi H. Okafor, Yacob Wondimkun Endaylalu 

 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The project is proposed as a Category B project, given 
that it would finance activities, especially those related 
to veterinary services to detect and respond quickly to 
major disease outbreaks, improved animal health 
services, production of quality forage and feed, 
including feed production and processing, small scale- 
products’ collection/ processing units, waste 
management systems to minimize greenhouse gas 
emissions, pollution and dissemination of pathogens. 
Since the scope and nature of the sub-projects and 
their site-specific locations are not known at this time 
of preparation, the specific instrument proposed for 
analyzing potential environmental risks is an ESMF. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 TBD 
 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 TBD 
 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

Project funds may be used to purchase and distribute 
pesticides for control of vectors of livestock /animal 
diseases and agrochemicals for improved production 
of forage and feed, and it is likely that more generally 
support through the Project will encourage small 
holder farmers, and veterinary service providers to use 
more pesticides and chemicals. The ESMF will contain 
a section on PMP/IPMP that would elaborate on what 
actions need to be undertaken to minimize 
environmental, health and safety impacts. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No 
 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 Yes 

The Project triggers OP 4.10 as the vast majority of 
people in the lowland area of the project area meet 
the criteria for the Indigenous People or underserved 
groups.  The project will conduct Social Assessment 
and enhanced public Consultation with the affected 


persons and communities to reflect the policy 
requirements. The key findings of the social 
assessment including the process used to foster free, 
prior, and informed consultations and broad 
community support for the project, including the 
provision of grievance redress, and benefit sharing 
issues; and the identified mitigating measures will be 
incorporated in the design of the project and 
summarized in the PAD. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

Since the project sites are not known, therefore, to 
address potential scope of impacts on loss of 
economic activities, land acquisition and/or relocation, 
the project will avoid adverse impacts on people, land 
and other economic resources and on livelihoods by 
preparing a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). The 
RPF will be consulted upon and reviewed and cleared 
by the World Bank before it is disclosed publicly in 
Ethiopia and the Bank’s Info shop prior to project 
appraisal. In cases where impacts are known, the 
project will Resettlement Action Plan, based on the 
guidance and standards set forth in the RPF, and the 
RAP will also be reviewed and cleared by the World 
Bank prior to implementation of any compensation 
actions or civil works. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 
 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Apr 24, 2017 
 

Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Project’s safeguards instruments (ESMF, PMP, and RPF) will be prepared, reviewed and approved by the World Bank and 

disclosed in Ethiopia by the GoE and sent to the Bank for disclosure at the Info Shop 
 
 


