






















































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Lake Chad Region Recovery and Development Project (P161706) 

 
 

  
Oct 12, 2018 Page 1 of 22  

     

 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 06-Nov-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSC19997 


BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Africa P161706  Lake Chad Region 
Recovery and 
Development Project 
(P161706) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA Oct 21, 2019 Dec 17, 2019 Social, Urban, Rural and 
Resilience Global 
Practice 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Republic of Cameroon - 
Ministry of Economy, 
Planning and Regional 
Development,Republic of 
Chad - Ministry of Economy 
and Planning,Republic of 
Niger - Ministry of Economy 
and Planning 

(TBC) Republic of Cameroon 
- Ministry of Economy, 
Planning and Regional 
Development, (TBC) 
Republic of Niger - Executive 
Secretariat for the SDS Sahel 
Niger (SE/SDS Sahel-Niger) 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
To contribute to the recovery of the Lake Chad Region through supporting regional coordination and crisis monitoring, 
connectivity and agricultural livelihoods in selected provinces of Cameroon, Chad and Niger. 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 165.00 

Total Financing 165.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 165.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 165.00 

          IDA Credit 60.00 

          IDA Grant 105.00 

   
 

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B - Partial Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Regional and Country Context           
                            Figure 1: The Lake Chad 

1. Lake Chad is a large transboundary lake located in the Sahel as well 
as in the West and the Central Africa sub-regions. The Lake Chad is shared 

between Cameroon, Chad, Niger and Nigeria1 and a total of 49 million people 

live from the exploitation of its rich natural resources (fishing, livestock 

farming, flood-recession agriculture, hunting and gathering). A net exporter of 

food and a provider of seasonal jobs, it also contributed to the food and job 

security of people in its hinterlands2, including two regional metropolises, 

Ndjamena and Maidiguri, as well as the impoverished regions of the lake’s 

Sahelian hinterlands (Borno in Nigeria; Diffa in Niger, the Far North Province 

in Cameroon and the regions of the Lake, Lac, Kanem, Hadjer Lamis, and Chari 

Baguirmi in Chad). If the lake area represents such a food production hub, it is 

because it offers, all year long, a relative secure source of water, fodder and 

fertile land. Moreover, those mostly family fishing and farming systems are labor intensive and generate 

significant indirect employment (processing, trade, crafts, and transport). Finally, the ecological value of Lake 

Chad has been recognized by the Ramsar convention and the Lake is being classified a World Natural Heritage 

Site by UNESCO. 

2. Despite its potential of being a driver for development in West Africa, however, development in the 
Lake Chad area is challenged by multiple and interrelated drivers of conflict and fragility. Most recently, 

the Boko Haram regional insurgency has affected over 23 million civilians around the four countries (Cameroon, 

Chad, Niger and Nigeria). Violent acts caused by Boko Haram include coercion, abduction, forced recruitment, 

                                            
1 This project includes the three countries Cameroon, Chad and Niger. While the World Bank’s broader Lake Chad Program includes Nigeria, Nigeria 

is not participating in this concrete project. This project, however, is processed as a Series of Projects, and will thus allow for the participation of 

Nigeria to opt into the program at a later date and according to the country’s needs and specific requirements. 
2 The lake hinterlands, or its area of influence through trade and seasonal migration, extends-up to 300 km around the Lake and represents an area of 

about 250,000 km2. 

indoctrination, human rights abrogation, violent extremism, etc. and besides causing immense psychological 

trauma and weakening social networks, these acts have also disrupted livelihoods and destroyed assets. The 

conflict has exacerbated pre-existing challenges and caused extensive damage. As a consequence of the Boko 

Haram conflict, the Lake Chad Region is also Africa’s largest forced displacement crisis. Latest estimates show 

2.3 million individuals (half of them are children) are now displaced in the Region, both internally and across 

borders as refugees.3 These significant numbers of refugees and IDPs have added pressure on host communities 

that are already food insecure. 

 

3. Vulnerable groups, in particular women and youth have been mostly affected by the consequences 
of the Boko Haram crisis. While youth account for most of the population in the countries around the lake and 

could be a potential driver for economic growth, they are faced with the highest rates of unemployment and the 

lowest levels of formal education and vocational training in the respective countries. Facing limited opportunity, 

youth are easily susceptible to recruitment into criminal activity or armed violence. Young women and men who 

have been recruited and used by armed groups are especially vulnerable as they are marginalized and stigmatized 

by their communities (when and if they return), thus facing many barriers to their reintegration.4 Gender-based 

violence (GBV) and violence against children, already widespread in the Lake Chad Region before the outbreak 

of the Boko Haram conflict has also increased since the crisis (reported acts include abduction, detention, rape or 

forced marriages, and the forced use of children as kamikazes). In addition, common to many young women in 

the Region is the experience of early marriage and childbirth and resultant health risks. 

 

4. The underlying causes of the Boko Haram crisis include high inequality, perceived social injustice, 

a lack of social service provision, historic marginalization, inadequate economic opportunities, high levels 

of poverty, rapid demographic growth and the impacts of climate change and land degradation. The conflict 

can be traced back to a range of fragility drivers and historical underinvestment in remote areas. Fragility drivers 

include i) lack of public services; ii) the pressure on the already fragile ecosystem which is significantly increasing 

due to a high population growth5, iii) poor natural resource management, and climate and disaster risks in the 

Region6; iv) weak governance and weak presence of state institutions; v) weak agriculture performance vi) poor 

connectivity around the lake and rural access roads which are old and not regularly maintained, and vii) missing 

international road corridor and energy transmission linkages. The lack of public services, basic infrastructure and 

social services within the areas surrounding the Lake Chad reflect systemic national development problems and 

are a result of many years of neglect by central authorities. Grievances of the populations living in the Lake Chad 

Region are further deepened by repeated unfulfilled promises of development and many have lost their trust in 

the government. As one of the results, the areas surrounding the Lake Chad represent the poorest, most 

                                            
3 Plan International, Lake Chad Snapshot, 15 Feb 2018. 
4 Young women have especially been negatively impacted as they have been facing the additional stigma of being survivors of sexual violence. 
5 The population of the four countries around the Lake Chad (Cameroon, Chad, Niger and Nigeria; entire territory of the countries, not vicinities of the 

Lake Chad) has more than quadrupled in the last 50 years – from 60 million in 1960 to more than 243 million inhabitants in 2017. See UNFPA: From 

crisis to development around Lake Chad, Strategy for an Integrated, Holistic and Sustainable Response, 2018. 
6 The project has been screened for climate and disaster risks. The exposure of the project locations and the impacts on the project’s physical 

infrastructure and assets have been rated as High. Extreme temperature, extreme precipitation, flooding and drought are projected to increase in all 

three participating countries of this regional project (Cameroon, Chad and Niger) and in particular in the Lake Chad Region. Future projections show 

that mean annual temperature is projected to increase between 1.0-3.4°C by 2060. Annual number of ‘warm’ days and nights are also projected to 

increase. Projected increase in inter-annual rainfall variability is likely to exacerbate drought risk in the future. Projected increases in seasonal rainfall, 

total runoff, and the proportion of rainfall in heavy events will have profound implications for flooding. These extreme climate and hazard events affect 

marginalized groups more severely. 



marginalized and neglected part of each respective country and have been left susceptible to crime and violence 

and promises from radical Islamists. In Cameroon, for example, poverty is increasingly concentrated in the 

northern parts of the country – the Far North and the North present a poverty rate of 74.3% and 67.9% respectively, 

and the literacy rate is almost half in the North (43%) compared to the rest of the country (72% nationally). While 

the regions bordering the Lake Chad in Chad and Niger have been less marginalized and less excluded from 

development planning compared to equivalent regions in Cameroon and Nigeria, development indicators remain 

worse than the national averages.7 

 

5. As a result, a military victory and humanitarian assistance alone are not enough to create peace and 

stability in the Lake Chad Region and a focus on restoring and enhancing resilience is needed, even as 

humanitarian activities and security operations continue. As outlined in the joint World Bank Group’s (WBG) 

and United Nations “Pathways for Peace Study” (2018), conflict stems from the mobilization of people’s 

perception of exclusion and injustice, which are rooted in inequalities, and tackling these issues should be a 

priority to prevent further escalation of conflict. While military and security agencies have made some progress 

in limiting the activities of extremist groups, their own practices have, at times, been heavy-handed and have 

included violations of human rights, adding to the sense of insecurity and alienation which increase divisions 

among displaced persons and communities. Furthermore, social inclusion will also be key for a long-term 

stabilization and prevention of future conflicts. In this regard, preventive action needs to adopt a more people-

centered approach that includes mainstreaming citizen engagement. Enhancing the participation of women and 

youth in decision making, as well as long-term policies to address the aspirations of women and young people, 

will also be fundamental to sustaining peace. 

 

6. The conflict has significantly impacted livelihoods and economic productivity in the Lake Chad 

Region, which are largely based on farming, pastoralism and fishing. The main impacts of the conflict include 

inaccessibility and a loss of productive assets and inputs due to human displacement and the disruption of markets 

due to physical destruction of facilities, and the enforcement of security-related measures such as restrictions of 

movement and the prohibition to farm or trade in certain areas.8 As a result, agricultural production and access to 

land have declined sharply, resulting in a widespread loss of livelihoods and employment. In addition to direct 

losses in productive assets, agricultural trade has also been significantly impaired by damages to the road network 

and the closure of borders. The recent AFD/IRD study “Crisis and Development – the Lake Chad Region and 

Boko Haram” shows that the Lake Chad Region was a highly complex and interlinked regional system prior to 

2013, where the country’s borders did not represent real boundaries. Acts of violence by Boko Haram have 

destabilized the former regional system and have compromised productive activities in the rural areas around the 

Lake Chad. A growth of rural income and livelihood opportunities combined with connectivity improvements 

would build the resilience of the population around the Lake Chad and thus help to (i) give the population, and in 

particular those who are at-risk a viable livelihood option besides joining Boko Haram, (ii) restore the 

communities’ trust in the government and the prospect for development in the region, and (iii) reestablish 

community ties. 

     

7. A regional and geospatial targeted approach will help to chart a path that promotes growth and 
economic clustering, while at the same time efficiently promoting inclusion, equal opportunities, and 

security. The contextual rationale for a regional response is three-fold9: (i) The Boko Haram insurgency is a 

regional crisis with significant cross-border spill-over effects; (ii) the Region is characterized by a web of 

economic, trade, historical, political, cultural, ethnic and religious ties, which makes its populations linked and 

interdependent across borders. Events in one country affect others, and the problems of weak community 

institutions, livelihoods and connectivity can only be solved through a broader regional response; and (iii) the 

Lake Chad area is a fragile and vulnerable socio-ecosystem and regional in nature. Furthermore, the “Lagging 

Lands, Violent Lands”10 framework for action suggests a combined spatial and social lens for such areas and 

around country borders where interventions as well as violence can have impacts that spill beyond national 

boundaries. In the Lake Chad Region, where violence is recurrent, and divisions are entrenched, area-based 

interventions that are spatially targeted at places with development deficiencies and socially targeted at factors 

that elevate the risk of violence are required in order to create areas which can become socially, politically and 

economically stable. Coordination between administrative areas at national and regional levels will also be key 

to ensure regional stability and exploit possible positive economic and social externalities, such as those achieved 

by public productive investments, livelihoods, value chain development and transport infrastructure investments. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 

 
8. The current security crisis has forced countries of the region to coordinate and collaborate more 
extensively on security issues, though on development there is a general lack of regional leadership and 

collaboration on common problems. These issues surfaced during the Oslo Consultative Group meeting in 

Berlin (September 2017). The lack of collaboration between regional economic communities of the Economic 

Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the Economic Community of Central African States 

(ECCAS-CEEAC), and the weakness of the Lake Chad Basin Commission, means that a coherent regional 

response to the deeply-rooted drivers of fragility will remain challenging. While putting in place a sustainable 

platform for programmatic prioritization and coordination, regional dialogue, exchange of ideas and policy 

harmonization will take time and will require sustained support over many years, it will be an important and 

necessary early step for the long-term sustainable development of the Region and will help to restore citizens’ 

trust in government interventions. 

 

9. The Sahel Alliance has opened a window of opportunity for stabilization and recovery in the Lake 
Chad Region. Informed and sustained high-level dialogue and diplomacy in coordination with strong 

international commitment are the prerequisites to help build trust between neighboring governments in areas 

beyond security cooperation. During the International High-Level Conference on the Sahel in Brussels, Belgium 

on February 23, 2018, France, Germany, the EU, the African Development Bank, UNDP and the World Bank 

(the six founding members), joined by Italy, Spain and the UK, officially launched the Sahel Alliance, which 

paved the way for international cooperation following the guiding principles of (a) governance; (b) gender; (c) 

youth and (d) donor coordination. The AFD, EU/DEVCO, AfDB, Germany, the UK and USAID, amongst others, 

have already made allocations for stabilization and development activities in the Lake Chad Basin in parallel to 

humanitarian funding. This proposed Lake Chad Region Recovery and Development Project (i) builds upon the 

                                            
9 The IEG found that a regional approach is relevant if i) program objectives require cooperation among neighboring countries to address regional 

externalities, ii) program objectives align with country and regional development priorities, and iii) the program adheres to the principle of subsidiarity. 

These three conditions are fulfilled in the case of this proposed engagement. 
10 World Bank: Lagging Lands, Violent Lands, A framework for Action, 2017. 


momentum created by the launching of the Sahel Alliance, and (ii) constitutes the World Bank’s commitment to 

the Sahel Alliance by focusing on the stabilization of a main sub-region – the Lake Chad Region. The project 

aligns with the specific objectives of the Sahel Alliance by ensuring a strong coordination with the members of 

the Sahel Alliance, promoting multilateralism and better coordination and collaboration with humanitarian and 

development partners and security actors, in particular through the proposed Component 1, and by putting special 

emphasis on the development of rural areas and infrastructure development through the proposed Component 2 

and 3. 

 

10. The project contributes and will be guided by the World Bank’s Regional Recovery and 
Development Strategy for the Lake Chad Region (Lake Chad Region Business Plan) which is currently 

being developed. A first mapping of WBG responses in the Lake Chad Region has showed that the total amount 

of current World Bank activities in the Region is an estimated USD 470 million11 and that more than 10 million 

beneficiaries benefit from these activities. There is thus a considerable scope for the WBG to scale up its 

development support to the Lake Chad Region, though particularly in Chad and Niger. To this end, the World 

Bank is currently developing its longer-term strategy for the Lake Chad Region of which this project is an integral 

part of. In this context, a grant of the State and Peace-building Fund has been approved in September 2018 for 

the Cross-border collaboration in the Lake Chad Region Project to build the foundations of this Regional 

Recovery and Development Strategy for the Lake Chad region by enhancing cross-collaboration between the four 

countries around the Lake (the three countries participating in this proposed project and also Nigeria)12. 
 

Map 1: World Bank activities in the Lake Chad Region               

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

11. The project is part of the World Bank’s Lake Chad Region Program. The project constitutes the 
second phase (“Stabilization and early recovery) of the World Bank’s three-phased Lake Chad Region Program 

and prepares the transition from a national post-crisis response (Phase 1) to a long-term resilience and sustainable 

development response (Phase 3) in the Lake Chad Region. The World Bank’s broader Lake Chad Region Program 

                                            
11 USD 140 million have recently been spent on activities and USD 330 million are currently in progress. The national breakdown is the following: 

Nigeria: USD 230 million; Chad: USD 75 million; Cameroon: USD 150 million and Niger: USD 15 million. 
12 The expected outputs of the cross-border collaboration in the Lake Chad Region Project are: (i) Support to the Lake Chad Basin Governors’ Forum 

organization including an early 2019 meeting in Niger; (ii)  Citizen engagement consultation/awareness workshop; (iii) Establishment of a knowledge 

and monitoring platform for the Lake Chad; (iv) Establishment of a data center; (v) Study on multi-dimensional risks around the Lake Chad; and (vi) 

Stakeholder engagement including quarterly multi-partner meetings and support to key conferences (briefs, presentations and participation). 


     

aims to address regional, national and sub-national drivers of fragility through a programmatic, coordinated and 

holistic approach. It is guided by the following five key principles of engagement: (i) a multi-phased and multi-

sector approach to increase the resilience of populations; (ii) flexibility for both riparian client countries and 

stakeholders in their degree of engagement; (iii) flexibility in resource allocation across project components and 

geographic locations; (iv) convergence of efforts with other donors and initiatives along the humanitarian-

development-security nexus; and (v) use of innovative project preparation and M&E mechanisms, such as third-

party execution or monitoring, on an as-needed basis. 

 

12. The World Bank’s Lake Chad Region Program was confirmed at the High-Level Conference on the 
Lake Chad Region in Berlin 2018. On September 3-4, 17 UN Member States, the European Commission, the 

World Bank and the African Development Bank combined announced US$2.17 billion and US$ 467 million in 

concessional loans to support a comprehensive response to the crisis in the Lake Chad Region. The conference 

also highlighted the regional dimension of the Lake Chad crisis, the crucial role of local actors, cross-border 

cooperation and ownership at all levels. Furthermore, stakeholders committed to address the immediate and 

longer-term needs and help build the resilience of crisis-affected people in the Lake Chad region – thus strongly 

endorsing the work along the humanitarian-development-security nexus.13 

 
Figure 2: Supporting the transition from a humanitarian to a development response and cooperation with partners 

 

 
 
 

13. The project is aligned with the WBG’s priorities and UN Strategies in the Lake Chad Region. The 
WBG’s engagement in the Lake Chad Region is aligned with the two interrelated pillars of its Africa Strategy: 

(i) vulnerability and resilience; and (ii) economic opportunity and integration, the Bank’s corporate priority under 

IDA 18, aimed at scaling up its response to issues of fragility, conflict and violence, as well as the Lake Chad 

Development and Climate Resilience Action Plan and the Africa Climate Business Plan. The proposed project 

will be aligned with the International Finance Corporation’s (IFC) Sectorial Strategy and Operations in the three 

countries. Furthermore, the project is aligned and reinforces UNDP’s and UNOCHA’s “Resilience for Sustainable 

Development in the Lake Chad Basin”, UNFPA’s “From Crisis to development around Lake Chad – Strategy for 

                                            
13 Most activities in the region are almost entirely focused on a humanitarian response with very little development programming, in particular on the 
Chadian and Nigerien side. While humanitarian actors have begun incorporating resilience programming and small development interventions, there 

is an identified need for development actors to engage at scale and support the development of the regions adjoining the Lake Chad. 




an Integrated, Holistic and Sustainable Response” and the “UN Support Plan for the Sahel – Working together 

for a prosperous and peaceful Sahel”. This will be done by supporting the transition from a medium-term response 

focusing on resilience and recovery to a longer-term response that will strengthen transformation and 

development. The project will adapt a comprehensive people-centered approach and will, as highlighted in various 

UN Strategy Documents, strengthen resilience of communities in the Lake Chad Region that improves coping 

capacity and reduces vulnerabilities. 

 

14. The project is also in strong alignment with existing regional and national strategies and plans. The 
project is in line with the recommendations of Cameroon’s RPBA to focus all efforts on achieving concrete results 

around the following objectives: (i) putting in place durable solutions for forced displacement; (ii) improving 

local development/decentralization processes and the functioning of local governance; (iii) improving the 

provision of basic social services; (iv) promoting the recovery of the economy and improvement of economic 

opportunities; and (v) improving individual and territorial security. Furthermore, the proposed project is aligned 

with the nine pillars of the “Regional Strategy for the Stabilization, Recovery and Resilience of the Boko-Haram 

affected areas of the Lake Chad Basin” which has been adopted by the Lake Chad Basin Ministers on August 31, 

2018. The nine pillars of the strategy are: (i) Political cooperation; (ii) security and human rights; (iii) 

disarmament, demobilization, rehabilitation, reinsertion and reintegration of Persons Associated with Boko 

Haram; (iv) humanitarian assistance; (v) governance and social contract; (vi) socio-economic recovery and 

environmental sustainability; (vii) education and vocational training; (viii) prevention of violent extremism and 

peacebuilding; and (ix) empowerment and inclusion of women and youth, respond to the multilayered challenges 

in the Lake Chad Basin region. 
 

Relationship to CPF and other strategies 
 

15. The project’s objectives are fully aligned with the Country Partnership Frameworks (CPF) for Chad, Cameroon and 
Niger: 

 Chad: The three identified themes of engagement for FY16-20 are: (i) Strengthening management of public 
resources; (ii) improving returns to agriculture and building value chains; and (iii) building human capital and 

reducing vulnerability. The proposed project addresses the second and third themes of the CPF by supporting 

public productive investments and development along the agricultural value chain, enhancing sustainable 

livelihoods of local communities, strengthening social accountability mechanisms, and improving rural transport 

linkages. 

 Cameroon: The three focus areas for FY17-21 are: (i) Addressing multiple poverty traps in rural areas (with a 
focus on northern regions); (ii) fostering infrastructure and private sector development; and (iii) improving 

governance. The proposed project will address the first focus area by supporting public productive investments, 

improving access to livelihoods and rural transport linkages in the Far North Region of Cameroon. 

 Niger: The three focus areas for FY18-21 are: (i) Rural productivity and incomes; (ii) human capital and social 
protection; and (iii) governance for jobs and growth. The proposed project focuses mainly on the first focus area 

of the CPF ‘Rural Productivity and Incomes’ by directly improving rural livelihoods (in particular the agricultural 

value chain), rural connectivity and public productive investments. 

 

16. Relationship to Africa’s Regional Integration and Cooperation Assistance. The project’s objectives are aligned 
with the “Supporting Africa’s Transformation: Regional Integration and Cooperation Assistance Strategy (FY18-FY23)” 

and in particular its strategic priority 4 “promote collective action to address risks of regional economic contagion, fragility, 

epidemic and climate hot spots”. Sub-objective 4.2 refers to support to sustainable management and financing of 


     

transboundary waters and 4.3 to provide support to communities affected by regional forced displacement and help countries 

to deal with underlying conflict prevention measures. 

 
 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 

17. The proposed project development objective for the Lake Chad Region Recovery and Development 
Project-SOP1 is the following: to contribute to the recovery of the Lake Chad Region through supporting regional 

coordination and crisis monitoring, connectivity and agricultural livelihoods in selected provinces of Cameroon, 

Chad and Niger. 

 

18. The proposed program development objective is the following: to contribute to the recovery of the Lake 
Chad Region through enhanced regional coordination and crisis monitoring, socio-economic development and 

the strengthening of local level institutions in the Lake Chad Region. 

  

19. Project beneficiaries will be vulnerable populations in selected intervention areas in the three countries. 
This includes, for instance, youth at risk and women. While not specifically targeted, project beneficiaries could 

also include displaced and ex-combatants. While the project intends to include activities which also support the 

R (“Reintegration”) of ex-Boko Haram combatants, this project does not specifically target ex-Boko Haram 

combatants so as to avoid any possible stigmatization that would exacerbate an already very difficult social 

cohesion effort between and within communities. 
 
Key Results (From PCN) 
 

20. The following PDO indicators will be considered and refined during project preparation: 
- Establishment of a functioning knowledge and monitoring platform endorsed by the participating 

countries. 

- Increased regional dialogue and coordination on conflict and climate and disaster risk management among 
the three countries (Cameroon, Chad and Niger).14 

- Number of direct project beneficiaries in the three countries (number), of which percent of female and 
youth. 

- Beneficiaries in the three countries that feel project investments reflected their needs (percentage), of 
which percent of female and youth. 

- Beneficiaries in the three countries that feel that project investments have positively contributed to the 
community’s social well-being and have helped to restore trust. 

- Beneficiaries of regional economic development activities that report an increase in income 
(disaggregated by type of service, gender and target group). 

- Improvement of Rural Access Index (RAI; number of index points improvement). 

 

Figure 3: The Project’s Theory of Change 

                                            
14 As reported by the participating project countries. 

 
 

 

D. Concept Description 
 
                                 Figure 4: The Project’s Intervention Rationale 
21. To restore and enhance resilience in the 
Lake Chad Region, this project will work along the 

humanitarian-development-security nexus to (i) 

address some of the existing drivers of fragility in 

the Lake Chad Region, in particular poor regional 

crisis preparedness and management, poor 

connectivity around and on the Lake, poor local 

governance and unemployment (especially youth 

unemployment), and (ii) mitigate some 

consequences of the crisis, in particular destroyed 

public productive investments, poor livelihood 

opportunities and a weakened agriculture value 

chain. More concretely, this project will bridge the gap between humanitarian and development assistance and 

support its transition. Investments will be made complementary to humanitarian activities and collaboration and 

coordination with security actors will allow the project to operate in an insecure environment and support the 

recovery of provinces where security interventions have achieved to bring peace back to the communities. By 

showing an immediate positive development impact through quick-win interventions, peace and stability brought 

back by security actors can be sustained and can make a transition from a humanitarian to a development response 

possible. This project’s specific added value lies in (a) strengthening crisis and conflict preparedness, response 

and coordination at the regional level to better prevent and mitigate regional fragility, and (b) addressing a set of 

priority activities which are expected to have a high development impact; are in areas where security allows for 

an intervention; and are complementary with other programs (clusters). 

 

22. Following a contextual regional rationale as outlined in the context section above, the project will translate 
this into a technical regional rationale and thus prioritize activities which are trans-border in nature and will 



therefore help to restore and strengthen the regional system which has been negatively impacted by the Boko 

Haram crisis. The regional activities will be the following: (i) restoration of rural mobility and cross-border 

connectivity through the rehabilitation of critical rural roads and infrastructure (on the Lake Chad and around the 

Lake, and other intervention areas which are of regional importance), which will help to connect communities of 

all the participating three countries, and (ii) agriculture value chain development with a regional aspect combined 

with public productive investments which will facilitate and reinforce cross-border trade.15 In addition, the project 

will support a coordination and monitoring platform to reinforce regional dialogue and institutional capacity. 

 

23. The proposed financing instrument for this project is an Investment Project Financing (IPF) with total 
proposed IDA funds of US$225 million to be disbursed as grant and credit16. Following a pre-identification 

mission and the readiness of all three participating countries, the IDA funds are likely to be allocated as follows: 

US$60 million for Cameroon; US$45 million for Chad; and US$60 million for Niger. The proposed project is 

being processed as a Series of Projects (SOP) given that the three proposed project countries all deal with the 

same negative impacts of the Boko Haram crisis, similar underlying drivers of fragility and regional 

underdevelopment. The SOP approach will also allow for the participation of the Republic of Nigeria to opt into 

the program at a later date and according to the country’s needs and specific requirements. This project is the first 

proposed project of the SOP, and will focus on regional coordination and monitoring, rural connectivity and a 

few agricultural livelihood restoration priority activities. In addition, this first SOP will pilot social community 

engagement activities to support the process of restoring trust between and within communities. The second 

project in this SOP Series would build upon first achievements, expand livelihoods support and community 

engagement activities and also provide direct support to the beneficiaries’ access to basic socio-economic services 

in the Lake Chad Region. 

 

24. The project will embed essential features of ensuring citizen participation in prioritizing developmental 
needs including livelihoods opportunities to improve self-reliance of communities and social cohesion and greater 

demand for social accountability. Citizen Engagement mechanisms will be built into the project through (i) setting 

up effective grievance redress and beneficiary feedback mechanism, (ii) ensuring an intensive program of 

engagement with project stakeholders, (iii) deploying effective strategic communications and public education, 

and (iv) monitoring social impacts through annual stakeholder surveys. In addition, the project will identify local 

conflict and help set up conflict resolution mechanisms with the aim to restore trust among the community 

members and promote inclusion. The project will also use a targeted geographical development approach which 

combines a spatial and social lens. Targeted social inclusion will be ensured by using specific community-led 

processes to identify and reach vulnerable and systematically excluded people17, including young women, women 

from poorer households (including widows), and women with disabilities; and youth in general, at risk youth and 

youth affected by radicalization, involved in criminal networks, etc. Innovative citizen engagement approaches 

already tested in the region, mobilizing third party monitoring, ICT and CSOs will be explored.18 In addition, the 

concept for the operationalization of gender mainstreaming, in particular multi-sectoral prevention and response 

                                            
15 The component description provides examples of activities with a regional rationale which will be supported under this project; a detailed list of 
activities under Component 2 and 3 that have a regional public goods nature will be defined during project preparation. 
16 See a detailed overview of the project’s financing in the table on p. 13. 
17 The reasons for systematic exclusion from programs and economic participation are for a range of reasons, including social norms, lack of 

information, and inability to meet costs of participation in community institutions, including cost for transport. 
18 In Cameroon, for example, a successful Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) has been included in the context of the CEMAC Transport and Transit 

Facilitation Project. Important lessons learned from this project and other projects in the Region will be included in the design of this proposed Lake 

Chad Region Recovery and Development Project.  

to gender-based violence (GBV) will, amongst others, be guided by a joint French Development Agency 

(AFD)/World Bank study which is currently being conducted.19 

 

25. Investments will be integrated and complemented by investments of the AFD’s Lake Chad Inclusive 
Economic and Social Recovery Program (RESILAC)20, initiatives on polder rehabilitation close to the Lake Chad, 

key WBG’s operations such as the CEMAC - Transport-Transit Facilitation Project in Cameroon, the Niger Rural 

Mobility and Connectivity Project, and the Refugees and Host Communities Support Projects in Chad and Niger, 

and interventions of humanitarian and development partners, and will be in alignment with the UN strategies for 

the Lake Chad Region21 and the Sahel Alliance. The following areas have been pre-identified as potential areas 

of intervention: (a) In Niger: Clusters of pepper productions along the main corridor of the national road from 

N’Guimi via Diffa to Zinder, two fishing communities and one cattle area in the North of the Lake Chad22; (b) in 

Cameroon: communes along the CEMAC corridor in Maroua and Septentrion and communes in the close vicinity 

to the Lake Chad (here, in particular fisheries), and (c) in Chad: a transport corridor connecting N’Djamena to the 

South of Cameroon and West via Bol and Baga Sol and polder areas in Tangal and Gueni. 

 

26. Security will be monitored closely and will inform project implementation. The project design will allow 
for flexibility in resource allocation across project components and geographic locations. Such flexibility is 

necessary to operate in a highly volatile environment with ongoing security concerns and people’s movements. 

A careful targeting of selected provinces and the use of a carefully chosen mix of activities combined with robust 

monitoring will help to reduce the risk that communities could become a target of violence as a consequence of 

investments made under this project.  
 

Component 1: Regional and national coordination platform and local capacity building 

 

27. This component will aim at reinforcing regional dialogue and institutional capacity by putting in place an 
analytical and monitoring platform of key vulnerability factors of the Region. It will also provide targeted capacity 

building of selected institutions at the regional, national and local levels to reinforce the regional cooperation and 

governance. This component will finance the following activities: 

 Sub-Component 1.1: Knowledge and Monitoring platform: An analytical and monitoring platform will be set 
up to foster knowledge exchange, collaboration and partnerships and to strengthen conflict and disaster early 

warning systems. This platform will be used for programmatic prioritization and coordination, policy 

harmonization23, regional dialogue at technical and strategic levels; as well as consolidate and strengthen 

already existing early warning systems (as e.g., the Continental Early Warning System (CEWS) established 

by the AU), provide capacity building to monitoring institutions and connect the systems across the three 

countries. Integrated and coordinated conflict and disaster early warning systems will allow stakeholders to 

anticipate disaster and conflict trends and better understand the rapidly changing dynamics of situations. Other 

topics that the platform could address and promote are citizen engagement, social inclusion and gender, 

                                            
19 The name of the study is Opportunity study: Strengthening the consideration of gender dynamics in the response to the Lake Chad crisis. 
20 This project aims at boosting the local economy by creating jobs for young people in rural areas and diversifying family-based production systems, 

strengthening social cohesion through psychosocial support for communities affected by Boko Haram's violence and providing institutional support 

for local authorities and civil society organizations. 



including strategies to prevent GBV. The platform will build on existing initiatives (in particular AFD and 

UN) and will engage researchers from the countries bordering Lake Chad and other key stakeholders, i.e. 

humanitarian workers, diplomats, international actors and national development programs. Data collected 

from monitoring will be confirmed based on the existing research data gaps24. The knowledge platform will 

have strong linkages with universities25 in each country bordering the Lake Chad. The platform will also 

conduct a review of the existing ICT services and the demand from users; and will use and test innovative 

technology, such as satellite images, geo-enabled data and other ICT tools to generate knowledge about the 

Lake Chad Region and its ecosystem, and to ensure monitoring in a challenging environment with many 

security constraints. Information and data gathered under this component will directly feed into the monitoring 

of the results of Component 2 and 3. 

 

 Sub-Component 1.2: Institutional capacity building to strengthen regional cooperation and local governance: 
The project will reinforce institutional capacity at regional, national and local levels and coordination of 

institutional stakeholders to strengthen regional dialogue on conflict prevention and local development in the 

Lake Chad Basin. This will be by supporting existing regional dialogue initiatives (such as the Lake Chad 

Basin Governors forum and other cross-border initiatives in the Lake Chad Region). Moreover, the project 

will support innovative citizen engagement mechanisms (access to information, participatory planning and 

budget, Grievance Redress Mechanisms) aimed at improving participatory planning and monitoring of 

investments around local plans and better institutional governance thus rebuilding trust between local 

populations and institutions. 

 

Component 2: Restoring Rural Mobility and Connectivity 

 

28. The component consists of civil works for rehabilitation of rural roads which are of regional importance, 
focusing on small-scale infrastructure provision to address immediate priority gaps in rural road connectivity in 

selected areas of the Lake Chad. The aim of this component is to improve access of communities to markets, 

especially regional markets, and to provide beneficiaries with an opportunity for short-term employment. 

Selection of the investments will be aligned with the activities of Component 3, in particular with regards to 

enhancing the logistics performance of the selected value chains on the infrastructure side and addressing the lack 

of mobility services or equipment, such as IMT (Intermediate Means of Transport). Road rehabilitation and 

maintenance sites will be assessed by considering the accessibility to basic services and a rapid mobility 

diagnostic based on (i) the calculation of RAI (rural access index), (ii) the accessibility by road to markets and 

health facilities such as centers offering emergency obstetrical services, and (iii) mobility needs and constraints 

of the population (through e.g. conducting some focus group discussions with selected communities). The civil 

works will be performed by using the Labor Intensive Public Works (LIPW) method for rural roads rehabilitation. 

This approach will contribute to promoting social cohesion while improving local governance and supporting 

economic recovery through wage jobs, community engagement (collective decision-making, collaborative 

behaviors, and community ownership, etc.) and improved regional road infrastructure. As part of the technical 

approach and to maximize cost efficiency and economic benefits, the use of a combination of regular full all 

weather standard rehabilitation/construction and environmental Oriented Spot Improvement Design to restore 

basic connectivity integrating duration of execution as a factor will be explored during project preparation. This 

component will consist of two sub-components: 

 

                                            
24 See the recent AFD and IRD study Crise et développement – La région du lac Tchad à l’épreuve de Boko Haram. 
25 Potential identified universities are: University of Diffa in Niger, University of N’Djamena, University of Maroua and University of Maiduguri. 


 Sub-Component 2.1: Rural Roads Rehabilitation Preparatory and Technical Studies and Community 
Maintenance System: This sub-component will finance preparatory and other technical studies to be 

conducted during project preparation and implementation including preliminary conditions surveys, bills 

of quantities and cost calculations and support for environmental and social assessments. Gender specifics 

needs will be identified by the LDP and a mobility assessment (e.g., such needs could include dedicated 

sanitation facilities, street lighting, GBV, etc. at important logistical hubs or market areas). In addition, 

this component will support the development of a community maintenance system to promote the 

sustainability of investments, in terms of both jobs and roads. This could include the development of a 

small association or micro enterprise at community level for road maintenance. 

 

 Sub-Component 2.2: Rural Roads Rehabilitation Works: This sub-component will finance all civil works-
related expenses to beneficiaries for the preparation, execution, and supervision of works which aim at 

restoring rural mobility and connectivity on the Lake Chad and around the Lake. This component will 

complement productive investment activities under Sub-Component 3.1. This includes civil works to 

rehabilitate existing rural roads to obtain all-season road upgraded to respect defined technical standards, 

in particular targeted small rural roads to improve access of communities to regional markets.26 The 

financing of targeted dredging of navigation channels and construction/rehabilitation and maintenance of 

river docking piers infrastructure will also be explored.  

 

Component 3: Agriculture Investments and Value-Chain Development 

 

29. This component will promote public productive investments, value-chain development and citizen 
engagement and community participation activities in underserved communities in targeted areas. It has three 

sub-components: 

 

 Sub-Component 3.1: Public Productive Agriculture Investments: This sub-component will provide 
investment funds to communities through local planning processes to finance small investments for 

agriculture activities with a regional link. Activities that could be supported under this component are as 

follows: (i) Participatory local development needs assessments and local development plans, including the 

identification of areas of the agricultural value-chain that can be strengthened; and (ii) economic or 

productive investments, the construction/rehabilitation of rural markets, landing platforms for boats, small 

bridges and culverts, cleaning of channels, platforms (small commercial/logistics/processing platforms27), 

community storage facilities, the restoration of land quality through watershed management, irrigation 

perimeters, enclosures and waterpoints for agriculture and livestock use.28 

 Sub-Component 3.2: Livelihood Support and Value Chain Development: The project will provide targeted 
support for agriculture value chain development, including targeted support to agriculture production, pre- 

and post-harvest and marketing for selected products along the agriculture value chain (in particular red 

pepper, livestock and fish)29. The supported activities will have a cross-border potential, as for example 

                                            
26 The design of the civil works for rehabilitation of rural roads will take in mind potential risks due to extreme temperature, extreme precipitation, 

flooding and drought – risks to which the project locations are being exposed. 
27 This could, for example, include improved technologies for irrigation and fish processing. 
28 The design of the small-scale infrastructure work under this component will take in mind above identified climate and disaster risks to which the 

project locations are being exposed. 
29 Due to the importance of multiple livelihood strategies in the Region, the project will also focus on the interaction of livelihood with agricultural and 

fishery activities. 



activities which support the production of trading goods will be prioritized, such as the red pepper road in 

Niger (which is then exported to Nigeria), livestock/fish support in Niger and Chad which would be traded 

to Cameroon and Nigeria, and products along the agriculture value chain that have a regional rational. 

Activities under this component could include: (i) strengthening areas of production and livelihood 

opportunities (irrigation, material, rehabilitation and development of selected polders and horticulture 

perimeters); (ii) provision of assets to enhance the production of sorghum, horticulture, rice, cattle, 

fisheries, etc. to increase the productivity of these sub-sectors;30 and (iii) targeted support aimed at 

facilitating and reinforcing selected trans-border trade for selected areas of value chain development (such 

as markets, storage facilities, etc.). Technical assistance on trans-border trade will also be explored. 

Innovative approaches for improving the agricultural value chain development will be identified during 

project preparation31. Activities of this component will particularly target women and female-headed 

households and youth and will thus serve both as a means of prevention (i.e. reducing women’s and 

youth’s vulnerability) and as a means of longer-term support for those affected by violence. Activities will 

also be chosen following a careful assessment of their level of positive impact on women and youth, and 

if these activities are accessible for women and youth. Furthermore, the negative impacts of post-harvest 

processing which address in particular women and children will also be reduced.32 Given the large youth 

population among the beneficiaries, targeted skills trainings to include life and entrepreneurship skills will 

also be explored based on needs. The approach for identifying, prioritizing, implementing and monitoring 
these activities will be participatory, therefore done in collaboration with local institutions and beneficiary 

communities to mitigate risks of conflicts between communities and contribute to reducing Gender Based 

Violence (GBV), including sexual violence.  

 

 Sub-component 3.3.: Citizen engagement and community participation activities: The project will provide 
targeted support to citizen engagement and community participation activities, such as psychosocial 

support and mentoring, flexible and adaptable community reintegration programs, sports and cultural 

community activities, and different campaigns, such as GBV prevention, de-stigmatization campaigns and 

the engagement of youth and women as conflict and climate and disaster risk management champions will 

also be supported during the planning and implementation processes. These activities will help to restore 

trust among the population and will reduce the risk of further stigmatization, exclusion, radicalization and 

violence, including GBV, etc. These activities would also be complementarity to UNDP’s support to the 

DDR process in the Lake Chad Region, and in particular to the activities of a DD facility which UNDP is 

currently assisting to establish. 
 

 

 

Component 4: Project Management 

 

30. This component will finance the planning, implementation, and technical oversight of program activities; 
and effective social and environmental safeguards management, financial management, and procurement. The 

arrangements for project coordination will be determined at preparation stage. Relevant government agencies at 

                                            
30 The activities will complement the activities under the sub-component 2.1. and especially with regards to the provision of small scale post-harvest 

infrastructure which strengthens the agriculture value chain. 
31 The project may also include support for diversification out of climate-sensitive livelihoods; this will be identified during project preparation. 
32 See Central Africa Coastal Fisheries report (P165882). Fish smoking is done with basic ovens that have negative impacts on the products themselves 

and on the health of the processors mainly women and their children. The FAO, for example, has recently developed a new type of smoking oven that 

reduces the exposure to toxic smoke and chemicals, while also reducing the amount of fuel needed for smoking.  



the regional, national, sub-national and local levels will be involved in the implementation process with adequate 

capacity building support. The following activities will be included: Communication, Monitoring and Evaluation 

(M&E) arrangements, including the set-up of a Management Information System (MIS), outcome/impact 

evaluations at mid-term and end-of-project; and measures for enhanced transparency and accountability. 

Innovative implementation mechanisms (use of Third Party Monitoring, digital monitoring/supervision tools, 

such as satellite data) will be considered given the specific security challenges. Data produced with the help of 

the Knowledge and Monitoring platform as outlined in Sub-Component 1.1. will feed directly into project 

supervision and oversight. Project Management will be undertaken in close coordination and collaboration with 

security and justice forces and mechanisms for identifying risk of violence at various stage of project 

implementation will be established so as to allow the project to operate in such an insecure environment. 
 
  

Component 5: Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC) 

 

31. The project will operate in a highly complex and volatile environment. This zero-funded component will 
allow the governments to quickly mobilize funds in the event of an emergency that will require immediate 

recovery and reconstruction response. The detailed design of this component will be developed during project 

preparation. 
 

Figure 5: Overview of Project Components 
 

 
  



 
The World Bank  
Lake Chad Region Recovery and Development Project (P161706) 

 
 

  
Oct 12, 2018 Page 18 of 22  

     

   

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
The project will be implemented in several areas that border Lake Chad, initially in Niger, Cameroon and Chad. The 

following areas have been pre-identified as potential areas of intervention: (a) In Niger: Clusters of pepper productions 
along the main corridor of the national road from N’Guimi via Diffa to Zinder, two fishing communities and one cattle 
area in the North of the Lake Chad ; (b) in Cameroon: communes along the CEMAC corridor in Maroua and Septentrion 
and communes in the close vicinity to the Lake Chad (here, in particular fisheries), and (c) in Chad: a transport corridor 
connecting N’Djamena to the South of Cameroon and West via Bol and Baga Sol and polder areas in Tangal and Gueni. 
These are low density areas in terms of population but represent important transport corridors for goods and produce for 
the region. 
 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
Cameroon: The country has a comprehensive environmental and social legal framework, including the 1996 

Environmental Law and its implementation decrees including a decree on ESIA.  The Ministry of Environment, Protection 
of Nature and Sustainable Development (MINEPDED) is responsible for approval of ESIAs/ESMPs/RAPs and ESMPs/RAPs 
compliance monitoring. The Ministries has divisional entities that ensure local ESMPs monitoring compliance. The Order 
No 0010/MINEP of April 3, 2013 requires to set up in each Division of the country, a Committee for the technical and 
administrative supervision of ESMP. However, only one Divisional committee has not been set up in the Project. The 
decentralized entities remain weak and have limited human and logistic capacities.  The country has experience in 
monitoring environmental and social safeguards policies of World Bank financed projects. 
 
Chad: The country has an environmental and social legal framework that includes the legislative framework includes Law 

n ° 14/PR/98 of August 17, 1998 defining the general principles of environment protection. The Country published also on 
August 4, 2010 decree n °630 regulating the Environmental Impact Assessment and on November 29, 2012, the EIA 
preparation general guide. The Ministry in charge of Environment is responsible for approval of ESIAs/ESMPs through 
DEELCPN. This Department remains very poorly staffed and staffs that are there are poorly equipped. The country has 
experience in monitoring the implementation of World Bank financed projects.  The  capacity to deal with environmental 
and social safeguards remains very weak.  
 
Niger:  The country has a comprehensive environmental and social legal framework that includes the Law n ° 2018-28 of 

May 14, 2018 determining the fundamental principles on Environmental Assessments. The Bureau Environmental 
Assessments and Impact Studies (BEEEI), under the Ministry of the Environment and Sustainable Development 
responsible for approval of ESIAs/ESMPs and ESMPs compliance monitoring. In practice, BEEEI lacks decentralized 
entities. BEEEI has some skilled staffs but the number of staff remains limited with regards of the workload and 
responsibilities to be undertaken. BEEEI has very limited logistic  capacities. BEEEI has experience in monitoring World 
Bank safeguards. 
 
During the project preparation, an in-depth assessment of the three borrower's institutional capacities will be 

undertaken and relevant mitigation measures will be proposed. 
 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The proposed project is categorized as category B 
project under this policy, because activities under 
Component 2 and 3 are expected to generate 
potential adverse social and environmental risks and 
impacts that will be limited in scale. Most of them will 
be site specific within the target area, few if any of 
them will be irreversible and in most cases, mitigation 
measures can be designed. As the identification of 
sites and works is not yet finalized, an ESMF will be 
prepared for each country, consulted upon, and 
disclosed both in-country and at the World Bank 
website prior to appraisal. In addition, a GBV risk 
assessment for each country will be undertaken in 
order to provide recommendations for how to 
mainstream mitigation measures appropriate for each 
context into the country components. 

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No 
This policy is not triggered as the activities do not 
intend to use private sectors activities as described 
under this policy. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

OP 4.04 is triggered as the Lake Chad has been 
recognized by the Ramsar Convention on Wetlands of 
International Importance (i.e. the Lake Chad is a 
"Ramsar site"). While specific project sites are 
currently not known, it is likely that some project 
activities might take place in the vicinity of the Lake 
Chad. Provisions and further information on 
appropriate risk mitigation strategies and measures in 
relation to the site(s) will be included in each of the 
country specific ESMFs. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No 

This policy is not triggered as the project activities do 
not expect to affect negatively on the health and 
quality of forests and/or finance activities that would 
do so. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

Although procurement of pesticides is not envisaged 
under the project, it is possible that the activities with 
regards to the strengthening of agriculture production 
will lead to an increased use of pesticides. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 
The Physical Cultural Resources Policy (OP 4.11) is 
triggered because Cameroon, Chad and Niger are 
viewed as rich cultural heritage area. The Lake Chad is 



also classified as a World Natural Heritage Site by 
UNESCO. Though it is unknown at this time which sites 
may contain such resources, due to the lack of 
specifics on the locations, size, scale of planned 
investments under the project, it was judged prudent 
to use caution when implementing the productive 
investments, especially the civil works. During the 
development of the country specific ESMFs, physical 
cultural resources will be taken into consideration and 
a baseline will be defined. The ESMFs will include clear 
procedures that will be required for identification, 
protection of cultural property from death and 
treatment of discovered artefacts, and which will be 
included in standards bidding documents. The ESMFs 
will also provide procedures for handling chance finds 
(during implementation of the project's activities). 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 TBD 

A social assessment to determine if there are 
Indigenous peoples in the project area or that will be 
impacted by project activities will be undertaken. If 
there are Indigenous peoples, an IPPF or IPP will be 
prepared for the specific country to provide guidance 
during implementation. The IPPFs or IPPs will be 
disclosed in country and on the World Bank website 
prior to appraisal. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

OP 4.12 is triggered due to the potential impacts 
related to civil works under Components 2 & 3, which 
may lead to minor land acquisition, loss of assets 
and/or access to resources. A Resettlement Policy 
Framework for each country will be prepared or 
updated, consulted upon, approved and disclosed 
both in-country and at the World Bank website prior 
to appraisal. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 
The policy is not triggered as the project activities will 
not involve the construction of a dam or being 
dependent upon an existing dam. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

Yes 

The policy is triggered because some of the proposed 
investments under component 2.2. (e.g. targeted 
dredging/navigation channels/rehabilitation and 
construction of docking pier infrastructure) and 
possibly also 3.1. (e.g. landing platforms for boats, 
small bridges and culverts, cleaning of channels) will 
take place on an international waterway (Lake Chad), 
as per OP 7.50. As a consequence, other riparian 
countries will be notified of the proposed project and 
the Lake Chad Basin Commission will be involved as 
appropriate and as according to Bank procedures. 


     

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
The policy is not triggered as the project does not 
anticipate any disputes in the targeted area. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Apr 25, 2019 
 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
RPFs will be simultaneously prepared (or updated in the case of PNDP in Cameroon) for each country prior to appraisal. 

The information obtained during the preparation will be used to prepare the Appraisal stage ISDS. 
 
 

