























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Khyber Pakhthunkhwa Irrigated Agriculture Improvement Project (P163474) 

 
 

  
Jul 31, 2017 Page 1 of 21  

     

 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 30-Apr-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSC21925 


BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Pakistan P163474  Khyber Pakhthunkhwa 
Irrigated Agriculture 
Improvement Project 
(P163474) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

SOUTH ASIA Oct 31, 2018 Feb 20, 2019 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing The Islamic Republic of 
Pakistan 

Department of Agriculture, 
Government of Khyber 
Pukhthukhwa, Department 
of Irrigation, Government of 
Khyber Pukhthunkhwa 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
To enhance water management, productivity and climate resilience of irrigated agriculture in project areas 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-NewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 183.00 

Total Financing 183.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 165.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 165.00 

          IDA Credit 165.00 

Non-World Bank Group Financing 

     Counterpart Funding 18.00 



 
The World Bank  
Khyber Pakhthunkhwa Irrigated Agriculture Improvement Project (P163474) 

 
 

  
Jul 31, 2017 Page 3 of 21  

     

          LOCAL: BENEFICIARIES 18.00 

   
 

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

A - Full Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 
 

  Other Decision (as needed) 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

1. Pakistan, the world’s sixth most populous country, is a lower-middle-income country 
which has made significant progress towards macroeconomic and financial stability. Pakistan’s 
per capita income has almost doubled and the share of the population living in poverty has 
decreased by two-thirds over the last decade. Gross domestic product (GDP) growth reached 4.7 
percent in 2016 and is expected to reach 5 percent in 2017, supported by construction and 
manufacturing activities, increased private sector credit growth, increased reserves, low 
inflation, continuing strong remittances, and an upturn in foreign direct investment related to 
the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor.  

2. Nevertheless, Pakistan faces serious development challenges, mostly in rural areas. 
GDP growth has been slower than needed to provide for the level of jobs required for a young 
and growing population. Inadequacy in the private sector environment, public sector 
management, and implementation capacity will continue to hamper service delivery 
performance. Thus, human development indicators continue to lag. In fact, Pakistan did not meet 
the targets of most of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) by 2015. Rural poverty remains 
about double the urban poverty (35 percent versus 18 percent in 2014) and decreases less 
rapidly, given low growth of the agriculture sector, inadequate rural infrastructure and 
connectivity to markets, weak governance and institutions, and limited access to finance. 

3. Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KP) has faced a number of crises in the past decade. With 
geographical proximity and community-level ties to Afghanistan, KP has suffered from the fallout 
of the conflict in Afghanistan, which has given rise to a precarious security situation as well as 
prolonged political and social instability. Related hostilities and extremist violence have caused 
far-reaching disruption to economic activity and inflicted extensive damage on private property, 
livelihoods, and public infrastructure.  


4. KP is also one of Pakistan’s less developed regions, with some economic and social 
development indicators lagging behind the national averages. The province of KP accounts for 
an estimated 10.5 percent of the country’s GDP and about 14.6 percent of the population 
(approximately 30.5 million). The per capita income in KP is estimated to be 33 percent below 
the national average, and despite a sharp and consistent decline in poverty, 27 percent of 
households are estimated to be living below the national poverty line. Another relevant indicator 
is the household size, which is strongly correlated with poverty in Pakistan. KP households 
comprise 7.2 members on average, well above the national average of 6.3 members. Most of 
KP’s population (85 percent) also lives in rural areas, where access to public services and income 
generation opportunities is lower than in urban centers. 

5. Climate change is expected to exacerbate extreme weather events in KP, thereby 
increasing the vulnerability of people and assets to climate induced disasters. Since 2010 
extreme events such as cloudburst over the catchment areas of Indus and its tributaries, have 
frequently occurred during the annual monsoon season. This often leads to flash floods and 
landslides, causing damages across several sectors, including agriculture, livelihoods, 
infrastructure, transport and communications, and housing. Since 2010, KP has been facing 
extreme precipitation events, in the Indus catchment areas, particularly during the annual 
monsoon season. This results in swelling of rivers, causing localized and major floods in low-lying 
areas. KP is also facing an increased number of glacial lake outburst floods (GLOF) due to 
increased temperatures and intense precipitation. Being an upper riparian province in Pakistan, 
KP receives the shortest lead times for early warnings on climate induced hydro-meteorological 
disasters. As a result of the 2010 floods, KP suffered US$ 1.1 billion in damages, which included 
damages and losses of US$ 96 million1 to the agriculture sector in the province. 

B. Sectoral and Institutional Context 

6. Agriculture is important for Pakistan and the Government has placed agriculture 
development and water efficiency at the forefront of its development agenda. Agriculture2 
remains the second largest economic sector in Pakistan, contributing about 21 percent to the 
national GDP and employing approximately 42 percent of the labor force. The sector is also the 
largest contributor to export revenues with about 75 percent share from exports of primary and 
processed (mostly cotton textile) goods. The Government acknowledges that sustaining an 
annual GDP growth rate of 6 percent or more will require greater focus on agriculture and 
improved water resources planning, governance, and resilience. The Government is pursuing 
multiple initiatives to boost efforts to increase agricultural and water productivity, promote 
efficient use of its scarce water and precious land resources, and incentivize private sector 
investment in these areas for economic growth and shared prosperity.  

7. The contribution of agriculture in the KP economy, however, is less prominent, although 
it employs a high percentage of its labor force. KP’s contribution to the country agriculture GDP 

 

is the smallest of all provinces at 7 percent, compared to its share in total GDP of 11 percent. Also 
within KP, agriculture accounts for only 14 percent of the provincial GDP, representing the 
smallest share of all provinces. The sector accounts for 37 percent of labor force employment3 
and 11 percent of the total household income. The total cultivated area of the province is 1.6 
million ha (7 percent of the country’s total), half of which is rain fed. It produces about 5 percent 
of the country’s total wheat, 2 percent of rice, 17 percent of maize, 8 percent of sugarcane, 16 
percent of barley, 4 percent of gram, 3 percent of rapeseed and mustard, and 75 percent of 
tobacco. Its share in the country’s total livestock population is about 6 percent in cattle, 2.5 
percent in buffalo, 2 percent in sheep, and 8 percent in goats. KP is currently facing a food deficit 
and depends heavily on imports from other provinces, especially from Punjab, for important 
commodities like wheat (64 percent), rice (74 percent), milk, meat, sugar (80 percent), and 
vegetables (90 percent) to complement its production. The answer to this conundrum of 
agriculture may lie in the under exploitation of its natural resources, as the sector grew at a 
decent rate of 3.1 percent to 7.3 percent in the 2010–2015 five-year period, especially after the 
active insurgency period ended. 

8. KP’s land and water resources are under exploited. Of the total culturable4 land of 2 m 
ha., 1/3rd is irrigated, 1/3rd is rainfed and 1/3rd is culturable waste. Water allocated to KP under 
the National Water Apportionment Accord (WAA) of 1991 is 8.78 million acre feet (MAF) but due 
to current carrying capacity of the aging infrastructure and lack of new infrastructure the 
province is only able to withdraw about 68 percent (5.97 MAF) of its share. Also, 14 percent in 
floodwater, under the accord, is not fully used. Additionally, all water resources freed up from 
the WAA’s ambit, for the province, are not yet fully used. These include waters from schemes not 
exceeding 5,000 acres above elevation of 1200 ft. (Survey of Pakistan Datum [SPD]) and waters 
from Kurum/Gomal/kohat basins located in the highly-underserved areas of Kohat, Hangu, Karak, 
Bannu, Lakki Marwat, and D.I. Khan Districts. Thus, one-third of KP’s arable land depends on 
rainfall in a climate that is semiarid to arid. Another one-third (1.08 million ha) of KP’s arable 
land, called culturable waste land, is out of cultivation due either to water logging, non-
availability of irrigation water, salinity, unlevel land, lack of manpower, funds shortages, and so 
on. Thus, more land and water resource development is desperately needed for KP’s food 
security, import substitution, and economic development especially of the lagging areas. That’s 
why feasibility studies are included in the project design to prepare future investments in water 
resources development. 

9. The irrigation infrastructure in KP suffers from deferred maintenance5. KP canals are 
aging. Some are older than 100 years. As an upper riparian province with hilly terrains and steep 
slopes, KP’s canals suffer from frequent bank breaches, bed erosion and scouring due to floods, 

 
3 28 percent of male and 77 percent of female (mostly rural); 44 percent of rural and 6 percent of urban labor force is engaged 
in agriculture. The labor force participation is 80 percent male and 20 percent female (21 percent in rural and 12 percent in 
urban areas). 
4 According to bureau of statistics-Pakistan, culturable land includes cultivated and culturable waste lands and 

cultivated area includes rainfed and irrigated lands. 
5 De-siltation; oiling & greasing; repairing leakages, damaged sections of canal prism, cross drainage structure and outlets 



sliding and high velocities in addition to the normal wear and tear of a canal. Due to the poor 
condition of the canals, the system’s delivery performance is poor and the leakages/wastages 
(estimated at 25%) are causing water logging. Unlike Punjab, the reliance on ground water is 
minimal in irrigated areas, therefore water lost would be wasted and even would cause water 
logging and salinity. The silt deposition raises the level of the command area for which canal bed 
needs to be raised to continue providing the required volumes of water. 

Besides the canals, there are some 4,000-km long surface and subsurface drainage system in KP 
that was built to flush out the excess water to keep the fertile land in production in the central 
districts. However due to lack of funds, this infrastructure is also suffering and, the carrying 
capacity of the drainage system has diminished and large tracts of precious fertile lands are 
becoming water logged and saline again.  

To keep pace with the exceptional level of O & M needs of the KP irrigation and drainage system, 
larger amounts of funds are needed. However, according to the KP Irrigation Department, only 
1/3rd (PkR 500 m vs PkR. 12,00 m for the last 10 years) of the needs are provided. Water charges 
(Abiana) collections in the province has been low at 30% of the total assessed, mainly because of 
the limited paying capacity of the large number of small landholders and low flat rates - PKR 
300/year/acre. Besides, its own system, the department also must, at times, shoulder the 
rehabilitation of civil canals which are community owned and do not pay any water charges. 

This practice of ‘build neglect rebuild’ costs the exchequer dearly6 which are oftentimes met from 
the development budget. 

Removing this backlog of rehabilitation as well as modernization is important to improve the 
system service capability, reduce water wastages/leakages and water logging and safeguard the 
system sustainability.  

10. In KP, as reported by the Irrigation Department, 10-15 percent of the canal outlets are 
tampered and /or illegal. This creates in-equity among growers in the system and affects the 
productivity of the farmers mainly at the tail end. An understanding has been reached with the 
Department to resolve such in-equities during the rehabilitation of the system. 

11. Historically, the collaboration between Irrigation and Agriculture Departments, in KP, is 
weak. Irrigation Department is responsible for development of dams, canals and drains, its 
functionality and O&M; delivering water to farmers at the outlet/farmgate (in watercourses); and 
assessment and collections of water charges. The Agriculture Department is responsible for 
development and rehabilitation of watercourses, promoting water conservation technologies 
and training farmers in good agriculture practices. Due to poor coordination, the benefits of up 
and down stream investment do not consolidate at the farm level. The Baizai Irrigation scheme 
is a good example. The Irrigation Department constructed the upstream delivery system with 
capacity for 25,000 acres but since no provision was made in the scheme budget for the 

 
6 According to a global estimate, a dollar deferred maintenance costs US$7 in repair/rehabilitation 


construction of watercourses, the agriculture department could not do so and after more than 2 
years the farmers are unable to utilize the water fully. This collaboration has started to improve 
in some very new schemes and this project will contribute to improving this collaboration further. 

12. In KP, as in the rest of the country, O & M of the watercourses, that brings water from 
canals to the farms, is a challenge on the daily basis. These are earthen structures owned and 
managed by farmers. The average length of a watercourse (including branches) is about 3 km, 
serving an average area of 150 acres with an average number of 75 shareholder farmers. Every 
farmer has a turn, once a week, to take his share in proportion to his landholding from the 
watercourse. Every time a farmer diverts his/her share, loose earth/mud and stone mixture are 
gathered from the surrounding fields to plug and unplug the farm gate and watercourse at the 
turnouts. Preventing leakage from these structure is a continuous battle for the farmer. Since 
this channel must pass near each farm, there are many turns and branches through which water 
passes. This is an important cause of spillage and leakage for water. Being earthen, many 
different weeds/shrubs/trees start growing on the banks of the watercourse. These often 
become a source of blockage due to its own biomass and capturing silt load causing the water to 
overflow and causing ponding near the watercourse-sometimes becoming mosquito breading 
points. Another source of damage are rodents and grazing animals. This necessitates recurrent 
seasonal cleaning by farmers. Since farmers are poor and cannot afford to hire labour, they do it 
mostly themselves. This O & M of the watercourse draws heavily on the farmers’ time and labour 
-and also cause wastage of his precious water estimated up to 40%. Being earthen, it is easier to 
cut and steal other farmer’s share that can become source of heavy rifts in relations. Therefore, 
it is important to support farmer with watercourse improvement i.e. lining of 507% length, 
installing all turnout structures, construction of crossing culverts, washing pads, and animal 
drinking wallows. It is estimated that this investment helps the farmer save 75% labour time, 15 
percentage point of water wastage, water travel time by 50%, in-equity, theft control which 
results in 15-20% crop yield increase, 30% cropping intensity and ultimately increased net 
incomes. In addition to these benefits it also helps in saving energy costs and precious ground 
water on tube-well water courses. 

13. Field application of water is highly in-efficient in KP as in other parts of the country. Due 
to the widespread practice of flood irrigation and insufficient knowledge of good irrigation 
agronomy practices, water losses are highest at the field level where application efficiency is as 
low as 65–70 percent. Resultantly, crop yields and cropping intensities are low. Investments to 
promote water conservation technologies such as high-efficiency irrigation systems (HEIS) and 
laser-based precision land leveling (PLL) on-farm are of paramount importance for saving losses 
on-farm. HEIS is estimated to increase field application efficiency by 25 percentage points to 95% 
and PLL helps save water by about 30% resulting in increased yields and incomes. 

14. In KP, farmers’ productivity is generally low. Most crop yields in KP are low compared to 
other provinces and progressive growers. This could be attributed to large number of (80%) small 

 
7 So far the department lined 30% but the new findings and demand from the farmers suggest to increase it to 50% 



landholdings lacking scale and purchasing power; labour shortage due to out migration to cities 
and abroad and insufficient mechanization to off-set this shortage; shortage of skilled labour; 
insufficient private sector participation and services; lack of financial services; weak public sector 
research and extension services. 

15. KP has pockets with unique agro-climatic conditions, ideal for horticulture production. 
These include, among others, citrus, dates, pome fruits, potato, tomato, and onions. However, 
the current share of the subsector in the total cropped area is only 6 percent. With improved 
access roads to the main domestic markets and neighboring Afghanistan and air links to the Gulf 
and Central Asian countries, KP could potentially further capitalize on this comparative 
advantage.  

16. Postharvest losses are high. Lack of postharvest technology and management and 
modern cool chain infrastructure and inappropriate storage, packaging, and transportation 
facilities are major bottlenecks specially for perishable commodities in KP. Postharvest losses of 
35 percent to 40 percent for fruits and vegetables remain one of the most pressing problems, 
mostly given the lack of farmer’s awareness about scientific handling of farm produce. 
Inappropriate storage facilities, both in the public and private sector, register the highest losses 
during handling operations. Horticulture products are mostly stored in shallow pits covered with 
farm wastes without ventilation, without proper sanitation, and without preventive measures for 
insect and disease control. The concept of a cool chain network is in its infancy and integrated 
cool chain networks are mostly lacking. The existing cold storage facilities are unevenly 
distributed across the country with Punjab dominating with 512 units, while KP only had 16 units 
in 2009 (Planning Commission 2009). The cold storage facilities are based on old technology that 
do not differentiate for unique temperature requirements of crop species. Moreover, most of 
the existing packing facilities do not measure up to international standards. The types of 
containers used for transporting and storing products vary from place to place, but a common 
practice is to use whatever container is available. This causes the produce to be pressed hard in 
the crates or carried in oversized containers, causing huge loss.  

17. In addition, the agricultural marketing infrastructure and system is inadequate and 
lacks market responsiveness. Many wholesale markets (mandis) were built years ago, and are 
unable to cope efficiently with increased transactions. Serious traffic congestion, insufficient 
space for efficient movement of products in and out, inadequate storage, and improper 
management are some of the major factors for increased marketing costs and physical losses of 
farm products. Hygiene conditions, particularly in the case of fruits, vegetables, and livestock, are 
quite dismal. Excessive domination of commission agents, lack of physical and allied facilities, 
non-involvement of growers and consumers in market committees, and an ineffective market 
information system are some of the inherent problems of these markets and are putting farmers 
at a disadvantageous situation while selling their produce. In addition, the lack of planning and 
communication between demand and supply result in gluts at one time and shortages at other 
times, causing severe price fluctuations and loss of farmer incomes.  



18. The level of processing and value addition of agricultural products is very low in 
Pakistan. Only 3 percent of the total production of fruits and vegetable and less than 10 percent 
of milk are processed in the country (Planning Commission 2009). There exists enormous 
potential of adding value to various fruits and vegetable, such as freezing, drying, dehydrating, 
or crushing into powder, juice, pulp, oil, paste, sauce, chips, pickles, chutney, and jam. The culture 
of value addition through processing and diversification is still at infant stages in Pakistan. This 
small amount of processing leaves large opportunities and could also absorb some of the 
seasonal glut and extend the life of the raw material. 

19. The new government has increased the budget allocation to the sector and shifted its 
policy from higher productivity to higher profitability for smallholder farmers. The KP 
Government increased the budget for its annual development plans to US$62 million for 
agriculture and US$71 million for irrigation in FY17, which is still well below the needs. Key 
priority areas of the new government, as highlighted in the KP Integrated Development Strategy 
of 2014–18 and the KP Agriculture Policy and Strategy—a ten-year perspective (2014–24), are 
improving, among others, production, processing, and marketing, thus improving extension 
services; diversification into high-value agriculture (horticulture, livestock, dairy, and 
aquaculture); adaptation to climate change; on-farm water management (OFWM); development 
of new water resources; rehabilitation/modernization of the existing irrigation and drainage 
infrastructure; and governance. 

20. The World Bank’s last engagement with KP in the sector was for about six years from 
2001 to 2007 for a total of US$21 million made mainly in restoration/rehabilitation of the 
irrigation network from the secondary to the tertiary level. Major efforts were also made, in 
support of the national drainage program (NDP), in devolving the management to farmers, with 
powers to collect water charges and keep 40 percent for managing the operation and 
maintenance of the system from the secondary level downward. However, this outcome could 
not be sustained for long and has been rolled back by the Government. 

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

21. To enhance water management, productivity and climate resilience of irrigated 
agriculture in project areas. 

Key Results (From PCN) 

22. The project outcomes will be measured with the following indicators: 

a) Area provided with improved irrigation and drainage services; 

b) Increase in agriculture productivity (yield); 

c) Increase in areas cultivated for High-Value Agriculture; 

d) Area under climate-resilient technologies and practices (resilience); 

e) Total number of project beneficiaries (including number of female beneficiaries) 


D. Concept Description 

23. The project will contribute to the development of the agriculture sector by working on (a) 
water as an important input and limiting factor to productivity and overall production (b) training 
and technology for improving productivity, post-harvest management and value addition. More 
specifically, it will support six key priority areas of the government strategy for the sector, that 
is, improving performance/functionality of the delivery system and reducing water wastages; 
making water allocation/distribution equitable; increasing financial sustainability of the irrigation 
system management; increasing climate resilience; increasing productivity and promoting high 
value agriculture (production, processing and marketing); and strengthening the department for 
improved service delivery and governance.  

24. To consolidate the benefits of the project, priority will be given to schemes where all the 
three components’ interventions can happen together. In this way, the two departments of 
agriculture and irrigation will work in close collaboration, hitherto weak.  

25. The project will provide climate change co-benefits derived from: (a) adaptation, by changing 
irrigation management systems and practices to reduce vulnerability to climate change, by 
reducing water wastages and its negative externalities during delivery and by reducing losses 
during field application and crop growth stages; and by promoting innovative resource 
management practices to increase resilience, expanding the use of crops and crop 
mixes/rotations less vulnerable to climate variability, and expanding the use of protected 
agriculture and drought/heat resistant varieties; and (b) mitigation, by promoting sustainable 
water management practices that promote water use efficiency and by promoting agricultural 
intensification using higher yielding varieties, carbon sequestration species and cropping 
patterns, and replacing traditional sources of energy. 

26. Woman will be particularly encouraged and targeted to derive maximum benefits of the 
project and play role in the implementation of the project. The project will also ensure to 
safeguard the interest and needs of woman and marginalized groups e.g. providing for protected 
washing pads and animal drinking willows, and avoiding technologies and practices that increases 
drudgery for woman. Further, contractors, consulting firms and implementing partners of the 
project will be sensitized on gender issues and encouraged to achieve gender balance in their 
teams. The operational manual will spell out gender aspects and protocols for mainstreaming 
gender within project interventions.  

27. The project will be open to the entire province and will be completed in six years. The 
project will have the following components: 

Component A: Irrigation System Management (IDA $52 m US) 

This component will have the following three sub-components. 



28. Sub-compoenent-A1: Rehabilitation and reduction in in-equities: This sub-component 
would support the Irrigation Department to overcome the backlog of rehabilitation to fully 
restore the functionality/performance of the irrigation system; reduce the excessive and wasteful 
losses estimated at 25% by 7 percentage points; and increase economic/service life by at least 
10-15 years. This will include support to both the government and civil (community owned) 
canals systems. The government has prepared a prioritized list of 22 schemes, costing about 
USD140 million, for rehabilitation. The project, during the preparation, will conduct a diagnosis 
of the KP irrigation system, including the list provided by the government to, identify the schemes 
to be support by the project. The criteria for selection would include: vulnerability to climate 
change impacts; acreage and number of beneficiaries; potential for high value agriculture; 
poverty levels in the area served; and cost effectiveness (cost per unit area served). A Project 
Preparation Facility (PPF) has been discussed with the client for preparing detail designs and 
bidding documents for the selected schemes. The rehabilitation works would, usually, include 
flood eroded beds and banks; sunken earth filled sections; and damaged hydraulic structures like 
100ft up and down stream of the fall structures, off-taking points of minors and sub-minors, 
footings of overhead bridges; passages through settlements and deep cut areas; and catchwater 
drains for flushing flood water. Before rehabilitation work begins, any outlets tampered and/or 
illegally installed will be removed. 

29. Sub-component-A2: Institutional strengthening & Reform: To avoid buildup of further 
backlog, an understanding with the GoKP will be developed to increase allocation of recurrent 
budget for the O&M of the system by lifting the current cap that is in place for the last 10 years. 
This could be informed by conducting a study on the cost of neglecting (under funding) the O&M 
of the system. However, to make it sustainable in the long run, support will be provided to the 
department to improve its revenue generation capacity by improving collection of the water 
charges. The investments of component C, should help increase the farmers’ capacity to pay 
water charges by improving their crop productivity and switching to high value crops.  

Further support will be provided for training of staff; developing asset management plan; and 
developing water budgets and water balances estimates for the six-major government canal 
systems.  

The KP government has planned to develop the Provincial Integrated Water Resources 
Management Policy with support from the Bank managed MDTF funded Governance and Policy 
Support project. Support under this sub-component will be re-aligned with the directives of this 
policy.  

30. Sub-compoenent-A3: Future investments preparation: To increase availability of water for 
irrigation, households and livestock; support ground water recharge; reduce intensity of floods, 
siltation downstream by tapping hill torrents and splash floods in the rainfed areas, the project 
will finance preparation of feasibilities, detailed designs, and bidding documents for selected 
dams and irrigation schemes. The scheme selection will be based on criteria of number of farmers 
and acreage benefiting and cost effectiveness and poverty levels in the area served. 


Component B: On-farm Water Management (IDA $51 m US) 
This component will enable the Agriculture Department to support farmers including woman, to 
rehabilitate/improve existing and construct new watercourses; adopt water conservation 
technologies on their farms; and in training its staff. The component design benefits from lessons 
drawn from Sindh and Punjab Irrigated Agriculture Improvement projects. These include a) 
developing good database of watercourses with information for length, no. of shareholders, legal 
status; inclusion of tube-well watercourse; lining 50% length and all turnouts; seasonal work 
windows; monitoring dashboards; estimation of average costs; openness to the entire province 
b) empowerment of the farmers to select and negotiate price of the HEIS and PLL equipements 
with suppliers; training of farmers in crop agronomy; fixing maximum cap on project support per 
unit, c) ensuring geographical spread for laser land leveling promotion etc. The component will 
also finance the extended presence of consultants/firm for engineering supervision of activities 
to be implemented by the field teams of the Department. This component will have the four sub-
components, as follows; 
31. Sub-component-B1: Rehabilitation of existing watercourses: The rehabilitation/improvement 
works will be done on existing watercourses on government and civil canals; springs and tube-
well irrigated areas. This work will include lining of 50% length from the offtake point including 
selected critical sections; alignment; desilting; re-sectioning; installing all turn out structures; 
crossing culverts, washing pads and animal drinking willows. Farmers will contribute 20% of the 
total cost in the shape of skilled and unskilled labour and form themselves into water users’ 
associations with at least 70% farmers’ representation.  

32. Sub-component-B2: Construction of watercourses network: Construction of new 
watercourses network will be done in some new schemes areas where the Irrigation Department 
has already completed the upstream irrigation infrastructure but not the watercourses due to 
which farmers are unable to utilize water. The project support will include farmer’s mobilization 
and their formation of WUAs; engineering design, BOQ & cost estimates for construction of the 
full length of earthen watercourse; lining of 50% length preferably from the off-taking point and 
other critical sections; construction of all turn out structures, crossing culverts, washing pads and 
animal drinking points. Here again farmers will contribute 20% of the total cost in the shape of 
skilled and unskilled labour and form themselves into a water users’ association where at least 
70% farmers become members. 

33. Sub-component-B3: Promote water conservation technologies: To promote on-farm 
water conservation, technologies like HEIS and precision laser land leveling (PLL) will be 
supported on a cost sharing basis. These technologies will particularly suit at the tail end and 
tube-well irrigated areas. Farmers will be trained in growing high value crops under HEIS to make 
the use of technology economically viable. 

34. Sub-component-B4: Capacity building & institutional strengthening: The project will 
finance training of staff in new improved methods of on-farm water management and data and 
studies on the watercourses network. 


Component C: Agriculture Productivity Enhancement and Value-Addition (IDA 
$50 m US)  
The objective of this component is to improve the productivity, diversification, harvest and post- 
harvest management and processing & value addition in agriculture (crops, horticulture, fisheries 
and livestock sub-sectors). This objective will be achieved by i) strengthening public sector 
institutions (e.g., research and extension institutions) to solidify the foundation for sustained 
sectoral growth; i) investing in capacity building and iii) introducing modern technologies to 
farmers; and iv) support agribusinesses/ag-entrepreneurs for higher value addition through agro-
processing and commercialization services. This component addresses the climate change 
vulnerabilities to the agriculture sector, as set out in the project’s vulnerability context. All the 
activities under the Component will adequately reflect important CSA areas of productivity, 
adaptation and mitigation as highlighted in Pakistan CSA profile important for agriculture in 
Northern Pakistan. Considering that more than 70% of Pakistan’s female workforce is employed 
in agriculture, there is a special need to ensure all services provided by the Component will be 
more gender sensitive. The lessons drawn from similar projects, for example, the Sindh 
Agriculture Growth Project, have been incorporated to the Component design. The component 
will also finance the extended presence of technical consultants/firm to assist with planning and 
management of the Component. 

35. Subcomponent C.1: Modernizing public extension service and agricultural research (US$14 m). 
The sub-component will finance modernizing and rehabilitating extension and research facilities 
which have been identified as critical for the KP agriculture sector, such as the agricultural 
research centers, training centers and laboratory facilities etc. The subcomponent will also 
finance information and communication (ICT)-based technologies and services for delivery of 
agricultural extension and marketing for farmers and value chains, such as developing mobile 
phone APPs and other ICT tools (e.g., 24/7 call center, interactive websites, mobile training and 
demonstration centers etc.). The subcomponent will also support studies and data on the sector 
and training of staff. 

36. Subcomponent C.2: Capacity building of farmers (US$6 million).  The project will finance 
training and capacity building for famers, which will be based on training needs assessment 
carried out by the departments and their technical assistance providers. Training topics will 
include, but not limited to, good agricultural practices (including those specifically related to 
CSA), agribusiness management, negotiating in the market, basic accounting, and business plan 
development skills, etc. This will be done through demonstration plots, public information 
campaign, face-to-face training (farmers field school), domestic study tours and exposure visits 
etc.  Special attention will be given to climate smart agriculture related knowledge.    

37. Subcomponent C.3: Introducing modern technologies to farmers (US$20 million).  The project 
will finance investments to increase productivity, climate resilience and on-farm pre-and post-
harvest management of crops, horticulture, fisheries and livestock sub-sectors through 
technology (e.g., farm machinery, equipements, seeds, breeds, and infrastructure etc.).  This 



support will be provided on a cost sharing basis with 70% paid by the Project and 30% by 
beneficiaries on a first come first serve basis, with ensuring regional equity. 

38. Subcomponent C.4: Support agribusinesses (US$10 million). This sub-component will support 
agribusinesses (SMEs)/agro-entrepreneurs for improved services, commercialization and 
processing & value addition. This will include businesses like seed companies, nursery growers, 
fish hatcheries, animal semen producers, farm machinery & equipements providers; reefer 
transporters, chillers, ventilated & cold storages, pack-houses including graders, sorter; slaughter 
houses, pulpers, oil extractors, de-hydrators, tanners; trading centers like rehabilitation of fruit, 
vegetable, livestock and grain wholesale markets; introducing digital trading platforms and 
contract growing etc. The project will provide a competitive grant program with a transparent 
and efficient review and selection process. The grant size will be up to US$100,000, with 30% 
matching fund from applicants. The grant will be released in three tranches based on verified 
progress of proposal implementation. 

39. The component will provide climate change co-benefits derived from: (a) adaptation, by 
promoting innovative resource management practices to increase resilience, expanding the use 
of crops and crop mixes/rotations less vulnerable to climate variability, and expanding the use of 
protected agriculture and drought/heat resistant varieties; and (b) mitigation, by promoting 
agricultural intensification using higher yielding varieties, carbon sequestration species and 
cropping patterns, and replacing traditional sources of energy.. 

Component D: Project Management and Implementation Support (IDA US$12 
million) 

40. This component will support the establishment of the project management structure. This 
will include project administration, human resources including woman staff, procurement, and 
financial management; monitoring and evaluation (M&E); communications management; social 
and environmental safeguards management; and grievance redress and community feedback 
mechanisms particularly channeling the voices of woman beneficiaries.  

41. Citizen Engagement (CE): The populations targeted in the citizen engagement mechanism 
of the proposed project will be farmers and agribusiness owners receiving support to increase 
their yield/productivity and the commercialization of their products. The CE mechanism will 
assist the extension service and government officials in making more informed decisions about 
resource allocations, training and technology needs of farmers and agribusiness owners. Overall, 
the CE mechanism will enhance the successful implementation of the project, and guide the 
government in preparing better programs for farmers. A detailed citizen engagement mechanism 
and grievance redressal mechanism will be elaborated during the preparation phase of the 
project, and will be included in the project implementation manual. 

42. Gender. The project design and approach will reflect the need for taking account of the 
gender dimension and risks associated with knowledge and technology transfer. Project will be 
designed to ensure that it provides equal opportunities for women to participate in project 



activities. Climate-resilient agricultural technologies will be screened to ensure that they are 
gender-neutral. A comprehensive social assessment has been initiated as part of project 
preparation and is expected to result, among others, in a Gender Action Plan. 

   

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
The project will be implemented in various districts of KP. The land cover of KP changes from north to south. The 

Province sits primarily on the Iranian plateau and comprises the junction where the slopes of the Hindu Kush mountains 
on the Eurasian plate give way to the Indus-watered hills approaching South Asia. Geographically, the province could be 
divided into four agro-ecological zones on the basis climatic conditions covering temperature, rainfall, altitude and 
topography as developed by Environmental Protection Agency of KP:  
(a) Zone A – Northern Mountains covering districts of Buner, Shangla, Upper and Lower Dir, Swat and Chitral.  
(b) Zone B – Sub Humid Mountain covering districts of Haripur, Batagram, Mansehra, Abbottabad, Kohistan and 

Torghar.    
(c) Zone C – Central Valley Plains covering districts of Peshawar, Mardan, Charshada and Nowshera. 
(d) Zone D – Piedmont Plains (including Suleiman) covering districts of Bannu, karak, Lakki Marwat, Tank and DI Khan.  
The snowcapped mountains of Chitral and Swat have low vegetative cover above 4,000 meters. Mountains having 

altitude less than 4,000 meters have alpine forests (up to 3,300 meters). Altitudes between 3,000 meters to 1,500 meters 
have conifer and between 1,500 up to 900 meters have sub-tropical forests. These forests and plains provide habitat to 
98 species of mammals and birds including endangered species of snow leopard, brown bear, ibex, etc. The protected 
areas notified in KP includes 6 national parks, three wildlife sanctuaries, 38 game reserves, 90 community game reserves, 
16 private game reserves, 2 wildlife refuges and 8 wildlife parks. The combined area of all protected areas is 666,340 ha. 
The project activities are located in parts of Zone C valley plains and Zone D piedmont plains, which are are mostly used 

for agriculture and livestock grazing. Indus River and its tributaries are the main source of water for agriculture in the 
Province. Other major rivers that crisscross the province are  Kabul, Swat, Kunar, Siran, Panjkora, Bara, Kurram, Dor, Haro, 
Gomal and Zhob. 
 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
The KP Government will be the implementing agency. The last time these two departments, Agriculture Department and 

Irrigation Department  implemented a World Bank project was in 2001-2007, and there the Irrigation Department had a 
secondary role. This leaves much desire for familiarity with and improvement in the understanding of the Bank safeguard 
policies. Therefore, safeguards capacity support, handholding and training will be provided throughout the project 
implementation to ensure that they have adequate capacity to respond to project safeguard issues. 
 
A Project Coordination & Management Unit (PCMU)—led by the Agriculture Department, will be established to manage 

implementation and coordination. Project Implementation Units one each in Agriculture (or two in its sub departments) 
and Irrigation Departments will be established to supervise technical implementation in the field. The PCMU will have a 
senior Safeguards Specialist as part of the PCMU Team. PIUs  at the two departments level will be supported by individual 
environment & social safeguards consultants. These consultants will work closely with the engineering supervision 
consultants, and will provide input into the project design as per safeguards instruments (such as ESMF, RPF, RAP, etc.). 
The senior Safeguards Specialist at the PCMU level will be responsible for the overall implementation and performance of 
the safeguards documents, while the day-to-day screening, monitoring and implementation will be the responsibility of 

d specialists at the PIU levels. The project will have a Project Implementation Committee (PIC) co-chaired by 
Secretary Agriculture and Secretary Irrigation and membered by heads of the PIUs, Chiefs of Water, Agriculture & 
Livestock from P & D, to review the progress of project components. The senior Safeguards Specialist at the PCMU level 
will be a part of the PIC. All project implementation and supervision consultant firms will be required to have adequate 
social and environmental safeguards specialists. The contractors for civil works will implement Contractor ESMP, including 
all necessary guidelines on labor health, safety and environment.  
 
Project launch workshop will be organized by the task team once the project becomes effective and will include a 

detailed session on safeguard implementation arrangements. 
 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The project activities involve irrigation infrastructure 
improvement, on farm water management schemes 
and production and post-production support to 
farmers and market actors. These activities are 
expected to cause some adverse environmental and 
social impacts. Overall, most of the impacts are 
expected to be during the construction phase and are 
likely to be temporary and reversible. Consequently, 
the policy has been triggered. Since project will also 
finance feasibility studies for dams, the scale and 
capacity of which is currently unknown. Based on 
existing information, the project has been categorized 
as Category A.   
 
The irrigation infrastructure improvement will overall 
improve irrigation efficiencies and help in ensuring 
availability of designed water flows at the tail-end of 
watercourses. However, improved infrastructure will 
not change the designed water allocations.Typical 
negative impacts associated with civil works financed 
by the project include land acquisition and 
resettlement; noise, air, soil and water pollution due 
to dust and exhaust emission and other wastes; 
vegetation clearance; damage to the existing 
infrastructures such as rural road, temporary water 
stoppages for irrigation, community and worker health 
and safety risks, etc. During operation, some potential 



 
The World Bank  
Khyber Pakhthunkhwa Irrigated Agriculture Improvement Project (P163474) 

 
 

  
Jul 31, 2017 Page 17 of 21  

     

adverse impacts are forecasted such as water 
pollution and spreading diseases by human and animal 
wastes, pesticides use potentially causing water and 
soil pollution, excessive application of irrigation water 
causing leaching of soil nutrients and changes in soil 
characteristics, etc.  
Since the exact location of subprojects are not known 
at present and will be identified during project 
preparation and implementation, framework 
approach has been adopted.  Environmental and 
Social Management Framework (ESMF) along with 
Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) 
for the known priority projects will be developed by 
project appraisal. The ESMF will also include 
assessment of regional impacts on water quality, 
analysis of any possible changes in groundwater and 
downstream surface water availability. The ESMF will 
also include Terms of Reference for environmental 
and social impact assessment (ESIA) for the feasibility 
studies of small dams and environmental and social 
screening checklists/procedures for competitive grant 
program (project component C). 

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No  

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 No 

Most of physical infrastructure investments financed 
by the project are rehabilitation and improvement of 
the existing infrastructures. Some new construction 
activities such as construction of watercourses in new 
command areas and small-water storage tanks will 
take place on the existing agricultural lands. These 
activities are not expected to convert or degrade 
natural habitat. Therefore, the policy is not triggered.   
It is important to mention here that the project is 
supporting preparation of feasibility studies for 5 small 
dams or irrigation schemes. The studies will include 
EIAs. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No 
The project is not expected to impact forests and 
associated ecosystems as envisaged in the policy. 
Therefore, the policy is not triggered. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The project will not support purchase of pesticides. 
However, the policy is triggered because the project 
interventions may lead to substantially increased use 
of pesticides and subsequent environmental 
problems. Thus, to mitigate this impact the project will 
apply an IPM approach with an IPMP prepared. 


     

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 TBD 

At this stage, it is not possible to identify potential 
impacts on physical cultural resources (PCRs). 
However, final determination would be made by QER.  
Chance find procedures will be included in ESMF. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 Yes 

The project area extends across KP, including Chitral 
district which is home to the Kalash who are 
recognized as Indigenous People (IP); hence, OP 4.10 is 
triggered. An Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework 
(IPPF) for interventions in Chitral district will be 
prepared, consulted upon, and disclosed publicly on 
the client’s website (in-country) and by the Bank prior 
to appraisal. Indigenous Peoples Plans (IPPs), if 
required, will be prepared for specific project 
locations. 
Given the cultural sensitivity and tribal nature of the 
area, the social assessment will carefully assess 
potential project impacts on IPs and mitigation 
measures including grievance redress mechanism will 
be developed through free prior and informed 
consultation as required under OP4.10. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

Small parcels of land will be required for project 
interventions. In most cases land needs will be met 
through Community or Voluntary Land Donations 
(VLD), the procedures for which will be laid out in the 
ESMF. In few cases small parcels may need to be 
acquired e.g. watercourses construction in new 
command areas (e.g. Bazai etc.). Certain interventions 
e.g. rehabilitation of existing water courses, may 
involve minor temporary impacts on livelihoods (due 
to restricted access; temporary dislocation) which 
could require small scale compensation. However, the 
impacts are not expected to be large scale. Hence OP 
4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement has been triggered. 
A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), and 
Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) for actual sites that 
may have been identified, will be prepared, consulted 
upon, and disclosed publicly on the client’s website 
(in-country) and by the Bank prior to appraisal. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 Yes 

The project will not directly finance rehabilitation of 
existing dams or construction of new dams. The 
project activities especially investments for 
improvements in irrigation infrastructure may rely on 
performance of the existing dams such as Warsak Dam 
on Kabul River or Munda dam on Swat River. However, 
the exact location of schemes are not known at 
present. The project will also finance feasibility studies 



     

for dams, scale and capacity of which is currently 
unknown. The policy is therefore triggered to ensure 
due diligence and for adequate coverage of 
environmental and social aspects/impacts. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

Yes 

The proposed project activities are located in the 
command area of tributaries of Indus river, which is an 
international water way (river). The proposed project 
activities under component 1 and 2 qualify to trigger 
this policy. The task team will consult LEGEN to 
determine whether waiver to notification to riparian is 
applicable. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
There are no disputed areas as defined in the Policy 
where project interventions are to be undertaken and 
therefore this policy is not triggered. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Sep 17, 2018 
 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
1. ESMF by 30 August, 2018 
2. ESMP for first year schemes by 30 August, 2018 
3. IPMP by 30 August, 2018 
4. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be prepared to provide guidelines for project interventions that could 

require land acquisition, and which may lead to resettlement and impact on livelihood. RPF will be completed by 30 
August, 2018. 
5. RAP for first year schemes by 30 August, 2018 
6. Ingenious Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) will be prepared by 30 August, 2018. IPPs (Indigenous Peoples Plans) for 

the first year schemes will be prepared by 30 August, 2018, where required.  
7. Assessment of regional impacts on water quality, groundwater availability and downstream water availability will be a 

part of the overall ESMF, as well as the social assessment. Moreover, given the cultural sensitivity and tribal nature of the 
area, all assessments will carefully assess consultations/GRM/FPIC requirements.  
8. All feasibility studies will include a TOR on E&S screening and social and environmental impacts analyses.   
 
 
 

