

















































PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
CONCEPT STAGE

Report No.: PIDC11855

Project Name Bangladesh NATP-2: National Agricultural Technology Program - Phase II 
(P149553)

Region SOUTH ASIA
Country Bangladesh
Sector(s) Agricultural extension and research (50%), Animal production (20%), 

Crops (20%), Information technology (10%)
Theme(s) Rural services and infrastructure (50%), Technology diffusion (25%), 

Rural markets (25%)
Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P149553
Borrower(s) Economic Relations Division, Ministry of Finance
Implementing Agency Ministry of Agriculture (MOA)
Environmental 
Category

B-Partial Assessment

Date PID Prepared/
Updated

04-Sep-2014

Date PID Approved/
Disclosed

09-Sep-2014

Estimated Date of 
Appraisal Completion

05-Nov-2014

Estimated Date of 
Board Approval

26-Feb-2015

Concept Review 
Decision

I. Introduction and Context
Country Context
Building on its remarkable social and economic performance over the last 20 years, Bangladesh 
aims to become a middle income country by 2021; to achieve this will require among other that the 
GoB overcomes considerable challenges in agricultural development and rural economic growth. 
The country’s GDP growth averaged 5.8 percent between 2000 and 2010, accompanied by a decline 
in the national poverty headcount rate from 48.9 percent to 31.5 percent over the same period, 
effectively lifting some 16 million people out of poverty. Bangladesh, a country of over 160 million 
inhabitants, has also made noteworthy gains in education and health, and is well set to achieve most 
of the MDGs.  
Bangladesh remains a predominantly agricultural country and growth and development 
achievements in rural areas must be brought on par with those in urban areas. Agriculture occupies 


some three-quarters of the scarce land space of the country and supports the livelihoods of the 
majority of the population. While overall poverty has significantly declined over the 2000 to 2010 
period, the poverty headcount in rural areas (still 35.2 percent) has not declined as fast as in urban 
settings; moreover, the proportion of people living in extreme poverty in rural areas is still three 
times higher than in urban areas. The contribution of agriculture to the country’s economic output 
has declined over the past decade, but crops, livestock, forestry, fisheries still combine for almost 
one-fifth of GDP. Moreover, with some 70 percent of the population living in rural areas and over 
43 percent of the country's total labor force engaged in agriculture, achieving further economically, 
socially and environmentally sustainable economic growth and poverty reduction will require 
policies and investments conducive of lasting transformational changes in rural areas – including 
through technological innovations in agriculture.

Sectoral and Institutional Context
To eliminate the country’s extreme poverty by the year 2030 and to promote shared prosperity for 
the poorest 40 percent, agriculture  must continue to grow (in ways that are sustainable and adapted 
to climate change) and rely on a more diversified production base. Poverty reduction in rural areas 
depends crucially on growth in agricultural productivity, which is driven by investment in 
infrastructure, generation of new or improved technologies adapted to changing climate, and their 
adoption by farmers and other value chains actors (e.g. processors). Sustainable intensification and 
diversification of agriculture through technological change requires an efficient and productive 
national agricultural technology system, comprising agricultural research (technology development 
and refinement) and agricultural extension (technology dissemination and adoption). This needs to 
be supported by appropriate value addition and market linkages through smallholder participation in 
emerging/established supply chains for higher value agriculture. To achieve these strategic goals, 
the GoB has been seeking the support of development partners such as the Bank, to develop and 
finance activities aimed at boosting agricultural production through productivity enhancement, and 
increasing smallholders’ income.   
In Bangladesh, while the performance of the NARS has been impressive in contributing to food 
security (in particular with rice), research in some key sub sectors (e.g. livestock, fisheries) has yet 
to reach its potential productivity in terms of releasing a sufficient stream of useful innovations 
(including a range of new climate smart technologies for production and post-harvesting). The 
extension system has still extremely limited reach into the myriad communities of the nation (in 
particular for the fisheries and livestock subsectors were local level public extension workers are 
absent), and worse, hardly communicates with the NARS, or the relevant private and non-
government entities also engaged in technological advance. In short, the national agricultural 
innovation system is far from exploiting the systemic interactions that should drive it to success, and 
the insufficiencies pervade the system both within the subsystems, the all-too disconnected and in 
some instances less than strong elements of the NARS: public-private links are disturbingly absent, 
and links between research entities public and private with the higher education sector are sparse 
and severely underexploited. To enable agriculture and stakeholders to adapt readily when 
challenges occur and to respond readily when opportunities arise, the proposed project will seek to 
overcome some of the key constraints to increasing the efficiency and performance of the national 
agricultural innovation system. 
The National Agricultural Extension Policy (NAEP, 2012) and the Bangladesh Agricultural 
Research Council Act (BARC, 2011) provide the sector policy framework for the proposed 
NATP-2. NAEP advocates inter alia the development of decentralized, integrated, demand-driven 
agricultural research and extension services. Support is now required for the Department of 
Agricultural Extension (MoA) towards achieving the strategic objectives of the NAEP and as well 

as technical assistance for the Department of Livestock Services and the Department of Fisheries 
(both MFL) for the completion of their respective sector extension strategy/policy. The 2012 BARC 
Act aims at fostering the coordination of research activities conducted by the twelve NARS 
institutes, making BARC responsible for the allocation of resources among the NARS institutes and 
for the approval of the institutes’ research programs; it is among other things expected to reduce 
duplication of research efforts and enhance accountability. Implementation of the BARC Act 
remains a challenging process and requires additional financial and technical assistance. Further, 
there are some significant differences in the institutional capacity and performance among the 
various NARS institutes (with livestock and fisheries lagging behind), and the project is expected to 
strengthen the research agenda and outcomes for livestock and fisheries given the importance of 
these sub sectors for rural economic growth and rural livelihoods.

Relationship to CAS
Agriculture has long occupied a central place in the Bangladesh development agenda and in the 
CPSs of the WBG. In the CPS for FY11-14 (subsequently extended to FY15), agriculture is 
highlighted in Pillar 3, Vulnerability, Adaptation and Inclusion, although the sector surely 
contributes to the growth Pillar 2, and benefits from initiatives under the 4th Pillar of Governance. 
As the CASPR (Report No. 73983-BD) of November 20, 2013 notes concerning Pillar 3 Outcome 
3.1 on Agriculture and Food Security, program implementation has been ramping-up and is showing 
significant improvements in agricultural productivity as measured in crops and livestock 
performance. Recurrent natural disasters and deficiencies in technology remain the basic threats to 
improvements in agricultural production, and are therefore the focus of Bank interventions in the 
sector. IFC, with financing from the Pilot Program for Climate Resilience, is also assisting by 
supporting the climate resilience of agribusiness companies and their supply chains, and is 
exploring availability of low-cost housing and livestock protection structures in flood-prone coastal 
areas. Furthermore, IFC’s investment climate and advisory services include activities in agriculture 
that are complementary to NATP-2 (e.g. development of Seed Act and National Seed Policy, 
strengthening of sanitary and phyto-sanitory registration and certification system, development of 
the dairy value chain). The proposed follow-up to NATP Phase 1 was retained in the revised CAS 
for FY15 implementation.

II. Proposed Development Objective(s)
Proposed Development Objective(s) (From PCN)
6. The proposed project development objective (PDO) for NATP-2 is to enhance the 
agricultural productivity of smallholders through better research and extension and improve their 
market access through better integration in selected value chains. To that effect, NATP-2 will 
support a decentralized, demand-driven agricultural research and extension services, and promote 
market-oriented smallholder production. NATP-2 will also support access to markets for 
smallholder farmers by facilitating their linkages with selected value chains, contributing in turn to 
increased farm income and to the sustainability of farmer groups and producer organizations formed 
by the project. The following project design emerged as an outcome of the Identification mission: 
Comp.1: Promoting Agricultural Innovation, Comp.2: Supporting Crops Development; Comp.3: 
Supporting Livestock Development; Comp.4: Supporting Fisheries Development; and Comp.5: 
Project Management and Coordination. 
7. NATP-2 will achieve the PDO: (i) by strengthening the capacity of the NARS and the 
extension services to generate and diffuse agricultural technologies aimed at increasing farm 
productivity; and (ii) by promoting the sustainability of existing and newly created farmer groups 

and producer organizations by strengthening their linkages with markets. Sustainable intensification 
and diversification of agriculture through technological change requires an efficient and productive 
national agricultural technology system, comprising agricultural research (technology development 
and refinement) and agricultural extension (technology dissemination). This needs to be supported 
by appropriate value addition and market linkages through the strengthening of supply chains for 
high value agriculture. To that effect, while NATP-2 will continue supporting agricultural research 
and extension, it will need to have a stronger focus on market-oriented production, on value chains 
and on the participation of smallholders in those emerging market opportunities, than under 
NATP-1.

Key Results (From PCN)
(i) Client satisfaction (including for female-led households) with the agricultural extension and 
advisory services provided by the agricultural innovation system has increased  
(ii) New technologies generated by the agricultural innovation system have been adopted by 
producers (including by female-led households) and other value chain actors targeted by the project  
(iii) The increase achieved in agricultural productivity (for crops, fisheries and livestock) is 
larger for farmers supported by the project  
(iv) The proportion of smallholder agricultural production marketed relative to total smallholder 
farm output has increased 
(v) The women-led Common Interest Groups for homestead gardening are making a significant 
contribution to improving nutrition in participating households

III. Preliminary Description
Concept Description
NATP-2 will achieve the PDO by: (i) continuing to strengthen the capacity of the NARS and 
extension services to generate and disseminate agricultural technologies aimed at increasing farm 
productivity; and (ii) promoting the sustainability of existing and new farmer groups and producer 
organizations by strengthening their linkages with markets. Sustainable intensification and 
diversification of agriculture through technological change requires an efficient and productive 
national agricultural technology system, comprising agricultural research (technology development 
and refinement) and agricultural extension (technology dissemination). This needs to be supported 
by appropriate value addition and market linkages through the development of supply chains for 
high value agriculture. To that effect, while NATP-2 will continue supporting agricultural research 
and extension, it will need to have a much stronger focus on market-oriented production, on value 
chains and on the participation of smallholders in those emerging market opportunities, than under 
NATP-1. A differentiated approach will be required for project activities at field level to account for 
the vertical and horizontal scaling up efforts under NATP-2. The new project will deepen the 
interventions in existing upazillas (vertical scaling up) while expanding the geographic coverage to 
include new districts and upazillas (horizontal scaling up) . 
The project design for NATP-2 takes into account some of the shortcomings identified under 
NATP-1 and reflects the integrated approach required to achieve the PDO. NATP-2 includes a 
broader component that addresses the multiple dimensions required for decentralized, demand-
driven agricultural research as a core pillar of an agricultural innovation system in the country 
context. The project further includes three sub sector components, each tackling specific constraints 
to the development of selected commodities from technology generation to transfer and adoption at 
farm level, to market-oriented production and agro processing. This value chain approach is 
expected to lead to a better integration of research and extension, which was regularly reported in 

NATP-1 as an area requiring further improvement. Finally, the project includes a component that 
covers most cross-cutting activities as well as regular project management tasks. Project 
components, their objectives and contribution to the PDO, as well as the core activities covered, are 
described below. 
 
Component 1: Enhancing the Agricultural Innovation System 
This component, led by the Project Management and Coordination Unit with implementation 
support from other agencies, will support the development of decentralized, demand-driven and 
integrated agricultural research. This component will likely include investments, capacity 
enhancement and technical assistance in areas launched under NATP-1 (such as sustainability of 
Common Interest Groups (CIGs) and emerging Producer Organizations (POs), rehabilitation of 
rural markets, technical advisory services), strengthening National Agricultural Research Institutes  
(NARI) (including investments in physical infrastructure), developing one-stop farmer advisory 
service centers. The component will also include the window for competitive research and matching 
grants under the Agricultural Innovation Fund.   
 
Component 2: Supporting crop development  
This component, coordinated by the Department of Agricultural Extension, will support the 
development of decentralized extension services and demand-driven research for crop production 
(including horticulture), post-harvest management and processing, and facilitate the integration of 
smallholder farmers in selected crop-based value chains (bananas, vegetables, and aromatic rice). 
This component would include investments, capacity enhancement and technical assistance in e.g. 
smallholder farm mechanization, seed testing facilities (with IFC), an electronic phytosanitary 
certification system (with IFC), food safety, agricultural commercialization, and promotion of 
smallholder-based commodity value chains. Financial incentives to smallholder farmers for the 
adoption of productivity enhancing and post-harvest loss reducing technologies, as well as support 
to private small and medium agro entrepreneurs in the selected value chains (e.g. food processing) 
will be secured through the corresponding AIF window.  
 
Component 3: Supporting fisheries development  
This component, coordinated by the Department of Fisheries, will support the development of 
decentralized extension services and demand-driven research for fish and aquaculture, and facilitate 
the integration of smallholder fish farmers in selected commodity value chains (tilapia, major carps, 
and shrimps). This component would include investments, capacity enhancement and technical 
assistance in e.g. the rehabilitation of fish ponds, food safety, quality improvement of fish feed and 
fingerlings, fish commercialization and the promotion of aquaculture-based commodity value 
chains. Financial incentives to smallholder farmers for the adoption of productivity enhancing and 
post-harvest loss reducing technologies, as well as support to private small and medium agro 
entrepreneurs in the selected value chains (e.g. food processing) will be secured through the 
corresponding AIF window. 
 
Component 4: Supporting livestock development  
This component, coordinated by the Department of Livestock Services, will support the 
development of decentralized extension services and demand-driven research for livestock products, 
and facilitate the integration of smallholder farmers in selected commodity value chains (dairy, goat 
meat). This component would include investments, capacity enhancement and technical assistance 
in e.g.: laboratory infrastructure and equipment (including at the regional level), artificial 
insemination, fodder production and conservation, efficient biogas production, farm mechanization, 




food safety, and the promotion of livestock-based commodity value chains. Financial incentives to 
smallholder farmers for the adoption of productivity enhancing and post-harvest loss reducing 
technologies, as well as support to private small and medium agro entrepreneurs in the selected 
value chains (e.g. food processing) will be secured through the corresponding AIF window. 
 
Component 5: Project Management and Coordination 
Under this component a Project Management and Coordination Unit will be in charge of overall 
day-to-day project management and implementation, as well as coordination among the project 
PIUs from the Ministry of Agriculture and Ministry of Food. The PCMU will have the operational, 
safeguards and fiduciary responsibility and be accountable for overall project performance. The 
PCMU will carry out procurement and financial management activities. Other specific PMU-led 
activities under this component will include among others: (i) the support to the development of a 
national agricultural atlas, (ii) the coordination of third-party project monitoring and impact 
evaluation (with baseline, midline, endline surveys), (iii) the coordination of analytical studies and 
dissemination of findings, (iv) the support to short- and longer term assistance to the project 
management team and other agencies involved in component implementation, (v) the coordination 
of all staff training and (vii) preparation studies for a potential follow-up operation (phase III of 
NATP).

IV. Safeguard Policies that might apply
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No TBD
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖

V. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 200.00 Total Bank Financing: 150.00
Financing Gap: 0.00
Financing Source Amount
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 3.00
 International Development Association (IDA) 150.00
 US  Agency for International Development (USAID) 25.00
 Bangladesh MDTF for Climate Change 0.00
 International Fund for Agriculture Development 22.00
 Total 200.00


