


































 

 

 

 

TANZANIA 

 

 

 

 

MARKETING INFRASTRUCTURE, VALUE ADDITION AND RURAL FINANCE 

SUPPORT (MIVARF) PROGRAMME 

 

 

 

PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT 

(PCR) 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

RDGE/COTZ 
 

July 2019 

  

 

 

 
 

 

 

AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FUND 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 

I  BASIC DATA 
  

A  Report data 
 

Report date Date of report: 27 December 2018 

Mission date (if field 
mission) 

From:  09 November 2018 To:  06 December 2018 

 

B  Responsible Bank Staff 
 

Positions At approval At completion 

Director General Gabriel Negatu Gabriel Negatu 

Country Manager Tonia Kandiero Alex Mubiru 

Sector Director Adbirahman Beileh (Acting)  

Sector/Regional Manager Alex Mend (OIC) Joseph Coompson 

Task Manager Edson Mpyisi Salum Ramadhani 

Alternate Task Manager Salum Ramadhani - 

PCR Team Leader  Salum Ramadhani 

PCR Team Members 
 Salum Ramadhani, Emmanuel Maliti 

(Consultant) 

 

C  Project Data 
 

Project name: Marketing Infrastructure, Value Addition and Rural Finance Support (MIVARF) Programme 

Project code: P-TZ-AA0-019 Instrument number(s): 2100150024993 

Project type: Investment  Sector: Agriculture & Agro-Industry 

Country: TANZANIA Environmental categorization (1-3): 2 

Processing milestones – Bank 

approved financing only 
(add/delete rows depending on the 

number of financing sources) 

Key Events (Bank approved 

financing only) 

Disbursement and closing dates 

(Bank approved financing only) 

Financing source/ instrument1: 

ADF Loan 

Financing source/ instrument1:  Financing source/ instrument1:  

Date approved: 29/06/2011 Cancelled amounts: NA  Original disbursement deadline: 

30/03/2017 

Date signed: 12/09/2011 Supplementary financing: NA Original closing date: 31/03/2016 

Date of entry into force: 

23/01/2012 

Restructuring (specify date & 

amount involved):  NA 

Revised (if applicable) disbursement 

deadline: 31/12/2018 

Date effective for 1st 

disbursement: 23/03/2012 
Extensions (specify dates): 

<31/12/2016 and 31/12/2017> 

Revised (if applicable) closing date: 

30/09/2018 

Date of actual 1st disbursement: 

21/05/2012 

  

TANZANIA: MARKETING INFRASTRUCTURE, VALUE ADDITION AND 
RURAL FINANCE SERVICES – PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT (PCR) 

 

AFRICAN  
DEVELOPMENT  

BANK GROUP 



 

2 

Financing source/ instrument 4: 

IFAD Loan 

Financing source/ instrument2: Financing source/ instrument2: 

Date approved: 31/12/2010 Cancelled amounts:  NA Original disbursement deadline: 

30/03/2017 

Date signed: 25/02/2011 Supplementary financing: NA Original closing date: 31/03/2016 

Date of entry into force: 

23/01/2012 

Restructuring (specify date & 

amount involved): NA 

Revised (if applicable) disbursement 

deadline: 31/03/2020 

Date effective for 1st 

disbursement: 23/03/2012 

Extensions (specify dates): 

31/03/2020 

Revised (if applicable) closing date: 

30/09/2020 

Date of actual 1st disbursement: 

21/05/2012 



Financing source/instrument 
(add/delete rows depending on the 

number of financing sources): 

Disbursed 

amount 

(amount, UA): 

Percentage 

disbursed (%): 

Undisbursed 

amount (UA): 

Percentage 

undisbursed (%): 

Financing source/ instrument 1: 
ADF Loan <UA 40 million> 

37,189,760.47 92.97 2,810,239.53 7.03 

Financing source/ instrument 2: 

Government/Districts <2.08 

million> 

                                    

675,105.73 

32.00                         

1,404,894.27 

64.00 

Financing source/ instrument 3: 
Recipient communities <UA 0.11 

million> 

110,000 100.00 0.00 0.00 

Financing source/ instrument 4: 

IFAD: <UA 63.30 million> 

                               

89,580,140.23  

85.00                           

15,909,859.77  

15.00 

TOTAL: UA 105.49 million  127,555,006.43 86.37 20,124,993.57 13.63 

Financing source/instrument 
(add/delete rows depending on the 

number of financing sources): 

Committed 

amount (UA): 

Percentage 

committed 

(%): 

Uncommitted 

amount (UA): 

Percentage 

uncommitted 

(%): 

Financing source/ instrument 1: 

ADF Loan <UA 40 million> 

722,238.33 1.81 2,088,001.20 5.22 

Financing source/ instrument 2: 

Government/Districts <2.08 

million> 

0 0.00 0 0.00 

Financing source/ instrument 3: 
Recipient communities <UA 0.11 

million> 

0 0.00 0 0.00 

Financing source/ instrument 4: 

IFAD: <UA 63.30 million> 

                                  

10,369,507.00  

94.00                                  

661,414.50  

6.00 

TOTAL: UA 105.49 million 11,091,745.33 80.14 2,749,415.7 19.86 

 
 

D  Management Review and Comments 
 

Report reviewed by Name Date 
reviewed 

Comments 

Country Manager Alex Mubiru   

Regional Manager Joseph Coompson   

Director General (as chair of Country 
Team) 

Gabriel Negatu   

Sector Director    

 



 

3 

 II  Project performance assessment 

 
A: Relevance 

 

1. Relevance of program development objective  
 

Rating*  Narrative assessment (max 250 words)  
 

4 The program’s development objective was to contribute to poverty reduction and economic growth 
through enhancing rural incomes and food security. The objective was well aligned to the needs of the 
beneficiaries – where despite a declining trend, 28% of Mainland Tanzanians remain income poor, more 
so in rural areas (33%) than in urban areas (22%).1.  The program’s objective was the mirror image of 
the of the national strategies including the National Strategy for Growth and Reduction of Poverty II 
(NSGRP), and both the 2013 agricultural policy and the Agricultural Sector Development Program II 
(ASDP). 
 
At the regional level, the program’s development objective aligned to several regional development 
strategies to which Tanzania engaged. The program activities of financing rural markets and storage 
facilities were for instance, the mirror image of the EAC’s food security action plan which specifically 
advocates for the construction of agriculture market facilities, feeder roads and storage facilities as well 
as promotion of low-cost technologies on food processing. 
 
The program underwent two Country Strategic Papers (CSP) 2011-2015 and 2016-2020. It was 
embedded in the CSPs’ infrastructure development pillar which considered rural feeder roads as among 
the key supports to local economic development. The program supported the Bank Group’s Agricultural 
Sector Strategy 2010-2014, and the Bank’s framework paper on Post-Harvest (PH) loss reduction. Such 
Bank’s Group policies have prioritised reducing PH loss and investing in market structures, and agro-
processing as among the important enablers for agricultural transformation. See annex 1 for further 
details on the relevance criteria. 
 

* For all ratings in the Program Completion Report (PCR) use the following scale: 4 (Highly satisfactory), 3 
(Satisfactory), 2 (Unsatisfactory), 1 (Highly unsatisfactory) 
 

2. Relevance of program design  

 
Rating*  Narrative assessment (max 250 words)  

 
4 As a multi-sectorial focusing on local areas, the institutional design of the program was appropriately 

opted for the Prime Minister’s Office (PMO) as the executing agency.2 The program formulation was 
participatory3, and identified geographical areas and clustered projects to maximize expected 
outcomes. Several lessons from the previous Agricultural Marketing Systems Development Program 
(AMSDP) informed the program formulation including better provision for the design of rural roads 
(civil, geodetic/geomatics and geotechnical engineering) and the need for putting in place a well-
designed and robust Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) system. The program activities were clustered 
such that investments in warehouses, roads and markets complemented each other.    
 
The program design allowed the district authorities4 to compete for resources based on a set of 
eligibility criteria. To ensure full functioning of the market structures, the design financed service 
infrastructures such as cold-storage facilities located within the rehabilitated markets. To enhance 
sustainability of the program’s investments, the design included capacity development sessions to 
Government staff and beneficiary communities to plan for, implement and manage market/storage 
facilities. The support to the rural economy was also a gender sensitive approach to rural development 
as it is estimated that 84% of Tanzanian women are employed in agriculture, against 80% for men. 
 

 

                                                           
1 URT 2011/12 
2 Up to end of 2015, the PMO office was responsible for LGAs in Tanzania 
3 The preparation mission included a three-day workshop and field visits to Arusha and Zanzibar, while the 
identification mission made field visits to Arusha, Moshi, Morogoro, Dodoma, Mbeya and Zanzibar. 
4 Local Government Authorities. 



 

4 

3. Lessons learned related to relevance  
 

Key issues 
(max 5, add 
rows as 
needed)  

Lessons learned  Target 
audience  

1. 
Institutional 
design of the 
program. 

The support from the PMO, regional and district authorities (the latter two authorities 
were under the PMO during much of the program implementation time) helped to 
address challenges that risked delaying the delivery of the program’s expected 
outputs. An example is the Government interventions when contractors abandoned 
sites – interventions that allowed completion of construction activities. Lessons: 1) 
Multi sectorial programs need to be hosted within authorities higher than sectorial 
ministries 2) It is even more important for program that devolve implementation to 
local levels to be hosted within an authority managing district and regional 
administrations.    
 

The Bank, 
other 
Development 
Partners 
(DPs) and 
Government 
of Tanzania 
(GoT) 

2. Continuity For continuity purpose and transfer of good lessons to the new program, the program 
team was composed of experienced personnel from the previous two programs of 
AMSDP and RFSP. They joined the program with experiences in delivering 
infrastructure development in rural areas, capacity building and networking capacities 
with local authorities.  Lessons: Succession of capacities needs to be prioritised for any 
potential successor to MIVARF. 
 

The Bank, 
other DPs 
and GoT 

3. 
Prerequisite
s for the 
matching 
grants 

The program design introduced several prerequisites to be met by potential 
beneficiaries of the matching grants scheme. However, some of the matching grant 
beneficiaries struggled to meet the prerequisites (qualified buildings, electricity 
connection, working capital) and lacked experience on their planned business lines. 
Lessons: Design of agro-processing machinery support needs to include a well-
resourced component on business support to beneficiaries (e.g. skills transfer, 
business advices, certifications etc.) 
 

The Bank, 
other DPs 
and GoT 

4.  
Geographica
l coverage. 

Because of the widely scattered villages the Bank’s resources were thinly spread with 
the program team covering vast distances during supervision. The 32 program’s 
districts spread across 16 regions had a combined population of about 6.1 million (1.2 
million households). Despite the challenge on the coverage, the program functioned 
successfully because of effective communication with program’s liaison officers at the 
district/regional level and good liaising with the political and administrative 
structures at such levels. Lessons: Dispersion of resources across many projects, wide 
geographic areas and/or too many institutions/districts need to be avoided. Future 
Bank’s rural development programs need to concentrate in fewer places for more 
impactful outcome.  
 

The Bank, 
other DPs 
and GoT 

5. Contract 
management 

Limited contract management capacities by some districts resulted into incidences 
under-designing, and contract variations which increased cost to accommodate design 
components not included earlier on. Also, the quality for some of the complicated 
structures could have been improved if districts had requested additional technical 
support. Such challenges were mitigated by the Bank and the Government exercising 
flexibility to accommodate some of the additional costs. In addition, the program team 
backstopped districts lagging behind in implementation. Lessons: 1) to avoid delayed 
no-objection turnaround and contract variations, ensure that all factors affecting 
implementation are considered when establishing contract duration 2) backstopping 
and additional capacity building to weak districts is unavoidable 3) encourage local 
authorities to use own resources in seeking third party opinion on complex designs 
(e.g. bridges design etc); and 4) intensify supervision, and contractors should be made 
liable for faults before the defect liability period lapses. 

The Bank, 
other DPs 
and GoT 

 
 
 
 



 

5 

B: Effectiveness 

 
1. Progress towards the program’s development objective (program purpose) 

 
Comments 
Provide a brief description of the Program (components) and the context in which it was designed and implemented. 
State the program development objective (usually the program purpose as set out in the RLF) and assess progress. 
Unanticipated outcomes should also be accounted for, as well as specific reference of gender equality in the program. 
The consistency of the assumptions that link the different levels of the results chain in the RLF should also be 
considered.  Indicative max length: 400 words. 
The overall development objective was to contribute to poverty reduction and accelerated economic growth 
through enhanced rural incomes and food security. The program planned to contribute to the Government efforts 
in raising rural incomes and food security through improved market access (feeder roads, market centres and 
linkages, and storage facilities), and increased value-added agricultural produce (through training and matching 
grants equipment). The program which was designed to upscale successful activities implemented under the 
former Bank’s and IFAD’s AMSDP and RFSP5 was made up of three components 1) Marketing infrastructure and 
systems development 2) Rural finance; and 3) Program coordination. The implicit assumptions that linked different 
levels of the results chain were consistent and remained valid to date. For instance, the program’s investments in 
rural infrastructures, in particular rural feeder roads, storage facilities and markets were expected to improve 
access to agricultural markets for small holders, reduce PH losses, all of which were expected to contribute to 
poverty reduction through enhanced rural income and food security. 
 
The program’s 2017 outcome study confirmed the advances made towards the development objective of poverty 
reduction through enhancing rural income. About 78% of program’s beneficiaries in the surveyed program’s wards 
acknowledged increased monthly household income from TSh 95,194 in 2012 to TSh 307,696 in 2017. Surveyed 
beneficiaries attributed such positive income changes to the program interventions of market linkages, utilization 
of program’s warehouses that had reduced PH losses, reduction in transport costs, capacity building and equipment 
support. The program’s support to market linkages, for instance, has expanded markets for program’s beneficiaries, 
as confirmed by 40% of the surveyed wards which reported to have experienced improved market linkages to local 
and out of region markets. The PCR mission also met producers who have experienced increased access to export 
markets for processed breadfruit (producers in Pemba), and onions to Kenya and Uganda (producers in Karatu). 
The advances made on the development objectives of the program were gender sensitive as demonstrated by data 
presented in section B.5. The program also had gender perspective. For instance, through PEML, the program’s 
equally empowering men and women in group’s leadership. In addition, the Program’s infrastructures, such as the 
cold rooms’ in the Mombasa market in Zanzibar largely benefited women (About 50% of traders in that market are 
women). 

 

                                                           
5 Rural Finance Support Program. 



 

6 

2. Outcome reporting  
 

Outcome 
indicators (as 
per RLF; add 
more rows as 
needed) 

Baseli
ne 
value 
(Year) 

Most 
recent 
value  
(A) 

End target 
(B)  
(expected 
value at 
program 
completion) 

Progress 
towards 
target  
(% realized) 
(A/B) 

Narrative assessment  
(indicative max length: 50 words per outcome) 

Core 
Sector 
Indicator 
(Yes/No) 

Outcome 1: Improved access to agricultural markets for smallholder producers and traders  
 
Indicator 
1.1: 
Revenue 
from 
markets/ 
warehouses 
 

US$ 
3.0mi

llion 
p.a.  

 

  NA US$ 
6million 

p.a. by 
PY5. 

NA Deposit value of agricultural produce 
stored in 27 rehabilitated warehouses was 
TSh 3.2 billion (as of 30th June 2018).  
Revenue from selling 76.2% of the stored 
produce was TSh 4.5 billion. The gains 
from program’s markets and warehouses 
also included safe and clean trading 
environment, employment, and expanded 
space for auctions.  

 

Indicator 
1.2: 
Transport 
charges 
from farm 
to primary 
market. 
 

US$ 
6.4 
per 
ton. 

Reduced 
by 50% 

Reduced 
by 25% 

200% Transport charges along all rehabilitated 
roads fell between 20 to 50% of the 
previous charges (annex 2). E.G. transport 
charge for one sack of onions along the 
program rehabilitated road to Mang’ola 
market in Karatu went down from TSh 
3,000 to TSh 500. Crop transportation time 
fell by approximately 3 hrs from the 
previous overall mean of 3.5 hrs to 0.56 
hrs.  

 

Outcome 2:  Reduction of PH losses for key food crops 
 
Indicator 
2.1: % of 
PH losses 
for maize 
and rice. 
 

Maiz
e: 
22% 
 
Rice:  
13% 

NA Maize: 
14%  
 
Rice: 9% 

NA Use of program’s warehouses reduced the 
overall PH losses (all crops) from 57% to 
as low as 15%. Beneficiaries such as Meru 
dairy company reduced PH loss by almost 
85%. After the program’s supported cold 
room, the daily processing capacity 
increased from 400 to 2,200 litres (see 
annex 3 for further details).  

 

Outcome 3:  Increased income of producers and traders 
 
Indicator 
3.1: Mean 
per capita 
households 
monthly 
agricultural 
income 
 

TZS 
11,32
4 
(US$
8.0) 

Increase 
by 
223%6 

Increase 
by 25%. 

892% About 78% of the beneficiaries in the 
surveyed program’s wards acknowledged 
to have experienced improved households 
income, from a monthly average of Tsh 
95,194 in 2012 to Tsh 307,696 in 2017 (in 
nominal terms) (see annex 4). The income 
increase is attributed to selling value-
added items, improved market access, 
improved productivity, use of improved 
technology including among others the use 
of System of Rice Intensification (SRI), 
improved seed and fertilizer use. and 
enhanced capacity to negotiate better 
prices (through farmer producer groups). 
In about 61% of the surveyed wards, 
capacity to negotiate better prices was 
rated as highly improved.  
 

 

                                                           
6 We used the reported figures from the outcome study (an increase from Tsh 95,194 in 2012 to Tsh 307,696 per 
month in 2017) rather than the baseline in the result framework. 



 

7 

Rating* (see 
IPR 
methodology) 

Narrative assessment  

 
4 

  
The program’s outcome study attributes most of the advances towards the program’s development 
objectives to the program’s interventions. Program’s warehouses have improved the overall 
marketing of crops through improved quality management of the agricultural produce, which in turn 
has reduced PH losses and extended marketing period. Extended marketing periods, for instance, 
facilitated farmer’s access to better prices and ultimately improved incomes (annex 5). The 
program’s rehabilitated roads have largely improved market access to distanced farmers as well as 
the improved volumes of crops reaching the markets and warehouses. In addition, transport charges 
and time have been on the decline, an outcome of roads improvement. The rehabilitated rural roads 
have also improved the supply of agricultural inputs (annex 6) which in turn has raised farm 
productivity. In some of the improved program roads, the time to reach markets declined from 3hrs 
to just 1hr. Farmers along the rehabilitated Mapogolo-Mbalino road in Mbarali district, for example, 
used to sell a bucket of paddy for Tsh 5,000 before the road was rehabilitated. The same bucket now 
fetches Tsh 10,000 after road improvement – simply because farmers can now easily take their 
produce to the market rather than selling to buyers who used to collect directly from individual 
farmers. New farming fields have also emerged because of the improved access to markets. An 
example is the paddy field in one of the wards along the Mwapogolo-Mbalino road in Mbarali which 
has expanded from 2,300 acres to 3,700 acres.  
 
Trainings in value addition, and the matching grant equipment have enhanced value addition and 
ultimately reduced PH losses. The program’s outcome study reports that the overall mean for the 
value-added produce in the surveyed program’s wards per season was 849 tonnes ranging from a 
minimum of 6.25 tonnes (in Isandula ward) to a maximum of 4,750 tonnes (in Dakawa ward). 
Through PEML, farmer producer and marketing groups have expanded in numbers and membership. 
Working in groups has enhanced farmers negotiations for better prices, market search including 
links to potential traders and off-takers. Working in groups did also improved farmer enabling 
environment by advancing the use of weighing scales and other measuring facilities (confirmed by 
60% of the surveyed farmers groups). Prior to program support farmers used to rely on volumes.  
 
The advances made on the program’s development objectives are attributed to many factors. They 
included: 1) rigorous backstopping to district staff 2) reliability of   Bank’s financial resources 3) 
flexibility of the Bank, the Government, and the program to take into account field realities 4) close 
supervision and reporting the program, the Government and the Bank 5) capacity development 
efforts 6) participatory approaches e.g. when selecting program sites (that considered the 
dimensions of value chains, presence of complementing interventions such as rural markets) 7) 
agriculture potentiality of the program areas 8) reviews of scope, available resources, and timelines 
of program’s activities to reflect actual situation 9) high level of awareness and relatively good sense 
of ownership of the program by local authorities and commmunities 10) close working relationship 
with partners including the private sector 11) competition for resources between districts has 
allowed the program to invest in best proposals thus ensuring value for money. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 

8 

3. Output reporting 
 

Output 
indicators (as 
specified in the 
RLF; add more 
rows as 
needed) 

Most 
recent 
value  
(A) 

End target 
(B)  
(expected 
value at 
completion) 

Progress 
towards 
target  
(% 
realized) 
(A/B) 

Narrative assessment  
(indicative max length: 50 words per output) 

Core 
Sector 
Indicator 
(Yes/No) 

Component 1. Marketing infrastructure and systems development 
 
Subcomponent 1: Marketing infrastructure 
 
Output 1. Rural markets and warehouses storage constructed /rehabilitated 
 
Indicator 1.1 
No. of new 
storage 
facilities 
 
 

29 29 100% Warehouses that have been handed over so far to district 
authorities are currently operational (see annex 7 and 8). 
Igurusi warehouse, for instance, was storing 2,600 bags of 
paddy at the time of PCR mission. District authorities are 
the owners of the infrastructures, with farmers groups 
engaged participatorily during program implementation 
manage the facilities.  

 

Indicator 1.2 
No. of 
renovated 
storage 
facilities. 

6 6 100% Renovation included added facilities (e.g. cold rooms). 
The Mombasa market in Unguja was installed with two 
cold rooms, for storing fish and vegetables. The cold 
rooms at Mombasa market also serve individuals outside 
the market users (meat traders). The program 
infrastructures are also the reason behind the declining 
storage charges as highlighted in annex 9. 

 

Indicator 1.3 
No. of rural 
markets 
constructed 
and 
maintained. 

16 16 100% The program’s livestock market in Longido has an average 
daily sale of between 3,000 and 6,000 animals. A total of 5 
program’s markets (4 in Zanzibar and 1 in the Mainland) 
were equipped with cold storage facilities for to serve 
perishable products. The facilities will support 
sustainable food production, food security, nutrition, and 
competitive producers’ prices.   

 

Indicator 1.4 
No. of local 
market 
infrastructure 

56 56 100% Complementarity of the program’s investment was 
prioritised by rehabilitating, for instance, rural roads that 
serve the program’s markets and warehouses. The 
successful Longido livestock market serves southern 
highlands, central and lake zone regions of Tanzania, and 
has turned into a regional market flooded with traders 
from Kenya. The markets have also significantly raised 
revenue collected by the district.  

 

Output 2: Feeder roads upgraded to all weather condition 
 
Indicator 2.1: 
km of roads 
constructed/ 
rehabilitated. 

1,079 1,000 108% Rehabilitated roads included the ones linking production 
areas to markets and storage facilities, as well as to main 
roads which have improved access to input supplies, 
increased productivity and reduced imports. For example, 
the improved domestic food supplies to Tibirinzi market 
in Pemba (due to the program’s road) has reduced 
dependency on imports from Tanga region.   

 

Output 3:  Governmental staff trained to be able to sustainably manage food marketing 
 
Output 3.1: 
Government 
staff trained 
to be able to 
sustainably 
manage food 
marketing 
infrastructure

720 720 
(40% 

women) 

100% Training themes ranged from planning, procurement to 
contract management of the Rural Markets Infrastructure 
(RMI). Regional and districts program personnel were 
also facilitated with working tools (motorcycles, 
computers and accessories etc.). The PCT also 
backstopped the program’s local officials to accelerate 

 



 

9 

Output 
indicators (as 
specified in the 
RLF; add more 
rows as 
needed) 

Most 
recent 
value  
(A) 

End target 
(B)  
(expected 
value at 
completion) 

Progress 
towards 
target  
(% 
realized) 
(A/B) 

Narrative assessment  
(indicative max length: 50 words per output) 

Core 
Sector 
Indicator 
(Yes/No) 

, of which are 
women (%). 

planning, surveys, engineering designs, procurement and 
supervision of the construction contracts.7 

Indicator 3.2 
No. and type 
of Local 
Market 
Infrastructur
e Committees 
(LMICs) 
trained and in 
operation 

56 
LMICs 

53 LMICs 
 
 

106% 
 

LMIC were formally established after training their 
prospective members. Operation and maintenance, 
branding and packaging, warehouse receipt system were 
I   mportant themes delivered at the trainings. The 
program went further by facilitating officials from 
important institutions such as TBS8 to enhance important 
capacities necessary for producers to apply for standard 
certifications.  
 

 

Subcomponent 2: Value addition 
 
Output 4: Post-harvest centres rehabilitated and equipped 
 
Indicator 4.1 
No of PH 
training 
centres 
rehabilitated 
and 
resourced. 

13 13 100% 10 centres were rehabilitated and equipped, with the 
remaining 3 centres only needed equipment. The centres 
will support transfer of PH management and value 
addition know-how to regions and districts. SIDO’s PH 
training centre in Moshi has already trained 60 Training 
of Trainers (ToT) who came from regional SIDO centres 
and from other organisations.  

 

Output 5: New technology disseminated for PH management 
 
Indicator 5.1 
No. of new 
technologies 
for PH 
management 
disseminated 

50 50 100% The value addition component supported regional PH 
management training centres, and trained processor 
groups on PH technologies. The program established 
close working relationship with private sector to improve 
access to technologies that advanced processing activities 
and reduce PH losses.  

 

Output 6: Business and technological skills for producers and processors 
 
Indicator 6.1 
No. of 
bankable 
value 
addition 
proposals 
 

37 35 106% Competition for program’s resources between districts 
led to investment in best proposals thus ensuring value 
for money. Value addition activities included milling, 
draying, grading, packaging, labelling, sorting, etc. A 
matching grant beneficiary in Pemba composed of 8 
women and 2 men expanded from producing 1 product 
type to 9 types and now exports breadfruit powder to the 
middle east.   

 

Output 7: On the job training for staff, farmers and processors groups 
 
Indicator 7.1 
Regional and 
district 
officials 
training*  

497 350 142% In addition to training, the program personnel were 
facilitated with working tools (motorcycles, computers 
and accessories etc.). The PCT also backstopped the 
program’s local officials to accelerate the planning, 
surveys, delivery of engineering designs, procurement 
and supervision of the construction contracts.9 

 

Indicator 7.2 
Community 
and 

2,394 2,262 106% Infrastructure management committees were established 
and trained - to effectively and efficiently take the 
responsibility of managing the program’s infrastructures. 
Tanzania Rural and Urban Roads Agency (TARURA) has 

 

                                                           
7 According to the Programme design, the District Councils are responsible for the overall management of the 
infrastructure development in the respective focal areas 
8 Tanzania Bureau of Standards.  
9 According to the Programme design, the District Councils are responsible for the overall management of the 
infrastructure development in the respective focal areas 



 

10 

Output 
indicators (as 
specified in the 
RLF; add more 
rows as 
needed) 

Most 
recent 
value  
(A) 

End target 
(B)  
(expected 
value at 
completion) 

Progress 
towards 
target  
(% 
realized) 
(A/B) 

Narrative assessment  
(indicative max length: 50 words per output) 

Core 
Sector 
Indicator 
(Yes/No) 

councillors 
training* 

also delivered trainings to some of the program’s 
communities on collective management of rehabilitated 
rural roads.   

Indicator 8.2 
No. of 
producers 
and 
processor 
groups 
trained10 

350 
ToT 

 
37,500 
Traine

es  

350 ToT 
 

37,500 
Trainees 

100% 
 

100% 

Trainings were delivered on crop storage, drying, grading, 
sorting, moisture control and milling. Producers groups 
went on study tours to familiarise with best practices in 
garlic, paddy and sunflower value chains. The visits 
covered Kenya and Uganda to acquire knowledge on 
market operations and also look for potential avenues to 
export their produce.  

 

Indicator 8.3 
No. of 
producers 
and 
processors 
linked with 
services. 

26,964 5,000 534% End of program target was surpassed 5-fold. Processors 
were linked to technology and input suppliers (e.g. 
processing addictive and preservatives). Farmers 
organizations were facilitated to engage in formal 
contracts with buyers; to attend promotional events 
including Nane Nane, and SIDO’s entrepreneurship 
exhibitions, World Food Day, and the Dar es Salaam 
International Trade Fair (DITF). 

 

Indicator 8.4 
No. of groups 
receiving 
matching 
grants for 
agro-
processing 
equipment.  

35 25 140% Beneficiary groups paid 25% of equipment cost.  As of 
2017, the percentage change in amount of value added 
produced has improved to for instance71% in Itunundu 
ward. Some equipment were advanced that beneficiaries 
successfully utilised to advance quality and output prices. 
An example is the rice milling equipment at Kisongoni in 
Unguja, which is one of its kind in Zanzibar. 

 

Component 3: Program coordination 
 
Program 
Steering 
Committee 
(PSC) 
meetings* 

10 9 90% PSC11 membership included key public sector 
stakeholders from the Mainland and Zanzibar12, and 
private sector The PCT was responsible for coordinating 
program activities and reported to the Permanent 
Secretary, PMO who was actively engaged and regularly 
briefed by the program and the Bank.   

 

 

4. Development Objective (DO) Rating13 
 

DO rating 
(derived from 
updated IPR)* 

Narrative assessment (indicative max length: 250 words) 

4  
 
(IPR is 
attached as 
annex 11) 

The overall physical implementation of the program is highly satisfactory as the program’s outputs were 
136% achieved (36% above targets). With regards to poverty reduction and food security, significant 
achievements were made reported to have increased 8-fold (in nominal terms) from Tsh 95,194 in 2012 
to Tsh 307,696 in 2017 (in nominal terms) (section B.2). Indirect benefits from the program’s markets 
increased farmers increased awareness of prices, and increased productivity that has largely contributed 
to the increased household income. An example is the increased productivity of onions in Karatu from an 
average of 30 sacks to 50 and 70 sacks.  Nevertheless, the markets have made it easier for traders to buy 
onions from the homes of individual farmers. The number of sellers and buyers have significantly increased 
after the commissioning of the new markets. At Kinyasini market (Unguja), the number of sellers increased 
from 150 (pre-program) to 350 (post-program). It is also worth mentioning that the structures of some of 
the program’s markets have been constructed with excess capacity to cater for possible future expansion 
(e.g. additional storeys).   

                                                           
10 Disaggregated by type of beneficiary group and gender 
11 Programme Steering Committee. 
12 PMO-RALG, MAFC, MITM, MW&I, MLDF, MID, MFEA, MOF, MANR and MoRASD-Zanzibar. 
13 For operations using the old supervision report and rating system in SAP, the DO rating for the PCR shall be 
calculated using the IPR methodology. 



 

11 

 
Rehabilitated roads have contributed to the observed progress on the income side (see the discussion in 
section B.1 and B.2). For example, program beneficiaries testified that the roads have largely improved the 
volumes of crops reaching intended markets. Specifically, the volumes of crops reaching the crop markets 
as a result of improved rural roads increased from an overall mean of 230.5 tonnes to 808.6 tonnes per 
season.  

 

5. Beneficiaries (add rows as needed) 
 

Actual (A) Planned 
(B) 

Progress 
towards target  
(% realized) (A/B) 

% of 
women 

Category (e.g. farmers, students) 

350 350 100 20 Government staff  
2,500 2,500 100 35 Farmer producer groups  

26,694 5,000 187 65 Processors linked to SPs  

 
6. Unanticipated or additional outcomes (add rows as needed) 
 

Description Type (e.g. 
gender, 
climate 
change, 
social, other) 

Positive 
or 
negative 

Impact on 
program 
(High, 
Medium, 
Low) 

Private sector has taken advantage of business opportunities created by the 
program’s infrastructures. An example is the livestock market in Longido where 
a private investor is currently constructing an abattoir with a daily capacity of 
processing 2,000 goats. The investment will further raise the volume of animals 
being traded in the market.  
 

Business Positive  High 

Ownership disputes of markets, e.g. the Longido livestock market where the 
ownership has moved from the district council to the Ministry of Livestock.  There 
were also few incidences of ownership disputes of the matching grant equipment 
- between farmers groups who contributed the 25% and LGAs who claimed to 
own the facilities (claiming the 75% came from the Bank’s loan as a public fund).  
 

Governance Negative Low 

Increased property values along the program’s rehabilitated roads. For example, 
a 400 square meters piece of land along the rehabilitated Karansi Tanki la Maji 
road in Siha district now fetches Tsh 4 million from Tsh 1 million pre-
rehabilitation.  In rural Tanzania, land constitutes 70-80% of asset endowment; 
and it is key to household wealth. In addition to rising property prices, 
Government investment in securing property rights will be a step toward further 
reduction in rural poverty. 
 

Business Positive  Medium  

Cooling chambers that were intended for fruit and vegetables have been utilised 
for other produce as well. An example is the use of the chambers to store ‘Mbege’, 
a traditional brew of the Chagga ethnic group in Kilimanjaro region. The brew is 
made up of ripe bananas and sprouted millet. 
 

Business Positive Medium 

Disputes on the user fees between district authorities and traders who have 
rented stalls inside the markets. The program advised the markets management 
committee and the district authorities to meet and reach an amicable solution. 
 

Management Negative Medium 

 
 

 

 

 
 
 



 

12 

7. Lessons learned related to effectiveness (add rows as needed) 
 

Key issues 
(max 5, add rows 
as needed) 

Lessons learned Target 
audience 

1. Matching 
grant scheme 

Matching grant scheme was relatively new to both LGAs and potential beneficiaries. It took 
almost three years of awareness campaigns before credible applications could be received. 
Late implementation was an outcome of potential beneficiaries delayed application waiting 
to see what happens to early adopters. Also, most equipment had to be sourced from 
abroad. Despite being a learning platform, the intervention was a success as some of the 
cooperatives went as far as taking loans to finance their 25% contribution. Lessons: 1) 
Matching grants scheme is a time-consuming initiative requiring resources and time for 
awareness raising, capacity building and attitudinal change 2) Program coordination teams 
need to assist producers to identify appropriate technology and the scale of operation; and 
3) Early adopters motivate others to join in and commit the 25% contribution. 

 
The Bank, 
GoT, other 
DPs 

2. Sequencing 
of the 
interventions 

Few incidences of non-preparedness of communities to assume fully responsibility of the 
constructed infrastructure. One of the reasons behind such difficulties was the delayed 
efforts from the other donors in forming beneficiary groups at the time construction was 
well advanced. The program sustained its efforts to deliver training to the management 
committees – with an expectation that the district authorities will take over such 
responsibilities post program. Lessons: For effective operation of the infrastructure, 
awareness creation and capacity building of stakeholders need to precede construction and 
rehabilitation works.  

The Bank, 
other DPs 
and GoT 

3. 
Procurement 
rules 

One of the reasons for varying procurement capacities across districts was the staff 
turnover. The program engaged the new staff to be conversant with the Bank’s procurement 
rules through repeated trainings. Such interventions were inclusive and ensured that even 
if staff leaves the LGAs those remaining are well familiar with the program’s guidelines. 
Lessons: Training on Bank’s procurement rules to LGA is not a one-off activity. Continued 
effort is highly encouraged to get district staff well informed with guidelines.   

The Bank, 
other DPs 
and GoT. 

4. 
Communication 

Quick proactive verbal and email interactions between the program and the Bank were very 
productive. The interactions were necessary to effect backstopping, guide, get buy-in and 
facilitate the Bank to be aware of the progress and timely resolve emerged hitches. Lessons: 
Informal interactions fast track decision making and minimise chances of Bank objections. 

The Bank, 
other DPs, 
and GoT. 

 
C: Efficiency  

 

1.0 Timeliness 
 

Planned program duration – years (A) (as per 
the Project Appraisal Report (PAR)) 

Actual implementation 
time – years (B) (from 

effectiveness for 1st disb.) 

Ratio of planned and actual 
implementation time (A/B) 

Rating* 

5 6.6 0.76 2 
Narrative assessment (indicative max length: 250 words) 
The loan agreement was signed in September 201114, with the program taking effects in March 2012. The program was 
initially expected to be conclude by December 2016 but was extended to 30 th September 2018. The extension was 
necessary for a number of reasons - as follows. The program was a complex infrastructural based intervention with 
several construction contracts and demanding engineering designs, and procurement. Some of the projects were new at 
the local level (e.g. cold rooms whose design component had to be outsourced). Nevertheless, the identification of 
potential program’s districts was a time-consuming exercise that could have been avoided if the districts were identified 
prior to loan application. Like in many other development programs, contract management at the lower level was a 
challenge which led to variations due to additional works that were left out at the design phase.  
 
Other reasons for the time overruns included: el Niño rains, community indecision on site selections, disputes between 
contractors, communities on areas to extract construction materials, delayed legal opinion on the draft loan agreement, 
the delayed disbursement of 5% counterpart fund, and the prolonged consultations with authorities in Zanzibar on the 
choices of procurement methods for works contracts. To accelerate implementation, the program intensified follow ups; 
terminated grossly underperformed contracts; reviewed workplans to address implementation gaps; and, gave special 
attention on procurements for some infrastructural designs immediately after delays were noted. The PMO was also 
helpful in resolving delays in the release of the counterpart funds from the program’s districts.  

 

                                                           
14 Implementation of IFAD-funded components started in July, 2011, about 13 months earlier. 



 

13 

2.0 Resource use efficiency 
 

Median % physical implementation 
of RLF outputs financed by all 

financiers (A) (see II.B.3) 

Commitment rate (%) (B)  
(See table 1.C – Total commitment 

rate of all financiers) 

Ratio of the median percentage 
physical implementation and 

commitment rate (A/B) 

Rating* 

100% 90% 1.1% 4 
Narrative assessment (indicative max length: 250 words) 
The program was financed by the Bank, IFAD, counterpart funding from beneficiary districts and in-kind contribution 
from communities. The Bank and the counterpart contributions financed the marketing infrastructure development and 
value addition aspects of the program’s Component 1 and part of Component 3; whereas IFAD resources financed the 
producer empowerment and market linkages activities of Component 1, all of Component 2 and part of Component 3 
(see the description of the components in section B.1). By the time of mission visit, the disbursement rates were as 
follows: The Bank (91%); IFAD (72%); and the counterpart LGA funding (77.9%). In absolute numbers, as of 30th 
November 2018, the Bank had disbursed UA 36,635,956.25; counterpart LGA funding USD 1.12million (UA 0.80 million) 
and IFAD USD 65.0 Million (46.43 million). All making a total spending at UA 83.87 million. 
 
Taking into account ground realities and other factors (e.g. rising contraction costs), the program’s targets in the result 
framework were revised at the MTR. For example, the target for rehabilitating rural roads was scaled down from the 
initial 1,550 km to 1,000 km due to escalating costs. Per unit cost of rehabilitation increased from US$ 19,500 estimated 
at the appraisal to about US$ 35,000. The construction target for the agricultural markets was also scaled down from 32 
(at appraisal) to 16 because of 1) increased per unit cost of rehabilitation from US$ 200,000 estimated at appraisal to 
US$ 450,000; and 2) decreased demand from districts. Despite the program delivered less outputs set at the approval, 
at the program end, the targets set for the output indicators at the MTR were achieved by an average of 136%. The 
computation of the resource use efficiency was based on the targets revised at the MTR.  

 

3.0 Cost benefit analysis 
 

Economic Rate of Return (ERR) 
(at appraisal) 

Updated Economic Rate of Return  
(at completion) 

Rating* 

ERR: 22.4% Net Present Value (NPV): Tsh 215.8 billion ERR: 31% NPV: Tsh 2.3 trillion  4 
Narrative assessment (indicative max length: 250 words) 
The cost benefit analysis is rated highly satisfactory as the ERR at the program end is higher than the ERR at the 
appraisal stage (31% versus 22%). This is despite the downward revision of some of the output targets during the 
Mid-Term Review (MTR). The economic analysis has been undertaken over a 20-year span in line with the projected 
economic life of the program. The analysis is on an estimation of program-wide benefits from 1) investments in rural 
roads and market infrastructure 2) incremental incomes resulting from increases in value of commodity sales; and 3) 
equipment support for value addition (see the key assumptions in annex 10). The EIRR computation is provided in 
annex 10.1. Sensitivity analysis shows the program is more sensitive to changes in benefits than costs. For instance, a 
20% increase in costs results into only 3.1%and 8% reduction in NPV and ERR respectively from the base scenario. A 
similar percentage decrease in benefits leads to 23.1% and 9% reduction in NPV and ERR respectively (ann ex 10.2). 
However, none of such changes has a dramatic impact on the NPV and ERR i.e. pushing the NPV towards zero. Given 
the consistent positive net benefits and ERR from the sensitivity analysis, and the difficulties in quantifying socio-
economic benefits (e.g. from the newly constructed/rehabilitated roads), the program has more benefits than what the 
NPV and EIRR figures suggest.  

 

4.0 Implementation Progress (IP)15 
 

IP Rating (derived 
from updated IPR) * 

Narrative comments (commenting specifically on those IP items that were rated unsatisfactory or highly 
unsatisfactory, as per last IPR). (indicative max length: 500 words) 

4 The latest IPR is dated May 2018. The IPR concluded that the overall physical implementation of the 
program was satisfactory bar intervention on bankable proposals for value addition which had 
physical implementation of only 74%. At the time of the IPR (May 2018), a total of 37 bankable 
proposals out of the planned 50 had been prepared, out of which, 19 proposals were funded by the  
program’s matching grant scheme, 7 remained eligible for the matching grant, with 10 proposals 
forwarded to the rural finance component for funding by Microfinance Institutions (MFI). 
 
By the end of the program the number of bankable proposals for value addition surpassed the target 
by 6% (106% achievement rate). As discussed in section A.3, the challenge with the matching grant 
component was the overstretched and limited financial capacity of some beneficiaries, as well as the 
tendency of some of potential beneficiaries to wait and observe what the early adopters would 

                                                           
15 For operations using the old supervision report and rating system in SAP, the IP ratings need to be converted from 
the 0-3 scale used in SAP to the 1-4 scale used in the IPR.     



 

14 

experience. Despite such challenges, the matching grant scheme was a success, not only because it 
surpassed its targets but also because even financially constrained beneficiaries managed to borrow 
from financial institutions and meet the 25% criteria. As discussed in section B.7, the key lessons 
from delivering the matching grant scheme included the need for extensive awareness and capacity 
development of the processor groups in agro-processing technology to stimulate demand for such 
grants. Programs should also assist groups in identifying appropriate technology, as well as scale of 
their operations to enable the groups to afford 25% contribution. 

 
5.0 Lessons learned related to efficiency 
 

Key issues 
(max 5, add rows 
as needed) 

Lessons learned Target 
audience 

1. 
Maintenance 
of equipment 
supplied 
under the 
matching 
grants  

Most of the matching grant beneficiaries experienced positive outcomes (e.g. increased 
productivity) with the support they received from the program. Experiences gained 
from supporting processors to secure equipment included the risks for beneficiaries to 
order equipment that are too advanced to their environment; and the need for rigorous 
after-sale maintenance support from suppliers. Lesson: Programs need to be well 
resourced to support verification and selection of delivered equipment (such capacities 
are lacking at the local level).  

The Bank, 
other DPs, 
and GoT 

2. Beneficiary 
contributions. 

The 5% beneficiary contribution for infrastructure programs (markets and warehouse) 
and 25% beneficiary contribution for the matching grant equipment was a challenging 
experience to some communities and local authorities. Delays in contributions from 
some of the program’s districts was among the main reasons for the delayed 
implementation of planned infrastructures. Rather than waiting for the districts to 
advance the 5% contribution, the program proceeded with procuring works contracts 
with districts allowed to advance partial payments. Lessons: 1) Capacity to meet 
counterpart contribution differed between local authorities because of differences in 
endowments 2) Context and nature of the interventions (or technologies to be acquired) 
should guide the choice of cash or in-kind contribution 3) Continuous follow up on 
districts to ensure that they meet their financial obligations including seeking support 
from higher authorities 4) mandatory contribution (matching grants) risks to deflect 
interventions from the targeted poor to the better-off. 

The Bank, 
other DPs, 
and GoT 

3. Group size The program experience shows that the small sized farmers groups are performing 
relatively better than large groups. Among the areas that separate the two groups, is the 
fact that the large groups are characterised by large sized committees which raises 
group management costs. Differences in members objectives, free riding and 
opportunistic behaviours is more prevalent with large groups. Lessons: Encourage and 
advocate for small sized farmer organisations as operators of program infrastructures.  

The Bank, 
other DPs, 
and GoT. 

4. Technology Some of the program’s storage facilities were installed with advanced technology (e.g. 
cold rooms, processing machineries) that were very new to most local authorities. As 
such, some local authorities struggled not only to be actively involvement in engineering 
designs but also on best practices when it comes to management and operation of such 
facilities. The latter challenge (engineering designs) was addressed by outsourcing 
designs to experienced entities. Lesson: Complementary TA is necessary to support and 
guide district authorities to establish ideal management and operationalisation models 
for the infrastructures. Overall, the infrastructure interventions need to be accompanied 
by intensive business support taking into account all aspects that would, for instance, 
advances the facilities as profitable business ventures.  

The Bank, 
other DPs, 
and GoT 

5. Co-
financing 
arrangements 
and risks. 

The PAR identified IFAD and AGRA as co-financers of the program. However, only the 
Bank and IFAD proceeded with its co-financing commitment. Commonly to most co-
financing arrangements, co-financers have their own procedures and ways of doing 
business which at times affect the pace of implementation, timelines for supervision 
missions and synchronization of components from different financers. A case in point 
was the mismatch in pace between the Bank’s infrastructure component (‘the 
hardware’) and IFAD’s capacity building component (‘the software’) component. 
Consultations between co-financers helped in avoiding serious misalignments. Lessons: 
1) Flexibility by the Government and/or the Bank in stepping in when potential co-
financers do not fulfil their commitment 2) regular consultations to avoid serious 
misalignment between components being targeted by co-financers 3) Government is an 
important mediator when delays from one co-financer affects the delivery of 
components of the other co-financers. 

The Bank, 
other DPs 
and GoT 

 



 

15 

D:  Sustainability 

 

1.0 Financial sustainability 
 

Rating* Narrative assessment (indicative max length: 250 words) 
 

4 To enhance sustainability, one of the key criteria to initiate program activities was the commercial prospects 
of projects to be financed by the program. To complement such efforts, the program linked the agro-processing 
to the marketing dimensions and access to financial services as well as investing in rehabilitating roads that 
linked beneficiary communities to the pre-existing and program’s rehabilitated markets and warehouses. Of 
recent, the Government has established TARURA, an agency that is tasked to oversee O&M of all rural roads 
including the ones rehabilitated by the program. Such institutional reform raises the likelihood that the 
program investments in rural roads will be sustained.  
 
Strong evidences of potential financial sustainability of the program investment are emerging. The revenue 
collected by the Longido district rose by 300% after the the launch of the program’s livestock market. In fact, 
the district was able to meet its 5% counterpart contribution from the revenue collected from the market. One 
of the program’s market in Zanzibar (Kinyasini market) which used to collect Tsh 1.5million pre-program, 
now collects an average of Tsh 7million – after the new market structure was launched. The milk processor in 
Zanzibar which obtained processing equipment from the program matching scheme used to sell a 175ml cup 
of yogurt for Tsh 500. They are currently fetching Tsh 1,000 for the same due to improved quality. 16 The 
business is now able to price compete with larger processors.  
 
Financial sustainability is also highly likely as some of the program’s markets have introduced additional 
revenue opportunities. The onion market in Karatu, for example, is collecting Tsh 5,000 from each truck 
collecting onions from the villages. Between July-November 2018, more than 1,950 trucks have paid the fee. 
The number of buyers and trucks coming to the market are on the rise due to the program’s rehabilitated 
roads going to the mentioned market. Serve the need for continuous support in strengthening business 
practices in managing the program’s markets and warehouses, revenues being generated from these 
infrastructures currently cover the operating costs.   

 
2.0 Institutional sustainability and strengthening of capacities 
 

Rating* Narrative assessment (indicative max length: 250 words) 
 

4 The program’s effort in training management committees that foresaw the developed infrastructures was an 
important step to reinforce sustainability of the program interventions and ensuring continued use of the 
program’s roads, markets and warehouses. Other training beneficiaries included regional and district personnel 
from program’s region and districts (engineers, procurement, to environmental officers). In addition to the 
provision of training to the beneficiaries and staff the program was well integrated into government 
institutional structure to ensure ownership and sustainability (e.g. implemented by the PMO office with the 
infrastructural assets owned by the local authorities). The field interview shows that 66.7% of the surveyed 
wards have committees in place to ensure continued maintenance of the infrastructures. Moreover, about 
70.4%of the wards confirmed that the committees have a role to set penalties for improper use of the program’s 
infrastructures. Other roles given to the committees included security for the facilities, budgeting, records and 
controlling income from the facilities. In some wards, the committees were given the role of training other 
community members on the proper use of the program’s infrastructures.  
 
The good experiences on maintaining and managing program’s infrastructures from the exemplary districts 
(e.g. Siha district from Kilimanjaro region) have been shared to other districts through workshops and 
documentation for future guidance. Through PEML, the number of farmer producer groups and farmer 
marketing groups have expanded including membership with the groups equally empowering men and women 
in group’s leadership. Working in groups has enhanced producers’ empowerment in price negotiations, market 
search and linkages to potential traders and off-takers. The program also released more than six instruction 
manuals on PH handling of perishables.17 

 
 

 

                                                           
16 We cannot ignore the inflation factor as well.  
17 They included 1) horticultural, roots and tubers crop 2) small milling operations for cereals 3) rice grain PH 
management 4) spice and condiments processing 5) sunflower oil processing 6) packaging and labelling. 



 

16 

3.0 Ownership and sustainability of partnerships 
 

Rating* Narrative assessment (indicative max length: 250 words) 
 

4 To raise the sense of ownership, groups the received matching grants for agro-processing equipment 
contributed 25% of the cost of buying equipment. Beneficiary districts also remitted 5% cash contributions 
for the market and warehouse facilities. Sustainability of these facilities is also highly likely as the maintenance 
and repairing of some of the equipment are currently fully financed by the beneficiary groups. The same with 
the roads. For example, the Government has invested in upgrading the program’s constructed Mkanyageni-
Kangagani (4.5km) feeder road in Pemba by adding one more layer of gravel. Beneficiaries districts have 
invested additional facilities after taking over the program’s infrastructures. For example, the district 
authority managing the Tibirinzi market in Pemba has installed 100 additional stalls in addition to 82 
program’s installed stalls.   
 
To optimise benefits from the program financed markets, district authorities, Longido for example, is 
consulting the Ministry of Livestock to connect the market to the ministry’s livestock marketing information 
system. District authorities in collaboration with beneficiary communities have also enacted bylaws to enforce 
sustainable use of the rehabilitated roads. In Siha district, for instance, a fine of Tsh 200,000 is imposed on 
livestock crossing the newly rehabilitated roads. Despite the district authorities owning the infrastructures, it 
is the beneficiaries’ committees which are tasked to operate the markets and storage facilities. The 
sustainability of such partnerships is highly likely given the management training that the program delivered 
to both parties. However, further clarification is necessary with regards to ownership, operational costs and 
revenue for some of the facilities.  

 
4.0 Environmental and social sustainability 
 

Rating* Narrative assessment (indicative max length: 250 words) 
 

4 Environmental sustainability: The program developed the Environmental and Social Management Plans 
(ESMP) describing measures to mitigate impacts during the construction works. In addition, training was 
delivered to all district environmental officers focusing on EMSP planning, monitoring and reporting. In 
collaboration with the National Environmental Management Council (NEMC), an environmental checklist for 
monitoring rural marketing infrastructure programs was developed and shared to all participating districts. 
Other efforts which have positive impacts on environmental sustainability included: 1) sensitized 
communities to undertake responsible farming along the road alignments as a way of minimising damage to 
the constructed roads 2) provision of adequate drainage; mitre drains and cross drainages structures 3)  
enhanced capacities of communities close to constructed roads in enforcing bylaws  
 
Social sustainability: The program ensured that alignments of the new roads limit any involuntary 
resettlement of communities. Safety signs have been erected along the program’s rehabilitated roads (e.g. 
speed limit signs) – with the police force training motor cyclists to observe rules. The program team and 
district personnel were also sensitised on gender mainstreaming. By February 2015, 25% of the 1,094 
community members who attended training on operation and maintenance of rural infrastructure were 
women. Moreover, some of the cooperatives that benefited from the matching grant scheme are largely 
dominated by women. The Muwanda cooperative creameries, for example, is composed of 8 female members 
and 4 male members. These benefits will positively impact the lives of women who account for a significant 
proportion of the rural population engaging in agriculture.  



 

17 
 

5.0 Lessons learned related to sustainability 
 

Key issues 
(max 5, add rows 
as needed) 

Lessons learned Target 
audience 

1. Utilization 
of storage 
structures 
 

Some of the community-operated warehouses were not utilized to the same extent as 
the privately-owned warehouses. The private owned warehouses have incorporated 
broader agricultural value chain activities e.g. paddy and sunflower processing etc. 
Lessons: 1) Need for increased awareness to the beneficiary communities that the 
program support (e.g. warehouse) is just a motivation to trigger their own efforts to 
invest in broader agricultural value chain activities (e.g. agro-processing) 2) capacity 
of stakeholders to implement additional agricultural value chain activities needs to be 
enhanced and synchronised with infrastructure development. 

The Bank, 
other DPs 
and GoT 

2. Access to 
standards and 
quality 
certifications 

Access to standards certification has been a time-consuming exercise for small 
processors – and of a high transaction cost given their small-scale operations. To 
address this challenge, the program established important contacts with the 
authorities to provide advisory services to processors in addition to inspection, and 
testing towards supporting their applications for certificates. Lessons: Support to 
processors to access standards and quality certification needs to be highly prioritised 
and be considered that is resource demanding similar to other program activities.   

The Bank, 
other DPs 
and GoT 

3. Access to 
standards 
certifications 

As part of their contractual obligations, equipment suppliers delivered trainings to the 
matching grant beneficiaries. However, few processors enrolled only a single member 
in such trainings, limiting the spread of knowledge on expertise to maintain the 
equipment in case of breakdown.  Lessons: Encourage beneficiary groups to enrol 
more than one group member in the O&M training sessions.  

The Bank, 
beneficiaries.  

4. Market 
disruptions 

In some of the areas that the program invested new markets, traders and middlemen 
are exploiting farmers by directly collecting agricultural produce from homes. Efforts 
from district authorities are well acknowledged to have restored order to some extent. 
Nevertheless, the markets were new experiences in some of the program areas, and as 
a result some farmers tended to ‘wait and see’ before engaging with the markets. 
Lesson: Government intervention is necessary to ensure that the operations of the 
markets are not interrupted by opportunistic behaviours of traders and middlemen.  

The Bank, 
GoT, 
beneficiaries. 

 
III: Performance of stakeholders 

 

1.0 Bank performance 
 

Rating* Narrative assessment by the Borrower on the Bank’s performance, as well as any other aspects of the 
program (both quantitative and qualitative). See guidance note on issues to cover. (indicative max length: 250 
words) 

 
4 The program was supervised bi-annually making a total of 14 supervision missions between 2012 and 

2018. The Bank’s missions were diversified in expertise by including financial, procurement and 
disbursement personnel as well as agricultural specialists. Keeping in view the infrastructures involved 
in the program, the Bank’s supervision team was also supported by an engineer. The supervision missions 
assisted the program and the executive agency to address managerial and technical aspects that impeded 
implementation. With more decision-making power devolved to field offices, the COTZ18, using both 
formal and informal means, closely monitored implementation and took prompt actions to resolve 
challenges. An example is the Bank’s interventions to restore the program’s coordinator in Zanzibar and 
the Bank’s procurement rules for works contracts.   
 
The Bank’s country office was involved, either through the supervision missions or outside such missions, 
to actively engage with the Government and co-financers in discussing progress and resolve 
implementation challenges. The MTR19 was carried out in June 2015 and helped to identify challenges and 
way forward including revising some of the program end-targets. The Bank also encouraged the program 
to undertake an internal PCR, a document that offered inputs to the Bank’s own PCR. The Bank also 
encouraged and motivated the program team to intensify monitoring, supervision and follow-up to ensure 
that all infrastructures were completed on time and are fully utilised by the intended beneficiaries.  

                                                           
18 Tanzania Field Office. 
19 Mid-Term Review. 



 

18 
 

Comments to be inserted by the Bank on its own performance (both quantitative and qualitative). See guidance note on 
issues to cover. (indicative max length: 250 words) 
The Bank provided close and extensive program review missions throughout the period of the programme. Since 
inception, the Bank supervised the program 14 times including the MTR.  All the Bank’s missions aided the programme to 
address managerial and technical aspects that greatly helped to expedite implementation.  In all the supervision missions, 
field supervisions were conducted followed by an analysis and discussion of observations including debriefing sessions 
held with the GoT officials and selected members of the steering committee, whose details and strategies for improving 
the program were presented in the aide memoirs of the missions. Where necessary, the Bank supported and aided re-
allocations of funds to GoT’s preferred areas of greater interests. The intensified Bank supervision towards the final stages 
of the program accelerated implementation and helping in the improvement of revised work schedules and activities 
which turned around the slow pace of implementation experienced initially. 
Key issues (related to Bank performance, max 5, add rows as needed) Lessons learned 
1. Future Bank’s supervision missions should maintain diversified 
personnel as appropriate with the aim of facilitating effective 
interactions and advices on various aspects related to program 
implementation.  

Maintain a team of diversified Bank experts in 
supervision missions as appropriate. 

2. In-kind contribution from beneficiaries were not monetised. To avoid 
understating counterpart contribution, the Bank can introduce a model 
were supervision and other costs incurred by beneficiary Governments 
are quantified, documented and ultimately included as part of the 
counterpart contributions.  

Introduce a model were counterpart in-kind 
contributions are monetised and 
acknowledged.  
 

3. Programs that support access to productive assets (equipment and 
infrastructures) need to invest heavily on business coaching to 
reinforce business mindsets and acumen on beneficiaries.  

Upgrade support to business coaching in 
programs that support access to productive 
assets.   

 

2.0 Borrower performance 
 

Rating* Narrative assessment on the Borrower performance to be inserted by the Bank (both quantitative and 
qualitative, depending on available information). See guidance note. (indicative max length: 250 words) 

4 Both the central and local authorities worked closely with the program during implementation. Senior 
officials from the relevant Government ministries constituted the PSC providing an enabling environment in 
terms of policy guidelines and staff. The same with the regional secretariat and LGAs (regional engineers, 
district engineers, agriculture and irrigation and cooperative officer etc) who facilitated implementation in 
terms of designing, procurement, supervision and management. The Ministry of Finance (MoF) was very 
active in negotiating the loan and also in meeting the covenants for the effectiveness of the loan. With regards 
to counterpart contributions, the Government provided the required cash contribution in meeting the 
payroll requirements of the staff serving the program. Despite the delays, the Government supported the 
program in ensuring that districts honoured their counterpart funding obligations as well as ensuring that 
periodic roads maintenance are carried out adequately. A vivid example for the latter is the financing of 
additional culverts along the program’s Mwapogolo-Mbarino road. The culverts protected the road from 
being washed away by water streams, while the culverts also allowed farmers to tap the water flow for 
irrigation. District authorities also closely enforced bylaws that aimed at efficient use of the market 
infrastructures. An example is the introduction of permits for trucks collecting onions in Karatu, a move that 
advanced the use of the program’s market, and district’s awareness of the number of traders operating in 
the area.  

Key issues (related to Borrower performance, max 5, add rows as needed) Lessons learned 
The central Government assisted in following up and reminding districts 
to remit counterpart funds. The efforts paid off as of April 2018, the 
program had collected Tsh 1.8 billion (76.1% out of the total planned 
counterpart contributions from the program districts). 

Timely submission of counterpart funds 
necessitates close follow up from local and 
central Government, and the program team. 

The program’s objectives and logical flow from outputs to outcomes and 
impact remain relevant. It is high likely that the program’s benefits will be 
sustained provided that the Government continue to capacitate 
communities and committing resources to maintain the rehabilitated 
roads and other program’s infrastructures.  

Continuous post-program Government 
follow up and support is necessary to 
sustain the program’s investments and 
benefits.  

Overall, the program team was found to prepare good quality progress 
reports and was up to date on the submission of periodic plans and annual 
external audit reports. Most program staff received relevant training in 
their respective fields such as program management; procurement; 
contract management; monitoring and evaluation, and Training of 
Trainers (ToT). 

A strong and well-resourced program team 
is necessary particularly for a complex and 
geographically wide spread program.  



 

19 
 

3.0 Performance of other stakeholders 
 

Rating* Narrative assessment on the performance of other stakeholders, including co-financiers, contractors 
and service providers. See guidance note on issues to cover. (indicative max length: 250 words) 

3 Generally, the performance of contractors was good, serve for some isolated cases of low quality of 
works and engineering designs. To enhance quality delivery of infrastructure assets, the program team 
in collaboration with beneficiary districts and communities intensified supervision, and whenever 
faults were noted, the responsible contractors were made liable before the defect liability period lapses. 
Continued developing the capacity of the district teams, as well as possibility of seeking third party 
opinion for complex design issues e.g. designing of the bridges, is a lesson for future programs. Other 
institutions such as SIDO and the Tanzania Electrical, Mechanical and Electronics Services Agency 
(TAMESA) had good collaborations with the program’s districts, especially when they were requested 
to repair processing equipment that were financed by the program. 
 

Key issues (related to performance of other stakeholders, max 5, add rows as 
needed) 

Lessons learned (max 5) Target audience 
(for lessons learned) 

Service providers were capacitated and rendered services that 
impacted on overall productivity of rural producers. They assisted in 
supplying the required inputs like seeds, fertilizers and pesticides 
intended for use by individual farmers, farmer producer groups, 
processors etc.  

Complementary 
services, e.g. input 
supplies are important 
targets for programs to 
reach their goals. 

GoT, the Bank, 
other DPs. 

Beneficiary communities were actively involved in the entire business 
cycle from the planning to the implementation stages. This reduced 
the risks of resentment by communities and simplified ways to 
address disagreements on the selection of program sites.  

Community 
participation is 
necessary at all stages 
of the program cycle.  

GoT, the Bank, 
other DPs. 

Increasing bargaining power and better prices for farmers as a result 
of the market and storage facilities were well acknowledged by the 
interviewed beneficiaries. However, traders continue to exploit 
farmers through monopolised structures (e.g. onion market in 
Karatu).  

Government 
interventions and 
market promotion to 
break the monopolistic 
structure  

GoT, the Bank, 
other DPs. 

 
 

IV: Summary of key lessons learned and recommendations 

 

1.0 Key lessons learned 
 

Key issues (max 
5, add rows as 
needed) 

Lessons learned Target 
audience 

Management of 
equipment and 
infrastructures 

Rural beneficiaries have limited business acumen to ensure profitable utilisation 
of equipment and infrastructures. As such, the design of the equipment and 
infrastructure support needs to embed a well-resourced component supporting 
business development services to further guarantee sustainable use of the 
equipment. 

The Bank, 
other DPs and 
GoT 

Matching grant 
scheme 

Matching grant scheme is a time-consuming initiative requiring significant 
resources and time for awareness building, attitude change, and support to 
beneficiaries in identifying appropriate technology and the scale of operation. 

The Bank, 
and other DPs 
 

Standard and 
quality 
certification 

Access to standard and quality certification is necessary for expanding market 
penetration but also a time and resource costly activity to most small processors. 
Program component on supporting access to such certifications needs to be 
highly prioritised in program planning.  

The Bank, 
other DPs and 
GoT 

Opportunistic 
behaviours of 
some of the 
traders and 
middlemen.  

The new markets offered improved prices and motivate farmers to bring their 
produce to the markets. However, Government intervention is necessary to 
ensure that operations of the markets are not interrupted by the opportunistic 
behaviours of some of the traders and middlemen.  
 

GoT 

 
 
 
 
 



 

20 
 

2.0 Key recommendations (with particular emphasis on ensuring sustainability of program benefits) 
 

Key issue 
(max 10, add 
rows as 
needed) 

Key recommendation Responsible  

1.  
 

Market and warehouse infrastructures have generated several benefits as discussed in 
preceding sections. However, further interventions by the district, regional and central 
Governments are necessary to optimise benefits accruing to farmers. There is a need to 
break buyers’ monopoly; promote and attract increasing number of buyers to advance 
the competitiveness of the market; and, strengthen the existing efforts to enforce the 
established marketing rules.  
 

Central, 
regional and 
district 
authorities. 

2.  The implementation of the IFAD’s components has been extended to March 2020. It is 
recommended for the extended IFAD component of the program to further strengthen 
the utilisation of the market and storage infrastructures by supporting marketing, 
financial services and business acumen in managing rural infrastructures.  
 

 
IFAD, and 
GoT. 

3.  Beneficiaries need to be closely supported to develop transparent and well elaborated 
business, and O&M plans for the program infrastructures and equipment. They need to 
have a clear understanding that the facilities need to be operated in a manner that 
maintenance and replacement costs are well covered.   
 

 
GoT and 
district 
authorities.  

4.  The preparation phase of infrastructure program needs to consider planning for an 
implementation time of the program from 5 to 7 years. The first two to three years of the 
program are spent on program identification, engineering designs and procurement 
processes. Another possibility is for the Government to have in place engineering and 
feasibility studies well in advance of loan application.  
 

 
The Bank, 
GoT. 

5.  Fully integrate program’s investments in the district annual plans and budget for 
maintenance for prolonged use of the infrastructures. Capacitate and sensitize local 
authorities to enforce by-laws (e.g. axel load limits on roads).  
 

 
GoT and 
district 
authorities 

6.  Ensure clear understanding for all parties when it comes to ownership and operational 
modalities of the infrastructure. Though local authorities own the markets and 
warehouses, they need to be encouraged or provided with complementary TA to 
establish formal agreements with respect to the role of owners and operators of the 
facilities.  

 

 
The Bank, 
GoT and 
district 
authorities 

7.  Ensure that all stakeholders are familiar with the Bank’s rules and program’s plans. 
Reference is made, for instance. Implementation delays are minimised if the Bank’s 
procurement rules are well understood. Procurement rules are among the rules that the 
Bank cannot change.  
 

GoT and 
district 
authorities 

8.  The initial ERR model (at the PAR stage) needs to be well documented at the PAR stage 
with the program’s M&E made responsible to regularly collect data necessary to update 
the ERR at the program closure stage.  
 

The Bank. 

9.  Intensify support to processors in quality and standards certification. Small processors 
cannot afford the high transaction costs and the time-consuming activity of following up 
certifications. The program approach in facilitating the standards organisations in 
assisting producers is one of the means to address the issue.  
 

The Bank  

10.  Government needs to intervene and clarify the few ownership disputes of some of the 
program’s markets and warehouses. Reference is made to the Longido livestock market, 
and the warehouses in Chato and Njombe.   
 

 
GoT 

 

 
 
 



 

21 
 

V: Overall PCR rating 

 
 

Dimensions and criteria Rating 
 

Dimension A: relevance 4 
Relevance of program development objective (II.A.1) 4 
Relevance of program design (II.A.2) 4 

Dimension B: effectiveness 4 
Development Objective (DO) (II.B.4) 4 

Dimension C: efficiency 3.5 
Timeliness (II.C.1) 2 
Resource use efficiency (II.C.2) 4 
Cost-benefit analysis (II.C.3) 4 
Implementation Progress (IP) (II.C.4) 4 

Dimension D: sustainability 4 
Financial sustainability (II.D.1) 4 
Institutional sustainability and strengthening of capacities (II.D.2) 4 
Ownership and sustainability of partnerships (II.D.3) 4 
Environmental and social sustainability (II.D.4) 4 

Overall program completion rating 3.9 
Highly satisfactory 

 
VI: Acronyms and Abbreviations 

 
AMSDP  - Agricultural Marketing Systems Development Programme 
ASDP II - Agricultural Sector Development Program 
CAADP - Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Program 
CSPs  - Country Strategic Plan 
DPs  - Development Partners 
DITF - Dar es Salaam International Trade Fair 
EAC - East African Community 
ERR - Economic Rate of Return 
ESMP - Environmental and Social Management Plan 
GoT - Government of Tanzania 
IFAD  - International Fund for Agricultural Development 
LMIC - Local Market Infrastructure Committees 
MTR - Mid-Term Review 
MoF - Ministry of Finance 
MFI - Microfinance Institutions 
MIVARF  - Market Infrastructure, Value Addition and Rural Finance 
M&E  - Monitoring and Evaluation 
NPV  - Net Present Value 
NSGRP II - National Strategy for Growth and Reduction of Poverty 
O&M - Operation and Maintenance  
PMO - Prime Minister’s Office 
PY - Program Year 
PH  - Post-Harvest  
PHTC  - Post-Harvest Training Centre 
PAR - Project Appraisal Report 
PCR  - Program Completion Report 
RFSP - Rural Financial Services Program 
RMI - Rural Markets Infrastructure 



 

22 
 

SADC - Southern African Development Community 
SRI - System of Rice Intensification 
SIDO  - Small Industry Development Organisation 
TNA - Training Needs Assessment 
ToT  - Training of Trainers 
TAMESA - Tanzania Electrical, Mechanical and Electronics Services Agency 
TARURA - Tanzania Rural Roads Agency 

 
