













































AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK


 

 

 

 

 

PROGRAMME: INCLUSIVE AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT SUPPORT 

PROGRAMME FOR AGRICULTURAL SECTORS (PADIDFA) 

COUNTRY: KINGDOM OF MOROCCO 

 

Appraisal Report 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

May 2018 

 

PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
 

INSTRUMENT:     Sector Budget Support 

PBO DESIGN MODEL:      Programme-Based Support Operations  

 

 

LOAN/ GRANT INFORMATION  

Client Information  

BORROWER:      Government of Morocco 
EXECUTING AGENCY:  Ministry of Economy and Finance 
 

Financing Plan 

 

Source Amount (EUR) Instrument 
 

AfDB 
 

200 million 
 

Loan 

 

Key AfDB Financing Information 
 

Loan currency Euro (EUR)  

Type of Loan Fully flexible loan 

Maturity To be determined (up to 25 years) 

Grace period To be determined (up to 8 years) 

Weighted average maturity  To be determined (depending on amortization profile, 

maturity and grace period) 
Reimbursement  Equal half-yearly instalments after the grace period or 

profile adapted to borrower's needs 
Interest rate  Base rate + Funding margin + Lending spread + Maturity 

premium (this interest rate must be greater than or equal to 

zero) 

Base rate Floating (EURIBOR 6 months revised every 1st February 

and 1st August) 
A free-floating option is available to set the base rate.  

Funding margin The Bank’s funding margin revised every 1st January and 

1st July and applied every 1st February and 1st August with 

the base rate 

Lending spread 80 basis points (8.8%) 

Maturity premium To be determined:  

-       0% if weighted average maturity <= 12.75 years  

-       0.10% if 12.75<weighted average maturity <= 15 years  

-       0.20% if weighted average maturity <= 15 years 

Front-end fees  0.25% of the loan amount, payable by the date of signature 

of the loan agreement  

Commitment fee  0.25% per year of the non-disbursed amount, starting to 

accrue 60 days after the date of signature of the loan 

agreement and payable on the set payment dates 

Base rate conversion option* Besides the free base rate fixing option, the borrower may 

revert to the floating rate or reset all or part of the disbursed 

loan amount. Transaction fees apply 

Rate cap or collar option* The borrower may cap or collar the base rate for all or part 

of the disbursed loan amount. Transaction fees apply 

Loan currency conversion 

option* 

The borrower may change the currency of all or part of its 

disbursed or undisbursed loan to another Bank loan 

currency. Transaction fees apply. 

 



 

v 

 

Implementation Schedule - Key Milestones (planned) 

Programme approval 15 May 2018 

Effectiveness 30 June 2018 

First disbursement 30 July 2018 

Second disbursement  30 July 2019 

Mid-term review 15 January 2019 

Programme closure 31 December 2019 

 

  



 

vi 

 

PROGRAMME EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  

Programme 

Overview 

Programme Name: Inclusive and Sustainable Development Support Programme for Agricultural 

Sectors in Morocco (PADIDFA).  

Scope and Sector: National Territory / Inter-sector.  

Overall Schedule: May 2018 – December 2019.  

Operational instrument /Financing: Sector Budget Support / EUR 200 million to be disbursed in two 

tranches (2018 and 2019). 

Programme 

Outcomes 

The objective of PADIDFA is to help boost agricultural sector competitiveness with a view to ensuring 

inclusive and sustainable economic growth by promoting value chains, employment creation, 

improvement of the business climate and sustainable natural resource management. It builds on two 

components: (1) “Support to job creation through the development of agricultural and agro-industrial 

sub-sectors” which will ensure: (i) skills development for access to employment in agricultural and agro-

industrial sectors; (ii) improvement of the investment climate and youth and female entrepreneurship in 

rural areas; and (iii) support for the structuring of agricultural sectors, processing of agricultural products, 

the development of agro-industry and exports; (2) “Support lasting rural employment through sustainable 

use of natural resources by the agricultural sector” which will ensure: (i) the strengthening of sustainable 

agricultural sector governance; (ii) improvement of water resource management to mitigate water stress 

and boost sustainability; and (iii) Support for energy transition in the agricultural sector.  

 

The implementation of these reforms will make it possible to support, by 2020, the following major 

outcomes: (i) Support to agricultural exports; (ii) Contribution to poverty reduction in rural areas; (iii) 

Mobilisation of additional private investments in the Sector Programme Contracts; (iv) Job creation for 

youth and women (nearly 3,000 jobs) ; (v) Irrigation Water Saving (a total of 990 million m3 in 2020) ; 

(vi) Extension of the use of renewable energies (solar pumping for 100,000 ha in 2020; (vii) Promotion 

of aggregation projects – PPP; (viii) Support for the establishment of four vocational guidance centres 

in rural areas; (ix) Formal recognition of all inter-professional associations in 2020 (21 inter-professional 

associations); (x) Validation of a Sustainable Development Action Plan for at least four key sectors 

(agriculture, water, energy, industry, etc.) by 2020; (xi) Annual training and qualification of nearly 300 

trainers, 2,600 graduates as young agricultural workers or technicians, and certification of approximately 

10,000 young daughters and sons of farmers benefiting from apprenticeship training. 

 

Alignment with 

Bank Priorities  

This sector budget support operation is fully aligned with the Bank's "High 5s", and directly contributes 

to creating an enabling environment for achieving the following three High 5s: "Feed Africa", "Integrate 

Africa" and "Improve the living conditions of the people of Africa". It also supports the green and 

inclusive growth objectives of the AfDB's Ten-Year Strategy for 2013-2022.  It is perfectly consistent 

with Morocco's Country Strategy Paper (CSP) for the period 2017-2021, more particularly its Pillar II to 

"Improve living conditions through jobs for youth, women and in rural areas". PADIDFA is aligned on 

the Bank's Agriculture and Agro-Industries Sector "Feed Africa" Strategy. In particular, it supports the 

inclusive development of value chains and the sustainable promotion of strategic value chains. Lastly, 

PADIDFA is in line with the Bank's Gender Strategy (2014-2018) "Investing in Gender Equality for 

Africa's Transformation", particularly on Pillar II "Economic Empowerment". PADIDFA would also 

support the thrusts of the new economic model and is fully in line with the process of establishing the 

advanced regionalization system launched by the Government. The approach emphasizes 

interdependence and complementarity between agriculture, the environment, employment, water and 

energy to promote harmonious and sustainable economic and social development.  

Needs 

Assessment and 

Rationale 

Since 2008, Morocco has undertaken structural reforms to support the Green Morocco Plan. The Bank 

contributed to the Green Morocco Plan through two budget support operations (PAMV 1 and PAPMV 

2) which generated positive results. Based on lessons learned, PADIDFA adopts a holistic approach 

aimed at stimulating intra- and inter-sector synergies and complementarities within the Green Morocco 

Plan Ecosystem (E-PMV) and between the upstream and downstream sectors of agricultural value 

chains. Emphasis is laid on interactions and complementary synergies between the Green Morocco Plan 

(PMV) and other sector strategies, with a view to achieving common and shared objectives. This 

approach involves inter-sector design and a quest for convergence and consistency between the policies 

of stakeholder ministries (agriculture, employment, environment, water, energy, industry, etc.). 

Accordingly, this operation is a truly inclusive and sustainable ecosystem for the Green Morocco 

Plan. Based on these considerations, the proposed support programme would represent a new generation 

of inter-sector budget support. Essentially, it will engage in selective and optimal targeting of the main 

components of E-PMV in a bid to support accelerated, inclusive and sustainable growth, amplify the 

dynamics driven by PAPMV 1 and 2, consolidate the achievements made and strengthen stakeholder 

mobilization to attain the appropriate objectives. It is not a mere counterpart to the implementation of a 

reform package. Rather, it fully fits into the national sustainable development policy and proposes to 



 

vii 

 

bring real value added to national policy implementation by systematically strengthening the 

convergence and overall consistency of sector policies relevant to the agricultural and rural sector.  

Harmonisation 

During the preparation of this budget support, the Bank's team met with major donors in order to promote 

potential synergies and complementarities within the framework of this operation. Thus, this programme 

is designed in coordination with other donors, more particularly the World Bank, which recently 

approved results-based financing in December 2017 (USD 200 million) aimed at promoting agricultural 

value chains. The same applies to the European Union Delegation (D-EU) in Morocco, which supports 

the VMP in addition to other bilateral financing (in particular KfW, AFD, JICA, BTC, etc.). Generally 

speaking, donor coordination in Morocco is very satisfactory and takes the form of formal dialogue and 

exchange frameworks, of which the Bank is an active member. In addition, thematic groups, led either 

by the partners or by the administration, meet regularly to coordinate activities related to sector 

operations. 

Bank’s Value 

Added 

The rationale for PADIDFA is the importance of agriculture in the Moroccan economy and its impact 

on employment, especially women’s and youth employment in rural areas, and its role in adaptation to 

climate change and water stress. It follows upon and consolidates the two phases of support to the Green 

Morocco Plan (PAPMV-1 & 2), implemented over the 2012-2017 period, and a welter of interventions 

contribute to the inclusion and sustainability of the Green Morocco Ecosystem Plan (E-PMV) which 

require synergies and complementarities with other sectors. The promotion of agricultural sectors will 

enable Moroccan agriculture to play a pivotal role in the country's economic and social development. 

The Bank is better placed to support Morocco in the reforms of this sector given the investments it has 

financed, the numerous technical assistance operations provided and the success of the two budget 

support operations (80% of the measures fully implemented for PAPMV-1 and 91% for PAPMV-2). The 

choice of this instrument will also provide the government with the necessary financial resources to 

implement its development policy and continue its reform efforts with the Bank's support and assistance. 

Contribution to 

Gender Equality 

and Women’s 

Empowerment   

The acceleration of the Green Morocco Plan and sustainability of its achievements will create lasting 

jobs, especially for youth and women, and build the institutional capacities of women's and youth 

organizations. This will have a positive impact on the standard of living of these target groups. Particular 

attention is paid in this programme to the capacity of agricultural sectors to generate additional 

employment, especially for rural women and youth. This requires a series of measures to improve the 

provision of training, adapt it to the needs of the rural world and promote entrepreneurship in rural areas. 

Policy Dialogue 

and Related 

Technical 

Assistance    

PADIDFA's preparation benefited from wide-ranging consultations, which enabled quality dialogue with 

all stakeholders, in particular the Moroccan authorities, trade associations, the private sector and civil 

society. These stakeholders were actively involved in the programme’s design by focusing on a 

participatory and inter-sector approach that allows the views of the sectors to be superimposed and 

potential convergences to be identified. The quest for ownership of the measures was at the heart of the 

design process. This process was reinforced during the preparation and appraisal by the organisation of 

consultation and validation workshops with all the actors concerned (seven administrative departments 

and representatives of the trade associations) to discuss the proposed measures, their relevance and the 

expected impact. This consultation will be continued during implementation through the inter-sector 

steering committee. 



   

viii 

PRELIMINARY RESULTS-BASED LOGICAL FRAMEWORK 
 

Country and Programme Title: Morocco - Inclusive and Sustainable Development Support Programme for Agricultural Sectors (PADIDFA) 

Programme Goal: Help boost agricultural sector competitiveness to ensure inclusive and sustainable economic growth through the promotion of value chains, employment creation, improvement of the business climate and sustainable 
natural resource management. 

 

RESULTS CHAIN 
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS MEANS OF 

VERIFICATION 

RISKS 

/MITIGATION MEASURES Indicators  Baseline Situation Targets 

IM
P

A
C

T
 

Improvement of agricultural 
sector competitiveness 

Value of agricultural exports MAD 21.3 billion MAD 45 billion in 2030 MEF / Global 
Competitiveness Report 

 

Improvement of the living 

conditions of rural 

communities 

Rural poverty rate  9.5 % in 2014 5% in 2030 HCP/Human Development 

Report, UNDP 

O
U

T
C

O
M

E
S

 

I. Jobs created through the 
development of supported 

agricultural sub-sectors 

(support for inclusive 
development) 

 

Contribute to jobs created for the youth and 
women in rural areas 

42000  
jobs, including 38,000 in 

rural areas in 2017 

62000 jobs including 55,800 
in rural areas in 2020 

Annual HCP Report on 
Employment 

Risks:  

External shocks and unfavourable international 

economic environment/fluctuation in the prices of 

hydrocarbons and commodities 
 

Climatic hazards and extreme weather events 
 

Mitigation Measure: 

Budget supervision committee established 
 

Targeted measures: management of shortages, 

promotion of localized irrigation, etc. 

Additional training for trainers, youth and 

girls 

- 400 trainers, 2600 youths and 

10000 girls trained in 2020 

Specific training report 

(Ministry of Agriculture, 
Vocational Training). 

Private investment in the agricultural sub-
sectors supported by the programme 

- At least MAD 1 billion by 
2020 

Report from the Ministry of 
Agriculture, COMADER and 

FENAGRI 

II. Sustainable management of 

agricultural sub-sectors 
improved, to ensure the 

sustainability of jobs created 

(sustainable development 
support).  

Amount of water saved in million cubic 

metres (mm3). 

880 mm3 (cumulative 

period 2008-17) 

990 million m3 in 2020 Report from the Ministry of 

Agriculture 

Utilization of renewable energies (solar 
pumping)  

10,000 farms in 2017, or 
nearly 30,000 ha 

30,000 farms in 2020, 
representing 100,000 ha.  

Ministry of Agriculture and 
AMEE 

O
U

T
P

U
T

S
 

I. Support for job creation through the development of agricultural and agro-industrial sub-sectors Risks: 
- Insufficient inter-sector coordination capacity 

between the various government departments 

involved in implementing programme reforms 
 

- Divergent interests of stakeholders  

 

Mitigation Measures: 

- Institution of the Steering Committee in MEF 

and strengthening of Agriculture/PMV, Water and 

Employment thematic groups 

 
- Strengthening of inter and intra-ministerial 

consultation, and creation of focal points 

 
 

I.1.  Skills development to ensure access to employment in the agricultural and agro-industrial sub-sectors 

Improvement of training 

tailored to private sector needs 
in rural areas 

 

Operationalisation of the Centre for 

Pedagogical Engineering and Training of 

Trainers 

Centre for Training of 

Trainers is non-existent 

One (1) engineering centre 

functional before end-2019 

Note on the centre’s 

operationalization signed by 
DEFR. 

Production of a Job-Competency Framework 

(JCF) and a Directory of Jobs and Trades 

(DJT) for the agricultural sector  

Not available JCF and DJT produced for the 

agricultural sector in 2018 
Copy of JCF and DJT  

Increased employment 

opportunities in rural areas 

Creation and establishment of vocational 

guidance centres in rural areas 

0 in 2017 Four (4) centres established 

before end-2018 

Instruments creating the 

centres 

1.2.   Improvement of the investment climate and entrepreneurship among the youth and women in rural areas 

Acceleration of investment in 
the agricultural sector 

Transmission of the law governing the 

National Agricultural Registry (RNA) to 

the SGG 

Bill prepared Bill submitted to the SGG 
before end-2019 

Letter of transmission to the 
SGG 

Business creation support for 

the youth and women in rural 

areas 

Completion of a study on the preparation of a 

national plan for the creation of regional 

incubators and establishment of two 
incubators 

An incubator established 

in Larache 

Study conducted and less than 

two incubators established in 

2019. 

Summary report  

Improve support to sub-sector 

businesses  
Signature of a framework agreement 

between ONCA and COMADER on 

Not available Copy of the signed agreement.  



 

ix 

 

agricultural extension, training and 

support for farmers. 

Encouragement of women’s 
entrepreneurship in rural areas 

Conduct of a study on women’s 
entrepreneurship 

Not available Study and action plan 
available before end-2019 

Copy of an action plan for the 
guide 

Strengthening agricultural 

extension in the agri-food 

sectors 

Preparation and signature of a partnership 

agreement between the DIAEA and ONCA 

for the development of agricultural 

extension in irrigated areas. 

Not available Agreement signed by end-

2019 

Copy of the signed agreement 

I.3.    Support for structuring of agricultural sub-sectors, processing of agricultural products, and the development of agro-industry and exports 

Structuring of inter-
professional associations 

Continuation of the process of recognition of 
inter-professional associations  

14 out of 21 inter-
professional associations 

recognized 

21 inter-professional 
associations recognized in 

2019 

Instruments of recognition 

Establishment of Agri-food 

Processing Areas (ZTAA) for 

the development and processing 
of agricultural products 

Publication of the Order establishing the 
amounts, conditions and procedures for 

granting State financial assistance for units 
for the enhancement of fresh agricultural 

products and their by-products. 

Not available Order published before end-

2019. 

Summary note on support to 

CIAAs and copy of the signed 

Order 

Improvement of standards for 

the promotion of exports, 
particularly with African 

countries 

Order defining complementary and special 

measures to combat the Newcastle disease 

and avian influenza in order to support 

poultry exports  

Incomplete texts Draft decree transmitted to the 

SGG before end-2018 

Copy of the Letters of 

transmission to the SGG 

Transmission of the draft law on 

fertilizers, their adjuvants and crop 

supports to the SGG. 

Incomplete texts Draft law transmitted to the 

SGG before end-2019 

Copy of the Letter of 

Transmission to the SGG  

II. Support lasting rural employment through the sustainable use of natural resources  

II.1.     Reinforcement of Sustainable Agricultural Sector Governance 

Promotion of green governance Publication of the Decree setting up the 

sustainable development strategy committee 
before end-2018 

Not available Decree published in the OG 

before end-2018. 

Copy of the OG 

Validation of Sustainable Development 

Action Plans (PADD) in 2019  

Not available Four (4) PADD validated in 

2019 

Validation report 

II.2.   Improvement of water resource management to mitigate the water stress and boost sustainability 

Strengthening of the 

institutional framework for 

integrated water resource 
management   

Decree on the PNE, PDAIRE and Local 

Water Management Plans (2019) 

Not available Decree transmitted to the 

SGG before end-2018 

Letter of transmission to the 

SGG 

Decree governing the water resource 

information system 

Not available Decree prepared before end-

2019 

Letter of transmission to the 

SGG 

Improvement of adaptation to 

climate change 

Preparation of regional vulnerability indices 

and regional CC adaptation plans  

Not available Study launched in three pilot 

regions before end-2019 

Service order on the study 

II.3.   Support for energy transition in the agricultural sector 
Reduction of the carbon 

footprint and further 
empowerment of small farmers 

Presentation of the Energy Efficiency 

Strategy to the Governing Council (2030) 

Not available EE strategy presented to the 

government council before 
end-2018  

Minutes of the Government 

Council 

Strategic study on the promotion of 
renewable energy in agriculture (solar 

pumping) 

Tripartite Convention 
(MEF-AGRI-ENV) 

available 

Results of the study available 
before end-2019 

Consultation notice 
Signed agreement 

 

Key Activities:  

- Signature of loan agreements and fulfilment of effectiveness and disbursement conditions 
- Implementation of adopted reforms, Government’s half-yearly and annual reports, Bank supervision reports as well as the programme’s mid-

term review and completion reports. 

Financing:  

 ADB loan   EUR 200 million: Two disbursement tranches (2018 and 2019) 



   

x 

 

Schedule for Implementation of PADIDFA Programme Activities 

 

 

Description of Activities 
2018 2019 2020 

3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 

1. Negotiations, Approval and Effectiveness 

Loan negotiations                                                                     

Loan approval by the Board                                                                     

Loan approval and effectiveness                                                                     

2. Programme Implementation 

Implementation of first tranche measures                                                                     

Mid-term review of the programme                                                                     

Implementation of second tranche measures                                                                     

Disbursement of the first tranche                                                                     

Disbursement of the second tranche                                                                     

Audit reports                                                                     

3. Programme Completion 

Submission of the PCR by the Government                                                                     

PCR completion mission by the Bank                                                                     

Validation of the PCR by the Bank                                                                     

 



   

1 
 

I. INTRODUCTION: PROPOSAL 

1.1. This is a proposal to grant a EUR 200 million loan to fund the Inclusive and Sustainable 

Development Support Programme for Agricultural Sectors (PADIDFA). It is a sector budget support 

operation in two tranches to be executed over the 2018-2019 period to help achieve the objectives of the 

Green Morocco Plan (PMV). The programme entails consolidation and deepening of reforms already 

implemented under PAPMV-1 & 2 between June 2012 and September 2017. Its design is informed by 

lessons from Phases I and II of PAPMV (cf. 4.4.3), the principles of the Paris Declaration as well as good 

practice principles for the application of conditionality. It will supplement other programmes financed by 

the World Bank, the European Union and bilateral funds (AFD, JICA, KfW, CTB, etc. see Annex 5).  

1.2.  The programme objective is to contribute to the creation of sustainable jobs in the rural 

areas of Morocco by boosting agricultural sector competitiveness through the promotion of value 

chains, improvement of the business climate and sustainable natural resource management. 
PADIDFA is based on Morocco’s various strategic orientations and is consistent with the second pillar of 

CSP 2017-2021 by supporting the improvement of living conditions through employment for youth, 

women and rural areas.  

1.3.  The programme is intended to sustain and consolidate the achievements of the Green 

Morocco Plan, and launch its acceleration phase (2017-2020). It helps the authorities with the 

formulation and implementation of inter-sector strategic reforms to strengthen the social and 

environmental dimensions of the PMV and promote inclusion, sustainability and competitiveness in 

Morocco’s agricultural sector.  

II. COUNTRY CONTEXT 

2.1. Political Situation and Governance Context 

2.1.1 Since adoption of its new Constitution in July 2011, Morocco has enjoyed outstanding 

stability while implementing reforms in tandem with multiparty politics. The September 2015 

regional and municipal elections were an important step towards implementing the decentralization 

process enshrined in the new Constitution. The October 2016 parliamentary elections resulted in the 

victory of the Justice and Development Party (PJD). In March 2017, Mr. El Othmani was appointed Head 

of Government by the King and a new Government was formed on 5 April 2017.  

2.1.2 In the last decade, Morocco recorded highly satisfactory results in good governance and 

corruption control. On 28 December 2015, it adopted the National Anti-Corruption Strategy that covers 

various aspects, including the improvement of institutional and legal measures, the implementation of 

preventive and enforcement measures, and the strengthening of community education and awareness-

raising. In November 2017, the decree to establish the Anti-Corruption Commission, placed under the 

authority of the Head of the Government, was published in the Official Gazette.  

2.2. Recent Economic Trends, Macroeconomic and Budgetary Analysis 

2.2.1 In 2017, the estimated real GDP growth rate of the Kingdom of Morocco was 4.1%. That 

year was characterized by an exceptionally good agricultural season. Hence, the Ministry of Agriculture 

announced in September that the overall cereal output reached 96 million quintals (compared to 33.5 

million in 2016), representing an increase of 187%. This was the fourth best cereal output in the country 

since the launch of the Green Morocco Plan in 2008 that has expanded the use of certified seeds and 

targeted areas best suited for cereal farming. Hence, real GDP growth in 2017 was largely driven by an 

increase in agricultural value added (+15.1%). The non-agricultural value added also grew, albeit at a 

slower pace (+3.1%) but at a higher rate relative to 2016 (+2.2%), driven mainly by the processing 

industries, mining and tourism. The manufacturing sector production index improved by 1.9%, the largest 

increase since 2012. This robust performance in the sector is consistent with the excellent sales trends 

abroad for all major export sectors, including aeronautics (+20%), the food industry (+8.8%), electronics 

(+7.6%), automobile (+7.3%), textiles and leather (+6.1%).  



 

2 
 

2.2.1 Domestic consumption continues to be supported by controlled inflation and improved 

revenue.  Household consumption increased in 2017, benefiting from the positive impact of a good 

agricultural season, an increase in remittances from Moroccans in the Diaspora (+4.5%) and the creation 

of 57,000 jobs (35,000 in rural areas). With regard to public consumption, the Government's investment 

efforts were sustained in 2017, and benefited from positive trends in outstanding equipment loans 

(+11.4%) and investment spending from the State budget (+5.1%). For 2018, the primary economic 

indicators point to the continuation of investments.  

Table 1: Key Macroeconomic Indicators - PEA, 2018 (% of GDP, unless otherwise stated) 

Indicators 2016 2017 (e) 2018 (p) 2019 (p) 

Real GDP growth 1.2 4.1 3.1 4.1 

Agricultural GDP growth -12.8 15.2 -1.0 - 

Non-agricultural GDP growth 3.1 3.0 3.6 - 

Inflation  1.6 0.9 1.8 1.9 

Budget balance (% of GDP) -4.1 -3.6 -3.0 -2.6 

Current account (% of GDP) -4.4 -4.0 -3.2 -2.9 

2.2.3 In 2017, Morocco continued its fiscal consolidation policy started in 2011. The budget deficit 

was expected to reach 3.6% of GDP in 2017 compared to 4.1% in 2016. External trade recovered in 2017 

compared to 2016, mainly due to the net decline in wheat imports (owing to increased production and a 

fiscal policy change limiting imports) and consolidation of the growth pace of exports through the 

development of the “new industries of Morocco” initiative (automobile, aeronautics and electronics). 

Despite the increase in the energy bill (+30%), imports rose at a lower rate (+5.7% compared to 7.2%) in 

2016, mainly due to the decline in grain imports (-22%). The current account deficit was estimated at 4% 

of GDP in 2017 compared to 4.4% in 2016. This improvement also stemmed from the increase in FDI 

and remittances from abroad, which rose in 2017 by +32% and +2% respectively, compared to 2016. 

Foreign exchange reserves remained at a reasonable level in 2017, i.e. approximately six months of 

import. 

2.2.4 The public debt was estimated at 64.3% of GDP in 2017 compared to 64.7% in 2016. The 

authorities have set a debt target of 60% of GDP by 2021, to be achieved through the stringent budgetary 

control policy initiated in 2013. Although the Treasury debt continued its upward trend from 2010 (its 

ratio to GDP was 63.2% in 2014 compared to 62.3% in 2013 and 49% in 2010), it started declining from 

2017. The debt ratio is expected to rise to 64% in 2018. It is worth noting that the increased debt since 

2010 stems from the recovery plan to combat the effects of the international financial crisis and the 

sluggish growth in Europe. Nevertheless, since 2013, the State has initiated a public expenditure control 

strategy to gradually reduce the budget deficit to 3% and ultimately reverse the upward trend in the debt 

volume (scenario validated by the IMF). According to the latest IMF mission (July 2017), the public debt 

will remain sustainable in the medium term mainly because its composition and structure are dominated 

by domestic debts, which account for 78% of the total debt. 

2.2.5 Morocco has an accommodating monetary policy and kept its interest rate unchanged in 

2017 (2.25%) after a decline of 0.25 point in 2016. It will be recalled that Morocco has kept its key 

interest rate low in order to stimulate its economy by encouraging credit to businesses. Inflation remained 

low at an average 0.9% in 2017, although it is expected to double to 1.8% in 2018. Furthermore, in January 

2018, Morocco announced the adoption of a new and more flexible exchange rate regime. 

2.2.6 In terms of the economic prospects for 2018, the real GDP growth rate should reach 3.1%. 

This prediction is based on an “average” agricultural season that yields a lower forecast (-0.8%) for 

agricultural value added.  Non-agricultural GDP will continue rising and is expected to reach 3.7%. The 

industrialists consulted during the economic situation survey conducted in the manufacturing sector by 

Bank Al-Maghrib expect an increased production and sales in 2018. Similarly, the forecasts for 2018 are 

also good for the tertiary sector, including tourism that grew by 32.3% in January 2018 compared to 

January 2017.  



 

3 
 

2.3. Public Finance Management 

Morocco has initiated several reforms to modernize its financial management system, as defined in 

the new Constitution adopted in 2011. In accordance with Article 75 of the Constitution, Parliament 

adopted the Organic Finance Law on 2 June 2015. This law, which went into force in 2016, has been 

gradually and progressively implemented over five years to enhance ownership of the new budgetary, 

accounting and financial rules that it advocates. The new Constitution guarantees the independence of the 

Court of Auditors and enshrines regionalization and administrative decentralization by strengthening 

control at the regional level. Accordingly, a Court of Auditors will be established in each region to carry 

out more exhaustive management control of public bodies and municipalities. 

2.4. Economic and Agricultural Sector Competitiveness 

2.4.1 According to the Davos Global Competitiveness Report, Morocco was the fifth most 

competitive economy in Africa and the first in North Africa in 2017. The Kingdom has maintained its 

ranking (71st out of 137 countries) and confirmed its significant advance made in: (i) improvement of the 

effectiveness and efficiency of institutions (49th/137); (ii) infrastructure development (54th/137); (iii) 

macroeconomic stability (55th/137) and (iv) improvement of the efficiency of goods markets, in particular 

the efficiency of the Agricultural Policy, which ranks Morocco 16th/137.   

2.4.2 This economic performance stems from considerable efforts made by the authorities to 

implement structural reforms that accelerate the transformation of the country’s economic model 

and industrialization. In 2016, manufacturing sector exports accounted for 70.1% of total exports, 

compared to 65.8% in 2005. In 2017, export from Morocco’s “global industries”, such as aeronautics 

(+20%), the food industry (+8.8%), electronics (+7.6%) and automobile (+7.3%) increased remarkably.  

2.4.3  Despite these economic diversification and sophistication efforts, the agricultural sector 

still accounts for a significant share of the Kingdom’s GDP (14%) and its performance, which is 

highly sensitive to climatic fluctuations, considerably affects the country’s economic growth (see §2.2.1). 

Nevertheless, the agricultural sector holds enormous potential in terms of development and job creation 

owing to its structuring of value chains and improvement of product quality (ADB, 2016).  

2.4.4 The agricultural sector has experienced sustained growth since implementation of the 

Green Morocco Plan in 2008 that has boosted sector competitiveness. Since 2008, the Plan has helped 

to increase: (i) the irrigated surface area by over 25% (137,000 ha); and (ii) the fruit and vegetable yield 

by 70%. Exports of agri-food products increased sharply to over USD 4.8 billion in 2016, representing a 

280% rise since 2001 (and more than 170% since 2008). Despite growing competition, especially from 

countries of the Mediterranean basin, Morocco is ranked among the five leading exporters of several 

products. Mindful of the importance of the sector and of the underlying issues, Morocco 

triggered the acceleration of the Green Morocco Plan (APMV) in 2016 as an instrument for 

implementing the agricultural strategy, with emphasis on the agricultural downstream, 

promotion of agricultural value chains and convergence with other complementary sectors. 

2.4.5 Besides, competitiveness gains are possible because agricultural value chains remain little 

developed and fragmented. Agricultural production is characterized by the coexistence of a large 

number of small-sized farms (70% of the 1.5 million farms have a surface area below 5 ha), the low 

quality of their output, little market integration and a limited number of large farms with high value added 

whose output is mainly exported. In fact, the 1.5 million farms only account for 4% of exports, while the 

agribusiness sector, which is less labour-intensive (60,000 workers), accounts for 2%. 

  



 

4 
 

2.5. Inclusive Growth, Poverty Situation and Social Context 

2.5.1 Efforts made to reduce social inequalities and poverty are beginning to bear fruit, with an 

estimated poverty rate of 4.2% in 2014. This result is the culmination of many reforms initiated in the 

1990s. Poverty is on the decline but remains rooted in rural areas. The constitutional reform of 2011 

promotes the universal character of the social safety nets. Since then, reforms are aimed at improving the 

coverage and efficiency of the social protection system, particularly regarding pensions, unemployment 

and health insurance. Nevertheless, this mechanism affects only a fraction of the population due to its 

fragmented targeting and the lack of an integrated strategy. In 2016, the authorities announced the 

establishment of a single identifier, coupled with the institution of a social identifier to improve targeting 

by 2021.  

2.5.2 Morocco has also made significant efforts to achieve the SDGs, especially SDG4, although 

major challenges remain in terms of the secondary education dropout rate and efficient support to 

out-of-school youth. The country has almost achieved universal primary education and significantly 

reduced the literacy rate for youth aged 15-24 by 10.8% (HCP, 2018). However, the school dropout 

phenomenon and its management by the authorities remains a concern particularly in secondary 

education. Although data from the Ministry of Education shows a decrease in the dropout rate, the number 

of dropouts remained significant at 279,177 compared to 329,618 in 2016.  

2.5.3 The persistent dropout rate and the poor diversification of the Moroccan economy tend to 

create structural unemployment for the youth and women, and increases underemployment in 

rural areas. In 2017, net job creation by the Moroccan economy was estimated at 86,000 jobs, comprising 

32,000 in urban areas and 54,000 in rural areas, relative to a loss of 37,000 in 2016 especially in the 

agricultural sector. This is far from the target of 200,000 annual jobs referred to in the National 

Employment Strategy. Hence, the unemployment rate rose from 9.9% in 2016 to 10.2% in 2017. In rural 

areas, underemployment affects 10.8% of rural workers. Young people aged 14-24 are still the most 

vulnerable to unemployment at a rate of 26.5%, followed by graduates at 17.9%, and women at 14.7%. 

The low level of qualification for the youth who are not in education, employment or training (NEET) 

confines them to precarious jobs with little pay and no future prospects (approximately two thirds of 

employees have no work contract and almost 78.4% have no health insurance). Similarly, the poor 

matching of training to employment is one of the causes of unemployment among graduates from non-

technical disciplines who predominantly come from the faculties of social sciences. Such graduates leave 

school with skills for which there is no demand in the domestic labour market and especially in the 

agricultural sector. Difficulties in ensuring the socio-professional integration of the youth prevent 

households from investing in education and fuel the school dropout rate.  

2.5.4  The agricultural sector employs 40% of the labour force and over 93.2% of the female 

labour force in rural areas, thus playing a major economic, social and environmental role.  The 

agricultural value added to the national economy increased by 13.5% in October 2017, thus by 3.9% year 

on year, compared to +1% during the same period in 2016 (HCP). In the third quarter of 2017, the 

agricultural sector (including fisheries and forestry) grew by 1.3%, creating a further 47,000 jobs 

nationally (40,000 in rural areas and 7,000 in urban areas), compared to losses of 75,000 jobs in 2014, 

27,000 in 2015 and 66,000 in 2016. The agro-industrial sector employed 143,000 people in 2016 with an 

output mainly destined for the domestic market. This sector has 2,050 industrial units composed largely 

of SMEs. Agricultural exports accounted for approximately 12% of all industrial goods exported in 2016. 

Hence, the sector accounted for 5% of national GDP in 2016, representing almost 27% of industrial GDP 

with a value added of approximately MAD 30 billion. 

2.5.5. Lastly, challenges in terms of gender inequality and the inclusion of small farmers in 

agricultural value chains persist. Women usually hold unskilled and non-permanent jobs with no 

social insurance. According to HCP data, over 93.2% of the rural female labour force is recruited by the 

agricultural sector, which often employs them as seasonal or occasional workers while men hold longer-

term jobs. Although the presence of women at decision-making levels is increasingly affirmed, women 

are still confined to labour-intensive manual tasks that require no special skills while men occupy the 

more skilled positions. These inequalities are also observed in income distribution because women earn 



 

5 
 

less than men and the number of women entrepreneurs in agricultural and agribusiness value chains 

remains insignificant. Unpaid employment is estimated to account for 40% of rural jobs (ILO 2014) and 

concerns 74% of the female labour force and 68% of young people aged below 25 years. These differences 

limit women's opportunities to access skills development and entrepreneurship, increase their 

vulnerability in the labour market and further relegate them to the informal sector. 

III. GOVERNMENT DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME 

3.1 Government’s Development Strategy and Medium-Term Reform Priorities 

3.1.1 Morocco has adopted a series of sector plans to accelerate growth, ensure sustainability 

and promote inclusion. The strategies marshalled are aimed at modernizing traditional sectors such as 

agriculture and fishing, and developing innovative sectors like renewable energy and services with high 

value added (industry, etc.). 

3.1.2 In 2008, the Government rolled out its 2030 Strategic Vision for the agricultural sector and 

initiated the Green Morocco Plan. The objective of the Plan is to boost agricultural productivity and 

increase exports and private investment in the sector. The Plan will help to combat poverty, ensure food 

security and equip the Kingdom with the skills needed to cope with vagaries of the weather and preserve 

its natural resources (water, soil and energy). 

3.1.3 The agricultural sector is also targeted by several other strategies. The National Industrial 

Acceleration Plan for 2014-2020 is aimed at integrating agricultural value chains to support the agri-food 

sector through the promotion and restructuring of strategic sectors (including staple food crops and export 

crops) by supporting the development of agropoles (integrated logistic platforms). Furthermore, the 

National Sustainable Development Strategy (SNDD) 2015-2030, the National Water Strategy 2009-2030 

and the National Energy Efficiency Strategy 2008-2030 focus on sustainable natural resource 

management and protection. Consequently, there is need for a systemic vision to support the 

sustainability and inclusion of the Green Morocco Plan Ecosystem. In this regard, PADIDFA, which 
is consistent with all the above strategies and with the Government Gender Equality Plan (GEP), 

advocates inter-sector coordination and is fully in line with the process of establishing the advanced 

regionalization system.  

3.2 Constraints to Implementation of the National/Sector Development Programme  

3.2.1 The growth diagnostic (conducted by the Bank in collaboration with the authorities and 

MCC) identifies poor coordination between economic stakeholders as one of the constraints to 

private investment. There are numerous public policies aimed at accelerating Morocco’s economic 

transformation and the development of value chains. However, the lack of coordination between public 

entities (agencies and ministries), private stakeholders (within value chains) and between the public and 

private sectors (promotion of trade agreements, for example) has a negative impact on the expected 

outcomes of public action. This problem is fundamental to agricultural development. The development of 

this sector requires support for concerted nationwide action at different levels, namely: (i) collaboration 

between the various departments of the Ministry of Agriculture; (ii) inter-ministerial coordination; and 

(iii) coordination between central and decentralized structures. For natural resources, such coordination 

involves the development of transversal governance and planning tools for the concerted monitoring of 

natural resource utilisation. 

3.2.2 The growth diagnostic identifies human capital as a major constraint to more inclusive and 

robust growth. The agricultural sector faces three major challenges: (1) the skills developed should be 

tailored to the needs of sector stakeholders - the involvement of inter-professional associations in the 

training cycle and the streamlining of higher education are essential in this case;  (2) research and 

development by public training-research structures must satisfy the needs of sector stakeholders; and (3) 

the adult population with a low human capital should not be excluded from value chain development. The 

development of human capital through agricultural vocational training in the regions is essential to 

improve the quality of the workforce, enhance salaried employment and promote self-employment. 



 

6 
 

Furthermore, there are other challenges to the encouragement of investment in agriculture, namely: (1) 

the low level of investment due to the fact that farm sizes in Morocco are limited by land tenure insecurity 

in rural areas as well as problems of joint ownership and fragmentation; (2) the lack of greater investor 

visibility in the agricultural sector; (3) the need for better promotion of recourse to PPPs; (4) the lack of 

dedicated logistics platforms that enable the private sector to develop synergies; (5) the lack of 

mechanisms that  enable small farmers to come together and offer a common service of sufficient 

magnitude to other stakeholders in the chain; and (6) the need to strengthen advisory services (with private 

initiatives) to support agricultural production (in terms of quality and quantity). 

3.2.3 Land tenure policy that facilitates investment in agriculture. Land tenure is one of the major 

obstacles that investors face. In particular, the growth diagnostic shows that the frequent lack of land titles 

in the agricultural sector limits investment by farmers and consequently undermines agricultural sector 

transformation.  Several projects have been initiated to address this constraint. One example is the public-

private partnership operation intended to make land of sufficient size available to private investors for a 

relatively long lease period. At the end of 2016, a surface area of 111,000 ha was made available to 

investors (particularly in the agropoles), who have ended up making actual investments of nearly MAD 

14 million on the ground; i.e. 95% of planned investments. Furthermore, to address the constraint of land 

fragmentation and improve the management of small farms, aggregation around private stakeholders or 

professional organizations with significant managerial capacity was adopted and implemented. This 

model yields a win-win partnership between the productive upstream and the commercial and industrial 

downstream.  

3.2.4 Resource overexploitation is a concern for Moroccan authorities. From an environmental 

standpoint, the agricultural sector is currently the bedrock of sustainable development in Morocco, given 

that it is the primary user of water and land resources, and one of the main users of energy resources 

directly (pumping, mechanical tools) or indirectly (fertilizers). In fact, agriculture uses 80 to 85% of the 

country's water resources. Another challenge for the sector is the achievement of sustainable growth 

through agriculture, considering the fragility of natural resources. This problem is even more acute as 

Morocco is encountering water stress. Rainfall is very low and the water is unevenly distributed among 

the various regions. The national water context is marked by increasingly growing scarcity, mainly due 

to climate change, irrational use and population growth. Morocco's natural water resources are among the 

lowest in the world.  This potential is estimated at the equivalent of 700 m3/inh./year and this quantity 

could drop to 520 m3, compared to the critical threshold of 1000 m3/inh./year. Therefore, it is necessary 

to manage water demand efficiently by planning investments, synchronizing with dam water resources, 

controlling water extraction and organizing stakeholders, while stimulating the search for new non-

conventional water resources. The issue of land and energy management, particularly the use of 

subsidized butane gas by this sector, is also the focus of attention. In this regard, there is a growing national 

advocacy for increased use of solar pumping. 

3.2.5 Finally, particular attention should be given to rural women, who hold 61% of jobs in the 

sector. The inclusive transformation of this sector is possible only if special attention is paid to rural 

women who are considered fragile stakeholders. 

3.3 Consultation and Participatory Process 

Stakeholders were actively involved in programme design through a participatory and inter-sector 

approach that allowed for consideration of views of various sectors and identification of potential 

convergences. The quest for ownership of measures informed programme design. Stakeholders 

concerned (various administrative entities, representatives of professionals, private operators, civil 

society, etc.) were involved throughout the process. This process was reinforced during the preparation 

phase through the organization of a consultation workshop with all stakeholders (seven administrative 

departments and representatives of inter-professional associations) to discuss the proposed measures, their 

relevance and impact. A workshop on the ownership of measures involving civil society and the private 

sector, organized during the appraisal, made it possible to agree on common ground, find a better basis 

for addressing the interests of stakeholders, and produce a validated matrix of measures and programme 

performance indicators. This consultation will be continued during implementation phase through the 

inter-sector steering committee. 



 

7 
 

IV. BANK SUPPORT FOR THE GOVERNMENT’S STRATEGY 

4.1. Linkage with the Bank Strategy  

4.1.1 This budget support programme falls under the second pillar of CSP 2017-2021 for 

Morocco, namely “improving living conditions through employment for the youth, women and 

rural areas”. It contributes to the achievement of three of the High 5s, namely: “Feed Africa”, “Integrate 

Africa” and "Improve the quality of life for the people of Africa". It pursues the green and inclusive 

growth objectives of the Bank's Ten-Year Strategy for 2013-2022 and is fully consistent with the 2016-

2025 Feed Africa Strategy (agricultural transformation through value chains development) as well as the 

Bank’s other sector strategies (including youth employment, the water and energy strategies, etc.). 

PADIDFA is also part of the Strategic Framework and Governance Action Plan 2014-2018 (GAP II). 

4.1.2  The Programme is justified by: (i) the importance of ensuring the sustainability of  

Morocco Green Plan (PMV) achievements and supporting its acceleration phase; (ii) the magnitude 

of the financial needs created by the reforms implemented by the PMV and associated sectors 

(environment, water, energy and employment); (iii) the urgency of instituting rational natural resource 

management (through operationalization of the National Sustainable Development Strategy (SNDD), the 

implementation of the Sustainable Development Action Plan (PADD) in the agricultural and associated 

sectors, management of the water stress and disruption of the water resources balance, and the insufficient 

development of agricultural products and clean energies); (iv) insufficient inclusive development (social 

inclusion based on age, gender and geography; insufficient creation of employment particularly in the 

agro-industry ecosystem, etc.); (v) poor promotion of value chains, limited empowerment of inter-

professional associations and low private sector involvement; and (vi) the urgency of addressing the 

demands of unemployed young graduates and marginalized rural women. The programme is also fully 

consistent with the advanced regionalization and inter-sector convergence process to sustain and support 

the impact of PMV and the PMV acceleration phase initiated in 2017. 

4.2. Compliance with Eligibility Criteria 

4.2.1  As presented in the previous chapters, Morocco enjoys a political and economic 

environment that is conducive to the use of the reform support instrument. The country has also 

demonstrated its commitment to the sector reform process, particularly in the agricultural sector (see 

Annexs 3 and 5). 

4.2.2  Furthermore, from the fiduciary standpoint, the country meets the eligibility criteria. The 

performance assessment results of Morocco’s PFM systems obtained in 2016 using the PEFA 

methodology (including public procurement) confirm that the country fiduciary risk level is moderate. 

According to the report, the main conditions for budgetary and financial discipline have been met, 

especially budget reliability and the achievement of set stability objectives. It specifies that more strategic 

public resource allocation remains a priority objective for the Government and that this objective is central 

to the reform programme currently being implemented. Lastly, it points out that the current public finance 

management system contributes only moderately to the improvement of public service quality, which is 

why the LOF introduces a performance-based approach and provides for objectives and indicators for 

measuring the quality of services. 

4.2.3 The public finance management and procurement framework has undergone significant 

reforms in recent years to attain international standards, as reflected in satisfactory fiduciary 

assessments conducted by the Bank and other partners. In particular, the Bank recently assessed 

Morocco's national public procurement system in November 2017 using the OECD/DAC methodology 

and the fiduciary risk for the procurement component at the national level was deemed moderate. The 

evaluation report of the national procurement system was validated with the participation of the major 

public procurement stakeholders and the key technical and financial partners. 

 

 



 

8 
 

4.3. Collaboration and Coordination with other Partners 

4.3.1 Since 2010, a donor coordination process has been conducted by the Ministry of 

Agriculture (Directorate for Strategy and Statistics-DSS) to coordinate PMV support. Regular 

meetings are held in the presence of technical and financial partners. The Bank plays an important role in 

this process through its country office (COMA). Hence, the design of PADIDFA was characterized by 

sustained consultation with the DSS and close coordination with partners, particularly the World Bank, 

the European Union, French Cooperation (AFD) and Belgian Cooperation (CTB). Considering the 

programming schedules, parallel financing was recommended. Furthermore, Moroccan authorities 

harmonize interventions through the MEF. The design of this programme took into consideration 

complementarity with the other TFPs, especially the World Bank, which operates in the same field. 

Additional measures were recommended, including processing zones, the establishment of an agricultural 

register and strengthening of agricultural extension (supported by the EU). 

4.3.2 In the water sector, coordination between the various donors is done through a thematic 

group established in 2011. This thematic group meets regularly to discuss sector trends, and to seek 

greater coordination and harmonization of sector interventions. The Bank has led this thematic group 

together with the AFD and the World Bank since 2016. 

4.3.3 In the areas of training and employment, the Working Group on Youth (2016) and donor 

coordination on education and training (initiated in 2008) are the discussion platforms for 

employment and training issues. The Bank actively participates in these working groups while 

harmonizing its interventions bilaterally with those of partners.  This coordination supplements the 

government’s consultative framework through annual consultation meetings and discussions on sector 

strategies that impact skills development and employment. 

4.4. Linkage with Other Bank Operations  

4.4.1 The Bank’s active portfolio in Morocco comprises 28 ongoing operations for a net 

commitment of UA 1.7 billion. The Bank’s overall portfolio performance remains satisfactory in 

general, with an average total score of 2.7 on 3 in 2017. The portfolio covers seven sectors: energy 

(35.4%), transport (23.5%), water and sanitation (16.7%), social (5.7%), agriculture (3.6%), and multi-

sector (15.1%). 

4.4.2 Promoting inclusive and green growth, and inclusive value chain development is a crucial 

issue of particular interest to the Bank. This programme is linked to the Bank's investment operations 

in Morocco, notably PAPNEEI, which supports the irrigation sector, as well as operations that promote 

renewable energies. The programme also consolidates budget support for reforms aimed at improving the 

business environment, boosting competitiveness (PACEM and PAAIM) and ensuring training-

employment matching (PAAFE). Furthermore, it supplements the two phases of the Green Morocco Plan 

Support Programme (PAPMV-1 & 2). The Bank also backs the establishment of a “Result Delivery Unit” 

within the Office of the Head of Government. Part of this support will be mobilized to monitor the results 

of SNDD implementation (see the measurement framework given as annex). 

Table 2 : Lessons learned from PAPMV-1 & 2 and previous Bank operations in Morocco 
Key lessons learned Measures taken to factor the lessons into the programme 

Adoption of an inter-sector approach to 

programme design that can generate institutional 

value added and rally stakeholders 

An inter-sector approach was adopted to promote additional synergies among 

the various departments and strategies. The programme identified areas of 

convergence and inter-sector interests. 

Importance of a collaborative approach and an 

inter-ministerial steering mechanism  

Programme design was conducted through grassroots consultation (organization 

of consultation workshop with stakeholders during the design phase) and the 

consolidation of the inter-ministerial steering committee was recommended. 

Ownership of measures guarantees 

sustainability 

Consideration was given to ownership of measures and provision made for the 

necessary support items (measurement forms, ownership workshop, 

consultative validation process, etc.).  

Enhance the management of preliminary 

dialogue to reduce the timeframe for adopting 

regulatory and legislative texts pertaining to 

stakeholder ownership 

Consideration was given to dialogue on ownership and measures were balanced, 

thus giving rise to texts containing direct action measures on the effective 

implementation of reforms. 

Need to sustain the PMV and strengthen water 

sector governance and regulation 

Provision was made for measures relating to the Supreme Council for Water and 

Climate (at the central level) and Water Basin Councils (at regional level). 



 

9 
 

4.4.3 Furthermore, the two PMV (PAPMV-I & 2) support phases generated conclusive results 

with highly satisfactory performance. The programme managed to satisfy virtually all the proposed 

measures through its two phases. Of the 56 measures planned under PAPMV-1, 45 were fully executed 

and 11 were partly implemented. At PAPMV-2 completion, a high implementation rate was recorded for 

the various measures (91%, or 30 out of the 33 scheduled measures plus two measures partly completed). 

For some measures, progress has been significant and achievements have exceeded set targets (national 

irrigation map, inter-sector coordination mechanism, institutional reform road map, measures to promote 

local products and organic production, agricultural insurance, support for the agricultural development 

fund, adoption of more than 10 laws, including those relating to aggregation, inter-professional 

associations, the private agricultural advisory services, water law, the law on organic production, the 

framework law on the environment and sustainable development, the law setting up ONCA, approval of 

the National Strategy for Sustainable Development by the Government Council, support for the 

establishment of four agropoles and one zoopole (livestock sub-sectors) development of the national agri-

food strategy and signing of framework programme contracts with inter-professional associations, etc.). 

The main lessons learned from PAPMV I and II were strategic and enhanced the design of PADIDFA 

(see Table 2 and more details in the technical annex). 

4.5. Analytical Work Underpinning the Budget Support 

Programme design was informed by the results of several analytical studies conducted by the Bank, 

the Government and technical and financial partners. The results of the Bank's 2014 growth 

diagnostic remain valid.  They highlight the economic and social role of the agricultural sector (almost 

40% of jobs, 61% of which are held by women). However, the report highlights several sector challenges, 

including: (a) human capital problems especially in rural areas; (b) microeconomic distortions and 

especially access to titled land; (c) lack of coordination among stakeholders, which impedes the promotion 

of value chains; and (d) the disturbing water resources situation. The approach advocated by the 

programme helps the authorities to resolve these challenges. Component I focuses on improving access 

to employment through value chain development (skills improvement, etc.), while Component II focuses 

on sustainable employment. Sector upgrade and stakeholder mobilization are crucial. Stakeholder 

coordination is central to this budget support, either to improve natural resource management (in particular 

water, soil and clean energy) or to structure and develop value chains. 

Table 3: List of AfDB Analytical Work (with partners) 
Studies Contribution to Programme Design 

Growth Diagnostic Identifies the major constraints to more robust and inclusive growth – 

particularly skills and land.  

Study on the development of Agri-food Processing 

Areas (ZTAA) 

Identifies opportunities for promoting various crop sectors and 

agricultural value chains. 

Strengthening agricultural value chains to feed Africa IDEV study recommends an appropriate scope and scale for DCVA 

interventions and profitability for all CV stakeholders.  

Agricultural production, food security and value added 

in North Africa 

Recommends an increase in the share of value added for farmers to 

strengthen food security, reduce poverty and create more jobs.  

Technical assistance on assessing the quality of 

vocational training centres  

Establishment of a reference framework for assessing quality and 

internal output of vocational training (delegated or through 

apprenticeship). 

Feasibility study on a centre of excellence for the 

promotion of entrepreneurship to support employability 

in North Africa 

Recommends the development of entrepreneurship through the 

generation/dissemination of knowledge and networking; support for 

resource mobilization and institutionalization of the platform. 

Technical assistance for development of the model in 

Morocco Attanmia Souk to boost youth and women’s 

entrepreneurship 

Recommends: (i) the improvement of access to funding and technical 

support for entrepreneurs; and (ii) strengthening of the ecosystem and of 

the entrepreneurial culture in Morocco with specific access for the youth 

and women. 

V.  PROPOSED PROGRAMME 

5.1. Programme Goal and Objective 

The programme objective is to help boost agricultural sector competitiveness to ensure inclusive 

and sustainable economic growth through the promotion of value chains, job creation, 

improvement of the business climate and sustainable natural resource management. The programme 

is intended to support the Green Morocco Plan 2008-2020, mainly in terms of the acceleration and 



 

10 
 

sustainability of achievements as well as the strategies of associated sectors (National Sustainable 

Development Strategy, National Water Strategy, Energy Strategy, National Employment Strategy and 

Industrial Acceleration Strategy). Hence, PADIDFA will help to: (i) support the PMV ecosystem and 

amplify its impact; (ii) promote the inclusion of vulnerable stakeholders (especially the youth and 

women); and (iii) build agricultural sector resilience. It is an important institutional lever for creating 

synergies between strategies governing agriculture, the environment, water, energy and employment. 

5.2. Programme Components 

5.2.1 The creation, sustainability and improvement of employment quality in agricultural sub-

sectors are essential to the reduction of multidimensional poverty in rural areas and thus remains 

the focus of national concerns. Based on data from the 2014 population census, the number of people 

living in multidimensional poverty rose from 80% in 2004 to 85.6%. Hence, among the 3.9 million poor 

Moroccans identified through the multidimensional poverty mapping exercise conducted in 2014, over 3 

million live in rural areas. Therefore, the development of agricultural value chains remains a major 

challenge for their socioeconomic integration. PADIDFA supports a series of medium- and short-term 

strategic reforms to improve the quality of life for the people through quality jobs and self-employment 

in rural areas, and the protection of such jobs through sustainable natural resource management.  

Component I: Support to Job Creation through the Development of Agricultural and Agro-Industrial 

Sub-sectors 

5.2.2 This component seeks to lay the institutional and operational foundations for the inclusive 

development of agricultural sub-sectors in Morocco, which create better quality jobs that particularly 

benefit women and the youth in rural areas. Job creation will be enhanced through: (i) skills development; 

(ii) improvement of the business climate and support to agricultural entrepreneurship; (ii) structuring of 

agricultural and agribusiness sub-sectors; and (iv) support for agricultural produce processing. 

Sub-Component I.1: Skills Development to Ensure Access to Employment in the Agricultural and 

Agro-Industrial Value Sub-sectors 

5.2.3 Problems and Constraints. Despite the considerable investments in human resource training 

under the PMV, the skills and qualifications deficit continues to limit access to employment.  This deficit 

also affects the productivity and competitiveness of agricultural enterprises, and reduces the potential of 

agro-industrial exports, de facto affecting job creation. Hence, the problem is twofold.  According to 

businesses, difficulties pertaining to unreliable access to quality raw materials, informal processing in 

production processes, product selection and packaging as well as poor traceability and certification partly 

stem from the lack of technical skills at the grassroots to ensure quality-at-entry, especially for products 

coming from cooperatives and small farmers. This situation further limits access to large markets and the 

creation of supplementary value added. Similarly, the limited access of agri-food VSEs and SMEs to 

business support services and highly-qualified personnel hampers quality improvement and an increase 

in product value added. The insufficient number of trainers, the quality of training programmes and the 

limited involvement of inter-professional associations are major challenges to be met in the medium term. 

5.2.4. Recent Action by the Government. Training and research are major levers of the Green 

Morocco Plan to: (i) support the development of agricultural value chains by providing a skilled workforce 

and anticipating skills needs in the medium term; and (ii) build the capacity of structures responsible for 

the national agricultural training and research system. The government has established an agricultural 

vocational training scheme with 52 schools covering all regions of the Kingdom to satisfy the demand for 

skilled labour in the various sub-sectors, boost their competitiveness and promote the socio-professional 

integration of rural youth. The new and current modes of work-related vocational training and 

apprenticeship partly meet the needs of the production sectors retained under the Green Morocco Plan but 

still fail to achieve the objectives of the Green Morocco Plan quantitatively and qualitatively, and meet 

the emerging rapidly evolving inter-professional needs. 



 

11 
 

5.2.5. Programme Activities and Expected Outcomes. To meet the demand for training skills in the 

medium and long term, the programme will support: (i) the extension of the agricultural apprenticeship 

training mechanism; and (ii) the strengthening of research and development in partnership with 

universities, inter-professional associations and the private sector. In this regard, the following measures 

will be taken: (1) the establishment and operationalization of the Centre for Pedagogical Engineering and 

Training of Trainers; (2) the opening of an additional centre for local agricultural vocational training; (3) 

signature of the amendment to the delegated management agreement on the livestock production zoopole; 

(4) signature of an implementation agreement between the Vocational Training Department and the 

Ministry of Agriculture to increase the number of apprentices in agricultural apprenticeship training 

programmes; (5) launching of a call for projects under the competitive fund to focus research more on the 

needs of inter-professional associations with the greater involvement of universities and the private sector; 

(5) production of JCF and DJT for the agricultural sector; and (6) creation and establishment of vocational 

guidance centres in rural areas. Yearly, these actions will lead to the training and qualification of nearly 

300 trainers and 2,600 young agricultural workers or technicians, and the certification of approximately 

10,000 farmers’ daughters and sons who would receive apprenticeship training. These are work-based 

short-term training courses (10 months) that yield a vocational qualification in about 30 professions 

leading to recruitment in agricultural enterprises or to self-employment (see Annex - Volume 2). 

Sub-component I.2: Improvement of the Investment Climate, Access to Employment and 

Entrepreneurship for Rural Youth and Women 

5.2.6. Problems and Constraints. As indicated in paragraph 3.2.3, the growth assessment shows that 

the frequent absence of land titles in the agricultural sector limits farmer investments and consequently 

agricultural sector transformation. In terms of financing, ignorance of the existing mechanisms and limited 

access to seed loans remain the major challenges for agricultural entrepreneurs. Despite their diversity, 

existing financing instruments are often unknown to rural youth and are intended more for project 

proponents who demonstrate maturity and experience in agricultural value chains and who present robust 

and bankable business plans. This raises the problem of a deficit in entrepreneurial culture and education 

as well as in long-term quality technical support. However, most young people embarking on agricultural 

entrepreneurship do not have the requisite technical skills to ensure the success of their businesses due to 

a lack of training, social capital and an entrepreneurial culture. The establishment of an environment 

conducive to dynamic, integrated and quality support for entrepreneurs as well as market access for young 

farmers remain a priority. 

5.2.7  Recent Measures Adopted by the Government. To overcome the major financing challenge, 

the Moroccan Government has developed a range of tools for start-ups through the establishment of 

competitive funds and guarantee mechanisms for independent entrepreneurs, start-ups and VSEs/SMEs. 

The State also supports several promising incubator/accelerator programmes including Réseau 

Entreprendre Network, Eirene 4 Impact, Espace Bidaya which target innovative start-ups with high 

potential, and Dare INC which supports social enterprises from ideation to growth and international 

markets. However, the pilot nature of these programmes and limited access opportunities for rural youth 

reduce their potential impact on self-employment, owing to the remote location of these youth and 

concentration of the programmes in large urban centres. The State has also undertaken to formulate a legal 

framework that grants access to work and income-generation opportunities to the most isolated rural 

communities.  

5.2.8  Programme Activities and Expected Outcomes. To facilitate investment, the programme will 

help to secure agricultural land mainly through: (1) transmission of the law on the National Agricultural 

Register (RNA) to the SGG; and (2) transmission to the SGG of the four decrees implementing Law No. 

113-13 on the management of pastoral and sylvo-pastoral areas. In particular, the programme supports 

the promotion and active participation of young people and women in the development of agricultural and 

agro-industrial sectors through reforms and affirmative employment initiatives that favour rural women 

and youth, including greater access to active employment programmes. Specifically, the programme will 

support the establishment of an entrepreneurial and employment support ecosystem to inform, guide and 

accompany young people and women wishing to invest in agricultural sub-sectors. It will also support 

businesses in the various sub-sectors in general. This entails: (3) implementing a national plan for the 



 

12 
 

establishment of regional agricultural incubators; (4) drafting and implementing a framework agreement 

with COMADER on agricultural advisory services, training and support for farmers; (5) transforming the 

framework agreement into specific agreements; (6) conducting a gender diagnostic in two vocational 

training establishments; (7) conducting a study on women’s entrepreneurship; and (8) drafting and 

signature of a partnership agreement between DIAEA and ONCA for the development of agricultural 

advisory services in irrigation areas. 

Sub-Component I.3: Support for Structuring of Agricultural Sub-sectors, Processing of 

Agricultural Products, and Development of Agro-Industry and Exports  

5.2.9. Problems and Constraints. The agricultural sector needs to develop its value chains and boost 

its competitiveness, sustainability and productivity to meet national and export needs for products with 

comparative advantages and to generate more jobs. Despite the economic performance of the sector, 

Moroccan agriculture still faces challenges in developing its agricultural products, especially on the 

international scene. Although commendable efforts have concentrated on upstream production 

(modernization and upgrading of facilities, improvement of production and productivity), focus should 

shift to the processing and enhancement of agricultural products (agribusiness, etc.). There is need to 

develop processing and logistics platforms to accommodate agro-industrial processing units. Similarly, 

agro-industry support structures for ensuring compliance with standards, particularly those responsible 

for the promotion of Moroccan agricultural and agri-food exports, such as ONSSA (National Authority 

for the Health Safety of Food Products), still face a legislative deficit in certain areas. Consequently, the 

regulations must be reviewed and/or enhanced to create a conducive framework for the upgrade of 

agricultural products in order to boost their marketing and export value and volume.  

5.2.10. Recent Measures Adopted by the Government. In a bid to consolidate the achievements of 

PMV 2 and promote the inclusive development of agricultural sectors, Morocco has embarked on a 

thorough effort to restructure inter-professional associations covering 21 sub-sectors and ensure the 

formal recognition of 14 inter-professional associations. To accelerate agro-industry development and 

boost exports, Morocco has embarked on the implementation of an Agro-food Sector Development 

Strategy covering promotion, export and distribution on the domestic market. A programme contract for 

the agri-food industry was signed for the period 2017-2021. This contract is intended to increase turnover, 

exports and value added in the sector. It specifically targets the promotion of certain agri-food sectors (the 

CP forecasts an investment volume of MAD 12 billion, including MAD 8 billion to be borne by the private 

sector). Similarly, the 2014-2020 Industrial Acceleration Plan was implemented in the Souss-Massa 

region in January 2018 and 8 agreements were signed on that occasion, thus creating a competitive 

economic hub. The Ministry of Agriculture, Maritime Fisheries, Rural Development, Water and Forestry 

is also planning to set up Agro-Food Innovation Centres (CIAA). Moreover, two of the seven agropoles 

scheduled under the Green Morocco Plan are already operational (Meknes and Berkane). These agropoles 

are expected to be a major lever for the agricultural sector. They seek to enhance the processing and 

marketing of agricultural products by providing a framework for the integration of all the segments of the 

value chain. Finally, ONSSA (National Office for the Health Safety of Food Products) set up in 2010 

under the PMV and under the supervision of the Ministry of Agriculture, is continuing its efforts to 

promote agri-food product exports.  

5.2.11 Programme Activities and Expected Outcomes. This sub-component is intended to develop 

Agro-food Processing Zones (ZTAA) while improving standards to boost exports especially to the rest of 

Africa. There is a dual social inclusion challenge at this level, namely: ensuring the transformation of very 

small agricultural enterprises and increasing the qualitative participation of small farmers in value chains. 

Therefore, the programme will support the development of inclusive mechanisms that ensure the 

participation and equitable remuneration of these vulnerable groups through a unified and more inclusive 

vision of value chains, including increased and improved access to production resources, markets and 

social coverage for agricultural workers. It provides for: (1) support for the creation and revitalization of 

agricultural cooperatives; (2) publication of the decree introducing the new FDA subsidy rates for 

agricultural processing units; (3) revision of legal instruments developing new legislation in the field of 

food safety – ONSSA’s legal arsenal (involvement of various structures in control activities; supervision 

of professionals; pesticides; exports; plant health; fertilizers); (5) drafting and transmission to the SGG of 



 

13 
 

new sanitary instruments governing the export of poultry products and preparation of terms of reference 

(CPS). These measures will support small producers, facilitate the processing of agricultural products and 

accelerate agricultural exports through the improvement of standards. 

Component II: Support Lasting Rural Employment through Sustainable Natural Resource 

Utilisation by the Sector 

5.2.12 This second component targets the long-term protection of jobs created in the agricultural sector 

through promotion of sustainable natural resource management (especially water) by the agricultural 

sector, and encouragement of renewable energy usage in rural areas.  

Sub-component II.1: Strengthen Sustainable Development Governance 

5.2.13 Problems and Constraints. As in other countries in the region, promoting green governance in 

Morocco is now an absolute priority for meeting the challenges posed by climate change in particular. 

Nevertheless, these challenges must be addressed as part of an inter-sector approach that includes the 

agricultural sector. Coordination around these objectives is crucial to the protection of created rural area 

jobs that are threatened by dwindling resource availability. 

5.2.14 Recent Measures Adopted by the Government. Morocco also played a major role on the 

international scene by undertaking to reduce its greenhouse gas emissions under COP 21 and organizing 

COP 22 in 2016, which included water resources on its agenda.  For COP 21, Morocco undertook to 

reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 13% before 2030. This target could be raised to 32% if international 

funds (estimated at USD 45 billion) are mobilized. As regards climate change mitigation, 50% of the 

projects focus on energy. They include: (i) the determination to increase the share of renewable energy in 

the installed electricity capacity from 34% in 2015 to 42% by 2020; and (ii) the improvement of energy 

efficiency. As regards adaptation, the programme includes: (i) the substitution of overexploited 

groundwater with surface water; and (ii) the acceleration of desalination programmes, construction of 

dams and recycling of wastewater by 2030. Water conservation is an essential pillar that can be developed 

through appropriate technologies and improved efficiency in usage. The National Sustainable 

Development Strategy (SNDD) was drawn up and presented to the Government Council on 1 June 2017, 

and adopted by the Council of Ministers of 25 June 2017. It received backing under the second phase of 

the Bank's support to the Green Morocco Plan (2015-2017). This strategy seeks to achieve Morocco's 

vision of a green and inclusive economy by 2030. In total, seven major challenges have been identified 

as pillars and have been broken down into 31 strategic sub-pillars and 137 objectives with precise 

indicators. This makes it a reference and convergence tool for various public policies aimed at ensuring 

Morocco's sustainable development. Thus, the Sector Sustainable Development Action Plans (PADD) 

specifying the contribution of each department to the implementation of this Strategy, as well as the 

Action Plan relating to State exemplariness have been drafted. To achieve these objectives, a governance 

framework is being established that comprises two committees: a Strategic Committee that has a policy 

and guidance role, and a Steering Committee that has an operational role. 

5.2.15 Programme Activities and Expected Outcomes: In a bid to support the operationalization of 

the SNDD, promote green governance and give impetus to a new inter-sector governance drive, the 

programme proposes the following measures: (1) Publication of the decree creating the Sustainable 

Development Strategy Committee in the Official Gazette; (2) Validation of at least four Sustainable 

Development Action Plans (PADD) in 2019; and (3) Design of a monitoring and evaluation system for 

the SNDD in 2019. The expected outcomes from implementing these measures are: (i) the scheduling of 

meetings of the strategic committee; (ii) the drafting and adoption of a ministerial order institutionalizing 

the steering committee mentioned in Article 6 of Decree No. 655 to create the strategic committee for 

implementing the SNDD; (iii) implementation of the PADDs of four sectors validated in 2019; (iv) 

strengthening of the steering and of the monitoring/evaluation strategy as well as improvement of 

decision-making.   



 

14 
 

Sub-Component II.2: Improvement of Water Resource Management to Mitigate the Water Stress 

and Boost Sustainability  

5.2.16 Problems and Constraints. The renewable water resource rate is less than 600 m3/person/year 

(the critical threshold being 1000 m3/person/year). Although drinking water production increased fivefold 

over the past three decades, the 145 dams have a storage capacity that is below the population's annual 

water consumption. Climate trends in the sub-region are disturbing due to declining rainfall estimated at 

30% by 2050. This pressure on water resources is compounded by the development of irrigation (1.5 

million hectares), although efforts are underway to convert large-scale conventional irrigation systems to 

drip irrigation.  In response, Morocco has initiated the development of non-conventional resources such 

as seawater or wastewater. The adoption of an integrated approach to ensure water resource sustainability 

is crucial to the development of sustainable and job-creating agriculture. 

5.2.17  Recent Measures Adopted by the Government. The National Water Sector Strategy 

formulated in 2009 is the strategic framework followed by: (i) the National Water Plan - PNE (focusing 

on demand management, especially demand for irrigation and water development); (ii) supply 

management and development (including non-conventional resources); and (iii) water resource 

conservation and adaptation to climate change. With the Bank's support, under PAPMV-2, the 

Government adopted a new Water Law in 2015 (Law No. 36-15), which introduced innovations in water 

planning, water governance and adaptation to climate change. 

5.2.18  Programme Activities and Expected Outcomes: The proposed measures are essentially aimed 

at implementing the new Water Law through promulgation of its main implementing instruments. These 

measures are: (1) transmission to the SGG of the decree governing the Supreme Council for Water 

Resources and Climate; (2) as regards water resource planning: transmission to the SGG of implementing 

decrees relating to: (i) planning documents (National Water Plan, Integrated Water Resource Management 

Master Plan, Local Water Management Plans); (ii) the water basin boards (including the publication of 

the decree governing water basin agencies in the Official Gazette) and (iii) Presentation of the PNE to the 

Interministerial Water Commission; (3) as regards the water information system: preparation of the decree 

relating to the Water Information System, preparation of the reference frameworks for agricultural water 

needs per region for rational use of irrigation water. To improve adaptation to climate change, regional 

vulnerability indices and Regional Climate Change Adaptation Plans for three pilot regions should be 

developed.  These actions will strengthen the legal framework for planning and governance for the 

concerted, territorialized and sustainable use of water resources. These actions will also help to build 

stakeholder resilience to climate change. 

Sub-component II.3: Support for Energy Transition in the Agricultural Sector 

5.2.19 Problems and Constraints. Faced with the challenges of climate change and the energy bill, a 

drive is already underway to use renewable energies, especially solar pumps, in agriculture. However, 

this drive remains essentially limited to large farmers. Small farmers are still difficult to reach, mainly 

because funding problems force them to rely on butane gas, which is still subsidized. Butane gas is 

frequently used to pump irrigation water and its consumption has even attained alarming proportions for 

some crops, thus putting pressure on the compensation fund (for 2017, a structural increase in butane gas 

compensation was noted, with a total subsidization cost of over MAD 9.9 billion in 2017 compared to 

MAD 6.7 billion in 2016). In the agri-food industry, additional efforts are also needed to reduce the energy 

bill of agri-food companies. Hence, public authorities should support increased energy development for 

agricultural holdings and agro-industrial units.  Furthermore, the development of agro-industry and 

irrigation systems generates a certain amount of waste (plastics, agricultural product processing by-

products, etc.) that is beginning to increase in volume and needs to be treated and recycled to avoid 

environmental pollution and contribute to job creation. 

5.2.20 Recent Measures Adopted by the Government. Morocco has a clear desire to optimize its 

economy through the adoption of energy efficiency in several sectors (with agriculture included among 

the five priority sectors). This drive is essentially based on the National Energy Efficiency Strategy for 

2030, which seeks to achieve a renewable energy share of 52% instead of 34% in 2015. This strategy 

provides for the adoption of a programme contract between the State, the Moroccan Energy Efficiency 



 

15 
 

Agency (AMEE) and priority sectors (industry, construction, agriculture, transport and public 

electrification). Crédit Agricole du Maroc (CAM) introduced a special financial product (called 

“EcoTaqa”) to finance initiatives that promote renewable energy. Through its Nationally Determined 

Contribution (NDC), Morocco has undertaken to cut its greenhouse gas emissions by 42% of projected 

emissions by 2030. The use of solar energy in the agricultural sector is a highly publicized strategy (solar 

pumping is part of the energy efficiency programme contract). In this regard and in partnership with 

GEF/UNDP, AMEE has launched the “Development of photovoltaic pumping systems for irrigation” 

project, which is part of implementation of Morocco’s commitments to develop renewable energy and 

combat climate change. For the climate change adaptation component, Morocco has adopted a National 

Climate Change Adaptation Plan and drawn up a green sectors promotion plan under the law on waste 

management (adopted in 2006).  

5.2.21 Programme Activities and Expected Outcomes. The programme provides for the following 

measures: (i) Presentation of the Energy Efficiency Strategy to the Government Council (by 2030); (ii) 

conduct of the strategic study and provision of mechanisms to support the promotion of solar pumping; 

and (iii) preparation of a skills directory for energy auditors to support the energy optimization for farms 

and agro-industrial units. These measures will promote renewable energy and energy efficiency, and 

facilitate butane substitution in the agricultural sector. 

5.3. Policy Dialogue 

The Government is moving towards the PMV acceleration phase by 2020 following the mid-term 

evaluation of the Plan. The major themes to be addressed in the policy dialogue during the programme 

implementation period are: (i) inter-sector coordination; (ii) sustainable natural resource management 

(reforms related to agricultural water use, agricultural land tenure, renewable energy support, energy 

efficiency and agricultural institutions); (iii) capacity-building (agricultural register, monitoring system, 

private agricultural advisory services, empowerment of inter-professional associations, competitive 

agricultural research mechanisms); (iv) development of green sectors and of the circular economy; and 

(v) the promotion of agro-industry and value chains. Furthermore, policy dialogue will be conducted in 

coordination with development partners, through the existing PMV thematic support group and under the 

G20 Compact with Africa programme.  

5.4. Loan Conditions  

Preliminary Measures - Triggers: Dialogue with the Government led to the identification of relevant 
measures that can support the programme and which the Government has undertaken to implement. These 

preliminary measures were selected based on their maturity status, relevance and significance. They are 

summed up in the table below: 

Table 4: Preliminary measures - Triggers 

Component Preliminary measures  

Measure 1 Publication in the OG of the Decree setting up the Sustainable Development Strategy Committee  

Evidence: Copy of decree published in the OG 

Measure 2 Draft decree on the composition and operation of the Higher Council for Water Resources and Climate 

Evidence: Copy of the letter of transmission to the SGG 

Measure 3 Start of construction work on a local agricultural vocational training centre 

Evidence: Copy of the service order launching the works 

5.5. Good Practice Principles for the Application of Conditionality  

The five good practice principles for the application of conditionality were factored into the 

programme design in accordance with the Bank's policy governing programme-based support 

operations (PBO), namely: (i) strengthening of national ownership by emphasizing on dialogue with the 

Government throughout the design and implementation of the Bank’s CSP 2017-2021 for Morocco in 

general, and the budget support programme in particular, due to the fact that PADIDFA was designed 

with the active collaboration of the authorities: (ii) the existence of a coordination drive initiated between 

TFPs; (iii) alignment of the Bank's support procedures on national priorities, including the priorities of 

the PMV acceleration phase 2017-2020 and the strategies of associated sectors; (iv) the targeting and 



 

16 
 

streamlining of disbursement measures and conditions resulting from the matrix developed in close 

coordination and cooperation with Moroccan authorities; and (v) alignment of Bank support with the 

country’s budget cycle, especially for FY 2018 and 2019 and the 2018 Budget Act. 

5.6. Financing Needs and Mechanisms  

5.6.1 The 2018 Budget Act provided for a budget of MAD 276.1 billion compared to MAD 285.6 

billion in 2017. This decrease stems from the reduction in operating expenses pursuant to the restrictive 

policy adopted by the Kingdom since 2012. Capital expenditure increased slightly by MAD 2.4 billion. 

According to the Budget Act, the overall financing requirement for 2018 is estimated at MAD 33.3 

billion or approximately EUR 3 billion. Nearly 57% of these needs will be covered by domestic loans 

and 43% by external loans, representing EUR 1.3 billion. The increased recourse to domestic borrowing 

is consistent with the Kingdom's prudent debt management policy. This debt allocation enables Morocco 

to hedge against exogenous shocks, especially against exchange rate risks. PADIDFA will be 
implemented in two tranches of EUR 100 million. In 2018 and 2019, the Bank's budget support will 

cover 3.4% of total budget financing needs (4.5% of the external financing need in 2018). AfDB financing 

will cover 3% of the current account financing requirement in 2018, helping to stabilize external debt by 

preserving foreign exchange reserves.  

Table 5: Projected Financing Needs and Sources in MAD/USD Million (Source: LOF 2018; IMF 2017) 

 

Items  

2018 

(MAD 

million) 

2018  

(EUR 

million) 

2019 

(MAD 

million) 

2019  

(EUR 

million) 

A Total revenue and grants  236 800 20 899 241 282 21 295 

  Including: non-tax revenue (excluding budget support) 22 000 1 942 14 700 1 297 

B Total expenditure and net loans  276 100 24 368 278 802 24 606 

  Including: public debt interest payments 27 100 2 392 29 036 2 563 

C including investment expenditure (*) 60 300 5 322 63 623 5 615 

D Special account 6 000 530 5 000 441 

E Net financing requirement (commitment basis) (A-B+D) -33 300 -2 939 -32 520 -2 870 

F Gross external funding 25 000 2 206 10 000 883 

M Including external AfDB funding 8 100 715 8227 726 

F Amortization 16 900 1 492 1 773 156 

I Net external financing (E-F) 1 133 100 1 133 100 

J Net domestic financing 16 400 1 447 30 747 2 714 

K Residual financing gap (E+I+J) 0 0 0 0 

VI. PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION 

6.1. Programme Beneficiaries  

PADIDFA will benefit the Moroccan population in general, and the youth and women in the rural areas 

in particular. It will specifically benefit: (i) local councils; (ii) inter-professional associations and 

professional organizations; (iii) agricultural VSMEs and organizations (crop sectors, waste management, 

etc.); (iii) the private sector (training, research, private agricultural councils, etc.); (iv) project proponents 

and young agricultural and rural entrepreneurs due to improvement of the business environment; and (v) 

women's associations and rural women (access to value chains, land tenure security, local services, etc.).  

6.2. Impact on the Environment and Climate Change  

6.2.1 Environmental Impact. The programme concerns the implementation of sector reforms and 

will not have any direct or indirect negative impact on the natural environment. Consequently, in 

accordance with Bank guidelines, it is classified in environmental and social category 3. It will enhance 

environmental protection through: (i) improvement of the environmental and social performance of 



 

17 
 

agricultural activities through the development and popularization of tools; (ii) promotion of resilient and 

sustainable agriculture through operationalization of the National Sustainable Development Strategy 

(2015-2030), particularly in the agricultural sector; and (iii) rational management and protection of water 

resources. 

6.2.2 Climate Change. The programme will have a positive impact by promoting the establishment 

of a legal, institutional and organizational framework that facilitates the development of climate change 

mitigation and adaptation measures. Accordingly, it will significantly contribute to the reduction of GHG 

emissions resulting from irrigation activities by replacing diesel and/or gas-powered pumps with solar 

pumps. It will also enable Morocco to play its role under the Paris Agreement and the Nagoya Protocol. 

6.2.3 Social and Gender Impact. Given the social objectives of the programme, social risks are 

virtually non-existent since the programme will ensure the social protection of rural communities and the 

promotion of Moroccan youth and women. In particular, it will focus on: (i) youth and women’s 

integration through the creation, preservation and quality improvement of employment in agricultural 

value chains; (ii) the definition of a framework for protecting and developing agricultural value chains; 

(iii) the inclusion and strengthening of the resilience of women small-scale farmers under the general 

drive to boost the productivity and competitiveness of agricultural businesses. In addition to the 21 inter-

professional associations identified, the programme will benefit young people, particularly women under 

35 who are likely to be absorbed into agricultural value chains as self-employed entrepreneurs, farm 

employees, members of cooperatives or farmer's daughters/sons wishing to perpetuate their family 

farming business. The programme targets 20,000 young people who will benefit from agricultural training 

or support services in rural entrepreneurship.  Besides, the economic empowerment activities of the inter-

professional associations and the signing of delegated training management agreements will improve the 

productivity of their members and develop their marketing and market integration skills at the national 

and international level. The programme will also facilitate the integration of out-of-school youth into rural 

family homes and agricultural apprenticeship training centres where they will be trained in various trades, 

including agricultural production, processing and marketing techniques.  Finally, the programme will 

support the development and implementation of an action plan for women's entrepreneurship that will 

help, in the medium term, to eliminate the major constraints that still hinder the full commitment and 

economic empowerment of women in promising agricultural sectors. 

6.3. Impact in Other Areas  

6.3.1 Apart from the major impacts cited, the programme will support South-South cooperation 

with other African countries. Strategic value chains are likely to initiate and consolidate this cooperation 

(e.g. poultry, olive, red meat, milk, etc.) as well as capacity-building activities on training by inter-

professional structures (e.g. the Casablanca zoopole which is a PPP success story).  

6.3.2 The programme can also generate an impact in other areas, such as regional integration 

(development of regional agricultural trade and exports), food security (increase in agricultural production 

and product development), skills development in the various value chains, agricultural entrepreneurship 

(PMV stakeholders) and the development of private initiatives (resulting from the initiatives of inter-

professional associations, promotion of the circular economy and waste management, etc.). It also targets 

synergy between PAIIM (general budget support) and PADIDFA (sector budget support). 

6.4. Implementation, Monitoring and Evaluation  

6.4.1. As was the case for PAPMV-I & II, the programme executing agency will be the 

Directorate for Strategy and Statistics (DSS) in the Ministry of Agriculture. As far as inter-sector 

measures are concerned, the Budget Directorate will be charged with the strategic coordination of the 

programme.  Based on the results recorded, these directorates are qualified and have the required skills. 

The programme provides for the establishment of technical coordination within the Ministry of 

Agriculture and a strategic committee within MEF. The Bank adopts an approach that stimulates synergies 

between the various sector strategies, ensures stakeholder involvement and strengthens the 

complementarity of donor interventions. Special attention will be given to results-based management. 

This operation is of particular interest to seven ministries, namely: (i) MEF (DB); (ii) MA (DSS, DIAEA, 



 

18 
 

DF, DDFP, DEFR, ORMVA); (iii) the sector ministries in charge of water resources, the environment, 

energy and employment and vocational training; and (iv) the inter-professional associations concerned. 

Local involvement is reflected through local structures such as ORMVA, the WBAs and ONCA’s and 

DEFR’s decentralized agencies, etc. 

6.4.2. The matrix of measures agreed upon with the Government and the Performance Measurement 

Framework will serve as PADIDFA’s monitoring/evaluation tools (Annex 2). The MA will collect data, 

coordinate monitoring/evaluation and provide information to the Bank through MEF. In this regard, it 

will produce half-yearly reports providing necessary information on programme’s progress. Supervision 

missions are planned during the implementation phase to assess progress. The Bank's country office will 

continuously monitor the implementation of programme reforms. At programme completion, the 

Government will prepare and submit a completion report to the Bank. That report will serve as the basis 

for organizing the programme completion mission. 

6.5. Financial Management, Disbursements and Procurement 

6.5.1. The ERFP or CFRA was conducted by the Bank in September 2016 through a review of 
Morocco's public finance management. It concluded that the overall fiduciary country risk is moderate, 

thanks to the generally satisfactory public finance management processes. The September 2016 PEFA 

report confirms this finding because Morocco obtained the following 30 ratings out of 31 public finance 

management performance indicators: 5 As, 14 Bs and B+, 5 Cs, 6 Ds and D+.  

6.5.2  The outcomes of these assessments confirmed Morocco's implementation and execution of the 

reforms set out in LOLF No. 130-13 of 2 June 2015. These include strengthening public management 

performance through a programme budget; establishing principles and rules on the financial balance of 

the Budget Act; ensuring public finance transparency; and increasing the role of Parliament in budget 

discussions and public finance control. On this subject, Morocco has initiated a major reform 

implementation drive through a progressive and evolutionary approach. Some reforms have been 

implemented and others are underway. However, the challenge remains optimizing the functional 

organization of MEF to improve reform implementation, which has generated an ongoing study. Fiduciary 

risks relating to the management of programme fund flows are low at Bank-Al-Maghrib, which holds the 

Single Treasury Account.  Budget appropriations management mechanisms are in place in the sector 

ministries involved in the programme and remain under the supervision of the internal and external State 

control bodies. Although these ministries have sector strategies, the strategies are sometimes not fed with 

sufficient data. Due to the weaknesses noted, an LOF training plan is organized for the sectors by the 

Budget Sub-Directorate.  

6.5.3 Considering Morocco’s fiduciary country risk level, the vast public finance management 

reform drive and the fiduciary assessment of the sectors concerned, the programme’s overall fiduciary 

risk is also moderate.  Capacity-building needs were expressed in the areas of triennial budgetary 

programming, programme evaluation, performance measurement, risk mapping package, procedures 

manual and control system, etc.  

6.5.4. Financial Management and Disbursement Mechanisms. MEF will manage the fiduciary 

aspects of the operation.  By its very nature, the operation will help to cover the 2018 and 2019 budget 

deficits, subject to the Borrower meeting its general and specific conditions. Programme funds will be 

tracked through the budget revenue circuit on external funding and in accordance with national regulations 

governing public finance management. The accounting regarding the funds will be based on the budget 

revenue nomenclature. At the Borrower's request, the Bank will make disbursements in two tranches in 

accordance with principles of fungibility (single till) and the single treasury account. Each year, the 

Moroccan Government tables the Audited Budget (“Loi de Règlement”) (BRL) on the execution of the 

Budget Act (FL) before Parliament in the first quarter of year n+2. This BRL is accompanied by the report 

of the Court of Auditors on the implementation of the FL and the general statement of conformity. The 

IGF will carry out the specific audit of programme fund flows and performance audit because of its 

proven experience in auditing the Moroccan PBOs financed by the Bank. The ToRs for the specific audit 

of fund flows were be drawn up by the IGF and discussed with the Bank. The time limit for submission 

of the audit report to the Bank will be six months from closure of the programme. The programme could 

be subject to fiduciary supervision.  



 

19 
 

6.5.5 Public Procurement Trends and Reforms. The national public procurement system made 

remarkable progress with the installation in January 2018 of members of the National Public Procurement 

Commission (CNCP), which is responsible for investigating complaints from competitors concerning 

public procurement and issuing legal opinions on disputes between public procurement holders and the 

Administration concerning the application of the regulations governing public procurement. In a bid to 

further improve public procurement transparency, the following key actions will be implemented by the 

National Public Procurement Commission (CNCP): (i) creation and commencement of trials for the 

effective operationalization of the CNCP website; (ii) preparation of the Ethics Charter, the internal rules 

of the Commission (including for ad hoc experts), the procedures manual per mission (processing of 

complaints, request and analysis of opinions, standing committees); and (iii) preparation of the strategy 

document on a rolling three-year programme. With regard to reforms, the decree creating the CNCP will 

be reviewed with a view to including the essential function of data-collection and production of statistics, 

among others.  

6.5.6  Sector Context of Public Procurement. Sector analysis highlights the following findings:  (i) 

Social sector: the procurement timeframe (from publication of the bid invitation to contract signature) is 

three months on average; the definition of needs (to prepare a CPS for the construction of a building for 

example) can take up to one year.   The Ministry reported limited productivity among the staff who need 

training in public procurement. (ii) Agricultural sector: in the Ministry of Agriculture, the definition of 

needs takes three to six months. The General Inspectorate of Agriculture carries out audit missions for all 

eligible contracts in accordance with the public procurement decree. However, the summaries of the 

control and audit reports are not published in accordance with Article 165 of the said Decree.  (iii) 

Environment sector: on average, the Ministry of Environment launches a maximum of 15 bid invitations 

for rehabilitation of landfills and two to three for delegated management (design, construction, operation). 

The ministry has introduced terms of reference with ecological specifications (air, biogas) in compliance 

with environmental regulations.  (iv) Water sector: minor weaknesses were noted in the management of 

public contracts, for instance the accumulation of incompatible tasks at the internal control level (e.g. 

needs determination and participation in the bid opening).  

6.5.7  Procurement of goods and services. Being a multisector budget support operation (agriculture, 

water, environment, social), the resources provided by the Bank will be fungible with those of the 

Treasury and used for the country's current needs and procurements, in accordance with the national 

procurement system whose regulatory framework is governed by Decree No. 2-12-349 of 20 March 2013. 

The Bank conducted the latest review of this system in November 2017 through a country procurement 

system assessment using the OECD/MAPS methodology (BPAR), and concluded that the risk level was 

moderate. An assessment of procurement practices in the sectors concerned reveals that no significant 

procurement element would justify the application of a fiduciary risk assessment in identified sectors that 

is different from the situation at the national level. Consequently, usage of the national procurement 

system will guarantee the efficient use of resources to be allocated under this operation, thanks to 

acceptable procurement procedures and an effective and reassuring control mechanism. However, the 

assessment mission identified measures to enhance the transparency of the national procurement system 

and improve the effectiveness of control and audit mechanisms in the agricultural and water sectors (see 

Technical Annex, Volume 2, procurements). To reinforce these improvements in public procurement, the 

government is undertakes to: 

 Publish the opinions issued by the CNCP on its website. This site, currently being finalised, will 
be operational by 31 December 2018 at the latest; 

 Ensure latest 30/06/2018, the effective application of Article 165 of the Public Procurement 
Decree through publication by the Ministry of Agriculture and Maritime Fishing (MAPM) of the 

summaries of all control and audit reports for contracts exceeding MAD 5 million (OC) or for 

negotiated contracts exceeding MAD 1 million DH produced as of 31/12/2017 in the public 

procurement portal. In this regard, the General Inspectorate of the Ministry of Agriculture shall 

submit the verification report to the Bank latest 30 June 2018; 

 Ensure latest 30/06/2018, the effective application of Article 165 of the Public Procurement 
Decree through publication by the Ministry of Water Resources of the summaries of all control 



 

20 
 

and audit reports for contracts exceeding MAD 5 million (OC) or for negotiated contracts 

exceeding MAD 1 million DH produced as of 31/12/2017 in the public procurement portal. In this 

regard, the General Inspectorate of the Water Resources Secretariat shall submit the audit report 

to the Bank latest 30 June 2018. 

 

VII. LEGAL DOCUMENTATION AND AUTHORITY 

7.1. Legal Documentation  

7.1.1 The legal document to be used under this programme is the Loan Agreement. The parties 

to this Agreement are the African Development Bank and the Government of the Kingdom of 

Morocco. The Loan Agreement shall become effective subject to fulfilment of the conditions provided 

for in Section 12.01 of the General Conditions for Loan Agreements. 

7.2. Conditions Associated with the Bank’s Intervention  

7.2.1. Conditions precedent to presentation of the programme to the Board. Through dialogue 
with the Government, it was agreed that the Government will implement certain preliminary measures 

before the programme is presented to the Bank's Board of Directors. These conditions are outlined in 

Table 5 on preliminary conditions. 

7.2.2. Disbursement in two tranches. Disbursement of the loan shall be subject to fulfilment of the 
following preliminary conditions:  

First tranche (EUR 100 million in 2018): Provide the Bank with proof of: (i) the opening of a Treasury 

Account in Bank-al-Maghrib acceptable to the Bank and intended to receive loan resources; (ii) the 

establishment of an inter-sector coordination mechanism, including the creation of: (a) a Programme 

technical coordination team in the Ministry of Agriculture; and (b) a strategic coordination committee of 

the programme in the Ministry of Economy and Finance; (iii) signature of a framework agreement with 

COMADER on agricultural advisory services, training and support for farmers; and (iv) an Order defining 

additional and special measures to combat the Newcastle disease and avian influenza with a view to 

promoting poultry exports. 

Second tranche (EUR 100 million in 2019): Provide the Bank with proof of :(i) transmission of the bill 

on the National Agricultural Register (RNA) to the SGG; (ii) signature of a partnership agreement 

between the ONCA and DIAEA for the development of agricultural advisory services in irrigation areas; 

(iii) transmission of the draft law on fertilizers, their adjuvants and crop supports to the SGG; and (iv) 

proof of validation of four (4) Sustainable Development Action Plans (PADD).  

7.3. Compliance with Bank Group Policies  

PADIDFA complies with Bank Group policies and guidelines on programme-based support. It helps to 

create an environment conducive to the achievement of the High 5s and the operational priorities of the 

Bank’s Ten-Year Strategy 2013-2022 and the Country Strategy Paper 2017-2021 for Morocco. No 

exemption from Bank guidelines is requested under this operation. 

VIII. RISK MANAGEMENT 

8.1  Major risks could arise from external shocks caused by unfavourable international 

economic conditions and hydrocarbon price trends. These could be compounded by severe vagaries 

of the weather and extreme phenomena as well as weak inter-sector coordination capacity. With regard 

to components, the risks stem from the overexploitation of natural resources, the marginalization of 

certain groups of stakeholders, divergent interests of stakeholders, the limited capacity of users and 

stakeholders in the cooperative sector, and sociocultural resistance on gender issues.  



 

21 
 

8.2. Mitigating the anticipated risks depends on government's ability to rollover certain 

measures (especially insurance to mitigate climate risk); set up integrated flood forecast and warning 

systems (flood event management); and draft water shortage management plans (drought management). 

These plans should contain measures established in advance in accordance with the degree of scarcity and 

that include all user sectors for proactive water scarcity management. It would also require the 

strengthening of inter-sector coordination through high-level support from the country's 

authorities. At component level, provision is made for consultation committees (working groups) to 

facilitate the search for solutions, particularly on key issues (water, environment, energy and social), as 

well as institutional and legal measures to protect all stakeholders. Each reform is also accompanied by 

awareness-raising and communication actions, particularly on gender and youth issues. Follow-up 

workshops will be organized with the support of the Bank's Office (COMA) to strengthen inter-sector 

coordination. 

IX. RECOMMENDATION 

It is recommended that the Board of Directors approve an African Development Bank loan, not exceeding 

EUR 200 million, for the Kingdom of Morocco to fund the Inclusive and Sustainable Development 

Support Programme for Agricultural Sectors in accordance with the conditions set out in this report. 

 





The PPP irrigation programme concerns the following: 

 New hydro-agricultural development projects: extension of irrigation in 
Gharb (30 000 ha), development of new irrigated areas downstream of 
the Adossa dam (5 442 ha) and the Saiss plain (30 000 ha), located 
downstream of the Mdez Dam ,and extension of irrigation in the Dakhla 
irrigated area using desalinated water (5 000 ha); 

 Irrigation safeguard projects in areas with high agricultural production 
potential: the seawater desalination-based irrigation project in the 
Shtouka area in Souss-Massa (15 000 ha) and the Azemmour-Bir Jdid 
coastal area irrigation project (3 200 ha). 

5. Enhancement of agricultural production 

> Promotion of agricultural exports 

Enhancing agricultural and food exports has always been one of the fundamental 
objectives of Morocco's agricultural policy. The Green Morocco Plan attaches special 
importance to the development and diversification of agricultural exports. It plans to triple 
the export volumes for citrus fruit and vegetables and fruit by pursuing efforts to promote 
exports to new destinations and also to traditional markets such as the European Union. 

Also, in order to help strengthen the competitiveness of the agricultural sector and ensure 
its integration into the European market, financial and technical support was provided by 
the European counterpart under the advanced status arrangement. The support targets 
the modernization of the agricultural sector as a whole and provides for assistance in the 
process for aligning the Moroccan normative framework with the European normative 
framework on sanitary and phytosanitary matters, which would ultimately allow the 
elimination of non-tariff barriers limiting access to Moroccan products. 

Moreover, to enhance and promote production quality, Morocco and the European Union 
concluded, in accordance with the terms of the Agricultural Agreement, an agreement 
on the reciprocal protection of geographical indications (GIs) for agricultural products, 
including fisheries products. This GI protection agreement was initialled by both parties 
in January 2015 in Berlin. 

> Development of local products 
The Department of Agriculture designed a comprehensive strategy for increasing 
existing supply of local products and established a legal framework encouraging farmers 
to promote and market their produce.  

It thus triggered a momentum that motivated the collective upgrading of small-scale 
farming, particularly in mountain and oases areas, where agriculture is characterized by 
remarkable specificities and the products have specific qualities, often bearing witness 
to the time-honoured traditions and secular know-how of the local people.  

Thus, the implementation of Law No. 25-06 on the distinctive marks of origin and quality 
(SDOQ) for foodstuffs and agricultural and fisheries products created the necessary legal 
framework for the recognition and protection of products with a specific quality linked to 
the country. 

The Moroccan system of labelling, implemented since the entry into force of Law 25-06 
in 2009 and up to the end of 2017, has led to the recognition of 53 distinctive marks of 
origin and quality (SDOQ), including 43 marks for Protected Geographical Indication 
(PGI), 5 for Protected Designation of Origin (PDO) and 5 Agricultural Labels. 

> Agropoles for enhancing the value of agricultural products 

As part of the implementation of the Green Morocco Plan, the Department of Agriculture 



 

VIII 
 

established 7 agropoles at Meknès, Berkane, Tadla, Souss, Haouz, Gharb and Loukkos 
to enhance the value of agricultural products through agro-industry. 

Furthermore, in a bid to build the capacity of stakeholders and support the efforts of 
professionals to improve the productivity of competitive and high-potential sub-sectors 
and enhance the value of each region’s agricultural products, the Department of 
Agriculture set up in each Agropole a Food Qualipole comprising 3 groups of specific 
operational laboratories (ONSSA, INRA and EACCE) and common spaces (reception 
centre, conference centre, accommodation area and restaurant). 

III. PRESENTATION OF THE WATER SECTOR 

The water sector in Morocco has been of special interest to public authorities and a 
central concern of the economic policies because of its crucial role in ensuring the 
country's water security and supporting its development, especially in the area of 
irrigated agriculture. 

In this context, Morocco has for long been engaged in a dynamic policy to build major 
hydraulic infrastructure, in an effort to improve access to drinking water, meet the needs 
of industries and tourism, and develop large scale. irrigation. 

Indeed, Morocco has managed to build an efficient water management model specific to 
the country and cited as an example internationally. 

This undeniable success was based on: 

• The water resource control and mobilization policy involving  the construction of 
large reservoir dams (major hydraulic infrastructure comprising 140 major dams 
with a total capacity of nearly 17.6 billion m3), water transfer structures and several 
wells drilled for groundwater; 

• The development of technical skills and applied scientific research; 

• The launch of a long-term planning policy in  the early 1980s that allows decision-
makers to anticipate water scarcity by giving public authorities long-term visibility 
(20 to 30 years); and 

• Lastly, major advances in the regulatory and institutional spheres, such as Law No. 
10-95, which consolidated the integrated, participatory and decentralized 
management of water resources by establishing watershed agencies and 
introducing financial mechanisms for the protection and preservation of water 
resources. 

As part of the modernization of the arsenal of legal provisions on the water sector, the 
Government revised Law No.10-95 on water in order to have a comprehensive, clear, 
precise and applicable legal and institutional framework. Indeed, the new Law No. 36-15 
on water, published in August 2016, strengthened the achievements of the Law No.10-95 
and incorporated new aspects, including: 

• Consolidation and strengthening of management and decentralized, integrated and 
participatory planning of water resources; 

• Strengthening of consultation and coordination bodies and agencies by setting up 
the Basin Council, which is a regional forum for discussion of water management 
issues; 

• Establishment of legal bases for the diversification of supply through the use of 
unconventional water resources; 

• Strengthening of the institutional framework and mechanisms for the protection and 
preservation of water resources through participatory management contracts; and 

• .Integration of the management of extreme events related to climate change. 

Moreover, in order to consolidate the above-mentioned achievements and meet water-
related challenges, the Government drafted the National Water Plan (PNE), which is an 
extension of the guidelines of the National Water Strategy presented to His Majesty on 14 



 

IX 
 

April 2009 in Fez. 

The main principles considered in the development of the PNE action plans focus on: 

 Integrated and concerted management of water demand and water resources; 

 Strengthening of the country's water security and adaption to climate change; 

 Solidarity in its various dimensions; 

  Promotion of good governance in the water sector and the search for efficiency in 
the activities of stakeholders, the search for convergence and the alignment of 
sector programmes; and 

 Search for mechanisms and means of financing the water sector combining public 
subsidies and the direct recovery of costs through water rates. 

The PNE is based on three pillars, namely: 

•  Management of water demand and water valuation; 

•  Supply development; and 

•  Preservation of water resources, the natural environment and adaptation to climate 
change. 

Currently, and in accordance with of the new Law No. 36-15 on water, the National Water 
Plan (PNE) and the Water Resources Integrated Development Master Plans (PDAIRE) are 
being updated to cover the period up to 2050, taking into account impacts of climate 
change. 

IV. PRESENTATION OF THE NATIONAL ENERGY EFFICIENCY STRATEGY 

The 2030 National Energy Efficiency Strategy, which is part of His Majesty King 
Mohammed VI's far-sighted vision for energy transition and the reinforcement of 
renewable energies, aims to achieve a target of 52% of renewable energies in 
Morocco's energy mix. 

This strategy will be translated into a programme contract between the State and 
the Moroccan Energy Efficiency Agency (AMEE). It includes several measures 
planned for the period 2018-2021, affecting the most energy-intensive sectors, 
notably the Transport sector, the leading energy consumer sector with a 
consumption  rate of 38%, followed by the construction sector with 33%, and 
industry with a final energy consumption share of 21%. The agricultural sector 
and public lighting, with an energy consumption rate of 8%, are also targeted.  

Today, the energy bill remains high, given the Kingdom's energy dependence on 
outside sources. This bill is amounts to approximately DH 52.5 billion annually, 
of which 93.3%  is for imported energy, whereas Morocco has an institutional, 
legal and organizational environment that could enable it to guarantee the 
sustainability of this service and ro diversify its sources of energy. 

When this strategy was presented to the Government Council, the latter decided 
to further review the measures and commitments of the ministerial departments 
concerned by the strategy and to verify the indicators in an effort to enable 
collective participation and mobilization of the sectors concerned, and indicated 
that the National Energy Efficiency Strategy would be adopted by a Council of 
Ministers. 

V. AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK SUPPORT FOR THE GREEN MOROCCO PLAN 

The Moroccan Government uses the agricultural strategy of its Green Morocco 
Plan to capitalize on its experience and wishes to deepen its cooperation with 
the African Development Bank through a multi-sectoral support programme for 
the inclusive and sustainable development of agricultural sub-sectors, covering 
the following components: 

• Support for job creation through the development of agricultural and agro-industrial 
sectors, 

• Support for the sustainability of rural employment through the sustainable use of 



 

X 
 

natural resources by the agricultural sector. 

 

VI. MODALITIES FOR THE MONITORING AND IMPLEMENTATION OF THE 
PROGRAMME 

Based on the first two experiments with the Support Programme of the African 
Development Bank for the Green Morocco Plan, an institutional framework will be 
formalized, focusing on the technical responsibility of the relevant ministries and on 
the overall coordination of the Budget Directorate of the Ministry of Economy and 
Finance.  

  

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 