










































 
AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK GROUP 

 

 
 
 

MAURITANIA 
 
 

AGRICULTURAL TRANSFORMATION SUPPORT PROJECT  
(PATAM) 

 
 

 
 

APPRAISAL REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Project Information Sheet 
Client Information 
BORROWER:   Islamic Republic of Mauritania  

(Ministry of Economy and Finance - MEF) 
 
EXECUTING AGENCY: Ministry of Rural Development - MRD  
 
Financing Plan 

Source Amount  Instrument 
ADF  UA 7.00 million. Loan 
NTF UA 6.00 million. Loan 
Mauritanian government UA 1.67 million. Treasury/Own resources 

TOTAL COST UA 14.67 million.  

 
Key AfDB Financial Information  
 

Item ADF loan NTF loan 
Loan currency Unit of Account (UA) Unit of Account (UA) 
Interest Type 1% NA 
Base rate NA NA 
Service commission 0.75% per year of the disbursed loan 

amount not reimbursed 
0.75% per year of the disbursed loan 
amount not reimbursed 

Commitment fee 0.50% per year on the non-disbursed 
and non-reimbursed portion of the loan, 
effective 120 days after signature of the 
Loan Agreement 

0.50% per year on the non-disbursed and 
non-reimbursed portion of the loan, 
effective 120 days after signature of the 
Loan Agreement 

Other Fees None None 
Maturity 30 years 20 years 
Grace period 5 years 7 years 

 
Timeframe – Main Milestones (expected) 

Concept Note approval July 2018 
Project appraisal July 2018 
Loan negotiations (ADF & NTF) 8-9 November  2018 
Project approval 12 December 2018 
Loan effectiveness (ADF & NTF) February 2019 
Project completion 31 December 2023 
Last disbursement 31 December 2024 

  



 

 iv 

Executive Summary 
 

I.  General Project Overview  

1.1  This project will support the upstream and downstream agricultural production subsectors in the 
Brakna-Ouest region. Its purpose is to improve food security and the living conditions of target 
communities through the inclusive and sustainable development of crop sectors. The Agricultural 
Transformation Support Project in Mauritania (PATAM) is fully consistent with the Accelerated Growth 
and Shared Prosperity Strategy (SCAPP) intended, among others, to consolidate the role of the agro-
pastoral sector and transform it into a source of economic diversification and growth. It is fully aligned 
with the Bank’s: (i) High 5s; (ii) the Ten-Year Strategy (2013-2022); (iii) the Feed Africa Strategy (2016-
2025); (iv) CSP 2016-2020 for Mauritania (Pillar 1 - Support for agricultural transformation); and (v) the 
Bank's flagship initiatives: Technologies for African Agricultural Transformation (TAAT), Young 
Entrepreneurs (Enable Youth), Risk Sharing Facility (RSF), and Agro-industrial Processing Zones 
(APZ). The project will focus on the Brakna-Ouest region, considered a zone afflicted by extreme 
poverty (12 points higher than the national poverty rate), and will affect Trarza and Nouakchott 
regions when it is scaled up to promote: (a) value chains (support for the establishment of agro-
industrial processing zones; (b) youth1 and women's entrepreneurship (support for the establishment 
of an incubation structure): and (c) the establishment of guarantee funds for agricultural sector 
financing. 

1.2  The project will finance: (i) the establishment of the main irrigation infrastructure (vegetable 
farming areas for women on 200 ha and flood-recession farming areas on 3,300 ha); (ii) the promotion 
of value chains and of youth and women's entrepreneurship as well as the establishment of inclusive and 
innovative agricultural sector financing mechanisms (guarantee funds, agricultural insurance, etc.); and 
(iii) institutional capacity-building and project coordination. It will affect 6,700 households, with an 
estimated target population of 42,600 inhabitants (52% being women), with a predominance of 
smallholders considered to be the Bank's main target group. The project will cost MRU 743.37 million 
(i.e., new Ouguiya), equivalent to UA 14.67 million, over a five-year period (2019-2023) and will be 
financed by an ADF loan of UA 7 million and an NTF loan of UA 6 million. It is an excellent climate 
change adaptation project and constitutes support for the transition to inclusive and sustainable growth. 

II. Needs Assessment 

Efficient natural resource management has become an imperative in Mauritania, given the country’s 
severe exposure to the effects of climate change. Consequently, economic diversification is necessary to: 
(i) get the country out of its undiversified and relatively fragile economy, which is dependent on 
extractive industries (particularly iron) that account for four-fifths of total exports on average and 30% 
of total budget revenue; and (ii) mitigate the risks associated with the reduction in iron prices and boost 
the competitiveness of the agro-pastoral sector through inclusive and sustainable development. The 
project was initiated based on the conclusions of the high-level “Feed Africa” conference held in Dakar 
in October 2015, which recommended that particular attention be paid to supporting agricultural 
transformation in African countries. The needs stem from the logic of consolidating and building on the 
significant achievements recorded by the West Brakna Irrigation Scheme Project (PAHABO) and 
strengthening the transformative dimension (promotion of value chains by focusing on two key sectors: 
rice cultivation and market gardening). It was designed through a concerted systemic method that 
involves stakeholders and emphasises a participatory and integrated approach (PIA). 

  

                                                
1  The National Youth Policy defines youth as the population of men and women aged 12 to 30 years. The beneficiaries are young people - 

(women and men aged 12 to 30 years), as well as women of any age. 



 

 v 

III. Bank Value-added  

Cognisant of the successful results of PAHABO,1 the Government considers the African 
Development Bank Group as a multilateral donor capable of addressing sector issues related to the 
development of irrigation and agricultural production, value chain promotion, and advancement of 
youth and women's entrepreneurship, in addition to assisting the country to rally other development 
partners. This project is an extension of PAHABO. Moreover, it builds on the reforms initiated under 
Phases 1 and 2 of the Economic Reform and Diversification Support Programme (PAREDE-1 & 2) and 
complements the PAFEJ and PAMPEJ projects. Lastly, PAHABO was awarded the High-5 Award (Feed 
Africa) at the Bank's annual meetings held in India in May 2017. The best practice developed under this 
programme will be replicated and the lessons learned have been factored into PATAM’s design. 

IV. Knowledge Management  

The project will help to strengthen the Bank's innovative operations in the agricultural and rural sector. 
It will help to modernise irrigation systems, promote agricultural transformation and value chains, 
develop youth and women's entrepreneurship, set up innovative and inclusive financing, and disseminate 
the requisite technical and organisational knowledge (use of the various information systems to be set up, 
agricultural advisory, etc.) to its stakeholders. Hence, the contribution through the TAAT initiative will 
be highly useful. The dissemination of smart agricultural technologies and practices to adapt to climate 
change and the guidance of farmers to improve market access will equally be relevant. These operations 
will build the capacity of institutional stakeholders such as administrative entities as well as inter-
professional and beneficiary organisations (water users' associations, rice cooperatives, women's 
vegetable farming cooperatives, EIGs, etc.). The knowledge generated will be disseminated to Mauritania 
and Bank structures through their respective websites, monitoring/evaluation, supervision, midterm 
review and completion reports, etc. Interactions with the African Digital Financial Inclusion (ADFI) have 
also been initiated to achieve innovative solutions aimed at promoting smart agriculture. 

                                                
1  The return of more than 1500 households to the project area is one of the key indicators of the project's success.  



 

 
 

vi 

PRELIMINARY RESULTS-BASED LOGICAL FRAMEWORK 

Country and Project Title: MAURITANIA - AGRICULTURAL TRANSFORMATION SUPPORT PROJECT (PATAM) 
Project Goal: Contribute to the improvement of food security and the living conditions of the target communities through inclusive development and sustainable agricultural subsectors. 

 

RESULTS CHAIN 

PERFORMANCE INDICATORS 
MEANS OF 

VERIFICATION 
RISKS/ 

MITIGATION MEASURES Indicators  
Baseline 
Situation 

(2017) 
Target 

IM
P

A
C

T
 

1. Impact: Long-term Impacts 
Improved food security and living 
conditions of target communities  

Improvement of the nutritional status  
 
 
Reduction of the poverty rate in the project area 
 
Reduction in imports of food products (cereals and 
vegetables) in tons 

2,283 Kcal 
 
 

43.3 %  
(EPCV, 2014) 

 
712.850 

(ASYCUDA, 2017) 

Daily calorie intake per adult rises from 2,283 
(2017) to 2,900 by 2030 
 
Reduce the poverty rate in Brakna-Ouest to 40% in 
2023 and to 35% by 2030 
 
Reduce imports by 10% in 2023 and 20% by 2030 

Statistical reports 
MEF, MY and ME 
reports 

 

O
U

T
C

O
M

E
S 

2. Outcomes: Medium-Term 
Outcomes 
Incrased and enhanced 
agricultural output  
 
 
 
 
 
Additional jobs created 
 
Increased income per household  

Contribution to the increase in the acreage of 
efficiently managed irrigation and flood-recession 
farming areas 
 
Cereal output from irrigation farming t/ha (rice & 
wheat) 
Flood-recession farming output t/ha (sorghum, maize) 
Vegetable farming output t/ha (sorghum, maize) 
 
Increased storage capacity for vegetable products 
 
Number of additional jobs created 
 
Improvement of annual income per household 

4,000 ha 
5,000 ha 

 
 

4.3; 2.6 
 

0.44; 0.5  
12; 15  

 
0 
 
0 
 

MRU 51,400 

4,200 ha of irrigation farming areas and 8,300 ha of 
flood-recession farming areas effectively managed 
in 2023 
 
Improve yields by 2023 by at least 30%  
 
 
 
 
360 t/year of packaged vegetable products by 2023   
 
2,200 jobs created in 2023 (40% for women). 
 
Improve the average income per household by at 
least 20% in 2023. 

Statistical reports 
MEF, MY and ME 
reports 

Risks: 

(i) Insufficient capacity for inter-sector coordination at 
the national level and consultation at the local level 

(ii) Recurrent climatic hazards and droughts 

 

Mitigation Measures: 

(i) Establishment of a strategic national steering 
committee and a local consultative committee (LCC)  

(ii) Dissemination of technologies and resilient seeds, 
and guidance of farmers to ensure that they factor 
climate information into the management of agricultural 
activities. 

O
U

T
P

U
T

S 

COMPONENT 1: Transformative irrigation schemes  
3. Outcomes: Short-Term 
Outputs 
3.1.1 Construction works 
executed 
 
3.1.2 Agro-pastoral ecosystem 
restored in the project area 

Construction of a dike track  
Construction of recessed water basins 
Vegetable farming areas for women (VFW) 
 
 
Number of ha of regenerated pastureland 

62 km degraded 
0 
0 
 
 
0 

62 km of dike tracks constructed in 2023 
3,300 ha of basins developed in 2023 
VFWs established on 200 ha of land in 2023 
 
 
At least 600 ha of pastureland regenerated in 2023 

Control Office’s 
monitoring and works 
supervision reports  
 
 
Project progress reports  

COMPONENT 2: Promotion of value chains, youth and women’s entrepreneurship 



 

 
 

vii 

RESULTS CHAIN 

PERFORMANCE INDICATORS 
MEANS OF 

VERIFICATION 
RISKS/ 

MITIGATION MEASURES Indicators  
Baseline 
Situation 

(2017) 
Target 

3.2.1. Agricultural value chains 
developed 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.2.2. Youth (boys and girls) and 
women's entrepreneurship 
developed 
 
 
 
 
3.2.3. Inclusive financing 
developed 

Strengthening of the seed sector  
 
 
 
Strengthening of the Rural Farmers’ Training Centre 
(CFPR) 
 
 
Strengthening of the vegetable products packaging 
centre and women's cooperatives 
 
Development of irrigated cereal and vegetable farming 
clusters 
 
 
 
Number of economic interest groups set up and 
supported  
 
Number of women's cooperatives supported  
 
Dissemination of smart farming technologies and 
practices to adapt to climate change and ensure 
increased market access 
 
 
Implementation of a training programme for the youth 
(boys and girls) and women 
Establishment of an incubation structure for the youth 
(boys and girls) and women 
Number of agri-businesses created- YAE (by gender) 
 
 
Establishment of a guarantee fund and farm insurance 

0 
 
 
 

120 participants 
 
 
 
0 
 
 
0 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
 

95 
 
0 
 
 
 
 
0 
 
0 
 
0 
 
 
0 
 

Equipped seed multiplication centre, control 
mechanism and approved multipliers in place in 
2023 
 
Intake capacity of the centre increased to 180 and 
the capacity of 12 trainers strengthened in 2023 
 
 
4 cold rooms equipped (capacity =  80 tons) and 90 
women's cooperatives strengthened in 2023  
 
Two irrigated cereal and vegetable farming clusters 
developed and the study on the establishment of the 
agro-industrial processing area in Rosso available in 
2023 
 
6 EIGs 
 
 
135 women's cooperatives supported  
 
At least 10 thematic and practical demonstrations 
are organised for farmers (men and women).  
 
 
 
Training of 2000 young people (of which 40% 
girls) in 2023. 
Entrepreneurship incubation structure for the youth 
and women set up in 2023 in 2023 
Training of 700 YAE (of which 40% girls) in 2023 
 
Guarantee fund and agricultural insurance 
established in 2023 

Project progress report  
 
Specific reports  
 

Risks: 

(i) Limited institutional capacity of stakeholders 

(ii) Problem of financial inclusion and access to funding 
and credit 

(ii) Poor servicing and maintenance of irrigation 
schemes 

(iv) Limited human and material resources at 
SONADER for project monitoring and implementation 
(v) Delays in procurement, launch of BDs and 
disbursements 
 
Mitigation Measures: 

(i) The programme provides for stakeholder capacity 
building  

(ii) The project provides for: (i) a Guarantee Fund to 
improve financial inclusion; (ii) assistance in 
organising the beneficiaries to facilitate access to credit; 
and (iii) the promotion of agricultural insurance 
(iii) The project provides for: (i) a Servicing and 
Maintenance Fund (FEM); (ii) support to establish the 
said fund 

(iv) The programme provides for stakeholder capacity 
building 

(v) Engage technical assistance, develop and implement 
the PPM, improve expenditure upstream (procurement 
monitoring) and downstream (disbursement planning 
and monitoring). 

COMPONENT 3: Institutional capacity-building and project coordination 

3.3.1 Institutional capacity 
strengthened. 
 
3.3.2 Coordinating Unit set up 

Creation of the Servicing and Maintenance Fund 
(SMF) 
M/E system for the project (gender-sensitive) 
Administrative/accounting procedures manual 

0 
0 
0 

Servicing and Maintenance Fund (SMF) created 
and operational in 2023 
M/E system operational in 2019 
Manual in use in 2019 

Specific report on the 
SMF  
Project progress report  

IN
P

U
T

S 

Component 1: Transformative irrigation schemes 
Component 2: Promotion of value chains, youth and women’s entrepreneurship 
Component 3: Institutional capacity-building and project coordination 

Component 1:                    UA 8.5 million 
Component 2:                     UA 3.15 million 
Component 3:                     UA 2.00 million 
PPF advance:                      UA 0.63 million  
TOTAL:                              UA 14.67 million 

Sources of Financing  
ADF: UA 7 million (PPF - UA 0.638 million)  
NTF: UA 6 million  
Government: UA 1.67 million  
Total: UA 14.67 million 



 

 
 

viii 

Project Implementation Schedule (2018-2023) 

 
 

Quarter (Q) Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
1. Approval of ADF & NTF loans

2. Installation of project staff

3. Entry into force of the ADF & NTF loans

4. Preparation/launch/signing of the works control and monitoring TA contract

5. Preparation/launch and allocation/signing of works contracts

6. Consutancy services/studies over 200 ha vegetable farmland

7. Launch of works
8. Consolidation of the 62 km track dike 
10. Irrigation scheme works on 3300 ha of basins
11. Upgrading of 200 ha of vegetable farmland
12. Environmental and Social Procedures
13 Promotion of value chains
14 Promotion of youth and women's entrepreneurship
15 Development of inclusive funding 
16 Capacity-building

17 Procurement audit 

18 Financial audit of project

19 Project management

18 Mid-term review

19 Drafting of completion report

ACTIVITIES 2018 2019 2020

CHROGRAMME OF ACTIVITIES 2018 - 2023

2022 2023
Years

2021



 

 1 

REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION OF MANAGEMENT OF THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
GROUP TO THE BOARDS OF DIRECTORS REGARDING A PROPOSAL TO GRANT AN ADF LOAN AND AN 

NTF LOAN TO THE ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF MAURITANIA  
TO FUND THE AGRICULTURAL TRANSFORMATION SUPPORT PROJECT (PATAM) 

 

Management hereby submits this report and recommendations concerning a proposal to grant an ADF loan 
of UA 7 million and an NTF loan of UA 6 million to the Islamic Republic of Mauritania to finance the 
Agricultural Transformation Support Project (PATAM). 

I. Strategic Thrust and Rationale 

1.1 Project Linkage with Country Strategy and Objectives 

1.1.1 PATAM reflects efforts by Mauritanian authorities to move from a rent economy to a 
diversified one driven by promising productive sectors, excluding extractive industries.1 In recent 
years and with a view to diversifying the national economy, the Mauritanian Government has taken 
measures to promote an institutional framework conducive to agricultural sector development. Thus in 
2012, it adopted a Rural Sector Development Strategy (SDSR), accompanied by a Framework Law on 
Agriculture (LOA), an Institutional Review of the Agricultural and Livestock Sector (RISAP) and a 
National Livestock and Agriculture Development Plan (PNDEA). Furthermore, the Government adopted 
an investment code and an Accelerated Growth of Shared Prosperity Strategy by 2030 (SCAPP). The 
intention is to ensure that agricultural development, poverty reduction, food security and the improvement 
of community living conditions become top priorities. Hence, a National Agricultural Development Plan 
(PNDA) was drawn up based on the SDSR and the initial PNDEA. Approved by the Council of Ministers 
in October 2016, this PNDA is the main operational reference framework and reflects Government's desire 
to ensure better coordination of agricultural sector actions to promote modern, resilient and competitive 
agriculture by 2025 (see strategic framework in Annex 1). 

1.1.2 To optimise the potential for agricultural and rural development, the Ministry of Agricultural and 
Rural Development defined its development policy in 2012, through the design and adoption of a Rural 
Sector Development Strategy (SDSR) and an Agro-pastoral Framework Law (LOA), in harmony with the 
Poverty Reduction Strategic Framework (PRSF 2011-2015) and the National Food Security Strategy 
(SNSA - 2012). Five strategic areas have been defined by the SDSR, namely: (i) infrastructure; (ii) 
research; (iii) rural advisory services; (iv) funding; and (v) trade. SCAPP (2016-2030), which is the 
reference framework for Mauritania as regards development, poverty reduction and job creation, thus 
confirmed these orientations and adopted the following three pillars: (i) promotion of robust, inclusive and 
sustainable economic growth; (ii) human capital formation and access to basic services; and (iii) 
strengthening of governance in all its dimensions. The “Produire en Mauritanie” (“Made in Mauritania”) 
Initiative (IPM), adopted by the Council of Ministers in October 2016, has consolidated the instruments 
established to diversify the Mauritanian economy, and reflects Government's desire to capture value added 
locally and to promote value chains. All these strategies highlight the considerable potential of the 
agricultural sector to reduce poverty, improve food security and create sustainable jobs. 

1.1.3 The project is well aligned with the strategic guidelines presented above and is underpinned by 
the pillars and priorities set by the Government of Mauritania (see 1.1.2). It is an attempt to combine 
production support (support for the upstream agricultural subsector) with the enhancement of production 
value (support for the downstream agricultural subsector). The focus is on: (i) consolidating the significant 
impact of PAHABO; (ii) replicability and extension of recorded achievements; and (iii) targeted support 

                                                
1  These efforts are reflected in the country’s new strategic vision for development, which are intended to be sustainable, inclusive and fair, and which 

seek to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals (SDG 2015-2030). 



 

 2 

to the transformative dimension that is compatible with available financing resources. The project as 
designed provides an opportunity to consolidate, extend and support transformation with a view to 
enhancing the linkages and continuity with PAHABO, and scaling up the pilot action. Therefore, it 
prepares a solid foundation for innovative and high value-added transformative agriculture in the second 
part of Mauritania's CSP that is consistent and fully compatible with the reform programme aimed at 
diversifying the economy and advocating support for the agro-pastoral sector. By adopting an inter-sector 
approach, the project strives to achieve complementarity and synergy with other sector strategies and 
initiatives, such as the Produire en Mauritanie Initiative (IPM); the National Employment Strategy; the 
Industrial Sector Development Strategy (2015-2019), especially for the agri-food and agro-industry 
component; the National Strategy for the Promotion of Micro- and Small-sized Enterprises (2015-2019), 
particularly the pillar relating to the integration of MSEs in sectors with high potential for value added and 
job creation; and the National Microfinance Strategy (2015-2019), with its fourth pillar related to the 
development of an inclusive supply of products. 

1.1.4 The agro-pastoral sector is strategic in Mauritania and contributed 23.4% to national GDP 
formation in 2017. Agriculture has considerable potential: nearly 500,000 ha of arable land, including 
about: (i) 365,000 ha for rain-fed crops; (ii) 135,000 ha for irrigated crops; (iii) 19,700 ha planted with 
palm trees; and (iv) 22,500 ha under dam-irrigated farming. There is also an undervalued irrigable potential 
along the Senegal River, with 46,100 ha of developed land. Livestock is another strategic sector. It 
contributed on average 20% of GDP over the 2014-2017 period, and accounted for 85% of rural value-
added and 78% of the national value added in the agricultural sector. Mauritania’s livestock population is 
significant and estimated at 21.05 million sheep and goats, 1.95 million cattle and 1.47 million camels 
(ONS, 2016). The agro-pastoral sector is the largest employer, despite the many obstacles that limit its 
development (access to finance, vocational training, new technologies, etc.). It has great potential that 
remains untapped in terms of mobilisation (intensification, productivity improvement, preservation, etc.) 
and enhancement to promote agricultural sector value chains. The institutional development of agricultural 
research, advisory and service structures, the reorganisation of professional structures, the structuring of 
strategic sectors and the upgrading of value chains are all challenges to overcome. 

1.1.5 The agro-pastoral sector is also a major employer in the country and accounts for 30% of 
the labour force. It provides income to approximately one (1) million inhabitants and plays a key role in 
food security and resilience. However, according to the latest ONS report on the poverty situation in 
Mauritania, households headed by persons working in the agriculture and livestock sectors are the poorest, 
with an incidence of 59.6% and 41.8%, respectively (2014). 

1.1.6 The lack of value-added in the agro-pastoral sector limits the country's prospects for 
diversification and job creation. The sector has great potential that remains untapped in terms of 
mobilisation (intensification, productivity improvement, preservation, etc.) and enhancement to promote 
agricultural sector value chains. Hence, the institutional development of agricultural research, advisory 
and service structures, the reorganisation of professional structures, the structuring of strategic sectors and 
the upgrading of value chains are all constraints to be addressed to ensure that Mauritania fully enjoys the 
economic potential of its agro-pastoral sector.  

1.2 Rationale for Bank Involvement 

1.2.1 The project needs stem from the logic of consolidating and extending the significant 
achievements of PAHABO and strengthening the transformative dimension (promotion of value chains by 
focusing on two key sectors that are crucial to the economy and to inclusive development, namely: rice 
farming and vegetable gardening). The project is consistent with the Bank's strategic guidelines and High 
5s, including the priorities “Feed Africa” and “Improve quality of life for the people of Africa”, food 
security enhancement and climate change adaptation measures. It is fully consistent with the Bank’s: (i) 
Ten-Year Strategy 2013-2022 (objectives of inclusive growth and transition to green growth); (ii) Pillar I 



 

 3 

of CSP 2016-2020 for Mauritania related to “Support for agricultural transformation”; (iii) agricultural 
strategy (Feed Africa [2016-2025]; (iv) Jobs for Youth in Africa Strategy (2016-2025) and (v) Investing 
in Gender Equality for Africa's Transformation (2014-2018), including Pillar II on “Economic 
Empowerment”. PATAM’s implementation requires significant investments and consistent technical 
support. Only the main multilateral donors, including the Bank, are considered by Mauritanian authorities 
as catalysts capable of helping to address such sector issues, and of involving other partners through their 
operations. The Bank has supported the agro-pastoral sector in the past and accumulated significant 
experience in the areas requested. In addition to its earlier funding of two agro-pastoral operations (PADEL 
and PAHABO) for UA 7.67 million and two phases of the Reform Support Programme (PAREDE), the 
Bank is currently engaged in a multinational agro-pastoral operation (P2RS), for which UA 11.5 million 
has already been allocated to Mauritania. It is also worth noting that Mauritania is engaged in transforming 
its economic model, which has so far been based on mining sector exports, into a sustainable dynamic 
economy characterised by diversification and job creation. In this regard, PATAM complements the 
reforms recommended by the PAREDE programme (1 & 2). 

Box 1: Towards a holistic, participatory and integrated approach oriented towards value chains 
The project is an attempt to adopt a holistic, participatory and integrated approach oriented towards the promotion of value chains. 
It is aimed at two levels of intervention: (i) upstream agricultural production to rationalise the use of natural resources (in particular 
water and soil), rehabilitate the natural environment and consolidate the socio-territorial unit; and (ii) downstream agricultural 
production to enhance the value of agricultural products (from farm to market) with particular emphasis on the promotion of public 
investments, improvement of the business environment, increase of the attractiveness of the private sector, promotion of PPPs , co-
responsibility of stakeholders and complementary synergy with other partners. The project also attempts to leverage the Bank's 
flagship initiatives: TAAT, Enable Youth, RSF, ZTAI, etc.  

 

1.2.2 Particular attention is paid to the synergy between various instruments adopted by the Bank in 
Mauritania, namely: investment support (PAHABO, PATAM), reform support (PAREDE 1 & 2) and 
technical support (PPF-PAHABO-2) to back reforms and investments, and increase their sustainability. In 
terms of comparative advantages, there are five basic arguments in favour of the AfDB Group's 
intervention in this project: (i) the Bank Group plays a strategic role in infrastructure development in 
Mauritania; (ii) the project builds on PAHABO and is in synergy with reform support (PAREDE-1 
completed and PAREDE-2 in progress), thus contributing to the establishment of an institutional and 
regulatory framework for economic diversification and support for the agro-pastoral sector; (iii) the project 
will boost agricultural transformation, combat poverty, and improve the conditions of young people and 
women through the promotion of entrepreneurship and job creation; (iv) the project will contribute to the 
improvement of food security in view of the projected additional agricultural output; and (v) the project is 
one of the measures relevant to climate change adaptation and support for the MDGs (end poverty in all 

Trade
and exports

Commodity Products
Improve the Agricultural Value Chain

Farmers Agro Dealers
Seed 

companies
Fertilizer 

companies
Agro 

processors
Industrial 

manufacturers

!"#$%&'())*+'+",,)-./''
01.23+%)3, 4)5*+6'7--%85.%)36'49:6';.)-5826'2.&<

Integration of the 
Private Sector

! Focus on Key 
Value Chains;

! Go to Scale

0=>7;7?='– @?AB;'C ;ADE0

D@:F'@$58+G%,+'5$)38'.G2'>5$"2'AG5%3

HDDH 0=DFE0'I)".G 4;@ D@DJD D8-),)$2+ !!!

"



 

 4 

its forms and everywhere; end hunger and achieve food security; improve nutrition and sustainable 
agriculture). 

1.3 Aid Coordination 
Sector development is ensured by the Government with the support of a number of bilateral and 
multilateral donors. The main partners in agricultural sector development are the World Bank (WB), the 
European Union (EU), the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), the Islamic 
Development Bank (IsDB), the Arab Fund for Economic and Social Development (AFESD), the African 
Development Bank (AfDB) and bilateral cooperation (Saudi Fund, AFD, GIZ, etc.). Coordination between 
the various donors is carried out through thematic groups, including the Agriculture Group chaired by the 
Directorate for Strategy, Planning and Monitoring and Evaluation (DSPSE) in the Ministry of  Rural 
Development.  

  
Sector or Subsector* 

Scope   
  GDP Exports Jobs    
  [Agriculture] [23.4%](1) [0%] [30%](1)   
  Stakeholders – Cumulative Public Expenditure   
  Government Donors  

 

[%]   
USD [USD 67.86 million] [USD 461.96 million] WB [34.2%]   

% [13%] 87%] EU  [20.4%]   
    IFAD [17.9%]   
   Saudi Fund  [7.4%]  
   IsDB [6.4%]  
   AFESD [4.7%]  
           AFD [2.9%]   
   AfDB [2.6 %]  
   GIZ [1.3 %]  

  Aid Coordination Level   
  Existence of thematic working groups [Yes]    
  Existence of a global sector programme [Yes]   
  AfDB role in aid coordination** [M]***   
*the most appropriate ** for this sector or subsector   
** L: Lead; M: Member (non-lead): None: No role 
(1) Including livestock farming    

II. Project Description 

2.1 Project Objectives: The project aims to achieve the inclusive and sustainable development of 
the agricultural sector. It will contribute to the improvement of food security and the living conditions of 
target communities. More specifically, it will support agricultural transformation in Mauritania by 
increasing the output and value of agricultural products.  

2.2 Project Components: To achieve its objectives, the project has identified the following three 
components: (i) transformative irrigation schemes; (ii) promotion of value chains, youth and women's 
entrepreneurship; and (iii) capacity building and project coordination. The first component, reserved for 
the development of transformative infrastructure, accounts for more than 65% of the total project cost. 

Table 2.2: Project Components 
No. Component 

Name 
Cost 

Estimate 
Description of Components 

 
I Transformative 

irrigation 
infrastructure 

9.52 
UA million 

(65.0%) 

 Establishment of transformative infrastructure for the irrigation of 200 ha of 
vegetable farms for women and 3,300 ha of flood-recession farming basins. 
Implementation of environmental and social measures 

 Support Measures: Monitoring and control of infrastructure construction works; 
including PPF for project preparation; implementation of ESMP through MEDD. 

II Promotion of 
value chains, 
youth and 

3.15 
UA million 

(21.5%) 

 Agricultural Production Support: Technical support to farmers, research and 
development, training of farmers (men and women), agricultural advisory. 



 

 5 

women’s 
entrepreneurship 

 Support for value chain promotion: support the IPM (support for the establishment 
of an agro-industrial processing area); equipment of the packaging centre, sales 
and marketing support (certification process, PPP initiative). 

 Support for the promotion of youth and women's entrepreneurship (YAE, Start-
up, etc.) and establishment of an incubation structure for YAEs, support for 
innovation, etc. 

 Support for the development of inclusive financing: support for the establishment 
of guarantee and risk-sharing funds, promotion of agricultural insurance, 
certification financing in the agricultural sector and agricultural entrepreneurship. 

III Capacity building 
and project 
coordination 

2.00 
UA million 

(13.5%) 

 Institutional and stakeholder capacity building for the project  

 Support for the establishment of a Servicing and Maintenance Fund (SMF) 

 National and regional coordination of the project; socioeconomic 
monitoring/evaluation (gender disaggregated) 

 Management of activities, physical and financial monitoring, internal and external 
audit. 

2.2.1 Transformative Irrigation Schemes: The main achievements and activities planned under this 
component are: (i) Consolidation and rehabilitation of the dike track over a distance of 62 km: This will 
open up access to existing villages and farming areas, and speed up the development and operation of new 
areas included under the project. The dike will be consolidated by upgrading the technical characteristics 
of its dimensions (including structures) based on new hydraulic, geotechnical, pedological and 
topographical studies. The dike will also increase protection against floods and ensure steady water supply 
to the flood-recession areas to be developed (basins). Installation of equipment to regulate the N'Diorol 
backwaters and weir for the introduction of fish farming; (ii) Development of seven basins (3300 ha): 
recalibration of the backwaters and supply channels of the seven basins to ensure and develop flood-
recession farming; (iii) Development of 200 ha of vegetable farms for women: Development and equipment 
of 200 ha of irrigated vegetable farming areas for women along the river; (iv) Implementation of 
environmental and social actions: environmental and social works (reforestation, dune fixation, etc.) to be 
undertaken to ensure the sustainability of the transformative structures to be built: (v) Technical assistance: 
all works on the transformative irrigation infrastructure will be executed by a contractor, and controlled 
and supervised by a consultancy firm and a works quality control laboratory. All the technical studies on 
the irrigation project carried out by the PPF are available.  

2.2.2 Promotion of value chains and of youth and women’s entrepreneurship: The main activities 
planned under this component are: (i) the promotion of value chains, mainly through equipment of the 
market gardening product packaging centre, support for the Rural Producers' Training Centre (CFPR), 
support to IPM (support to the market gardening and rice clusters, and support for the establishment of 
agro-industrial processing areas in Rosso), promotion of PPP initiatives and agricultural marketing, etc.; 
(ii) the promotion of agricultural and women’s entrepreneurship, in particular through support for 
ANAPEJ to champion youth and women's entrepreneurship, and the establishment of start-ups to 
complement PAFEJ and PAMPEJ. In this regard, a regional ANAPEJ agency will be opened at Boghé to 
promote local services. (iii) the development of inclusive financing through support to BCM for the 
establishment of a Guarantee Fund, promotion of agricultural insurance and support for the certification 
and entrepreneurship mechanism, with the mobilisation and backing of CAM, NBM and the SNIM 
Foundation. 

2.2.3 Capacity-Building and Project Coordination: The project will support capacity building for 
its staff (DSCSE, DDFCA, CNRADA, PCU, etc.) and beneficiaries as well as the establishment of a 
Servicing and Maintenance Fund (SMF) for irrigation infrastructure. 

 



 

 6 

2.3 Technical Solution Adopted and Alternatives Explored 

2.3.1 PATAM follows an integrated approach that links the upstream and downstream farming sectors 
to enhance value and promote value chains. It builds on PAHABO (2005-2014), which generated 
undeniable physical, human and institutional achievements that need to be consolidated and extended to 
surrounding areas. Consultation with stakeholders during project design missions made it possible to adopt 
the same technical solution implemented by PAHABO for transformative irrigation schemes. This 
technical solution has the advantage of: (i) setting up infrastructure to ensure adequate water collection 
and better use; (ii) opening up access to the area; and (iii) ensuring better optimisation of investment costs. 
The project will fund water supply right down to individual plots (farms). With regard to the promotion of 
value chains, two key sectors have been identified, namely rice cultivation and vegetable farming, which 
have tangible value margins and are aimed at differentiated target groups (male cooperatives for rice 
cultivation and female cooperatives for vegetable farming). Hence, PATAM seeks to build on these 
achievements by capturing value added at the local level and creating employment opportunities. It is also 
an appropriate solution for mitigating the effects of climate change. 

2.3.2 The technical design of the project took into account: (i) lessons from PAHABO; (ii) the 
availability of water and soil resources; (iii) consultation with irrigation water users and their approval of 
technical solutions for the choice of proposed works; and (iv) farmers’ capacity to master the techniques. 

Table 2.3: Project Alternatives Explored and Reasons for their Rejection1 
ALTERNATIVE 

EXPLORED 
BRIEF DESCRIPTION REASONS FOR REJECTION 

 Development and 
irrigation of the basins  

This entails building the necessary equipment 
to collect water for irrigation of the basins as 
well as land development to ensure sustainable 
irrigation. 

High cost of the investments and the transition 
towards flood-recession farming. 

 Regulation of the 
channels supplying 
water to the basins 

Regulation of the channels supplying water to 
the basins makes it possible to ensure flood-
recession farming. The solution considered is 
to carry out such regulation naturally without 
acting on the system. 

This option was abandoned because it does not 
guarantee proper regulation of flood recession. 
There are plans to install control structures to 
regulate the water level in the basin according to the 
flow rate of the backwaters that feed each basin. 

 Development of roads 
and bridges to open up 
access to the project 
area 

To ensure access, it is proposed that access 
roads be developed in the project area. 

Very high cost. Only the bridges for crossing the 
main backwaters have been retained and will be 
funded through an additional NTF loan.  

2.4 Type of Project 

This is a sector investment project that has the particularity of adopting a participatory and integrated 
approach to target investments and link up the upstream and downstream agricultural subsectors (see 
details in Technical Annex B.3, Volume 2). 

2.5 Project Cost and Financing Mechanisms 

2.5.1 The overall project cost, net of taxes and customs duties, is estimated at UA 14.67 million, 
equivalent to MRU 743.37 million. The foreign exchange share constitutes 73% of the total project cost. 
Customs duties and taxes will be defrayed by the State. Physical and financial contingencies, which total 
11% of the base cost, have been calculated based on detailed estimates presented by the Borrower. The 
Government contributes UA 1.67 million, equivalent to MRU 81.56 million, representing about 11.3% of 
the total project cost. The detailed project costs are presented in the technical annexes (C9). The ADF and 
NTF loans are valued at UA 7 million and UA 6 million, respectively. 

                                                
1  See detail of alternatives explored in Technical Annexes Volume 2 (Annex B.1).  



 

 7 

2.5.2 The project costs are summarised in Tables 2.4 and 2.5 below. 

Table 2.4 : Cost Estimate by Component [in MRU and UA million] 

COMPONENTS 
MRU million UA million % 

F.C. 

%  
Base 
cost 

L.C.  F.E Total L.C. F.C Total 

1. Transformative irrigation infrastructure  102.26 332.31 434.57 2.02 6,56 8,58 75 65 
2. Promotion of value chains and 
entrepreneurship  36.74 107.75 144.41 0.73 2,13 2,85 75 22 

3. Capacity building and project coordination 32.62 59.19 91.81 0.64 1,17 1,81 64 14 
BASE COST 171.62 499. 26 670.88 3.39 9, 86 13,24 74 100 
Physical and financial contingencies 29.84 42.65 72.29 0.59 0,84 1,43 60 11 
TOTAL PROJECT COST 201.46 541.90 743.37 3.98 10,70 14,67 73 111 

The exchange rates used are indicated in the introduction to this report [page (i)]. 

Table 2.5: Financing Sources [in MRU million and UA million] 

Financing Sources 
MRU million Millions UC 

% Total 
M. Locale  Devises Total M. Locale  Devises Total 

ADF loan 85.48 272.07 357.56 1.63 5.37 7.00 47.7 
NTF loan 82.16 222.09 304.25 1,62 4.38 6.00 41.0 
Mauritanian governement  33.82 47.74 81.56 0.69 0.98 1.67 11.3 
Total 201.47 541.90 743.37 3.94 10.73 14.67 100 

2.5.3 The breakdown of financing by expenditure category and expenditure schedule are presented 
in Tables 2.6 to 2.7 below. 

Table 2.6: Project Cost by Expenditure Category [in MRU and UA million]  

 
Table 2.7: Expenditure Schedule by Component (in UA million) 

Components 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 TOTAL 
1. Transformative irrigation infrastructure  0.23 1.40 4.50 2.64 0.14 8.91 
2. Promotion of value chains and entrepreneurship  0.59 1.57 0.49 0.29 0.22 3.16 
3. Capacity-building and project coordination  0.61 0.37 0.3329 0.32 0.33 1.96 
4. PPF Reimbursement  0.64 - - - - 0.64 
TOTAL 2.07 3.34 5.32 3.25 0,69 14.67 

2.6 Project Area and Beneficiaries  

2.6.1 The planned investments target historically poorly endowed areas where a large number of 
farmers are exposed to droughts and poverty and insecurity because they lack the resources to develop 
the existing potential (water and soil). These investments will promote shared prosperity and build the 
resilience of these target communities to future shocks, including those relating to climate change. 
The project will benefit a population of 42,600 (20,448 men, i.e. 48%, and 22,152 women, or 52%) 
from 6,700 households. The region is qualified because it is exposed to extreme poverty and is reputed 
for seasonal immigration; mainly men seeking informal employment.1 The main activities practised 
by the population and which constitute livelihoods within their local economy are (in descending 
                                                
1  2017 data from the Boghé Basic Health Center. 

EXPENDITURE CATEGORIES  
MRU Million UA million % 

F.C 

%  
Base 
cost 

L.C F.C Total L.C. F.C Total 

Investment 146.73 462.75 609.48 2.90 9.13 12.03 76 91 
Works  93.99 275.69 369.68 1.85 5.44 7.30 75 55 
Goods 8.17 23.95 32.12 0.16 0.47 0.63 75 5 
Services  44.58 163.10 207.68 0.88 3.22 4.10 79 31 
Operation 24.89 36.51 61.40 0.49 0.72 1,21 59 9 
Base cost 17162 499. 26 670.88 3.39 9.86 13.24 74 100 
Physical contingencies 8. 80 25.82 34.63 0.17 0.51 0.68 75 5 
Financial Contingencies 21.04 16.83 37.86 0.42 0.33 0.75 44 6 
COÛT TOTAL DU PROJET 201.46 541.90 743.37 3.94 10.73 14.67 73 111 



 

 8 

order): agriculture (43%), livestock (14.14%), trade (10.42%) and fishing (3.48%). Women are 
engaged in many activities: mainly agriculture (crops, vegetables), small livestock production, petty 
trading and handicraft. The project's support for job creation will be provided through ANAPEJ 
(promotion of YAE and innovative start-ups). Farmers in the rice and vegetable farming sectors and 
clusters are the main beneficiaries of IPM support. 

2.7 Participatory Approach to Project Design and Implementation 

2.7.1 PATAM was designed with the sustained involvement of the stakeholders concerned 
(various administrative entities, grassroots organisations, socio-professional structures, private 
operators, beneficiaries and development partners). The participatory approach was adopted prior to 
project design, from technical studies carried out under the PPF where the findings were submitted 
and validated with the relevant technical departments and representatives of the target communities. 
The process is fully participatory since the Local Consultation Council (LCC), the women's Economic 
Interest Group (EIG), representatives of women's cooperatives and user associations established since 
the implementation of PAHABO were involved in all the stages. As was the case in PAHABO-1, 
women's organisations, users' associations, the LCC and the EIG will also be involved in 
implementing this project. 

2.7.2 Furthermore, the Bank's various design missions also held numerous consultation meetings 
with the administrative entities concerned, professional structures, private operators likely to be 
involved in the project and beneficiary representatives (cooperatives, etc.). Moreover, the 
implementation of various proposed activities will be based on a participatory approach actively 
involving the LCC, the CNP and the organisations, to improve their governance and increase their 
accountability.  

2.8 Bank Group Experience and Lessons Reflected in Project Design 

2.8.1 The Bank’s portfolio in Mauritania (mid-November 2018) comprises 15 operations worth 
UA 239 million (see details in Annex 3). While the overall quality of the portfolio is deemed 
satisfactory, there are still some implementation problems, including: (i) start-up delays due to lack 
of project ownership on the Mauritanian side; (ii) procurement delays; and (iii) weak project 
implementation capacity. The measures designed to address these challenges include: (a) quality 
improvement at entry by setting up project management bodies prior to approval; (b) establishment 
of more rigorous procurement plans; and (c) assessment of implementation capacity problems and 
substantial capacity building. All these recommendations have been factored into PATAM. In 
particular, lessons from PAHABO are strategic guidelines that can further strengthen PATAM’s 
design and implementation. These include the need to: (1) ensure the availability of implementation 
studies and the finalisation of project BDs prior to project approval; (2) ensure geographic 
concentration and a particular interest in development to maximise value added at the local level and 
ensure better stakeholder mobilisation and beneficiary ownership; (3) strengthen the project 
monitoring, evaluation and coordination function, which are crucial to project implementation quality; 
(4) appoint a procurement manager and support procurement and disbursement procedures (provide 
capacity-building measures); (5) raise awareness among the client and target population on the role 
of servicing and maintenance to ensure better operation and sustainability of the facilities; and (6) 
improve the environment and business climate to ensure better private sector involvement.  

2.8.2 Based on these factors, project design focused on: (i) the availability of technical studies 
carried out under PPF-PAHABO-2 and which are highly useful for mobilising co-financing (IsDB, 
GCF, GEF, SF, EIB, etc.); (ii) the consolidation of results achieved, extension of PAHABO's 



 

 9 

outcomes to other areas and consideration of an entire component for the promotion of value chains 
as well as women's and youth entrepreneurship that are central to the project’s design and underpinned 
by a participatory and integrated process; (iii) measures to strengthen project monitoring, evaluation, 
steering and coordination have been planned to consolidate the quality of project implementation; (iv) 
crucial measures are planned to accelerate procurement: the appointment of a procurement officer 
from among the PCU staff, the use of advance contracting and the national system according to 
recommended thresholds, the implementation of capacity-building and support measures (support to 
the Public Procurement Regulatory Authority-ARMP), the conduct of procurement audits, the 
preparation of a procedures manual, the establishment of an accounting system for procurement, and 
the improvement of disbursements; (v) support for the establishment of a Servicing and Maintenance 
Fund (FEM), which will be provisioned from 2021 with a start-up allocation for more sustainable 
development; and (vi) innovative actions to strengthen the sustainability of the activities executed and 
private sector mobilisation: support for the establishment of a guarantee fund and a risk-sharing 
system, promotion of agricultural insurance, support for the establishment of an integrated logistics 
platform (agro-industrial processing area in Rosso in support of the “Produire en Mauritanie” 
Initiative (IPM), promotion of new concepts allowing the involvement of the private sector and the 
development of PPP initiatives (certification concept, agricultural entrepreneurship oriented towards 
high value-added services, supported and sponsored by the private sector: NBM, CAM, SNIM 
Foundation, etc. that have expressed interest in joining and backing these concepts). The Bank will 
seek technical support, through trust funds, to promote and ensure the implementation of these 
initiatives. 

2.8.3 PATAM has also benefited more from sector budget support (PAREDE-1 & 2) and technical 
support under PPF-PAHABO-2, which is still being implemented. One of the recorded achievements 
concerns the complementarity and synergy adopted between the Bank's three financing instruments 
(reform support, investment support and technical support) and the complementarity linkages with 
operations in a logic of convergence: 

 Bank Group: (i) PAREDE 1 & 2 (including support for PPPs and land reforms - 
agricultural and rural land is at the heart of this reform process and after significant 
progress in the Rosso region, agricultural and rural land regularisation is expected to 
start in the Brakna region; support for the establishment of a service and maintenance 
fund for agricultural infrastructure and structures, support for the establishment of 
innovative and inclusive mechanisms for financing the agro-pastoral sector); (ii) 
PAFEJ (technical and institutional support for ANAPEJ, support for the opening of 
local offices, support for the integration of young people); (iii) PAMPEJ ( 
establishment of the microfinance refinancing mechanism via the FOREMI fund 
hosted at the CDD); (iv) P2RS which intervenes partly in Brakna. 

 TFPs in Mauritania: The concentration on the agricultural sector is justified by the 
principle of complementarity with the operations of the World Bank (focused on core 
livestock sector projects such as the Regional Support Project for Pastoralism in the 
Sahel-PRAPS, USD 45 million), the EU (RIMRAP, RIMDIR and RIMFIL), GIZ 
(Promotion of Employment and Professional Integration in Rural Areas - PELIMIR) 
and AFD (CAP-Insertion).  

2.9 Key Performance Indicators  

The key project performance indicators are: (i) the total length (in km) of track dikes constructed or 
consolidated; (ii) the surface area (in ha) of basins developed; (ii) the surface area (in ha) of vegetable 



 

 10 

farming areas developed for women (FAW); (iii) the average yields obtained in basins and FAWs; 
(iv) additional agricultural output; (v) the number of farmers benefiting from the basins developed 
and the number of women farmers benefiting from FAWs; and (vi) the number of operational rice-
farming cooperatives for men and vegetable farming cooperatives for women as well as the respective 
memberships of both. The main impact indicators are: (a) improvement of the agricultural income of 
target communities; (b) contribution to poverty reduction; (c) contribution to the improvement of the 
nutritional status; (d) contribution to the reduction of food imports (in tons of cereals and vegetables); 
and (e) contribution to the creation of decent and sustainable jobs. The main data sources for 
monitoring these indicators are the PCU, DSCSE, ONS, CSA, BCM and ASYCUDA. This data will 
be supplemented by field surveys and targeted analyses, with occasional support from technical 
assistance, if necessary. The relevant data will be collected, processed and the results disseminated 
through the results-based monitoring and evaluation system set up by the project. 

III. Project Feasibility 

3.1 Economic and Financial Performance 

3.1.1 The transformative infrastructure to be constructed (irrigation schemes, access roads), the 
structures to be built in the basins (recalibration, cleaning) and women's vegetable farming areas will 
provide the population with newly cleared plots of irrigated good soil conducive to the development 
of the available potential (water, soil and labour force). This new situation, long awaited by the target 
communities, will stimulate the execution of vital activities that will help them to achieve poverty 
reduction, self-reliance, permanent employment, decent income and self-development. This will help 
to increase the added value of the irrigated areas concerned and to generate positive impacts that would 
be social (creation of local jobs, poverty reduction, improved nutritional status, reduction of rural 
exodus, etc.), economic (increased agricultural output, better use of irrigation water, enhanced 
regional balance, etc.), environmental (mitigation of the negative effects of climate change, rational 
exploitation of river water, substitution of water pumping by flood spreading and use of renewable 
energies vegetable-farming areas, which will lead to a reduction in energy demand, etc.) and 
institutional (consolidation of cooperatives, EIGs and water users' associations, institutional capacity 
building, organisation of farmers to improve market access, funding and service provision, etc.). The 
main benefits generated by the project are assessed through the following key indicators: 

Table 3.1: Project Economic and Financial Performance Indicators  
Indicators Per farm 

Farmed surface area in the current situation (ha) 0.67 
Farmed surface area in the future situation (ha) 1.5 
Current net average income per farm in flood-recession areas (MRU) 18,923 
Future net average income per farm in flood-recession areas (MRU) 70,409 
Future net average income per hectare in flood-recession areas (MRU) 306,606 

Indicators Project total 
Total output value per year of normal operation (MRU thousand) 295,084 
Jobs created during the investment phase (WD)(1) 186,288 
Jobs created from the year of normal operation(2) 451,877 

(1) Additional jobs created (in WD) during the construction phase in 2019-2023                 (Source: Feasibility and Field Studies, 2018) 
(2) The year of full operation is the fifth year of the project 

3.1.2 Financial profitability analysis yielded a FIRR of 18.8% and the sensitivity tests showed that 
profitability remains around the threshold of the opportunity cost of capital, even when there is a 10% 
decrease in output value and a concurrent 20% increase in investment costs, with the FIRR then being 
13%. Economic analysis was done based on the benchmark price method and comparison of the "no-
project" and "project" situations. The economic and financial performance was assessed based on an 



 

 11 

investment life of 30 years. The project costs relate to the investments made, including physical 
contingencies, repair and maintenance costs, production and renewal costs. The analysis focused on 
the seven basins (Afnia, Balla, Moi - Moi, Diayolé- Djoulé, Nevga, Regba), thanks to which the six 
creeks can be exploited (Lougué, Sidi Youkel, Koundi, Ngaleng, Ballabour, Regba) and a cluster of 
small vegetable farming areas developed along the river bank that will subsequently be allocated to 
women's cooperatives. The operation of this infrastructure will increase the average net income per 
farm in the flood-recession farming areas from MRU 18,923 in the current situation to nearly MRU 
70,409 in future, representing an increase of more than 3.5 times (3.62).  This income will directly 
benefit fragile rural households and contribute to poverty reduction among vulnerable groups 
(especially women and the youth).  

3.1.3 The project’s economic benefits stem from the increase in agricultural output during normal 
operation, with an additional annual output of 107,530 quintals of cereals produced from flood-
recession farming (sorghum and maize), 8,320 tons of rice, 4,000 tons of vegetable products, 5,100 
tons of fodder to be valued in terms of milk and meat, and value chain development for certain 
vegetable products (vegetable recycling and drying). Other project impacts such as opening up access 
to villages, facilitating access to farms, transporting products, developing marketing channels and 
improving access between farming areas, local (Boghé, Dar El Baraka, Ouled Biram, Dar El Avia, 
Aleg) and national markets (development of certification contracts and PPP initiatives) were not 
factored into the analysis.  

ERR (base-case scenario): 18.4 %  NPV (10%): MRU 462,125 

3.1.4 The sensitivity tests conducted show the profitability of the project: a 10% increase in 
investment costs reduces the ERR to 16.9%; a 10% decrease in production reduces the ERR to 15.0%; 
a 10% increase in investment costs combined with a 10% reduction in production yields an ERR of 
13.7%. 

3.2 Environmental and Social Impact 

Environment 

3.2.1 Based on the Bank's Environmental and Social Assessment Procedures (ESAPs), the project 
was classified under Category 2 due to the limited scale of the irrigation schemes that only concern 
200 ha, and the local and temporary scope of the expected impacts following the rehabilitation of the 
existing dike track. Decree No. 2007.105, which defines the content and procedure for conducting 
environmental impact assessment (EIA) and monitoring their implementation, classifies the project 
under the category of operations subject to an EIA. On this basis, an environmental impact assessment 
with an environmental and social management plan was prepared in accordance with the Bank's 
Integrated Safeguards System (ISS) and the national system. The study was validated and its summary 
submitted for publication for a period of 30 days prior to the Board of Directors' meeting. In 
accordance with Decree No. 2007.105, the consultation was organised with the target groups. The 
Decree stipulates and requires that any decision should be preceded by a public inquiry to seek public 
input and comment on the likely impacts of the project and the acceptability of alternative solutions 
or mitigation measures under consideration. 

3.2.2 From an environmental standpoint, the project will mainly lead to: (i) better management of 
water and soil resources, and development of the irrigation potential; (ii) a better understanding of 
rational water use for agricultural purposes; (iii) water and soil conservation; and (iii) the creation of 
favourable conditions for restoring the biodiversity in the backwaters. The positive impacts of project 



 

 12 

activities from the social standpoint essentially relate to: (i) improvement of agricultural production 
techniques and systems; (ii) improvement of income and marketing conditions; (iii) broadening of the 
product range and enhancement of output value through processing; and (iv) strengthening of the 
skills of the various agricultural sector stakeholders. In terms of impact on the community living 
environment, it will: contribute to food and nutritional security; famine control; and job creation. 
During the construction phase, the negative impacts will essentially be limited to the works area and 
generally be of low intensity. The ESMP prepared under this project includes a series of measures 
during the construction and operational phases aimed at mitigating negative impacts and ensuring the 
project's sustainability. In terms of job creation, the project provides technical guidance as well as 
innovative and inclusive financial support to the agricultural sector. Furthermore, with a view to 
promoting women's and youth entrepreneurship, the project seeks to combat women’s and youth 
marginalisation by setting up an inclusion mechanism to reduce cultural barriers that negatively affect 
these groups, and support financing for granting specific microcredit to this category of investors. 

Social 

3.2.3 The “Systematic Country Diagnostic” report prepared by the World Bank in May 2017, 
concludes that “the main driver of poverty reduction in rural areas has been the increase in the welfare 
of agricultural and livestock producers”. It also concludes that despite significant improvements, 
social indicators remain among the lowest in the world. Mauritania was ranked 153rd out of 186 
countries in the Human Development Index in 2014. Despite the progress made in reducing poverty, 
it remains a widespread phenomenon, mainly in rural areas, and is associated with unequal access to 
social services and productive capital. The qualitative data in this report indicates that land is unevenly 
distributed, particularly in the fertile Senegal River Valley, where the majority of poor agro-pastoral 
producers operate. Women are particularly affected; only 18.7% of them have land in the country. 
The highest poverty rates are recorded in households headed by persons who are illiterate or have not 
completed primary education. The “40 per cent poorest” have the lowest access to other basic services, 
such as health, water and sanitation. Limited access to land in rural areas and high food prices in urban 
areas prevent the poorest from accumulating assets. Very few poor small farmers hold formal land 
rights in the Senegal River Valley, while most of them depend on informal customary rights. This 
situation has caused land insecurity for land users and investors as well as social tensions.  The project 
responds to expressed needs and has taken into consideration the lessons from the previous PAHABO 
project. It addresses food shortages and malnutrition, inadequate access to agricultural inputs leading 
to low production, limited access to financial support and high youth (male and female) 
unemployment rates. All said, despite the relative socioeconomic progress, poverty remains high in 
Mauritania at 31% (EPCV, 2014) compared to 42% and 51% in 2008 and 2000, respectively. Poverty 
remains rural in nature (about one in two people in the rural areas is poor - 44.4%).  Brakna is among 
the four willayas with a worrying poverty rate that exceeds the national poverty threshold (43.3% in 
Brakna compared to 31% at the national level, i.e. 12.3 points above the average). The illiteracy rate 
is 52.5% (59% for women). With regard to income, the data indicates that the average annual income 
is estimated at MRU 224,800 for a “typical” well-off household and MRU 159,000 for an average 
household, while poor to very poor households have MRU 89,000 and MRU 51,400, respectively. 

3.2.4 The 2016 ONS data indicate that Brakna’s population is relatively young (the 15 to 39 
age group represents 35.2% of the total population). On the social level, the foreseeable negative 
impacts would affect farmers who are not project beneficiaries and whose competitiveness on the 
market would be relatively low, as well as rural women whose participation in project benefits remains 
limited due to cultural barriers. However, these impacts will be significantly reduced by the mitigation 
measures provided for in the ESMP, in particular the strengthening of women's participation in 



 

 13 

cooperatives and associations, and measures to support and finance income-generating activities for 
women and the youth who constitute the vulnerable segment of the population. 

Adaptation to Climate Change 

3.2.5 In terms of vulnerability to climate change risks, the project is classified in Category 2, which 
reflects medium vulnerability that requires the implementation of climate adaptation measures and 
their integration into the design of facilities planned. The following measures were considered to 
strengthen ecosystem and community resilience: (i) development of irrigated areas and reduction of 
extensive farming; (ii) introduction of innovative technologies for the optimal management of natural 
resources, particularly water; (iii) promotion of climate-friendly smart farming practices; (iv) 
promotion of small livestock farming, in particular goats and sheep, which also helps to fertilise the 
soil, etc.; and (v) programming of reforestation actions that reduce bank erosion and have a beneficial 
effect on carbon sequestration. An entire component is reserved for climate financing, on which a 
concept note has been submitted by the Bank to the Green Fund. 

Gender 

3.2.6 In Mauritania, efforts must be made to promote gender-sensitive human development. 
Women are among the prominent development stakeholders in rural areas (representing over 52% of 
the rural population in Mauritania). Agriculture is also the main economic activity of rural women 
and employs more than 90% of working women. About 90% of vegetable farmers are women. Indeed, 
almost the entire female labour force is engaged in this activity.  Apart from agricultural activities, 
rural women are involved in agricultural product processing and handicrafts, which is a key domain 
(weaving, wool processing, etc.). Furthermore, the agricultural model in Mauritania is based on cash 
crops and food crops farmed by men and women, respectively. Hence, farmers are organised into rice 
cooperatives (mainly men, with 30% women) and food crop cooperatives (mainly women). Two 
major challenges arise from this mode of organisation: access to land and financial assistance. 
Women's cooperatives specializing in food crops need small-sized farms and, consequently, the 
women cannot access financial assistance to increase their production. Furthermore, women have 
limited access to agricultural inputs because of their low level education and limited access to 
information. Since women also perform a triple function (childbearing, production and social 
responsibility), solutions must be found to reduce their workload. 

3.2.7 The project is intended to support women's cooperatives through: (i) improvement of 200 
hectares and expansion of the irrigation system of 90 women's cooperatives; (ii) increased access to 
financial support for women's cooperatives through the establishment of a gender-sensitive 
agricultural insurance guarantee fund (to reach 50% of women); (iii) development of a comprehensive 
training centre (incubation) equipped with the necessary demonstration equipment and a teaching 
model to improve agricultural products and agro-industry. Moreover, (iv) the operation of storage 
rooms and improved market access are expected to increase with the construction of the two bridges 
and the organisation of extension services.1 

  

                                                
1  See details in the technical annexes (B.9 &10). 



 

 14 

Forced Resettlement 

3.2.8 The Project does not involve the displacement or resettlement of people from the project area. 

IV. Project Implementation 

4.1 Implementation Arrangements 

4.1.1 Executing Agency: The project is placed under the technical supervision of the Directorate 
for Strategy, Cooperation and Monitoring/Evaluation (DSCSE) in the Ministry of Rural Development, 
which will entrust its management and coordination to an autonomous unit based in Boghé within the 
SONADER Regional Directorate. This will promote local supervision, the benefits of which were 
confirmed by PAHABO. The Project Coordination Unit (PCU) will comprise eight experienced 
managers,1 capable of executing the main project tasks:  (i) construction of infrastructure and 
development of flood-recession farmlands, land enhancement, farmers’ advisory, training, 
agricultural extension services, and support for project activities; (ii) project planning, programming, 
and administrative and financial management; and (iii) project coordination, monitoring/evaluation 
and control. Specifically, it will be responsible for the following tasks: (a) preparation and 
implementation of project work programmes and annual budgets (PTBAs); (b) preparation and 
monitoring of bidding documents, works execution, goods and services contracts and disbursement 
requests; (c) internal monitoring of the project; and (d) preparation of financial statements and 
progress reports. The PCU, the DSCSE and the SONADER regional management will work closely 
together to ensure the smooth implementation of project activities. Targeted technical assist ance 
missions (monitoring/evaluation, environmental monitoring) and certain technical departments 
(DDFCA, CNRADA, ENFVA-CFPR, DAR, ANAPEJ, IPM, DPN-MEDD, etc.) will periodically 
support the PCU. 

4.1.2 Institutional Arrangements: Based on the recommendations of the Paris Declaration and the 
conclusive lessons from PAHABO, particularly in terms of institutional arrangements, the project 
will recommend a light coordination and management structure, and will build on the State's 
sustainable structures through the signing of a coordination charter (between Ministry of Rural 
Development stakeholders) and specific partnership agreements with partners involved in its 
implementation (apart from the Ministry of Rural Development:  ANAPEJ, DPN-MEDD, etc.). (i) A 
National Steering Committee (CNP) will be set up at the start of the project to guide, orient and 
supervise its implementation. This committee will be chaired by the Secretary General of the Ministry 
of Agriculture and comprise representatives of stakeholders involved in the project: (MEF, DSCSE, 
DPN-MEDD, ANAPEJ), the PATAM Coordinator (Secretary) and two beneficiary representatives 
(including one woman). It will meet at least twice yearly to review the annual work and budget 
programme (AWBP), and assess project progress. (ii) A Local Consultation Committee (LCC), 
responsible for monitoring and organising activities within the area, will also be set up at project 
commencement. It will be chaired by the Hakem of Boghé, comprising representatives of NGOs and 
two representatives of beneficiaries per area (including one woman), and will meet at least four times 
a year. This Committee may be expanded as necessary to include other persons from the decentralised 
technical services and other structures present in the area (e.g. civil society, representatives of local 
authorities and beneficiaries). The project provides for the signing of a Project Coordination Charter 
(PCC), specific partnership agreements and performance contracts with members of the PCU team to 
ensure results-based management and promote a culture of performance. 

                                                
1  The coordinator, agricultural engineer, agronomist, procurement expert, monitoring/evaluation expert, gender and communication expert, 

administrative and financial officer (AFO), accountant (see organisation chart and job profiles in Annex C1). 



 

 15 

4.1.3 To preserve institutional integration, coherence and continuity, it was agreed to entrust the 
management of PATAM (ADF & NTF funding), the PATAM Project (IsDB funding) and the Climate 
Change Resilience Development Project (Green Fund financing) to the same coordination unit (PCU) 
by adopting the same implementation mechanism.  

Procurement Arrangements (Works, Goods and Services)  

4.1.4  Applicable Procurement Policy and Framework: All goods, works and services funded with 
Bank resources shall be procured in accordance with the Procurement Policy for Bank Group-funded 
Operations (“AfDB Procurement Policy”) October 2015 edition, and the provisions set out in the 
financing agreement. Pursuant to this policy and following various assessments conducted, it was 
agreed that all works, with the exception of irrigation works, and all goods shall be procured in 
accordance with the Borrower's procurement system ("National System") embodied in Law No. 2010-
044 of 22/07/2010 on the Public Procurement Code, its implementing decree No. 2017-216 and other 
statutory texts governing procurement in Mauritania, using national standard bidding documents as 
amended during the project negotiations.   

4.1.5 Irrigation works and all consultancy services will be procured in accordance with the Bank's 
procurement system ("AfDB System") and the Bank's relevant standard bidding documents (BD). The 
Borrower is expected to submit to the Bank a request to use advance contracting (AC), as defined in 
Article 11.2 of the Bank's Procurement Policy of October 2015. The activities targeted by such ACs 
are essentially those related to irrigation scheme works and ancillary control services. 

Special Conditions Stemming from Usage of the National System. 

4.1.6. Eligibility: The Bank's resources for financing project activities come from the joint ADF 
and NTF financing. Procurement financed by the NTF resources administered by AfDB is subject to 
compliance with the rule of origin. Following the assessment of procurement risks and capacities, it 
was decided that the National Procurement System be used for part of this project. All activities of 
this project, whose implementation is planned according to the national public procurement system,  
are financed exclusively from ADF resources. Therefore, no restrictions on the rule of origin will be 
applied to these activities. The only procurement co-financed by the NTF and the ADF, namely the 
consolidation of the track dyke and the development of 7 basins, will be subject to the Bank's 
procurement system and the Bank's rule of origin will be applied. 

4.1.7 Assessment of Procurement Risks and Capacity: Procurement provisions, including risk 
assessment, appropriate risk mitigation measures, procurement capabilities as well as procurement 
implementation details and associated control mechanisms are detailed in Annex B5.  

4.1.8 Advance Contracting: Considering the scheduling constraints related to the Borrower's 
agenda, a number of procurements may, at the Borrower's request, be implemented through advance 
contracting in accordance with the provisions of Article 11.2 of the AfDB Policy. The procedures and 
methods used for such advance contracting shall be identical to those adopted for the project. A 
reasoned request listing the procurements concerned together with a procurement plan shall be 
submitted to and accepted by the Bank.  

4.1.9 Financial Management: The financial management arrangements below are based on an 
assessment of the Executing Agency's financial management capabilities and fiduciary risks detailed 
in the technical annex. They will be redefined during the training to be provided when the project is 
launched. Responsibility for financial management shall rest with the Project Coordination Unit 



 

 16 

(PCU). The PCU will be created by the Ministry of Rural Development and placed under the technical 
supervision of the Directorate for Strategy, Planning and Monitoring/Evaluation (DSPSE). The 
financial management staff will include: a Coordinator, an administrative and financial officer, and 
an accountant. Their recruitment and performance contracts shall be subject to the Bank’s prior 
agreement. Before the beginning of each budget year, the PCU shall prepare an annual work 
programme and budget (AWPB) to be submitted to the Ministry of Rural Development for validation 
through the DSPSE, the Steering Committee and the Bank. It will produce the AWPB implementation 
reports that will serve as the basis for the analysis of variances between projections and actual figures 
(costs and timeframes), supplemented by corrective measures considered in the event of an 
unfavourable variance. These financial performance monitoring reports shall be annexed to the 
quarterly progress reports sent to the Bank latest 45 days after the end of the quarter. Although an 
administrative, financial and accounting procedures manual was prepared under the PPF, it will have 
to be revised and adapted to the final organisation chart of the PCU with a view to its harmonious 
integration within the Ministry of Rural Development, where it will collaborate with certain services. 
The internal control of the project will be based on this manual. 

Project accounting will be kept using the “Success” software procured with an advance from the 
Project Preparation Fund (PPF). The accounting will include all project sources of financing (ADF 
loan, NTF loan and counterpart contributions). The “Success” software will be configured to cover 
all project components and expenditure categories. It should be able to produce quarterly financial 
reports and annual financial statements. 

4.1.10 Disbursement Arrangements: The ADF and NTF loans will be disbursed in accordance with 
the rules and procedures of the Bank's Disbursement Manual, using the direct payment methods (ADF 
loan and NTF ) and the special account method (ADF loan for expenses related to recurrent activities 
and operations). A special account will be opened for this purpose in a bank acceptable to AfDB. 

4.1.11 Account Audit: project financial statements will be audited by an independent external auditor 
annually and at project completion in accordance with the terms of reference (TORs) for the audit of 
AfDB-funded projects. The first audit of the project will include an audit of the use of the Project 
Preparation Fund (PPF) advance in accordance with the Letter of Agreement. Project audit reports 
shall reach the Bank latest six months following the end of the audited fiscal year.  

4.2 Monitoring and Evaluation 

4.2.1 The project will adopt a results-based approach and impact-oriented monitoring (IOM). In 
this regard, a performance measurement framework (PMF) was prepared during the appraisal in 
consultation with the project team (see details in Appendix C.3 Volume 2). As regards this PMF, 
internal monitoring will be carried out by the M/E officer at the PCU level and will serve as a basis 
for evaluating project performance. Monitoring at the central level will be carried out jointly by the 
Directorate for Strategy, Cooperation and Monitoring/Evaluation (DSCSE) in the Ministry of 
Agriculture and MEF's General Directorate for Public Investments and Economic Cooperation 
(DG/IPCE). 

4.2.2 Activities scheduled under the project are summed up in the table below. These activities 
will be conducted following the project implementation schedule presented on Page (vi).  

  



 

 17 

Table 4.2 : Schedule and Key Stages of the Project 
Period Stages Monitoring Activities/Feedback Loop 

September 2016 Application of advance 
contracting (AC) 

Adoption of the national system 

December 2018 Project approval  Approval by the AfDB Group Board of Directors 
December  2018 Signature of the loan 

agreements 
Letter of Invitation to the Borrower  

February 2019 Project launching  Jointly organise the launch of the workshop with the Government 
(Bank’s launch mission) 

2019 – 2023 Award of contracts for the 
procurement of materials and 
equipment  

Bid invitation and evaluation (PCU and associated partners); signing of 
contracts (PCU/Ministry of Rural Development): Involvement of 
ANAPEJ, IPM, ENFVA-CFPR, CNRADA, DDFCA etc. 

Works and services Works execution (companies); works supervision and control; launch of 
DPs and bid evaluation; signing of TA contracts; TA coordination and 
supervision (transformative structure component); etc.  

2019 – 2023 Project supervision Loan administration; Supervision of project activities; Field supervision 
(two missions per year) 

December 2023 Project completion Completion report drafting meeting by ADF/NTF 

4.3 Governance 

4.3.1 The Mauritanian Government has made efforts over the past five years to increase 
transparency in public affairs management, adopt good governance practices and streamline 
public spending. Hence, it created the Monitoring Committee responsible for implementing the 
National Anti-Corruption Strategy (SNLC) to strengthen the powers and effectiveness of the 
supervisory authorities and the judiciary, and to enhance the key role of Parliament as an entity tasked 
with public expenditure control. This strategy gives civil society the opportunity to express itself, 
formulate opinions and take action with the authorities and the judiciary. The Government has also 
directed macroeconomic policy towards the elimination of extra-budgetary expenditure and budgetary 
financing by the Central Bank of Mauritania, as well as the reduction of recurrent expenditure. 
However, despite these efforts, governance reforms remain insufficient. In 2017, Mauritania was 
ranked 41st out of 54 African countries by the Ibrahim Index of African Governance (IIAG). 
According to the same report, the country's ranking deteriorated over the 2012-2016 period. Under 
Transparency International's Corruption Perceptions Index (CPI), Mauritania's score also deteriorated 
from 31/100 in 2015 to 28/100 in 2017, dropping 31 spots in world ranking (143rd in 2017 compared 
to 112th in 2015). Also, the 2016 Global Competitiveness Index identifies corruption as the third most 
problematic obstacle to doing business in Mauritania. 

4.3.2 In recent years, the Mauritanian Government, with the support of its technical and financial 
partners (TFPs), has initiated a sustained reform programme to improve the national public 
procurement system. This resulted in the adoption of Public Procurement Code 2010-040, which 
incorporates best practice in transparency and competition. To build on this regulatory environment 
for implementation of the provisions of the Paris Declaration on the use of national procedures for the 
execution of AfDB-funded projects, the Bank conducted a detailed review of Mauritania's 
procurement system in 2017. The review, which is currently being validated, concluded that the 
criteria of economy, equity, transparency and integrity are generally met by Mauritania's country 
procurement system. In terms of reforms, and with a view to improving the fiduciary framework for 
public expenditure and procurement efficiency, Mauritania adopted a new decree (No. 126-2017) in 
November 2017 repealing all the implementing decrees of Public Procurement Code 2010-040. This 
new implementing instrument ensures better consistency between the regulations and the public 
procurement code. In the area of financial management, the Government recently introduced a public 
budgetary and accounting management system, called Rashad. State expenditure on projects is 
executed through this system. 



 

 18 

4.4. Sustainability  

4.4.1 In view of the high priority given by the Mauritanian authorities to the agricultural sector 
with a view to diversifying the national economy, major public expenditure has been planned to 
support the construction of the irrigation schemes. Therefore, this project will enjoy total ownership 
by government structures (MEF, Ministry of Rural Development, MEDD, etc.) that have the required 
qualifications in the field, and will receive adequate counterpart funding. Recurrent (additional) 
expenditure due to the project will be budgeted and borne by the (regular) operating budget of the 
Ministry of Rural Development, to which the Servicing and Maintenance Fund to be established will 
make a significant contribution mainly to cover the maintenance and servicing costs of the 
transformative irrigation schemes.  

4.4.2 The project seeks to revive flood-recession farming in seven basins totalling 3,300 ha, 
develop vegetable farming areas totalling 200 ha for women, guarantee and ensure the availability of 
water for flood-recession farming, protect against floods and open up access to these areas. Thus, 
through the activities planned, PATAM will have a strong impact to stimulate the social and economic 
development of the project area. It will be recalled that one of the significant impacts of PAHABO is 
the reverse exodus phenomenon that has resulted in the resettlement of more than 1,500 households 
in the project area from the big cities (Nouakchott, Rosso, Nouadhibou, etc). Thus, farmers’ 
involvement in ensuring project ownership and their participation in financing and executing works 
to rehabilitate the farming areas, as well as measures taken to train and organise beneficiaries to ensure 
proper infrastructure management and maintenance will increase project viability and sustainability. 

4.5. Risk Management 

4.5.1 The main risk factors that could compromise project implementation are: (i) insufficient 
interdepartmental coordination; (ii) climate hazards; (iii) limited stakeholder institutional capacity; 
(iv) lack of financial inclusion and insufficient access to finance and credit; (v) poor maintenance and 
servicing of the irrigation schemes that affects the sustainability of the system, crop production and 
profitability; and (vi) procurement delays and their impact on the disbursement rate. 

4.5.2 The main risk factors and appropriate mitigation measures are summarised in the table below: 

Potential Risks Mitigation Measures Level 
Insufficient capacity for inter-sector 
coordination at the national level and 
consultation at the local level 

Establishment of an inter-sector National Steering Committee and a 
Local Consultative Committee. ++ 

Recurrent climatic hazards/droughts Dissemination of resilient technology and seeds. ++ 
Limited stakeholder institutional capacity The programme provides for stakeholder capacity building. ++ 

Problem of financial inclusion and access to 
funding and credit 

The project provides for: (i) a guarantee fund to improve financial 
inclusion; (ii) a partnership convention with Crédit Agricole de 
Mauritanie (CAM); (iii) assistance in the organisation of the 
beneficiaries to facilitate access to credit; and (iv) promotion of 
agricultural insurance. 

+++ 

Poor servicing and maintenance of irrigation 
schemes 

Support for the organisation of water usage, socio-professional 
associations (SPAs) and the establishment of a Servicing and 
Maintenance Fund. 

+++ 

Procurement delays and impact on bid 
invitations and on the disbursement rate 

(i) Use of the national system (ref. applied thresholds); (ii) application 
of advance contracting (APA); (iii) development and implementation of 
necessary tools and capacity building: technical support in procurement, 
development and implementation of public procurement to improve 
upstream (procurement monitoring) and downstream expenditure 
(disbursement planning and monitoring). 

+++ 

Highly significant: +++; Significant: ++; Less significant: +; Not significant: - 



 

 19 

4.6 Knowledge Building 

4.6.1 PATAM’s implementation will help to develop knowledge on new irrigation techniques, 
yield enhancement, promotion of the rice and market gardening sectors, farming of high value-added 
crops, management and saving of water resources, and mitigation of the effects of climate change. 
The TAAT initiative will provide support and contribute to: (i) the optimal exploitation of water 
resources; (ii) the adoption of participatory management of the irrigation scheme; and (iii) the use of 
various information systems established (monitoring/evaluation, mapping, agricultural insurance, 
guarantee system, etc.). The training and information sessions envisaged by the project for the 
provision of agricultural advice on irrigation techniques and farming practices to beneficiaries and 
technicians will provide another channel for enhancing and disseminating knowledge. The project 
will also run the Research and Development Programme sub-component, in addition to supporting 
Young Agricultural Entrepreneurs and their involvement in the priority subsector value chains 
retained. The main knowledge gained and lessons learned will be reflected in the project's periodic 
reports and completion report, filed in the Bank's archiving system and published on the websites of 
the ministries concerned (MEF, Ministry of Rural Development, MEDD and ANAPEJ, etc.); (iv) 
design production value models, value chain development in project areas and market access; and (v) 
promote a contractual framework between the stakeholders involved in project implementation. The 
training and information sessions envisaged by the project to promote research and development, and 
support farmers to master irrigation techniques and farming practices constitutes an ideal channel for 
knowledge dissemination. Furthermore, the institution building provided to grassroots organisations 
(rice cooperatives, women's vegetable-farming cooperatives, EIGs, water users' organisations, etc.) 
will give these structures the necessary capacity to serve more effectively as an interface with the 
Ministry of Rural Development. This knowledge will be systematically captured and documented in 
best practice manuals, monitoring and evaluation reports, supervision missions and periodic reports 
that will be shared at country and Bank level. The main knowledge gained and lessons learned will be 
reflected in the project's periodic reports and completion report, filed in the Bank's archiving system 
and published on the websites of the Ministries and stakeholders concerned (MEF, Ministry of 
Agriculture, MEDD, ANAPEJ, IPM, BCM, CAM and NBM). The “African Digital Financial 
Inclusion (ADFI) initiative will be promoted for innovative solutions targeting smart agriculture. 

V. Legal Framework 

5.1 Legal Instrument 

The financing instruments selected are: (i) a loan agreement between the ADF and the Islamic 
Republic of Mauritania; and (ii) a loan agreement between the AfDB acting as the administrator of 
the Nigeria Trust Fund (NTF) and the Islamic Republic of Mauritania. 

5.2 Conditions Associated with the Bank’s Intervention 

5.2.1 Conditions Precedent to Effectiveness: The NTF and ADF loan agreements shall become 
effective subject to the Borrower’s fulfilment, to the satisfaction of the ADF and the Bank, of the 
conditions provided for in Section 12.01 of the General Conditions for Loan Agreements and 
Guarantee Agreements of the ADF and the ADB respectively. 

5.2.2 Conditions Precedent to First Disbursement of the Loans: Apart from effectiveness of the 
Loan Agreements, first disbursement of the ADF and NTF loan resources shall be subject to the 
Borrower’s fulfilment of the following conditions, to the Bank’s satisfaction: 



 

 20 

 Provide evidence to the Bank (representing the NTF) and the ADF of the decision to create 
the Project Coordination Unit under the technical supervision of the Directorate for Strategy, 
Cooperation and Monitoring/Evaluation (DSCSE) within the Ministry of Rural Development; 
 

 The submission of a certified copy of the Project Coordination Charter (PCC) signed between 
the Project Coordination Unit (PCU), the Directorate in charge of Strategy, Cooperation and 
Monitoring and Evaluation, Directorate in charge of the Development of Sub-sectors and 
Agriculture Board (DFCA), National Center for Agronomic Research and Agricultural 
Development (CNRADA), National School of Training and Agricultural Extension (ENFVA) 
and Rural Producers Training Center (CFPR), the National Agency for the Promotion of 
Youth Employment (ANAPEJ) and the Directorate of Environmental Protection (DPN), and 
approved by the Secretary General of the Ministry of Rural Development and the Minister of 
the Environment. Economy and Finance, the terms and conditions of which will have been 
satisfactory to the Fund;  
 

 The submission of a certified copy of each of the Partnership Agreements signed between the 
Project Coordination Unit ("PCU") and (i) the Department in charge of the Development of 
Sub-sectors and the Agricultural Board (DFCA); ( ii) the National Center for Agronomic 
Research and Agricultural Development (CNRADA); (iii) the National School of  Training 
and Agricultural Extension (ENFVA) and the Rural Producers Training Center (CFPR); (iv) 
the National Youth Employment Agency (ANAPEJ); and (v) the Directorate of 
Environmental Protection (DPN), the terms and conditions of which have been deemed 
satisfactory by the Fund; and  
 

 The submission of satisfactory evidence of the inclusion in the State budget for the 2019 year 
of the government's financial contribution and the opening of the annual budgetary 
appropriation relating thereto. 

5.2.3 Other conditions: Furthermore, the Borrower shall: 

 submit to the Fund within three months of the first disbursement, evidence of the recruitment 
of members of the PCU, namely: Project Coordinator, Administrative and Financial Manager, 
procurement expert, GR Engineer, Agronomist, Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist, Gender 
and Communication Specialist, and Accountant within the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) 
whose qualifications and terms of reference have been deemed acceptable by the Funds; 

 submit to the Fund within three months of the first disbursement, evidence of the creation of: 
(i) a National Steering Committee (NSC) chaired by the Secretary-General of the Ministry of 
Rural Development and whose composition has been deemed satisfactory by the Fund; and 
(ii) a Local Consultative Committee (LCC) chaired by the Hakem of Moughatâa of Boghé and 
whose composition has been deemed satisfactory by the Fund; 

 send to the Fund, before 31 December 2020, evidence of the establishment and opening of a 
regional agency of the National Agency for Youth Employment (ANAPEJ) in Boghé; 

 set up, no later than 30 June 2019, a technical committee to support the Project Coordination 
Unit (PCU) in charge of the validation of studies planned for within the framework of the 
Project; 



 

 21 

 submit to the Fund, no later than 31 December 2019, a summary note from the land reform 
study and prospects for agricultural land; 

 send to the Fund, before 31 December 2020, evidence of the availability of the seed grant 
within the Maintenance and Operations Fund; and 

 provide the Fund, by 31 January of each year, with evidence of the inclusion in the State budget 
for the year concerned of the Government's counterpart contribution and the opening of the 
related annual budgetary appropriation. 

5.2.4  Commitments  

(i) The Borrower undertakes to comply with the project. In this regard, the Borrower shall implement 
the project and ensure that the Executing Agency, its contractors and/or agents implement it in 
accordance with the provisions of the Loan Agreements and Article IX (Project Implementation - 
Cooperation and Information) of the General Conditions. 

(ii) Institutional Provisions: The Borrower undertakes to act as follows, to the Bank’s satisfaction: 

 The main tasks of the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) will be to ensure (i) the 
construction of infrastructure and flood control structures, their development, 
animation, training, extension and support. Project activities; (ii) Planning, 
programming, and administrative and financial management of the Project; and (iii) 
Coordination, monitoring and evaluation and supervision of Project activities; and 

 The National Steering Committee (NSC) will be in charge of guiding, orientating and 
supervising the implementation of the Project, notably through the review of the annual 
work programme and budget submitted by the PCU and the assessment of the project 
implementation status. 

(iii) Environmental and Social Safeguards 

The Borrower shall undertake and ensure that the Executing Agency and each of its contractors, sub-
contractors and workers also undertake to: 

(a) Implement the Project in accordance with the ESMP, the Fund's Safeguards Policy and 
applicable national legislation in a manner satisfactory to the Fund, in substance and 
form; 

(b) Prepare and submit to the Fund, as part of the Project Report, [semi-annual/quarterly 
reports] on the implementation of the ESMP, including identified shortcomings and 
corrective actions taken; and 

(c) Refrain from any action that would prevent or hinder the implementation of the ESMP, 
including any modification, suspension, waiver and/or cancellation of any provision 
related thereto, in whole or in part, without the prior written consent of the Fund; and 

(d) Cooperate fully with the Fund in the event that the implementation of the Project or 
any change in its scope results in unforeseen displacement and / or resettlement of 
populations; and undertake to commence works in the area affected by the 



 

 22 

implementation of the Project only if all Project Affected Persons (PAPs) are 
compensated and / or resettled in accordance with the Resettlement Plan (RP) prepared.  

(iv)  Other commitments: The Borrower undertakes, to the satisfaction of the Fund, to maintain the Project 
Coordination Unit (PCU) under the technical supervision of the Directorate for Strategy, 
Cooperation and Monitoring and Evaluation (DSCSE) within the Project Executing Agency up to 
completion of the Project. 

(v) Integrity: The Borrower shall implement the project, and ensure that the Executing Agency and 
each of its contractors and/or agents implements the project, in accordance with the provisions of the 
Anti-Corruption Policies. 

5.3 Compliance with Bank Group Policies 

The project complies with all applicable Bank policies. 

VI. RECOMMENDATION 

Management recommends that the Boards of Directors approve: (i) the proposal to grant an ADF loan 
not exceeding UA 7 million to the Islamic Republic of Mauritania; (ii) the proposal to grant an NTF 
loan not exceeding UA 6 million to the Islamic Republic of Mauritania, to finance the Agricultural 
Transformation Support Project in Mauritania (PATAM) under the conditions set out in this report. 

 



 