














































  

AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK GROUP 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

PROGRAMME  : GOVERNANCE AND AGRIBUSINESS PROMOTION 
     SUPPORT PROGRAMME - (PAGPA) 

 
COUNTRY    : REPUBLIC OF TOGO  

 

APPRAISAL REPORT  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
PROGRAMME INFORMATION 

 

INSTRUMENT :    General Budget Support 

PBO MODEL DESIGN:                                    Programme Support Operation 

 

GRANT INFORMATION 

Client Information  

BORROWER:       Togolese Republic 

EXECUTING AGENCY:  Ministry of Economy and Finance 

Permanent Secretariat for Reform Policy and 

Programmes Monitoring 

FINANCING PLAN  

 

Source Amount  Instrument 

 

ADF 

 

9.53 Million 

 

GRANT 

FMI 

BM 

UE 

59,67 Million DTS 

50 Million USD                

19 Millions Euros 

 

LOAN 

GRANT 

GRANT 

 

  
Key ADF Financing Information 

 

 

GRANT Currency  

 

UA 

Commitment Fee 0.0%  

Other fees (services) 0.00%  

Maturity  

 

 

Implementation Schedule – Milestones (expected) 

 

Concept Note Approval 

 

June  2017 

Appraisal July  2017 

PAGPA Programme Approval  29 November 2017  

Effectiveness November  2017 

Last Disbursement  June  2018 

Completion December 2018 

 



iv  

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
 

Programme 

overview  

 

Country: TOGO. 

Programme Name: Governance and Agribusiness Support Programme (PAGPA) 

Overall Implementation Schedule: November 2017 – December 2018 

Operational Instrument: General Budget Support  

Programme Cost: UA 9.53 million disbursed in a single tranche in 2017 

Sector: Economic Governance and Agro-industry  

Programme 

Outcomes 
The main expected outcomes under Component A are: (i) a shorter ownership 

transfer timeframe from 283 days in 2016 to 60 days (WAEMU zone recorded 

average); (ii) a reduced agricultural trade deficit from CFAF 64 billion to 40 

billion, (iii) Togo's enhanced resilience to spatial and gender inequality-related 

fragility factors through the promotion of regional development around Agropoles 

and (iv) land tenure security on developed sites. Regarding Component B: (i) 

increased tax pressure from 17.9% in 2016 to 19.1% in 2018; (ii) optimized 

investment management, with the PI-11 rating moving from D to at least C in 2018; 

(iii) improved local tax governance through effective skills transfer and enhanced 

technical capabilities of local and regional authorities. 

Alignment with  

Bank  

Priorities 

 

PAGPA is aligned with the national development programme, SCAPE 2013-2017, 

notably Pillar (I) development of sectors with strong growth potential and Pillar 

(IV) strengthening governance. It is also aligned with the two pillars of the Bank's 

CSP (2016-2020), namely: (i) Development of inclusive growth and agribusiness 

competitiveness poles and (ii) Support for financial, sector and local governance 

and the Bank's 2013-2022 Ten-year Strategy as well as the Bank's Governance 

Action Plan (GAP II 2014-2018), more specifically, it contributes to the 

achievement of three of the Bank's five key strategic priorities (i) "Feed Africa," 

(ii) "Industrialize Africa" through agro-industry promotion measures, and (iii) 

"Improve the quality of life for the people of Africa" by supporting reforms seeking 

improved budget management and public action effectiveness through enhanced 

economic and financial governance. 

 

Needs  

Assessment and  

Programme  

Rationale 

 

The encouraging socio-economic performance notwithstanding, Togo remains in 

fragile situation due mainly to the wide spatial disparities in wealth generation and 

distribution. Economic activity remains mainly concentrated in the maritime 

region which generates on average 97% of the tax revenues collected by the OTR, 

against merely 2% for the other regions representing 89% of the territory and 57% 

of the population. To boost its resilience and accelerate its exit from fragility, Togo 

is banking on the structural transformation of the agricultural sector, notably 

through the establishment of agriculture hubs (Agropoles) for economic as well as 

social inclusion reasons. The effective implementation of this strategy requires 

mobilizing substantial investments, both public and private. The total cost estimate 

for the 2016-2020 phase is CFAF 3,791 billion, with an average financing ratio of 

46% from the State budget and 56% from the private sector. PAGPA, by 

concomitantly supporting substantial increase in internal resources, improving the 

private investment climate and strengthening agricultural sector governance, will 

provide Togo with the required financial and technical capabilities to implement 

its agricultural policy, a vehicle for sustainable and inclusive growth. Additionally, 

budget support resources will cover some of the financing requirements of the 

2017 budget, amounting to CFAF 400.6 billion. 

Harmonization Efforts are still required to coordinate the interventions of technical and financial 

partners (TFPs), in particular those engaging in budget support. The budget support 

consultation framework (COAB) set up since 2010, remains inoperative. The TFPs 

are yet to develop a joint matrix of their interventions, for which agreement with 

the government is awaited regarding its orientation, but they are working to 



v  

strengthen the complementarity of their actions in terms of dialogue and reforms 

monitoring. 
 

Bank’s Value  

Added 

 

The Bank has acquired proven expertise in strengthening economic and financial 

governance in Africa, notably in the sub-region (WAEMU). More specifically, the 

Bank has a comparative advantage in Togo for dialogue on reforms, having been 

the first development partner to re-engage after more than 15 years of dialogue 

with the international community; and on account of the results obtained in highly 

strategic areas such as revenue mobilization. Indeed, the Bank lent its full support 

to Togo in its vast and ambitious tax transition project that led to the establishment 

of OTR. PAGPA supports complementary measures to complete reforms seeking 

to optimize this structure, and diversify the economy by creating an enabling 

environment for the establishment of Agropoles. 

Contribution to 

Gender Equality 

and Women’s 

Empowerment  

Increased domestic resources mobilization and greater efficiency in public finance 

management will help improve the living conditions of the people in general and 

women in particular. PAGPA measures will lay the groundwork for a structural 

transformation of the economy, particularly at the local and regional level. The 

numerous opportunities that will open up around major Agropole projects will 

benefit women. In particular, that of the Kara region, the first pilot Agropole to be 

established with the support of this programme should, by 2020, help create 2,500 

jobs, 30% for women and 65% for the youth.  

 

Dialogue on 

Policies and  

Associated 

Technical 

Assistance  

 

 

PAGPA will help reinforce dialogue with the Government on public policies to 

support Togo’s economic transformation. The dialogue will focus on conditions 

for the effective implementation of the agricultural policy, with special focus on 

issues related to broadening the tax base to maximize domestic resources 

mobilization, thus strengthening macro-stability and creating a private investment-

friendly environment. Through ongoing capacity-building projects, the Resource 

Mobilization and institutional capacity building support project (PAMOCI) and 

the Fiscal Governance Support Project (PAGFI), Togo will continue to benefit 

from the assistance of national and international experts in revenue mobilization. 

The implementation of the agribusiness reforms will be supported by the 

investment project being prepared by the department in charge of agriculture in the 

Bank, which is aimed at establishing the Kara Agropole. The submission of this 

project to the Bank's Board of Directors is scheduled for December 2017. 



 

vi 

EXPECTED RESULTS - BASED LOGICAL FRAMEWORK 

 

Country and Project Name: TOGO: Governance and Agribusiness Promotion Support Programme (PAGPA) 

Project Goal: Contribute towards creating conditions for strong and inclusive growth supported by agribusiness.  
 

RESULTS CHAIN   PERFORMANCE INDICATORS MEANS OF 

VERIFICATI

ON 

RISKS/MITIGATION 

MEASURES  

Indicator (including CSIs)  
 

Baseline Situation Target   

IM
P

A
C

T
 Growth is 

sustained and 

more inclusive 

 

Economic Growth Rate   

5,1% in 2016 

 

5.6% in 2020 

INS  

HDI adjusted to inequalities 0.332 in 2015  0.400 in 2020 UNDP 

O
U

T
C

O
M

E
S

 

Outcome 1 :  

The 

agricultural 

sector’s added 

value in the 

economy is 

increased 

1.1Number of taxes per year 

 
49 in 2016 At most 39 in 2018. DB-WB 

Report 

Risk 1: Political 

instability: strong 

tensions related to the 

claims  

concerning the 

limitation of the 

number of presidential 

mandates 

 

Mitigation 

measures1: The 

Government is 

committed to revising 

the constitution in 

order to limit the 

number of presidential 

terms to two. The 

dialogue between the 

political actors 

continues 

 

Risk 2: 

Macroeconomic 

instability linked to 

the country's 

economic 

vulnerability to 

exogenous shocks 

Mitigation measures 

2: The Government is 

committed to 

strengthening the 

country's resilience by 

implementing a 

genuine policy of 

structural 

transformation of the 

economy and 

pursuing reforms 

agreed with the IMF 

and other partners. 

Risk 3: Fiduciary 

Risks due to 

weaknesses in the 

public finance 

management system 

Mitigation measures 

3: The effective 

implementation of the 

PA- GFP and the 

measures provided for 

in the PAGPA 1 will 

contribute towards 

consolidating the 

1.2  

Property transfer timeframes 
283 2016 90 days in 2018 

2.3 

 Agricultural trade balance deficit 
-44% in 2015 -38% in 2018 INS/ MEF/ 

Agriculture 

Outcome 2:  

Internal 

resources 

mobilization 

and public 

investment 

management 

are  improved 

1.1 Improved Tax burden  17.9%  en 2016 18.3% in 2017 and 19,1% in 

2018 

OTR SP-PRPF 

MEF 

1.2 Improved investment 

management 
PI.11 D in 2016 PI.11= C in 2018 PEFA/ 

Auto 

A) Support for improved private investment environment and agribusiness promotion 
 

A.1) 

Improving the 

private 

investment 

environment 

a.1.1) Adoption of land code by 

Council of Ministers  

 

Draft Code prepared; 

Transfer timeframe 283 

days in 2016 

Land code and rural registry 

adopted in Ministerial 

Council in 2017 

DADC 

a.1.2) Review and adoption of the 

investment code 

2012 Code in force very 

unfavourable to the 

cross-cutting objective 

of rationalization of 

exemptions, promotion 

of agribusiness and job 

creation 

The Investment and Free 

Zones Promotion Agency 

Operational in 2018 

 

Min industry/ 

Commerce/ 

Agriculture 

a.1.3) Adoption of the revised 

simplified tax code  

Preliminary draft code 

in the validation process 

Simplified tax code 

validated in 2018 

 

a.1.4) Adoption by the Council of 

Ministers of a National Strategy 

for Private Sector Development 

A draft Strategy already 

exists  

Private Sector Development 

Strategy adopted in 2018 

Ministry of 

Commerce and 

Private Sector 

MEF/SP-PRFP a.1.5) Creation of the Business 

Climate Unit 

No unit for the actions 

coordination 

Decree adopted by the 

Council of Ministers in 

2017 

A.2) 

Strengthening  

of the legal and 

institutional 

framework for  

agribusiness 

development 

 

 

 

 

 

 

a.2.1) Adoption by Council of 

Ministers of the National Strategy 

for Agropoles Development  

 

Preliminary draft 

strategy 

National Agropoles 

development strategy 

adopted in 20170 

Min industry/ 

Agriculture 

a.2.2) Rural roads  built in the area 

of the Kara agropole  

0 Km Km of rural roads built in 

2017 and 35 km in 2018 in 

the area of Kara Agropole 

a.2.3 Agricultural lands 

developed in the area of the Kara 

agropole 

0 Ha 

 
 500 ha in 2017 and 300 ha 

in 2018 of agricultural land 

developed in  the area of 

Kara Agropole, of which at 

least 30% for women's 

and/or mostly women's 

organizations 
a.2.4 Adoption by Council of 

Ministers of the National 

No industrial policy or 

agro-industry strategy  

The national 

industrialization policy and 



vii  

Industrialization Policy and  

National Agro-Industry Strategy 

the national agro-industry 

strategy are adopted in 2018 

gains and accelerating 

improved integrity of 

the public finance 

management system. 

Risk 4: 

 Weak human 

capacity to implement 

the reforms identified 

in general, and those 

related to Agropoles 

development, in 

particular. Mitigation 

measures 4: High-

level technical 

assistance to the 

Government on the 

design and 

deployment of 

Agropoles will be 

provided and financed 

by the Bank's Project 

Preparation Fund.  

 

Risk 5: Weakness of 

arrangements for co-

ordination of budget 

support 

 

 

Mitigation measures 

5 
the authorities are 

committed to 

strengthening 

arrangements for 

coordination and 

monitoring of budget 

support to make them 

more operational.  
 

 

 

 

a.2.5) Operationalization of the 

High Authority for Quality and 

technical Quality Structures  

The High Authority 

created is not 

operational 

. Director General is 

appointed and his team  set 

up 
   

B) Support for internal resources mobilization and optimal management of public 
investment 

 

B.1) Improved 

revenue 

mobilization 

 

 

 

 

b.1.1) Adoption by Council of 

Ministers of the new National 

Customs Code 

 Draft code 

 

 

Code adopted in 2017 

Code adopted in 2017 

 

SP-PRPF 

OTR 

SP-PRPF 

b.1.2) Establishment of the Fiscal 

Policy Unit by the MEF 

Draft establishment 

instrument 

Establishment in 2017 

b.1.3) Implementation of the 

Lomé tax registry 

 Study conducted The decree establishing  the 

Lomé region tax registry is 

adopted in 2017 

b.1.4) Adoption by Council of 

Ministers of the bill on the 

transfer of powers and resources 

to local and regional authorities 

Bill prepared  Bill adopted in 2017  

b.1.5) Study on gender 

mainstreaming in tax policy 

No analytical paper on 

the issue 

Study and adoption of an 

action plan for the 

implementation of 

recommendations validated 

in 2017 
b.1.6) Adoption of the national 

gender strategy in 2018 by 

Council of Ministers 

 No strategy National gender strategy 

adopted in 2018 

B.2)Enhanced 

investment 

management 

b.2.1Development of a public 

investments planning, selection 

and programming manual 

No manual or formal 

procedures 

 

Manual approved in 2017, 

PIP revised, 100% of the 

projects registered for 2018 

are validated by the 

selection committee 

 

SP-PRPF/DP 

b.2.2 Creation of Agency for 

government participation 

 

Poor performance  in the 

monitoring of investments 

Decree adopted in 2017 ; unit to 

be operational in 2018. 

b.2.3  adoption by the Minister a 

decree related on  reorganization 

and functioning of regional 

monitoring committees of 

investment project 

No coordinated 

monitoring of project 

implementation at local 

level 

 

The committees are set up 

in 2017 and 100% of 

investment projects in 

region have been supervised 

in 2018 

b.2.4) Finalization of the 

adaptation of SIGFIP to the 

technical requirements of the 

implementation of programme 

budgets (2019 Budget Policy 

Debate follows programme 

budget) 

BPD does not follow 

programme budget 

format  

Holding of the DOB in 2018 

at the National Assembly 

according to the programme 

budget format  

 

b.2.5) Deconcentration of 

financial control and duties, 

organization and functioning of 

financial control 

 

Centralized financial 

control 

Decree adopted in 2017; 

The controllers of the 5 

regions and the Ministry of 

Agriculture are appointed 

and installed in 2018 

SP-PRPF/DCF 

 

b.2.6) Conduct and regular 

publication of public procurement 

audits 

 

Audits of 2013 

conducted and 

published 

 Public Procurement Audit 

Reports 2014 and 2015 

published in 2017 

Components Funding 

Component A: Support for the promotion of Agropoles 

and strengthening of local governance 

 

AfDB : UA 9.53 million in 2017  

External financing of the funding requirement 2017 

Bank: UA 9.53 million 

IMF: SDR 50.4 million 

EU: EUR 19 million  

WB: USD 50 million 

Component B: Support for internal resources 

mobilization and optimal management of public 

investments 
 



1  

I. INTRODUCTION - THE PROPOSAL. 

1.1 Management submits the following proposal and recommendation for a grant of 

UA 7.21 million from Transition Support Facility (TSF) resources, and a grant of UA 2.32 

million from African Development Fund (ADF) resources, to the Republic of Togo to 

finance the Governance and Agribusiness Promotion Support Programme (PAGBA). 

PAGPA supports reforms aimed at creating a private and public investment environment 

conducive to agribusiness promotion, and improving revenue mobilization notably for capital 

investment purposes. It is designed as a reform operation funded by a budget support of 

total amount of UA 9.53 million to be disbursed in a single tranche in 2017. 

1.2 Single tranche disbursement, was justify by the particularity of 2017 fiscal year 

situation, which presents a high level of need for concessional financing mainly due to Togo's 

limited access to borrowing resources;  this is in accordance to the Government commitments 

under the framework of the economic program (2017-2019) supported by the IMF's Extended 

Credit Facility approved in May 2017. It also emerges from the revised budget prepared 

following the conclusion of the program with IMF, an overall need for financing gap of 280.8 

CFAF billions excluding grants, part of which will be financed by the ADF and TAF grant 

resources. On account of this financial support for Togo's budget, social sector allocations will 

be maintained, thus minimizing risks of the social climate deteriorating at this crucial 

transitional phase towards exiting fragility. With the programme spanning the November 2017 

to December 2018 period, the Bank will maintain sustained dialogue with the Togolese 

authorities for the effective implementation of the reforms scheduled for 2018. These reforms 

will be monitored in close collaboration with the IMF, World Bank and European Union whose 

programmes cover the 2017-2019 period. 

1.3 Despite the favourable outlook, Togo remains confronted with a number of socio-

economic challenges, including inadequate internal resources and an underperforming 

economy with low and non-inclusive value added creation. Despite efforts by GoT and the 

structural reforms implemented in recent years, including the creation of the OTR and the 

adoption of a new customs code, internal resources mobilization remains low compared to the 

financing requirements of the Accelerated Growth and Employment Promotion Strategy 

(SCAPE). The operationalization of the OTR, which is strongly supported by the Bank, has 

definitely yielded encouraging results, with a tax burden of 17.9% in 2016 that is expected to 

reach 18.3% in 2017 and 19.1% in 2018. However, despite this positive trend, on account of 

Togo's weak capacity to create value-added with one of Africa’s lowest GDPs, the absolute 

value of domestic revenues collected falls far short of the budget’s funding requirements. The 

average coverage rate of budgetary spending by tax revenue is about 60%, hence its heavy 

dependence on external financing and public borrowing both internally and externally. Indeed 

since 2016, Togo's debt risk is considered high with a debt ratio of 80.8% of GDP. In this regard, 

GoT has committed, under the new programme with the IMF, to lowering this rate to not more 

than 73% by 2019. 

 

 



2  

1.4 In a bid to maintain medium and long-term viability of the macro-fiscal 

framework, Togo is banking on the structural transformation of the agricultural sector 

to give sustained and inclusive impetus to accelerated economic growth. To leverage this 

sector as a prime mover of economic growth and social inclusion, the country has formulated 

and adopted an agricultural policy (2015-2030) aimed at achieving "a modern, sustainable and 

high value-added agriculture to support a strong, inclusive, competitive economy generating 

decent and stable employment by 2030". The country’s agriculture sector employs 60-70% of 

the working population and accounts for up to 38% of GDP. This sector has significant potential 

with 3.4 million hectares of arable land, of which only 45% is currently under cultivation 

yielding less than 50% of the optimum level. Furthermore, the industrial processing of 

agricultural products is in its infancy, as is the Togolese industrial sector as a whole. Over the 

last three years, the industrial sector, which is not well developed and is poorly integrated with 

the rest of the economy, contributed an average of 17.8% to GDP, with an average annual 

growth rate of 1.3%. PAGPA is a continuation of the Bank's previous PARG-II budget support 

and will allow more in-depth reforms focusing on strengthening public finance management 

and creating conditions conducive to agro-industry development. 

1.5 PAGPA is aligned with Togo's national development policies and contributes 

towards implementing the Bank's intervention strategies in Togo. PAGPA is in line with 

the national development agenda, SCAPE 2013-2017, particularly Pillar (I) "development of 

sectors with strong growth potential" and Pillar (IV) "strengthening governance". It is also 

aligned with the two pillars of the Bank's CSP (2016-2020), namely: “Development of inclusive 

growth and agribusiness competitiveness poles” and (ii) “Support for financial, sector and local 

governance”. It is also consistent with the Bank's ten-year strategy 2013-2022 and the 

Governance Action Plan (GAP II 2014-2018). More specifically, it is aimed at contributing to 

the achievement of three of the Bank's High-5s: (i) "Feed Africa", (ii) "Industrialize Africa" 

and (iii) "Improve the quality of life for the people of Africa". 

1.6 In accordance with the Bank's Policy on Budget Support Operations, this proposed 

operation is subject to consideration by the Board following the implementation of the agreed 

prior actions, which are fully consistent with the reform programme of the Government of Togo 

(GoT), designed in consultation with civil society and the country's technical and financial 

partners. 

II. COUNTRY CONTEXT 

2.1 Political Situation and Governance Context 

2.1.1 Political Situation: The 2015 presidential election which was won by the Presidential 

Party, and intensified dialogue between the ruling party and the opposition, contributed towards 

easing the political climate up to the end of the first half of 2017. This relative political stability 

has been conducive to the implementation of structural reforms for a progressive exit from the 

situation of fragility. However, the August 2017 political demonstrations, with sporadic 

violence, indicate that the dialogue during the budget support programme period could unfold 

in the context marked by tension arising from the holding of the legislative elections in 2018, 

local elections in 2019 and the presidential election in 2020. 



3  

2.1.2 Fragility Situation: Despite the progress achieved in recent years, particularly in 

economic terms, Togo remains in a fragile situation. Its average score in the Bank's and World 

Bank's Country Policy and Institutional Assessment (CPIA) is 3.2 out of 6. The reconstruction 

process following the political-democratic crisis is still ongoing. The North-South ethnic and 

regional divide continues to fuel the radicalization of the divergent positions among the political 

class and recurrent social tensions. The ownershipof sustainable mechanisms of socio-political 

dialogue, that is courteous, inclusive and constructive among the political class and the elite as 

well as the strengthening of institutions, constitute major challenges that Togo will face in terms 

of political governance. Moreover, the economy’s extremely heavy dependence on the 

phosphate sub-sector (over 40% of export earnings), and on revenues from port and airport 

traffic, also constitutes a source of fragility, as do the persistent spatial socio-economic 

development and gender disparities. The new development-oriented national agricultural policy 

has the dual objective of diversifying the economy and reducing inequalities in opportunities 

between the maritime region and other regions; and between men and women, by facilitating 

women's access to land through the provisions of the new land code that is in the process of 

adoption. 

2.1.3 Governance: According to the 2016 Mo Ibrahim report on the assessment of global 

governance in Africa, Togo ranks 33rd among 54 countries evaluated with a score of 48.5 out 

of 100. Notwithstanding its poor overall ranking, Togo, with an average change of +9.7 points,  

ranks 2nd  best governance reformer over the period 2006-2015, behind Côte d'Ivoire (13.1), the 

same as Zimbabwe (+9.7) and ahead of Liberia (+8.7), and Rwanda (+8.4). It is the only country 

whose overall governance has improved steadily with progress in each of the 14 sub-categories 

of the IIAG. The 2016 report by Transparency International ranks Togo 116th  out of 176 with 

a Corruption Perception Index (CPI) of 32 against 29 in 2014, on a scale of 0 (high corruption) 

to 100 (very low corruption). 

2.2 Recent Economic Developments, Macroeconomic and Fiscal Analysis 

2.2.1 The country is characterized by limited transformation of its economy, which is 

dominated by agriculture with 47.6% of GDP, followed by services (36.2%) and industry 

(16.2%)with merely 6.4% for manufacturing. However, despite a challenging external 

environment, the Togolese authorities were able to maintain a positive trend of economic 

activity. Indeed, the GDP growth rate, which was 6.1% in 2013, remained at an average of 5.4% 

over the period 2014-2016 due to the good performance of the agriculture and infrastructure 

investment sectors. This trend is expected to continue in 2017, with a growth rate of about 5.0% 

which could reach 5.3% by 2018, due to the combined effects of fairly good rainfall and 

increased productivity arising from the agricultural sector’s transformation and the improved 

transportation system. Inflation is also contained through the stabilization of food, energy and 

transport prices. It dropped from 1.8% in 2015 to 0.9% in 2016 and is projected to be negative 

at -0.1% for 2017. An analysis conducted in 2016 by the IMF and World Bank shows that Togo 

is at high overall debt risk. 

 

 



4  

2.2.2 The country's debt risk level is deemed extremely worrying. The public debt stock 

rose sharply from 48.8% at end- 2010 to 80.8% of GDP at end- 2016, above the Community 

norm of 70%. This increase is due mainly to infrastructure investments in 2015 and 2016. 

Togo's new programme (2017-2019) under the Extended Credit Facility (ECF) with the IMF 

seeks mainly to create conditions conducive to a substantial public debt level reduction from 

80.8% of GDP in 2016 to 67.8% by 2020.1 

TOGO – Macroeconomic indicators 2013 2014 2015 2016 
2017(e) 

2018 (p) 
2019 

(p) 

GDP Growth 6,1 5,9 5,3 5,1 5,0 5,3 5,6 

 population  growth 2,8 2,8 2,8 2,6 2,6 2,6 2,6 

Real GDP growth rate per inhabitant 3,3 3,1 2,5 2,5 2,4 2,7 3,0 

Inflation 1,8% 0,2% 1,8% 0,9% -0,1% 1,2% 1,4 

Budget balance (commitment base incl. grants)  (% GDP) -4,6 -3,4 -6,3 -3,2 -2,3 -2,5 0,2 

Budget balance (cash base)  (% GDP) -5,8 -7,9 -7,8 -9,6 -4,9 -4,7 -0,7 

Current account  (% GDP) -13,9 -10,2 -11,3 -10,1 -9,0 -8,3 -7,6 

Tax burden rate (% GDP) 

 
15,9 16,2 17,4 17,9 18,3 19,1 19,3 

Source : National administrations; calculations by the authors & IMF staff report article IV May 2017 

2.2.3 The budget deficit (cash basis) deteriorated progressively over the period 2013-

2016. It reached a record 9.6% of GDP in 2016,2 against 5.8%, 7.9% and 7.8% of GDP 

respectively in 2013, 2014 and 2015. Such deterioration in the budget balance is due mainly to 

a sharp increase in the aforementioned infrastructure spendings, and high cost of commitments 

under the "pre-financing" method used by the country to finance them. This deficit is projected 

at 4.9% in 2017 and should improve slightly to 4.7% in 2018 with the discontinuation of the 

pre-financing practice at end- 2016 and the renegotiation of the terms of the related 

commitments in 2017. The external current account balance is structurally in deficit, standing 

at CFAF 142.5 billion in 2016. It could rise to CFAF -140.5 billion in 2017, representing an 

improvement of CFAF 2 billion, attributable to an increased services balance (+ CFAF 4.1 

billion) and secondary revenues (+ CFAF 1.2 billion), which is cushioned by the decrease in 

the goods trade balance (CFAF -4.0 billion). 

2.2.4 The outlook is deemed favourable. The combined effects of support for the 

modernization of agro-industry, including Agropoles and extractive industries, and the 

envisaged reforms to strengthen competition rules in the hospitality, electricity, banking and 

telecommunications sectors, should help achieve an average growth rate of 5.3% over the 

period 2017-2019. Additionally, lessons learned from the implementation of budgets (2012-

2016) and the implementation of the programme with the IMF under the Extended Credit 

Facility (2017-2019) should lead to improved budget credibility and stability. 

2.2.5 Competitiveness of the Economy    

The Togolese economy’s competitiveness is structurally constrained by low overall 

productivity and high production costs. In the report Doing Business 2018 Togo loses two 
places compared to 2017 and ranks the 156th. Similarly, although the labour force has grown 

through improved education, physical capital accumulation has stagnated since the 1990s, 

contributing to a steady decline in overall factor productivity. However, significant progress is 

                                                 
1  Togo : Staff Report for the 2016 Article IV Consultation and Request for a Three-Year Arrangement Under 

the Extended Credit Facility, May 2017 
2  Data from IMF staff report Article IV, Table1. Togo: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 2013 – 21, page 25, May 2017. 



5  

being made by Togo in the international transport sector, which is crucial to improving its 

competitiveness. Mention can be made of (i) the 700 km trans-Togo road, (ii) the coastal back 

road (54 km), (iii) the modernization and extension of the port of Lomé, whose capacity has 

increased from 0.5 to 2 million containers per year, and (iv) the construction of a new airport 

in line with international standards. These impactful infrastructures, as well as their 

geographical position, represent opportunities that reinforce Togo's objective of becoming, in 

the medium term, one of the best performing logistics hubs in the region, given its current 

comparative advantage in that domain. In that regard, the World Bank's 2016 report on the 

logistics performance index (published every two years) shows that Togo has climbed 47 

positions, from 139th out of 160 to 92nd, and remarkably 64 positions on the "Speed" indicator, 

measured by shipment forwarding to freight forwarder times or  expected goods to port delivery 

times. 

2.3 Public Finance Management   

2.3.1 Since 2010, the Government has had a National Finance Reform Strategy with a 

Public Finance Management Reform Plan (PA-RGFP), the implementation of which is 

considered generally satisfactory although subject to improvement. Following the PEFA and 

PEMFAR conducted in 2008-2009, which revealed Togo’s extremely weak public finance 

management system, GoT in September 2010 adopted a public finance management reform 

strategy for the period 2010-2020, with an action plan (PA-RGFP) implemented on a sliding 

triennial basis. The PEFA and PEMFAR evaluations conducted in 2016 show that Togo has 

made significant efforts to put in place budget management tools and procedures that are 

good enough to restore public finance sustainability. 

2.3.2 Regarding budget preparation, the budget nomenclature in force (former WAEMU 

1998 standards) is considered adequate to ensure budgetary transparency. The new 

nomenclature, which complies with the new WAEMU guidelines, is being finalized and should 

enter into force for the 2019 budget at the latest. The budget programming process has also 

improved considerably since PEFA 2008, with an increased focus on short- and medium-term 

financial balances in conjunction with medium-term macro-economic and budgetary 

frameworks, debt sustainability analyses and cash flow plans. PEFA 2016 also noted an 

increased involvement of Parliament in the budget debate. 

2.3.3 In terms of budget execution and control, developments are also deemed positive, 

with noted improvement in revenue collection and the means used to ensure better tax base 

control, as well as enhanced taxpayer monitoring. Additionally, the national government 

procurement system has been assessed by the Bank as overall satisfactory, with a moderate 

level of risk. Similarly, financial control has been strengthened and is governed by general 

regulations that are aligned with good practices in terms of segregation of duties in public 

finance management. The national procurement system was assessed in accordance with 

accepted transparency and competition standards. 

 

 

 



6  

2.3.4 However, despite the above-mentioned progress, there are lingering weaknesses, 

although overall fiduciary risk has been assessed as moderate (see Technical Annex 1 on 

Fiduciary Risk Assessment). Accrual accounting is yet to enter into force, and still depends 

on the effective establishment of stock accounting. Similarly, the process of setting up the 

Single Treasury Account, initiated in 2013, has made no notable progress since the State’s 

accounts census stage. Through the Resource Mobilization and institutional capacity building 

support project (PAMOCI) project, the Bank is supporting the implementation of WAEMU 

directives and the Single Treasury Account. Furthermore, the adoption of the legal framework 

governing the financial regime of local and regional authorities has been delayed; the 

completion and publication of public procurement audits are not regular, and PIMA 2016 

reports that "public investment efficiency in Togo is low" with a gap of almost 70% against 

the most efficient countries, which would represent an efficiency loss of approximately 2/3 of 

the potential impact. These weaknesses have been taken into account in the design of the 

PAGPA. At the end of the last PEFA, PEMFAR and PIMA exercises conducted in 2016, the 

PA-RGFP was updated to take into account the findings and recommendations. The 

implementation of this plan should be accelerated, with a view to improving the overall 

performance of public finance management, in particular PI-11 "Investment Management." 

2.4 Inclusive Growth, Poverty and Social Context 

2.4.1 While the social indicators have improved slightly, Togo remains in the bottom 

quintile of the Human Development Index (HDI). The net enrollment ratio (NER) in primary 

education improved overall to 94.3% by 2015. The poverty incidence declined from 61.7% in 

2006 to 55.1% in 2015, but far short of the target of 27.6% expected in 2030 (SDG 1.2) and the 

extreme poverty rate has virtually remained unchanged , moving from 28.6% in 2006 to 28.7% 

in 2015. The Gini index improved from 0.393 to 0.380 between 2011 and 2015 (ODD 10), but 

growth is not yet pro-poor. Despite the progress of the last five years, spatial and gender 

inequalities persist. In rural areas, almost 7 out of 10 Togolese are poor and the availability of 

curative care decreased from 41% in 2014 to 37.7% in 2015, and more than a third of the 

population has to travel at least 5 km to a health centre. Only 50% of women are literate 

compared to 77% of men, and 25 women per 100 men own land, with their average areas 50% 

smaller than for men (CWIQ 2015). As a result, the Human Development Index 2016 remains 

low with a score of 0.487 ranking it 166th out of 188 countries. 

III. GOVERNMENT’S DEVELOPMENT AGENDA 

3.1 Governmental development strategy and medium-term reform priorities 

3.1.1 The Accelerated Growth and Employment Promotion Strategy (SCAPE) is the single 

reference framework for interventions under the Government's development agenda for the 

medium term. In 2013, GoT adopted SCAPE for 2013-2017; it is the reference framework for 

governmental action and comprises five strategic Pillars: (i) development of sectors with high 

growth potential; (ii) strengthening economic infrastructure; (iii) development of human 

capital, social protection and employment; (iv) strengthening governance and (v) promoting 

participatory development. The National Development Programme (PND 2018 - 2022), which 

is being prepared, will replace SCAPE. The transformation of the agriculture sector into a strong 

and inclusive growth sector is at the core of the Government's priorities. Furthermore, Togo is 



7  

working to strengthen financial management by continuing, in particular, with reforms fostering 

increased tax revenues, optimal management of public investments as well as public debt 

reduction.  The proposed PAGPA supports the implementation of these reforms through its 

Component (A), which aims to create a public and private investment framework conducive to 

agribusiness promotion; and component (B) which supports reforms aimed at increasing 

internal resources and improving their predictability in order to facilitate the capital expenditure 

necessary for the agriculture sector’s development. 

3.2  Obstacles to Implementing the National/Sector Development Agenda 

3.2.1  Togo has made remarkable progress which certainly places it on the road to lasting 

resilience. These gains must be consolidated in order to firmly lay the foundations of social 

peace and sustainable and equitable development. Progress is noted in the following areas: 

strengthening of security and stability, economic recovery with average growth rates of 5% 

over a ten-year period, implementation of major institutional and economic reforms, and 

strengthening of regional cooperation. However, the persistent ethnic and regional divide could 

constitute a setback to political stability, thus posing a severe threat to social peace and to exit 

from fragility. These challenges, if not addressed speedily, could impede economic progress. 

Moreover, the effective implementation of the SCAPE is severely constrained by inadequate 

financial resources. It is indeed clear from the last review of SCAPE, ahead of the development 

of the new NDP 2018-2022, that during the period 2013-2015 a total amount of merely CFAF 

516 billion, or 68%, was mobilized for the implementation of the scheduled priority action 

programmes against a requirement of CFAF 2.228 billion. Furthermore, the unsuitability of the 

business environment also constitutes a major obstacle to the emergence of a dynamic private 

sector, capable of driving the transformation of economic activity which remains unstructured 

and over 90% dominated by the informal sector.  

3.3 Consultation and Participation Process 

3.3.1  SCAPE 2013-2017 was developed in a participatory manner to ensure a 

comprehensive consideration of the different concerns of political and socio-economic 

stakeholders countrywide. SCAPE was prepared in consultation with all central and regional 

level stakeholders (central government, local authorities, civil society, private sector, political 

parties, traditional and religious leaders, etc.). Moreover, Togo's technical and financial partners 

were involved throughout the preparatory process.  

3.3.2 The design of the proposed PAGPA benefitted from broad consultations with key 

stakeholders. In particular, detailed discussions were held with the Permanent Secretariat for 

the Monitoring of Reform Policies and Financial Programmes (SP-PRPF) the Togolese 

Revenue Authority (OTR), the budget directorate and the Ministries of Agriculture, Commerce 

and Industry, Livestock, Rural Development, Environment and Gender. These discussions were 

followed by broader consultations with civil society (ONGs and producer associations). These 

exchanges led to agreement with the authorities on the need to involve the Togolese rural 

organizations and farmers’ associations in the framework for follow up and monitoring of 

implementation of the reforms.         



8  

IV. BANK SUPPORT FOR GOVERNMENT’S STRATEGY 

4.1 Linkages with Bank's Strategy 

The reforms under PAGPA support the implementation of the Bank's Togo CSP (2016-

2020). The programme’s first component supports reforms within the framework of Pillar (I) 

of the CSP, which aims at "Development of inclusive growth and agribusiness competitiveness 

poles”, and its second component largely contributes to the implementation of the Pillar (2) 

"Support for financial sector and local governance ". The proposed PAGPA, envisaged in the 

CSP, also contributes to the implementation of the Bank's 2013-2022 ten-year strategy and the 

Governance Action Plan (GAP II 2014-2018 ); more specifically, it contributes to three of the 

Bank's High Five strategic priorities: (i) "Feed Africa"; (ii) "Industrialize Africa" through 

measures to promote agro-industry and (iii) "Improve the quality of life for the people of Africa" 

by supporting reforms aimed at improving budget management and public action effectiveness 

through strengthening economic and financial governance and the key sector of agriculture. 

4.2  Compliance with Eligibility Criteria 

Togo fulfills the pre-requisites for budget support operations, as defined in the Bank's policy 

on reform programme support operations (see Technical Annex 3). However, efforts are still 

required in terms of coordination. The budget support consultation framework (COAB) is not 

optimal; there is no joint policy matrix of budget support interventions. Additionally, delays are 

noted in the implementation of a number of public finance reforms, translating into 

unsatisfactory results in the PEFA 2016 evaluation, where 28 out of 30 indicators are rated "C" 

or "D". Similarly, PIMA 2016 assessed the management of weak-efficiency investments. 

However, in view of the consistency of the measures of institutional reform being implemented 

and the level of integration of the national framework of the public finance management (see 

technical annex 1), global fiduciary risk has been rated moderate. In addition it should be 

minimized if the reforms planned in the PAGPA and others being finalised in the different 

departments concerned were diligently implemented. Furthermore, the Government is 

determined to accelerate the implementation of the national public finance reforms plan of 

PEFA, PEMFAR and PIMA, updated at the end of the 2016 fiscal year. 

4.3 Collaboration and Coordination with other Partners 

In designing the proposed programme, the Bank met with key technical and financial partners 

(TFPs) intervening through budget support, namely the IMF, WB, and EU. The AFD and 

UNDP also participated in the discussions. The operations in progress, or under preparation for 

the period 2017-2019, are: (i) the IMF's ECF of USD 241.5 million; (ii) the WB’s reform 

programme of USD 75 million and (iii) the EU’s budget support of EUR 54 million. Although 

thus far there is no joint intervention matrix, which awaits agreement with the government on 

its orientation, all partners, including the Bank, are strongly committed to harmonizing their 

actions in terms of dialogue and monitoring reforms. The areas of intervention of the TFPs are 

presented in Technical Annex No. 10. 



9  

4.4 Linkages with other Bank Operations 

4.4.1 Bank’s Active Portfolio in Togo: The active portfolio at April 2017 consists of ten 

operations for a total net commitment of UA117 

million (USD 160 million). It comprises eight 

national operations of UA 41.7 million (USD 57 

million) or 36% of the overall envelope. It also 

includes 64% for two multinational operations of UA 

75.3 million (USD 103 million). A high 75% of the 

portfolio is financed by grants. The sector 

distribution of the portfolio indicates the 

predominance of transport infrastructure with about 

64%, followed by economic and financial governance (17%), the social sector (16%), the water 

and sanitation sector (1%) and agriculture (1%). 

4.4.2  The March 2016 Portfolio Review assessed the portfolio performance as overall 

satisfactory, with a score of 3 out of 4 according to the rating of the latest Implementation Status 

and Results Report (ISRR). The portfolio’s performance is considered satisfactory with an 

overall disbursement rate of 42%, for an average age of 2.3 years. The portfolio is fairly young, 

with 50% of the projects approved between 2015 and 2016. The key challenges concern the 

mobilization of the national counterpart funds (particularly for transport projects) and the 

administrative red tape for disbursement and procurement. Special attention should be paid to 

the release of the national counterpart funds for the Togo-Burkina road rehabilitation and 

transport facilitation project, which is scheduled to close at end- 2017. The government will 

also take steps to accelerate the construction of the Togo-Benin juxtaposed checkpoint financed 

by the Lomé-Cotonou road rehabilitation project and transport facilitation on the Abidjan-

Lagos Corridor, Phase 1. 

4.4.3 Complementarity with Previous Operations: PAGPA is a continuation of the Bank's 

previous PARG-II budget support through the strengthening of public finance management and 

improvement of the business environment (see technical annex 7 on the achievements of 

PARGII). The implementation of the first component reforms will create the appropriate legal 

and institutional framework for the investment project under preparation by the department in 

charge of agriculture in the Bank, aimed at establishment of the Kara Agropole. The 

presentation this project to the Board is scheduled for December 2017. Furthermore, the second 

component reforms will benefit particularly from the capacity building activities under PAGFI 

(2016-2020), which is institutional support for the modernization of the OTR for optimized 

revenue collection. Additionally, the programme budget and the deconcentration of payment 

authorization and financial control will be further facilitated as the Integrated Public Finance 

Management System (SIGFIP) will be fully deployed and adapted to the new the new budget 

framework. The technical assistance and equipment needs for its deployment are fully covered 

by PAMOCI (2015-2018). Lastly, PAGPA is in complete synergy with the project to support 

markets reconstruction and traders in Kara and Lomé (2014-2018); the project to support youth 

employability and integration (2015-2020) and the project to support the financial inclusion of 

vulnerable women (PAIFFV 2016-2018). 

Water & 
sanitation

1%

Agric
1%

Gov
17%

Social
16%

Finance
1%

Transport
64%



10  

4.4.4 Lessons Learned from Previous Operations:The completion reports for PARCI I and 

II, and PARG II, indicate the following lessons: (i) the match between the scope of the reform 

programmes and the implementation capabilities of the structures involved; and (ii) the need to 

underpin reform programmes with institutional support. These lessons are taken into account 

in the design of PAGPA. The programme focuses on a limited number of reforms, but is 

strategic and aligned with the national objectives of the SCAPE. Furthermore, the programme 

will be supported by capacity building projects (PAMOCI and PAGFI), and the monitoring and 

evaluation mechanism will involve civil society in periodic reviews.  

4.4.5 Analyses Underlying the Operation: Analyses conducted by GoT, the Bank and other 

technical and financial partners (TFPs) served as the basis for the preparation of the budget 

support programme. The foremost among them are: (i) Public Expenditure Management and 

Financial Accountability Review (2016 PIMA, PEFA and PEMFAR), at the end of which the 

PA-RGFP action plan was updated; (ii) the WB's 2018 Doing Business report; (iii) the IMF's 

Article IV consultations report in November 2016; and (iv) the report of the Dutch Consultancy 

Kadaster on the reform of the Directorate of State Land and Cadastral Affairs (DADC). The 

main recommendations of these studies concern (i) strengthening budget credibility and 

accelerating the fiscal transition, (ii) improving land management, and (iii) the need for 

economic transformation to drive strong and more inclusive growth. 

V. THE  ENVISAGED PROGRAMME  

5.1 Programme Goal and Objective  

5.1.1 The programme’s principal objective is to contribute towards creating conditions 

conducive to inclusive economic growth. Its specific objectives are to support the development 

of an investment climate conducive to agribusiness development in a context of improved 

internal resource mobilization capacity to support the required public investment. The 

programme addresses Togo’s major persistent challenges in terms of exiting fragility and 

reducing its vulnerability to social crises. Furthermore, the programme will extend the Bank's 

interventions to reforms geared towards gender mainstreaming in government actions, 

particularly in the agriculture sector. 

5.1.2 The programme comprises two components: A) Support for improved private 

investment environment and agribusiness promotion: this component supports implementing 

reform measures aimed at setting up efficient mechanisms and a business environment 

conducive to agribusiness development; (B) Support for enhanced internal resource 

mobilization and optimization of public investment management: This component aims to 

strengthen the mobilization of internal resources, and streamline the management of public 

investments, in order to offset the agricultural sector’s infrastructure deficit and attract more 

private investors to agribusiness. 

 



11  

5.2 Component A: Support for improved private investment environment and 

agribusiness promotion 

Sub-component A.1: Improving the private investment environment 

5.2.1 Context, Constraints & Challenges. The private sector’s contribution to the national 

economy remains relatively low. It contributes merely15% to GDP and remains dominated by 

the informal sector. The formal industrial private sector contributes only 4 to 6% to GDP, which 

is well below the country’s potential. The agricultural sector offers the greatest potential in 

terms of job and wealth creation. However, formal private sector investment is undermined by 

the constraints of this sector. The main constraints on private sector development, particularly 

in  agribusiness, include: (i) predominance of the informal sector; (ii) lack of competitiveness 

due to the high cost of inputs (water, energy, transport, the Internet, etc.); tax policy not aligned 

with private sector development, in particular the need to create more synergy between the 

Investment Code incentives and the Free Zone regime; (iii) insecurity of land tenure; (iv) a 

dispersed institutional framework based on a multitude of entities dedicated to the same 

investment promotion functions (Togo's Presidential Investment Council, Togo-Invest, 

Ministry of Trade, Ministry of Industry, Investment Promotion Agency and non-operational 

free zones, etc.); (v) limited capacity of management structures to support SME/SMI enterprises 

in developing business plans for access to markets and technology; (vi) mismatch between 

training and employment in relation to the actual needs of the Private Sector; and (vii) 

inadequacy of the regulatory framework for management of Public-Private Partnership (PPP) 

Contracts (the revision of framework and establishment of the PPP Unit is envisaged after the 

adoption of the pertinent UEMOA directives). 

5.2.2  Government’s Achievements & Strategies: In response to these constraints, the 

Government of Togo has adopted national and sector strategy papers focusing on the private 

sector as the prime mover of economic growth, jobs and wealth creation. The establishment of 

structures, such as the One-Stop Shop and the Presidential Council for Investment in Togo 

(CPIT), which is a framework for dialogue between the Government and the Private Sector at 

the highest level, has been beneficial. The CPIT helped identify the major constraints on the 

Togolese Private Sector’s attractiveness and competitiveness, and made recommendations that 

enabled the country to climb from 164th to 149th position, moving up 15 places in one year in 

the Doing Business 2015 ranking. But this ranking has deteriorated in successive reports by 

2016, 2017 and 2018 with respective ranks of 154th and 156ieme on 190 ranked economies. 

However, the country has made progress compared to the year 2016, notably in the following 

areas: Starting a business (+7 points); Getting electricity (+1 point); Trading across borders 

(+10 points); and Resolving insolvency (+3 points). Togo must not only consolidate the above 

gains by pursuing structural reforms, but also make efforts to improve its ranking in the 

following areas: lengthy timeframes for: (i) ownership transfer (283 days against an average of 

60 days in WAEMU) and (ii) obtaining a building permit (163 days against 156 days in the 

WAEMU), and the multiplicity of taxes paid per year (49 against an average of 39 in the 

WAEMU). Furthermore, the government has established DOSI. This structure, supported by 

the bank under PAMOCI, is aimed at supporting informal sector operators to gradually 

formalize their activities. The government has also supported the setting up of recognized 

management centres in line with the directive of UEMOA. In addition, the government is 



12  

committed, under the FMI programme and the World Bank operation under preparation, to 

implement structural measures to improve the competitiveness of the sectors of energy and 

telecommunications with a view to reducing production costs.    

5.2.3  Reforms envisaged: Creating a business environment conducive to private sector 

development in Togo requires removing the above constraints through administrative and 

institutional reforms. These include: (i) updating the Investment Code to attract foreign and 

domestic investment and strengthen it, with a view to employment creation under SCAPE; (ii) 

operationalizing the Investment and Free Zone Promotion Agency by appointing the Director 

General and his team; (iii) adopting a National Strategy; (iv) adoption of a new tax code aimed 

at simplifying the tax structure and procedures; and (v) the creation of a Business Climate Unit 

dedicated to strengthened monitoring and improvement of indicators of performance relating 

to the business environment. 

Sub-component A.2: Strengthening the legal and institutional framework for agribusiness 

development  

5.2.4 Context and Challenges: Since the 1960s, the State of Togo has demonstrated its 

willingness to promote the industrial sector, through the transformation of a substantial part of 

agricultural and mineral commodities successively through a State model based on imports 

substitution until the late 1980s and then through liberalization policies granting the private 

sector an increased role. Despite these efforts, it is clear that the industrial sector remains poorly 

developed and weakly integrated with the rest of the economy. Embryonic and sparse, Togo’s 

industrial fabric comprises around ten large companies, a hundred medium-sized industries and 

a relatively large number of very small industrial units. The industrial sector's contribution to 

GDP over the last three years averaged 17.8%, with an average growth of 1.3% per year. Togo 

has opted for the transformation of the agricultural sector as the basis for the structural 

transformation of its economy. Togo’s agricultural sector employs 60-70% of the working 

population and accounts for 38% of GDP. This sector has significant potential, with 3.4 million 

hectares of arable land, of which, only 45% are currently under cultivation with low yields of 

below 50% of the optimum level. It is characterized by a very low level of mechanization and 

professional expertise, with 89% of the cultivated land sown manually (hoes and machetes). To 

leverage this sector as an engine of economic growth and social inclusion, the country has 

formulated and adopted an agricultural policy (2015-2030) aimed at achieving "modern, 

sustainable and high value-added agriculture ". The promotion of agro-industry and Agropoles 

is pivotal in this policy, which will enable the creation of integrated development zones around 

agricultural activity in order to support the promotion of industrial and services clusters and 

stimulate growth. The Agropoles pilot programme covers three of the country’s five regions 

that have been selected on the basis of their comparative advantages, as well as inclusion and 

poverty reduction criteria. The priority target products are rice, soybean, cashew nuts and 

sesame, sorghum, millet, maize and livestock. The objective is to enhance food security through 

import-substitution and exporting surpluses in the regional markets of WAEMU and 

ECOWAS, given Togo's age-old trade tradition, the opportunities offered by its geographical 

position and the expected increase in regional demand due to population growth, urbanization, 

income growth and diet diversification. 



13  

5.2.5 Major constraints on the promotion of Agropoles and agro-industry in Togo are: (i) 

lack of industrial policy and lack of serviced industrial sites; (ii) weak integration of the 

industrial sector with other sectors of the economy in general and the agricultural sector in 

particular, due mainly to supply difficulties and the lack of organization of the sectors; (iii) 

inadequacy of quality infrastructure and production support that hamper the development of the 

industrial fabric and agribusiness in particular; (iii) weak competitiveness of industrial 

products, due notably to the high cost of production factors (energy, transport, communications, 

etc.), non-conformity of industrial products with international standards, unfair competition 

from some industrial products imported fraudulently, and absence of legal instruments and an 

institutional quality control system for consumer products marketing in Togo; (v) credit access 

difficulties, notably for the agricultural sector which represents on average 1-2% of the bank’s 

portfolio, due particularly to the poor organization and professionalization of agricultural value 

chains and land tenure insecurity, especially for women; (vi) weaknesses in the institutional 

framework for industrial support, due mainly to strategic, organizational and institutional 

weaknesses at the level of the Ministry of Industry and industrial support services3; (vii) lack 

of accredited laboratories and inspection bodies capable of carrying out physical/chemical and 

microbiological analyses of industrial and agro-industrial products, testing and calibration in 

metrology and certifications to international standards for local marketing and export; (viii) 

territorial imbalance between the maritime region, which hosts nearly all the industrial units, 

and the country’s other regions which are agriculture-oriented and under-industrialized due 

mainly to the lack of appropriate infrastructure.      

5.2.6 Government’s Achievements & Strategies: In response to these constraints, the 

Government of Togo has adopted a number of reforms with special focus on industrial 

development. These include the Framework Law of 12 August 2009 on the organization of the 

national harmonization scheme for standardization, accreditation, certification, metrology, 

environment and promotion of quality in Togo; Decree of 27 December 2013 issued pursuant 

to Law No. 2011-018 of 24 June 2011 on the status of the industrial free zone; Law of 20 

January 2012 on the Investment Code in the Togolese Republic; Decree of 27 December 2013 

issued pursuant to Law No. 2012-001 of 20 January 2012 on the Investment Code in the 

Togolese Republic; Decree of 27 December 2013 on the allocation, organization and operation 

of the National Agency for the Promotion of Investments and the Free Zone and the Accelerated 

Growth and Employment Promotion Strategy (SCAPE) 2013-2017, under which industrial 

development and the transformation of agriculture are major pillars. More recently in 2016, the 

Agricultural Policy, together with the Strategic Plan for the Transformation of Agriculture in 

Togo by 2030, was also adopted.  

5.2.7 Several measures have also been implemented with a view to facilitating access to 

financing, in particular the creation of the National Agency for the Promotion and Guarantee 

of Financing of SMEs and SMIs (ANPGF). Additionally, the WAEMU Directive on public 

procurement and the delegation of services was made internal in 2014. This instrument, which 

did not take into account partnership contracts, nevertheless provided for the development of a 

PPP strategy and the setting up of a PPP management unit. These two reforms are suspended 

                                                 
3  In particular the quality management infrastructure: Metrology-Standards-Quality Control (MSQC) 

 



14  

pending a new institutional framework by WAEMU, which more clearly separates delegation 

and partnership contracts, on the one hand, from public procurement, on the other. Lastly, the 

finalization of the National Industrialization Policy is underway and will be followed by an 

Industrialization Strategy, which will be prepared in collaboration with the Bank and UNIDO. 

To this end, the authorities sent a request for technical assistance to the Bank aimed at making 

Togo a pilot experiment for the implementation of the strategic pillar relating to the 

industrialization of Africa. 

5.2.8 Reforms envisaged: Accelerating industrial development in Togo requires 

implementing a number of reforms aimed at removing the above constraints, particularly 

through measures such as: (i) adoption of a National Industrialization Policy; (ii) 

operationalization of the High Authority for Quality and Technical Quality Structures (the Fund 

and the Agencies) through the appointment of the Director General and his team and the 

allocation of the necessary resources for its start up in the 2018 budget; (iii) the adoption of a 

National Agropoles Strategy; (iv) adoption of instruments governing the national Agropoles 

development structure; (v) adoption of a new Land Code governing the land registry which 

would foster agribusiness development and loan access. 

5.2.9 The main expected outcomes of Component A are: (i) improving the agricultural trade 

balance deficit, (ii) strengthening Togo's resilience to fragility factors related to spatial and 

gender inequalities; (iii) improving the competitiveness of the agricultural sector; (iv) securing 

land for the development of agribusiness and facilitating access to financing; and (v) improving 

the business environment for domestic and foreign private investment. 

5.2.10 Component B: Support for internal resources mobilization and optimal 

management of public investments: 

Sub-component B.1: Improved Revenue Mobilization 

5.2.11 Context Constraints and Challenges: Togo has committed, under the programme with 

the IMF, to substantially reducing the level of public debt by prohibiting any new external non-

concessional loan and by capping the volume of concessional commitments. Against this 

backdrop, and faced with the urgent need to pursue investment spending that is crucial to 

achieving the development objectives of SCAPE, maximizing internal resources mobilization 

in the short term is essential as the main factor for macroeconomic stability and the 

sustainability of the budget framework. The establishment of the OTR in 2014, coupled with 

the modernization and extension of the Lome Port Authority, has definitely helped to enhance 

Togo’s revenue mobilization capabilities. The ratio of tax revenues (cash basis) to GDP 

increased from 15.9% in 2013 to 17.9% in 2016 and could reach 19% in 2018, nearly the 20% 

WAEMU standard. However, recent economic developments in the sub-region have 

highlighted the great sensitivity of OTR's performance to customs duties; with OTR’s, results 

for 2016 falling below target for the first time. This underperformance, though minimal (-1.1%), 

is mainly due to the sluggish economic conditions in the country's key trading partners (Nigeria, 

Ghana). In this regard, the major challenge for the country is to optimize domestic taxation by 

broadening the tax base through the exploitation of the land niche in particular. Additionally, 

simplification of customs and tax procedures should be pursued to attract private investment 

and accelerate added value creation. 



15  

5.2.12 Government’s Achievements & Strategies: In response to the challenge of improving 

internal revenue mobilization, the Government, with the Bank's support, initiated structural 

reforms that culminated in the establishment in 2012 of the Togolese revenue authority (OTR), 

which incorporates the two State financial administrations (taxes and customs) into a single 

entity with administrative and financial management autonomy. The operationalization of the 

OTR has enabled Togo to increase its budgetary revenues substantially; they increased from 

CFAF 403.6 billion in 2013 to 568.5 billion in 2016, representing a 40.8% rise. The average 

growth rate of tax revenues over the period 2013-2016 is 12.7%. Furthermore, the country 

adopted a new Customs Code which entered into force in 2014 (Law No. 2014 - 003 of 28 April 

2014) replacing the old instrument dating from 1966. A new revision of the Customs Code is 

underway to, among other things, further clarify the division of powers and responsibilities 

between the OTR and the Ministry in charge of finance and fiscal policy. In addition, the draft 

text of the new Customs Code will take into account recent developments in international trade 

regarding trade facilitation and improved customs procedures. Similarly, the GoT initiated the 

revision of the tax code with a view to simplifying the tax system to make it more attractive to 

investors and also more accessible to tax administration and taxpayers. Lastly, the GoT in 2016 

committed to a feasibility study for the establishment of a tax registry for an optimized property 

tax base. 

5.2.13 Reforms Envisaged: To accelerate enhanced internal resources mobilization, PAGPA 

will support the adoption by the Council of Ministers of the: (i) Lomé Tax Registry Decree, (ii) 

new national Customs Code; (iii) decree establishing the fiscal policy unit by the MEF; and (iv) 

bill on the transfer of powers and resources to local and regional authorities. 

Sub-component B.2: Strengthening Public Investment Management 

5.2.14 Context, Constraints and Challenges: Investment management was assessed as very 

unsatisfactory by the PIMA, PEFA and PEMFAR exercises conducted in 2016. The PIMA 

report shows that "public investment efficiency in Togo is low" with a nearly 70% gap 

compared to the best performing countries. This represents a loss of approximately 2/3 of the 

effectiveness of the potential impact. The Public Investment Program (PIP) is not aligned with 

the budget. An absolute gap of 15% between the 2016 PIP component and the draft budget for 

2016 transmitted to Parliament was noted. Inadequacies have been identified at all levels of the 

process (multi-year programming, ex ante evaluation, project selection, public procurement 

performance monitoring, and availability of investment credits). PEMFAR4 noted the absence 

of "national guidelines defining the principles and conditions for the economic and financial 

evaluation of projects". Economic evaluations of cost-benefit and cost-effectiveness are not 

always conducted, and whenever this is done no review mechanism for results review by an 

independent structure of the contracting authority is in place. Additionally, project recurrent 

costs are poorly estimated and only the operating costs of a project as an administrative unit are 

included in the budget. This partly accounts for the shortcomings noted in the public 

investments monitoring with irregular implementation monitoring activities and incomplete or 

non-existent data bases on physical and financial implementation of investments. The 

investment management situation in Togo deteriorated further with the so-called "pre-

                                                 
4  PEMFAR 2017 Report 



16  

financing"5 practice that the GoT applied between 2011 and 2016. Under this mechanism, 

besides the shortcomings of the basic financial package, pre-financing agreements were 

concluded and executed outside the public expenditure circuit and to the total exclusion of the 

internal control and external audit bodies. State reimbursements to banks thus faced high risks 

of fictitious progress payment claims and/or poor quality work. Lastly, investment management 

and, in general, the implementation of public policies in Togo are also handicapped by the lack 

of programme budgets, weak results-based budgeting practices and the centralization of 

financial control. PEMFAR 2016 noted that "in Togo, the centralization of authorizing officer 

and financial controller functions are veritable sources of delays and inefficiency in the 

expenditure circuit". Indeed, having no local or regional delegations, all vote holders in local 

authorities must travel to Lomé to submit their commitment and validation files. 

5.2.15 Government’s Achievements & Strategies: As part of its IMF- backed programme, 

the government stopped the pre-financing practice in the latter half of 2016. The government 

also pledged not to undertake new pre-financed investments, to validate all existing pre-

financed investments and to include pre-financing debt in the outstanding public debt. The 

authorities have also decided to follow in future the budgetary and procurement procedures for 

all new public investments. Besides the effective abandonment of pre-financing, it is crucial to 

establish an efficient investment management system, systematize programme budgets and 

decentralize financial control speedily in order to ensure an optimal framework for future 

investments, notably those required for the implementation of the national Agropoles 

development strategy. 

5.2.16 Reforms envisaged: PAGPA will support (i) the development of a public investments 

planning, selection and programming manual; (ii) adoption of the ministerial order on the 

framework for regional monitoring of investment projects execution; (iii) finalization of the 

adaptation of SIGFIP to the technical requirements for the implementation of programme 

budgets; (iv) adoption by the Council of the Ministers of the decree on the deconcentration of 

financial control and powers, organization and functioning of financial control; (v) publication 

of the 2014 and 2015 public procurement audit reports; and (vi) the creation of Unit for 

government participation with a view to strengthening the monitoring of public investments 

and the management of state assets. 

5.2.17 The main results of Component B are: (i) sustained revenue growth, (ii) improved 

PIP implementation rate; (iii) improved local fiscal governance; and (iv) enhanced financial 

and technical capabilities of local and regional authorities. 

5.3   Policy Dialogue 

5.3.1 PAGPA will strengthen dialogue with the Government and consultation with other 

TFPs, mainly in the following areas: (i) internal resources mobilization, where discussions will 

focus on the need to broaden the tax base; and (ii) transformation of the Togolese economy with 

special focus on the conditions for effective implementation of the agricultural policy. In this 

regard, and relying on its country office, the Bank will continue support for improved land 

                                                 
5  PEMFAR 2017 Report: This mechanism consists in awarding a public contract to one or more contractors to carry out a public investment. 

Successful bidders are financed by commercial banks to perform the work with guarantees from the Togolese State. The State in its 

capacity as contracting authority reimburses the former as and when the works/services are performed, in principle after acceptance of 

progress payment claims submitted by the operators. 



17  

management in order to speed up the establishment of a reliable registry to secure land tenure, 

a prerequisite for attracting private investors. In addition, PAGPA will enable the Bank to raise 

the level of dialogue with Togo on issues of gender promotion and civil society’s participatory 

role. Lastly, ongoing discussions will be continued with the Togolese government towards 

operationalizing the joint framework for the monitoring and evaluation of the performance of 

budget support and reform program. 

5.4 Grant Conditions  
 

Table 2. PAGPA Preliminary Measures 

 

5.5 Application of Good Practice Principles on Conditionality 

In accordance with the 14 March 2012 Bank policy on budget support operations, the design of 

the proposed PAGPA applied good practice principles on conditionalities. Eight conditions 

precedent have been agreed with the Country and these are in line with the country's priorities. 

They are drawn from national reform documents, in this case the agricultural policy and PR-

GFP. The programme’s Pillars and the results-based logical framework were discussed, and 

agreed, with the Government and all stakeholders, including other TFPs and civil society. The 

disbursement schedule is aligned with the budget cycle. 

5.6 Financing Requirements and Terms 

The macroeconomic framework was updated as part of the supplementary budget approved by 

the Cabinet in November 2017 in order to take into account the commitments made under the 

IMF program which aims to reduce Togo's indebtedness risk. This revised budget 2017 projects 

a level of revenues (excluding grants) of CFAF 560.4 billion against expenditures of CFAF 

841.23 billion (including arrears payments). The resulting financing gap of CFAF 280.83 

billion is entirely covered by internal financing and external resources from technical and 

financial partners including the Bank.  

Preliminary Measures 

General Prerequisite – Maintaining a stable macroeconomic  framework, as reflected by IMF reports or evaluations 

Component A – Support for  Agribusiness Promotion  
Component B –  Support for Internal Resources Mobilization and Optimal 

Management of Public Investment 

 

Action 1: Adoption by the Council of Ministers of the 

National Agropoles Development Strategy 

Evidence 1: Decree of adoption by the Council of 

Ministers of the National Strategy for Agropoles 
Development Strategy  

Action4: Establishment of the Tax Policy Unit. 

Evidence 4: MEF Order establishing the Tax Policy Unit  

Action 2 : Creation of the Business Climate Unit   

Evidence 2 : Decree adopted by the Council of Ministers  

Action 5: Adoption of the new national Customs Code 

Evidence 5: Release of adoption by the Council of Ministers of the bill on the new 

customs code.  

Action 3: Adoption of the National Private Sector 

Development Strategy, 

Evidence 3: Decree of adoption by the Council of 

Ministers of the national private sector development 

strategy 

Action 6: Deconcentration of financial control, powers, organization and functioning 

of financial control 

Evidence 6: Decree of the Council of Ministers on the deconcentration of financial 

control, powers, organization and functioning of financial control 

 Action 7 : Creation  of Agency for government participation 

Evidence 7 : Decree of adoption by the Council of Ministers of the creation of Agency for 
government participation  



18  

Table 3 – Estimated Financial Requirements and Sources in CFAF Bln 

  Rubriques 2017 (Bln CFAF) 

 

A Total revenues and grants 707,1 

                   Of which : tax revenues 503 

B                 Of which : grant 146,7 

C Total net expenditures and loans  771,23 

   Of which: interest payments  58,7 

   Of which :capital expenditures 313,5 

D Overall balance (base settlement excl. grants) (A -B-C) -210,83 

E Accumulation of arrears -70 

F Overall balance (cash basis) ( D+E) -280,83 

G External financing net (less Bank contribution ) 259,78 

H Bank contribution  7,95 

I Internal financing (net) 13,1 

J Financing (F + G+H) 280,83 

K Financing gap  (J+F)  0 

 Source: Ministry of Finance and Economy – Report’s Authors 

 

5.7 Application of Bank Group Policy on Non-Concessional Debts Accumulation 

The proposed PAGPA is financed by a grant and thus not governed by the Bank Group Policy 

on non-concessional debt accumulation. 

 

VI. IMPLEMENTATION  

6.1 Programme Beneficiaries 

The direct beneficiary of the programme is the Ministry of economy and finance through 

the financing of the national budget. In an indirect way the program will benefit to the 

whole Togolese population. PAGPA will help lay the groundwork for a structural 

transformation of the local economy and regions around major Agropole projects, as a source 

of resilience to address fragility concerns in the rural areas (about 62% of Togolese population) 

and on the outskirts of Lomé and the regional capitals. In particular, the development of the 

Agropole in the Kara region should enable the creation of 2,500 jobs by 2020, of which 30% 

for women and 65% for youth, an electricity access rate of 43% (against 16% in 2015) and 55% 

access to drinking water (against 25% in 2015). 

6.2 Impact on Gender, the Poor and Vulnerable Groups 

Despite the progress made over the past five years, gender discrimination persists. In 2011, 

Togo adopted a National Policy on Gender Equity and Equality. In 2014, the Code of Persons 

and Family was also revised, thus enabling legislation on major discriminations that existed in 

marriage and inheritance. In particular, Article 99, which provided that "The man shall be the 

family head" has become "The family shall be run by the spouses". However, in the absence of 

a clear intervention strategy, exclusionary practices identified in the National Policy remain 

topical, including difficulty of access to farmland for women. In addition to the family code, 

PAGPA will support the adoption of the law on gender parity in elective and appointive 

positions, the effectiveness of which will do more to further raise the required awareness among 

opinion leaders. Moreover, the programme will support a study to explore equitable gender 

mainstreaming in tax policy without altering the impersonal nature of taxation. The 

recommendations of this study will form an integral part of the national gender strategy also 

supported by the programme. 



19  

6.3 Impact on the Environment and Climate Change  

PAGPA is classified as Category III in accordance with the Bank's environmental and 

social impact assessment procedures. PAGPA has no negative environmental impact. 

However, the country is faced with the adverse effects of climate change and environmental 

challenges, particularly in the agricultural, forestry, energy, mining and water resources sectors 

and in coastal zone management. The GoT demonstrates a strong commitment to providing 

lasting solutions to the environmental degradation problems and considering climate change in 

public policy. Since 29 December 1998, Togo has adopted its National Environment Policy in 

accordance with international environmental agreements (the Vienna Convention and the 

Montreal Protocol, the Rio Conventions and their respective Protocols, Rotterdam Convention, 

Stockholm Convention)6. Furthermore, SCAPE 2013-2017 lays special emphasis on the 

environment and community resilience to climate change, with the intensification of actions 

provided for under initiatives such as: (i) National Adaptation Plan (PANA); (ii) National 

Programme for Reduced Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD + 2010-

2050); (iii) National Action Plan for the Management of Marine and Coastal Environmental 

Resources; and (iv) Environmental Management Capacity Building Programme (PRCGE). 

6.4 Macroeconomic Impacts 

The proposed PAGPA will contribute to macroeconomic stability by improving the agricultural 

sector’s performance and reducing the trade deficit. Furthermore, according to a study by the 

Dutch firm Kadaster on the reform of State lands and Cadastral Affairs Directorate (DADC), 

the potential yield of property tax (Land Taxes on built-on estates, land ownership registration 

duties) at the national level, based on a computerized cadastre on only the 400 000 plots already 

identified, would be over CFAF 100 billion against CFAF 1.4 billion of revenue collected in 

2016. PAGPA would help generate the budgetary resources required to make impactful 

investments, notably those needed for the Agropoles, which represent sources of new business 

and employment opportunities. 

 

6.5 Implementation, Monitoring and Evaluation 

The Programme’s executing agency is the Permanent Secretariat for the Monitoring of Reform 

Policies and Financial Programmes (SP-PRPF) within the Ministry of Economy and Finance. 

The implementation of PAGPA will be monitored through semi-annual and annual 

implementation reports, prepared by the SP-PRPF on the basis of a joint review with the 

programme’s participating structures as well as members of civil society, in particular the 

Coordination of Togolese farmer organizations and agricultural producers. The Togolese 

authorities will also transmit to the Bank the compliance report on the 2017 budget review law 

no later than 31 December 2018, drawn up by the Audit Court. The Bank will monitor the 

Programme in coordination with the group of TFPs acting through budgetary support. The Bank 

will undertake at least two programme supervision missions per year, and ensure that it interacts 

with all Programme stakeholders, including civil society. 

 

                                                 
6  CSP 2016-2020 
 



20  

6.6 Financial Management and Disbursement 

 

6.6.1 Disbursement: The resources of the proposed operation comprise as follows:  

 An amount of UA 2.32 million (ADF) that will be disbursed in a single instalment in 2017, 

upon entry into force of the ADF Grant Agreement between the Republic of Togo and the 

African Development Fund and the fulfillment of the conditions precedent set out for the 

disbursement in section 7.2.3 below; and 

 An amount of UA 7.21 million, from the Transitional States Facility (TSF), that will be 

disbursed in a single instalment in 2017, upon entry into force of the TSF Grant Agreement 

between the Republic of Togo, African Development Fund and African Development Bank 

and the fulfillment of the conditions precedent set out for the disbursement in section 7.2.3 

below. 

 

6.6.2 Financial Management and Audit: The assessment of the fiduciary framework of the 

public finance management system shows moderate fiduciary risks (see technical annex 1). In 

accordance with the fiduciary strategy for the CSP 2016-2020 period, PAGPA will be entirely 

managed within the national public finance management system. The effective payment of 

budget support resources into the State budget will be monitored through the Audit Court’s 

General Compliance Report on fiscal 2017, which will be transmitted to the Bank and the 

National Assembly of Togo at the same time. In addition, the Audit Court will audit the 

financial flows of the Special Account opened in the name of the Treasury and intended for the 

deposit of the grant resources. This report must be sent to the Bank no later than 3 months after 

the disbursement. 

 

6.6.3 Goods and Services Procurement: The grant will be in the form of general budget 

support. Accordingly, its implementation does not directly entail any goods and services 

procurement issues. It is clear from the fiduciary risk assessment that the legal and institutional 

framework for public procurement in Togo is overall operational, and that public procurement 

is conducted in accordance with the provisions of the Public Procurement Code. However, some 

shortcomings are noted, particularly, the regular absence of: (i) annual audit reports; (ii) post-

auditing of contracts below the review threshold of the National Procurement Audit Department 

(DNCMP); and (iii) capacity constraints of the contracting authorities. The reform measures 

identified under the proposed PAGPA, and the political dialogue on the continued need to 

improve the procurement system, will help address these shortcomings. Furthermore, the 

revision of the public procurement code and its implementing instruments initiated since 2011 

is being finalized, and should lead to the adoption before end- 2017 of a new legislative and 

regulatory framework. 

 

 



21  

VII. LEGAL FRAMEWORK 

7.1 Legal Instrument 

The Programme will be financed through two Grant Agreements between the African 

Development Fund (ADF) and the Togolese Republic, for the ADF grant and the African 

Development Fund, the African Development Bank and the Togolese Republic for the TSF 

grant. 

7.2 Conditions related to the Bank’s Intervention 

7.2.1 Conditions precedent to the entry into force of the Grant Agreement: The entry into 

force of the Grant Agreements is conditional upon signature (i) by African Development Fund and the 

Republic of Togo of the ADF grant, and (ii) by African Development Fund, African Development Bank 

and the Republic of Togo of the TSF grant.  

7.2.2 Conditions Precedent to Board Presentation of the Programme: Presentation of the 
Programme to the Board of Directors of the Fund shall be subject to evidence, provided by the 

Republic of Togo, of the implementation of all preliminary measures agreed with the Fund as 

specified in Table 2 in para: 5.4. 

7.2.3 Conditions Precedent to Disbursement: The disbursement of the resources of the grants 
is conditional upon realisation, by the Republic of Togo, to the satisfaction of ADF, of the following 

condition: Submit to the Bank the details of the Treasury bank account into which the resources of  the grant will 
be deposited 

7.3 Compliance with Bank Group Policies 

The proposed PAGPA is in line with the Bank Group policies and guidelines on reform support 

operations (2012). 
 

 

 

Table 4 – Risks and Mitigation Measures 
 

Risks 
Significanc

e of risk 
Mitigation Measures 

Political instability related to demands 
for Presidential term limits 

Substantial The government is committed to revising the constitution to limit presidential terms 
to two mandates.  Dialogue on this issue is ongoing with political parties. 

Macroeconomic instability due to 

the country's economic 
vulnerability to exogenous shocks 

Moderate The Government is committed to strengthening the country's resilience by 

implementing a genuine policy of structural transformation of the economy 
and pursuing the reforms agreed with the IMF and other partners. 

Fiduciary risks due to weaknesses 

in the public finance management 

system 

Moderate The effective implementation of the PA-GFP and the measures provided for 

under PAGPA I will contribute towards consolidating the gains and 

accelerating the improvement of the integrity of the public finance 
management system. 

Weak human capacities to 

implement the reforms identified in 

general, and those linked to the 
development of Agropoles, in 

particular 

Moderate High-level technical assistance to the Government on the design and 

deployment of the Agropoles will be established and financed by the Bank's 

project preparation fund. Other institutional and technical assistance funded 
by the Bank and other technical and financial partners is aimed at enhancing 

public administration capacity both at central and decentralized levels. 
Weakness of the budget support 
coordination mechanism 

Moderate The authorities have undertaken to strengthen the institutional arrangements 
for coordinating and monitoring budget support for make it more operational 

 

IX. RECOMMENDATION 

 

In light of the foregoing, it is recommended that the Boards of Directors approve a TSF grant 

not exceeding UA 7.21 million and an ADF grant not exceeding UA 2.32 million for the Republic of 

Togo, to finance the governance and agribusiness promotion support programme (PAGPA) in 

accordance with the conditions set forth in this report.


