












































Loan Agreement (Ordinary Operations [Concessional]) for Loan 3932-BAN: Rural Connectivity Improvement Project - Additional Financing


LOAN NUMBER 3932-BAN(COL)
[Additional Financing to Loan 3731-BAN and Loan 3732-BAN(COL)]

LOAN AGREEMENT
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

(Rural Connectivity Improvement Project - Additional Financing)

between

PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC OF BANGLADESH

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED 30 JUNE 2020

BAN 47243



LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

LOAN AGREEMENT dated 30 June 2020 between PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF 
BANGLADESH ("Borrower”) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB”).

WHEREAS

(A) by a loan agreement dated 13 January 2019 between the Borrower and 
ADB ("Initial Loan Agreement”), ADB has agreed to provide a loan from its ordinary capital 
resources in the amount of one hundred million Dollars ($100,000,000) (“Initial Loan”) to the 
Borrower for the purposes of financing expenditures of the project described in Schedule 1 of 
the Initial Loan Agreement (“Initial Project”);

(B) by a loan agreement dated 13 January 2019 between the Borrower and 
ADB ("Initial Concessional Loan Agreement”). ADB has agreed to provide a concessional loan 
from its ordinary capital resources in the amount of one hundred million Dollars ($100,000,000) 
("Initial Concessional Loan”) to the Borrower for the purposes of financing expenditures of the 
Initial Project:

(C) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a loan for the purposes of the 
scaling up of the Initial Project, as described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(D) the Project will be carried out by the Local Government Engineering 
Department (“LGED”) under the Local Government Division of the Ministry of Local 
Government, Rural Development and Cooperatives, and for this purpose the Borrower will 
make available to LGED the proceeds of the loan provided for herein upon terms and 
conditions satisfactory to ADB; and

(E) ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the Borrower from 
ADB’s ordinary capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein;

NOW THEREFORE the parties agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All provisions of ADB’s Ordinary Operations 
(Concessional) Loan Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 ("Loan Regulations”), are hereby 
made applicable to this Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully 
set forth herein.

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:



2

(a) “Community Participation Framework” or “CPF” means the community 
participation framework for the Project, including any update thereto, as 
agreed to between the Borrower and ADB;

(b) “Consulting Services” means consulting services as described in the 
Procurement Regulations and set out in the Procurement Plan, and to 
be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan;

(c) “Department of Environment” means the Borrower’s Department of 
Environment or any successors thereto;

(d) “EMP” means the environmental management plan for the Project, 
including any update thereto, incorporated in the IEE;

(e) “Environmental Safeguards” means the principles and requirements set 
forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of the 
SPS;

(f) “GAP" means the gender action plan prepared for the Initial Project and 
revised for the Project, including any update thereto, and agreed to 
between the Borrower and ADB;

(g) “Goods” means equipment and materials as set out in the Procurement 
Plan and to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan, including any 
related Nonconsulting Services such as transportation, insurance, 
installation, commissioning, training, and initial maintenance;

(h) “IEE” means the initial environmental examination for the Initial Project 
as revised for the Project, including any update thereto, prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower and cleared by ADB;

(i) "Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards” means the principles and 
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 2, and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

(j) “Loan Disbursement Handbook” means ADB’s Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time);

(k) “Nonconsulting Services” means nonconsulting services as described in 
the Procurement Regulations and set out in the Procurement Plan, and 
to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan;

(I) "PAM” means the project administration manual for the Project dated 29 
April 2020 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated from 
time to time in accordance with the respective administrative procedures 
of the Borrower and ADB;

(m) “Procurement Plan” means the procurement plan for the Project dated 
29 April 2020 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated 



3

from time to time in accordance with the Procurement Policy, the 
Procurement Regulations, and other arrangements agreed with ADB;

(n) “Procurement Policy” means ADB’s Procurement Policy - Goods, 
Works, Nonconsulting and Consulting Services (2017, as amended from 
time to time);

(o) “Procurement Regulations” means ADB’s Procurement Regulations for 
ADB Borrowers - Goods, Works, Nonconsulting and Consulting 
Services (2017, as amended from time to time);

(p) “Project Executing Agency” for the purposes of, and within the meaning 
of, the Loan Regulations means LGED or any successor thereto 
acceptable to ADB, which is responsible for the carrying out of the 
Project;

(q) “Project facilities” means the facilities to be improved, constructed or 
provided under the Project;

(r) "Safeguards Monitoring Report” means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower to ADB that describes progress with 
implementation of and compliance with the EMP, including any 
corrective and preventative actions;

(s) “Services” means Consulting Services and Nonconsulting Services;

(t) “SPS” means ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement (2009);

(u) “Target Areas” means the 16 districts in which the Project roads are 
located;

(v) “Tribes, Minor Races, Ethnic Sects and Communities Safeguards” 
means the principles and requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 
3, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of the SPS; and

(w) “Works” means construction or civil works as set out in the Procurement 
Plan and to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan, including any 
related Nonconsulting Services and project related services that are 
provided as part of a single responsibility or turnkey contract.

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB’s
ordinary capital resources (concessional) an amount of one hundred million Dollars 
($100,000,000).



4

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 20 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.

(c) The term “grace period” as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB an interest charge at the 
rate of 2% per annum during the grace period and thereafter, on the amount of the Loan 
withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time.

Section 2.03. The interest charge and any other charge on the Loan 
shall be payable semiannually on 1 May and 1 November in each year.

Section 2.04. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set forth 
in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.05. The currency of repayment of the principal amount of the 
Loan and the currency of payment of the interest charge for the purposes of Sections 4.03(a) 
and 4.04 of the Loan Regulations shall be the Dollar.

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to be 
applied exclusively to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the 
provisions of this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower shall 
procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds 
of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.04. Withdrawals from the Loan Account in respect of Goods, 
Works, and Services shall be made only on account of expenditures relating to:

(a) Goods which are produced in and supplied from and Works and 
Services which are supplied from such member countries of ADB as 
shall have been specified by ADB from time to time as eligible sources 
for procurement; and

(b) Goods, Works, and Services which meet such other eligibility 
requirements as shall have been specified by ADB from time to time.



5

Section 3.05. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 8.02
of the Loan Regulations shall be 31 May 2024 or such other date as may from time to time be 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4.01. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set forth 
in Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 4.02. (a) The Borrower shall (i) maintain separate
accounts and records for the Project; (ii) prepare annual financial statements for the Project in 
accordance with financial reporting standards acceptable to ADB; (iii) have such financial 
statements audited annually by independent auditors whose qualifications, experience and 
terms of reference are acceptable to ADB, in accordance with auditing standards acceptable 
to ADB. (iv) as part of each such audit, have the auditors prepare a report, which includes the 
auditors’ opinion(s) on the financial statements and the use of the Loan proceeds, and a 
management letter (which sets out the deficiencies in the internal control of the Project that 
were identified in the course of the audit, if any); and (v) furnish to ADB, no later than 6 months 
after the end of each related fiscal year, copies of such audited financial statements, audit 
report and management letter, all in the English language, and such other information 
concerning these documents and the audit thereof as ADB shall from time to time reasonably 
request.

(b) ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the 
Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 days of the date 
of ADB’s confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADB’s website.

(c) The Borrower shall enable ADB, upon ADB’s request, to discuss the 
financial statements for the Project and the Borrower’s financial affairs where they relate to the 
Project with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(iii) hereinabove, and shall 
authorize and require any representative of such auditors to participate in any such discussions 
requested by ADB. This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted only in the 
presence of an authorized officer of the Borrower, unless the Borrower shall otherwise agree.

Sec tion 4.03. The Borrower shall enable ADB’s representatives to 
inspect the Project, the Goods, Works and Services, and any relevant records and documents.



6

ARTICLE V

Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity

Section 5.01. The following is specified as an additional event for suspension 
of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the purposes of 
Section 8.01 (m) of the Loan Regulations: the Initial Loan or the Initial Concessional Loan shall 
have become liable for suspension or cancellation in accordance with the terms of the Initial 
Loan Agreement or Initial Concessional Loan Agreement respectively.

Section 5.02. The following is specified as an additional event for acceleration 
of maturity for the purposes of Section 8.07(d) of the Loan Regulations: the event specified in 
Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement shall have occurred.

ARTICLE VI

Effectiveness

Section 6.01. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.04 of the 
Loan Regulations.

ARTICLE VII

Miscellaneous

Section 7.01. The Senior Secretary, Secretary, any Additional 
Secretary. Chief, Joint Secretary, Joint Chief, Deputy Secretary, Deputy Chief, Senior 
Assistant Secretary, Senior Assistant Chief, Assistant Secretary or Assistant Chief of 
Economic Relations Division of the Ministry of Finance of the Borrower is designated as 
representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 11.02 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 7.02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 11.01 of the Loan Regulations:

For the Borrower

Economic Relations Division
Ministry of Finance
Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh
Sher-e-Bangla Nagar
Dhaka 1207, Bangladesh



7

Facsimile Number:

(880) 2-918-0788

For APB

Asian Development Bank 
6 ADB Avenue 
Mandaluyong City 
1550 Metro Manila 
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

(632) 8636-2444
(632) 8636-2340.



8

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF
BANGLADESH

FATIMA YASMIN 
Secretary 

Economics Relations Division 
Ministry of Finance

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

By
MANMOHAN PARKASH 

Country Director 
Bangladesh Resident Mission



9

SCHEDULE 1 
t

Description of the Project

1 The objective of the Project is to increase transport efficiency and to generate
related employment in the Target Areas.

The Project will scale up the Initial Project and shall comprise improving the 
condition of approximately 930 km of rural roads to all-weather standards which incorporate 
climate resilience and safety features.

3 The Project is expected to be completed by 30 November 2023.

11

SCHEDULE 3 

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1 The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category (“Table”). (Reference to “Category" in this Schedule is to a 
Category of the Table.)

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2 Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for 
each item of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Reallocation

Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal 
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, by notice to the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the 
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan 
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of 
ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

4 Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.

Retroactive Financing

5 Withdrawals from the Loan Account may be made to finance eligible
expenditures incurred under the Project before the Effective Date, but not earlier than 12 
months before the date of this Loan Agreement in connection with Goods, Works and Services, 
subject to a maximum amount equivalent to 20% of the Loan amount.



12
Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item

Total Amount 
Allocated for ADB

Financing 
($)

1

Basis for Withdrawal from the 
Loan Account

Category

1 Works 90,100,000 65% of total expenditure claimed

2 Consulting Services 5,000,000 100% of total expenditure claimed*

3 Unallocated 4,900,000

TOTAL 100,000,000
Exclusive of taxes and duties imposed within the territory of the Borrower



13

SCHEDULE 4

Execution of Project; Financial Matters

Implementation Arrangements

1 The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agency to ensure
that the Project is implemented in accordance with the detailed arrangements set forth in the 
PAM Any subsequent change to the PAM shall become effective only after approval of such 
change by the Borrower and ADB. In the event of any discrepancy between the PAM and this 
Loan Agreement, the provisions of this Loan Agreement shall prevail.

Procurement

The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agency to ensure 
that

(a) the procurement of Goods, Works and Services is carried out in 
accordance with the Procurement Policy and the Procurement 
Regulations;

(b) Goods, Works and Services shall be procured based on the detailed 
arrangements set forth in the Procurement Plan, including the 
procurement and selection methods, the type of bidding documents, and 
ADB’s review requirements. The Borrower may modify the detailed 
arrangements set forth in the Procurement Plan only with the prior 
agreement of ADB, and such modifications must be set out in updates 
to the Procurement Plan; and

(c) (i) all Goods and Works procured and Services obtained (including all
computer hardware, software and systems, whether separately 
procured or incorporated within other goods and services procured) do 
not violate or infringe any industrial property or intellectual property right 
or claim of any third party; and (ii) all contracts for the procurement of 
Goods, Works and Services contain appropriate representations, 
warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from the contractor, supplier, 
consultant or service provider with respect to the matters referred to in 
this subparagraph.

The Borrower shall ensure that the Project Executing Agency does not award 
any Works or Nonconsulting Services contracts until:

(a) the Department of Environment has granted the final approval of the 
IEE; and

(b) the Borrower has incorporated the relevant provisions from the EMP into 
the Works contract.



14

Schedule 4

Community Participation Framework (CPF)

4 The Borrower shall, or shall cause the Project Executing Agency to, implement
the CPF as agreed with ADB and in conformity with all relevant applicable laws and regulations 
of the Borrower.

5 The Borrower shall ensure, or cause the Project Executing Agency to ensure,
no section or part thereof under any Works contract awarded for the Project shall be handed 
over to the contractor unless the applicable provisions of the CPF have been implemented in 
full.

Operation and Maintenance

The Borrower shall ensure that it allocates sufficient funds for operation and 
maintenance of the roads to be constructed or upgraded under the Project, and ensure that 
the funds are made available to the Project Executing Agency on a timely basis for the same 
purpose.

Environment

The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agency to ensure 
that the preparation, design, construction, implementation, operation and decommissioning of 
the Project and all Project facilities comply with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the 
Borrower relating to environment, health and safety; (b) the Environmental Safeguards; and (c) 
all measures and requirements set forth in the I EE, the EMP, and any corrective or preventative 
actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report.

Involuntary Resettlement and Tribes, Minor Races, Ethnic Sects and Communities

The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agency to ensure 
that the Project does not have any Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards impacts or Tribes, 
Minor Races. Ethnic Sects and Communities Safeguards impacts. If the Project does have any 
such impacts, the Borrower shall take all steps required to ensure that the Project complies 
with the applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower and with the SPS.

Human and Financial Resources to Implement Safeguards Requirements

The Borrower shall make available or cause the Project Executing Agency to 
make available necessary budgetary and human resources to fully implement the EMP.

Safeguards - Related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

10 The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agency to ensure
that all bidding documents and contracts for Works contain provisions that require contractors 
to:

(a) comply with the measures relevant to the contractor set forth in the IEE 
and the EMP (to the extent they concern impacts on affected people 



15

Schedule 4

during construction), and any corrective or preventative actions set forth 
in a Safeguards Monitoring Report;

(b) make available a budget for all such environmental and social 
measures;

(c) provide the Borrower with a written notice of any unanticipated 
environmental risks or impacts that were not considered in the I EE or 
the EMP or any resettlement or indigenous peoples risks or impacts that 
arise during construction, implementation or operation of the Project;

(d) adequately record the condition of roads, agricultural land and other 
infrastructure prior to starting to transport materials and construction; 
and

(e) reinstate pathways, other local infrastructure, and agricultural land to at 
least their pre-project condition upon the completion of construction.

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

11 The Borrower shall cause the Project Executing Agency to do the following:

(a) submit semiannual Safeguards Monitoring Reports to ADB and disclose 
relevant information from such reports to affected persons promptly 
upon submission;

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts arise 
during construction, implementation.or operation of the Project that were 
not considered in the IEE and the EMP, promptly inform ADB of the 
occurrence of such risks or impacts, with detailed description of the 
event and proposed corrective action plan; and

(c) report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures 
and requirements set forth in the EMP promptly after becoming aware 
of the breach.

Prohibited List of Investments

12 . The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agency to ensure
that no proceeds of the Loan are used to finance any activity included in the list of prohibited 
investment activities provided in Appendix 5 of the SPS.

Labor Standards, Health and Safety

13 . The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agency to ensure
that the core labor standards and the Borrower’s applicable laws and regulations are complied 
with during Project implementation. The Borrower shall ensure that the Project Executing 
Agency includes specific provisions in the bidding documents and contracts financed by ADB 



16

Schedule 4

under the Project requiring that the contractors, among other things: (a) comply with the 
Borrower’s applicable labor law and regulations and incorporate applicable workplace 
occupational safety norms; (b) do not use child labor; (c) do not discriminate workers in respect 
of employment and occupation; (d) do not use forced labor; (e) allow freedom of association 
and effectively recognize the right to collective bargaining; and (f) disseminate, or engage 
appropriate service providers to disseminate, information on the risks of sexually transmitted 
diseases, including HIV/AIDS, to the employees of contractors engaged under the Project and 
to members of the local communities surrounding the Project area, particularly women.

14 The Borrower shall cause the Project Executing Agency to strictly monitor
compliance with the requirements set forth in paragraph 13 above and provide ADB with 
regular reports.

Gender and Development

15 The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agency to ensure
that (a) the GAP is implemented in accordance with its terms; (b) the bidding documents and 
contracts include relevant provisions for contractors to comply with the measures set forth in 
the GAP; (c) adequate resources are allocated for implementation of the GAP; (d) progress on 
implementation of the GAP, including progress toward achieving key gender outcome and 
output targets, are regularly monitored and reported to ADB; and (e) key gender outcome and 
output targets in the GAP are achieved.

Counterpart Support

16 The Borrower shall ensure that the Project Executing Agency has sufficient
funds to satisfy its liabilities arising from any Works, Goods or Services contract.

Governance and Anticorruption

17 . The Borrower and the Project Executing Agency shall (a) comply with ADB’s
Anticorruption Policy (1998, as amended to date) and acknowledge that ADB reserves the 
right to investigate directly, or through its agents, any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or 
coercive practice relating to the Project; and (b) cooperate with any such investigation and 
extend all necessary assistance for satisfactory completion of such investigation.

18 The Borrower and the Project Executing Agency shall ensure that the
anticorruption provisions acceptable to ADB are included in all bidding documents and 
contracts, including provisions specifying the right of ADB to audit and examine the records 
and accounts of the executing and implementing agencies and all contractors, suppliers, 
consultants, and other service providers as they relate to the Project.



