






































Untitled


LOAN NUMBER 6027-PAK (COL)

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

(Punjab Water Resources Management Projects) 

between

ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF PAKISTAN 

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED15 T.olo

PAK 51036



LOAN AGREEMENT
(Ordinary Operations)

LOAN AGREEMENT dated riLloXo between ISLAMIC REPUBLIC 

OF PAKISTAN (“Borrower") and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB").

WHEREAS

(A) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a loan under an ADB project 
readiness financing (“PRF") to finance preparatory activities for prospective projects ("PRF 
Activities”) described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement; and

(B) ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the Borrower from 
ADB's ordinary capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein;

NOW THEREFORE the parties hereto agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All the provisions of ADB's Ordinary Operations 
(Concessional) Loan Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 (“Loan Regulations"), are hereby 
made applicable to this Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully 
set forth herein, subject, however, to the following modifications:

(a) The term "Project" wherever it appears in the Loan Regulations as a 
defined term, shall be substituted by the term "PRF Activities".

(b) The term “Project Executing Agency" wherever it appears in the Loan 
Regulations as a defined term, shall be substituted by the term "PRF 
Executing Agency”.

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:

(a) "Amortization Schedule" means the amortization schedule for 
repayment of the withdrawn principal amount of the Loan (in the event 
that the PRF Loan is not refinanced by ADB), as set forth in Schedule 2 
to this Loan Agreement;

(b) "Consulting Services" means consulting services as described in the 
Procurement Regulations and set out in the Procurement Plan, and to 
be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan;



2

(c) “Ensuing Loan Agreement" means the loan agreement to be entered 
into between the Borrower and ADB for an Ensuing Project which also 
provides for refinancing of the Loan;

(d) "Ensuing Project(s)" means the prospective project(s) to be financed by 
ADB, that satisfy the selection criteria set forth in Schedule 1;

(e) "Existing Loan Agreement" means the loan agreement entered into 
between the Borrower and ADB for an ongoing project financed by ADB, 
an amendment of which provides for refinancing of the Loan;

(f) "Loan Disbursement Handbook" means ADB's Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time);

(g) "Nonconsulting Services" means nonconsulting services as described in 
the Procurement Regulations and set out in the Procurement Plan, and 
to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan;

(h) “PAM" means the project administration manual for the PRF Activities 
dated 18 November 2019 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB. 
as updated from time to time in accordance with the respective 
administrative procedures of the Borrower and ADB;

(i) “PRF Executing Agency" within the meaning of the Loan Regulations 
means the Punjab Irrigation Department of the Government of Punjab 
or any successor thereto acceptable to ADB, which is responsible for 
the carrying out of the PRF Activities;

(j) “PRF Implementing Agencies" means the Punjab Irrigation Department 
and the Punjab Agriculture Department of the Government of Punjab, or 
any successor thereto acceptable to ADB;

(k) "Procurement Plan" means the procurement plan for the PRF Activities 
dated 18 November 2019 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, 
as updated from time to time in accordance with the Procurement Policy, 
the Procurement Regulations, and other arrangements agreed with 
ADB;

(I) "Procurement Policy" means ADB's Procurement Policy - Goods, 
Works, Nonconsulting and Consulting Services (2017, as amended from 
time to time);

(m) "Procurement Regulations’ means ADB's Procurement Regulations for 
ADB Borrowers - Goods, Works, Nonconsulting and Consulting 
Services (2017, as amended from time to time);

(n) "Refinancing Date" means the date no later than the first Principal 
Payment Date that is either (i) the effective date of the Ensuing Loan 
Agreement; (ii) the effective date of the amended Existing Loan 
Agreement; or (iii) such other date as may from time to time be agreed 
between the Borrower and ADB;



3

(o) “Services" means Consulting Services and Nonconsulting Services; and

(p) “SPS" means ADB's Safeguard Policy Statement (2009).

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB's
ordinary capital resources an amount of eight million three hundred and twenty thousand 
Dollars ($8,320,000).

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 20 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.

(c) The term “grace period" as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the Amortization 
Schedule.

Section 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB an interest charge at the 
rate of 2% per annum during the grace period and thereafter, on the amount of the Loan 
withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time.

Section 2.03. Interest on the Loan shall be payable semiannually on 
1 April and 1 October in each year.

Section 2.04. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 2 to this 
Loan Agreement.

Section 2.05. In the event that the Loan is refinanced by ADB pursuant 
to an Ensuing Loan Agreement or an Existing Loan Agreement, on the Refinancing Date:

(a) the Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn 
from the Loan Account along with any interest accrued hereunder in 
accordance with the terms of the Ensuing Loan Agreement or the 
Existing Loan Agreement; and

(b) the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account 
shall terminate and any unwithdrawn amount of the Loan shall be 
cancelled.



4

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to be 
applied exclusively to the financing of expenditures relating to the PRF Activities in accordance 
with the provisions of this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower shall 
procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds 
of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.04. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 9.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 30 June 2024 or such other date as may from time to time be 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4.01. In the carrying out of the PRF Activities, the Borrower 
shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set forth in this Loan Agreement.

Section 4.02. (a) The Borrower shall or shall cause the PRF
Executing Agency to (i) maintain separate accounts and records for the PRF Activities; (ii) 
prepare annual financial statements for the PRF Activities in accordance with financial 
reporting standards acceptable to ADB; (iii) have such financial statements audited annually 
by independent auditors whose qualifications, experience and terms of reference are 
acceptable to ADB, in accordance with auditing standards acceptable to ADB; (iv) as part of 
each such audit, have the auditors prepare a report, which includes the auditors’ opinion(s) on 
the financial statements and the use of the Loan proceeds, and a management letter (which 
sets out the deficiencies in the internal control of the PRF Activities that were identified in the 
course of the audit, if any); and (v) furnish to ADB, no later than 6 months after the end of each 
related fiscal year, copies of such audited financial statements, audit report and management 
letter, all in the English language, and such other information concerning these documents and 
the audit thereof as ADB shall from time to time reasonably request.

(b) ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the PRF 
Activities and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 days of the date 
of ADB’s confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADB's website.

(c) The Borrower shall enable ADB, upon ADB’s request, to discuss the 
financial statements for the PRF Activities and the Borrower’s financial affairs where they relate 



5

to the PRE Activities with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(iii) hereinabove, 
and shall authorize and require any representative of such auditors to participate in any such 
discussions requested by ADB. This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted only 
in the presence of an authorized officer of the Borrower, unless the Borrower shall otherwise 
agree.

Section 4.03. The Borrower shall enable ADB's representatives to 
inspect the PRF Activities and any relevant records and documents.

ARTICLE V

Effectiveness

Section 5.01. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 10.04 of the 
Loan Regulations.

ARTICLE VI

Miscellaneous

Section 6.01. The Secretary, Economic Affairs Division, Ministry of 
Economic Affairs of the Borrower is designated as representative of the Borrower for the 
purposes of Section 12.02 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 6.02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 12.01 of the Loan Regulations:

For the Borrower

The Secretary
Economic Affairs Division
Ministry of Economic Affairs
Islamabad, Pakistan

Facsimile Number:

(92-51)910-4016.



6

For APB

Asian Development Bank 
6 ADB Avenue 
Mandaluyong City
1550 Metro Manila 
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

(63-2) 8636-2444 
(63-2) 8636-2484.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

By____
DR.

AKI STAN

Economic airs Division 
Ministry of Economic Affairs

ISLAMIC REPUBLIC

VAIZ ABBAS 
S^cfetary

ASIAN DEVE PMENT BANK

By
XIAOHONG YANG 

Country Director 
Pakistan Resident Mission



7

SCHEDULE 1

Description of the PRF Activities

1. The PRF Activities shall comprise:

(a) project preparatory activities in the form of feasibility studies and due 
diligence assessments, including preliminary engineering design; cost 
estimates: technical, financial, integrity, economic, and socioeconomic 
analysis; environmental analysis; and social impact assessment;

(b) detailed engineering design, and preparation of environmental and 
social safeguards planning documents;

(c) advance procurement actions, including preparation of bidding 
documents and supporting the bidding process until contract award; and

(d) capacity development for the PRF Executing Agency and PRF 
Implementing Agencies in PRF project preparation and implementation 
including procurement, contract management, financial management, 
safeguards planning and monitoring, and gender aspects.

2. Unless otherwise agreed between the Borrower and ADB, the PRF Activities
are expected to support preparation of the Ensuing Projects that satisfy the following selection 
criteria:

(a) Relevance: the project is in line with the overall objective of the PRF that 
is to (i) meet the policies and strategies of the national and provincial 
governments, and ADB. including sector operational plans, country 
partnership strategy and is included in the country operations business 
plan; and (ii) ensure high implementation readiness for the ensuing 
projects;

(b) Technical: the technical design will meet relevant guidelines and 
regulations of the Borrower. The technical feasibility will be assessed 
through detailed examination of the project s compatibility with local 
conditions, including current and projected climate variables, availability 
of water sources, proximity to the residents, and available land for 
project facilities. Alternative design options will be identified and 
assessed;

(c) Governance: both the executing agency and the implementing agency 
of the proposed project have an established capacity to administer and 
implement externally-funded projects including those financed by ADB. 
Both the agencies have adequate financial management and 
procurement capacity to manage activities related to the preparation of 
the proposed projects supported under the PRF;



8

(d) Safeguards: project preparation and design activities for the project 
supported through the PRF are expected to have no environmental or 
social impacts, as the project will only finance consulting services. The 
proposed project will fully meet the requirements of the SPS.

3. The PRF Activities are expected to be completed by 31 December 2023.



9

SCHEDULE 2

Amortization Schedule

1. The following table sets forth the Principal Payment Dates of the Loan and the
percentage of the total principal amount of the Loan payable on each Principal Payment Date 
(Installment Share). If the proceeds of the Loan shall have been fully withdrawn as of the first 
Principal Payment Date, the principal amount of the Loan repayable by the Borrower on each 
Principal Payment Date shall be determined by ADB by multiplying (a) the total principal 
amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding as of the first Principal Payment Date; by (b) 
the Installment Share for each Principal Payment Date.



* The arrangements for payment are subject to the provisions of Sections 3.04 and 4.03 of the Loan Regulations. 
2. If the proceeds of the Loan shall not have been fully withdrawn as of the first
Principal Payment Date, the principal amount of the Loan repayable by the Borrower on each 
Principal Payment Date shall be determined as follows:

(a) to the extent that any proceeds of the Loan shall have been withdrawn 
as of the first Principal Payment Date, the Borrower shall repay the 
amount withdrawn and outstanding as of such date In accordance with 
paragraph 1 of this Schedule; and

(b) any withdrawal made after the first Principal Payment Date shall be 
repaid on each Principal Payment Date falling after the date of such 
withdrawal in amounts determined by ADB by multiplying the amount of 
each such withdrawal by a fraction, the numerator of which shall be the 
original Installment Share specified in the table in paragraph 1 of this 
Schedule for said Principal Payment Date (the Original Installment 
Share) and the denominator of which shall be the sum of all remaining 
Original Installment Shares for Principal Payment Dates falling on or 
after such date.

3. Withdrawals made within 2 calendar months prior to any Principal Payment
Date shall, for the purposes solely of calculating the principal amounts payable on any Principal 
Payment Date, be treated as withdrawn and outstanding on the second Principal Payment 
Date following the date of withdrawal and shall be repayable on each Principal Payment Date 
commencing with the second Principal Payment Date following the date of withdrawal.



11

SCHEDULE 3

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category (“Table"). (Reference to "Category" in this Schedule is to a 
Category or Subcategory of the Table.)

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for 
each item of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Interest Charges

3. The amount allocated to Category “Interest Charges" is for financing interest
charges on the Loan during the implementation period of the PRF Activities. ADB shall be 
entitled to withdraw from the Loan Account and pay to itself, on behalf of the Borrower, the 
amounts required to meet payments, when due. of such interest charges.

Reallocation

4. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, in consultation with the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, 
to the extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the 
Loan which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion 
of ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, In consultation with 
the Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

5. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.



12
Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

Exclusive of taxes and duties imposed within the territory of the Borrower.

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item

Total Amount Allocated 
for ADB Financing 

($)
Category

Basis for Withdrawal 
from the Loan Account

1 Project Management 430,000 100% of total expenditure claimed

2 Consulting Services 5,950,000 100% of total expenditure claimed*
3 Interest Charges 470,000 100% of amounts due
4 Unallocated 1,470, 000

TOTAL 8,320,000



13

SCHEDULE 4

Execution of Project; Financial Matters

Implementation Arrangements

1. The Borrower shall ensure, and cause the PRF Executing Agency and PRF
Implementing Agencies to ensure, that the PRF Activities are implemented in accordance with 
the detailed arrangements set forth in the PAM. Any subsequent change to the PAM shall 
become effective only after approval of such change by the Borrower and ADB. In the event 
of any discrepancy between the PAM and this Loan Agreement, the provisions of this Loan 
Agreement shall prevail.

Safeguards

2. The Borrower shall ensure, and cause the PRF Executing Agency and PRF
Implementing Agencies to ensure, that the PRF Activities do not have any environmental, 
indigenous peoples or involuntary resettlement impacts, all within the meaning of the SPS.

Prohibited List of Investments

3. The Borrower shall ensure, and cause the PRF Executing Agency and PRF
Implementing Agencies to ensure, that no proceeds of the Loan are used to finance any activity 
included in the list of prohibited investment activities provided in Appendix 5 of the SPS.

Procurement

4. The Borrower and the PRF Executing Agency shall ensure that:

(a) the procurement of Consulting Services is carried out in accordance with 
the Procurement Policy and the Procurement Regulations;

(b) Consulting Services shall be procured based on the detailed 
arrangements set forth in the Procurement Plan, including the 
procurement and selection methods, the type of bidding documents, and 
ADB’s review requirements. The Borrower may modify the detailed 
arrangements set forth in the Procurement Plan only with the prior 
agreement of ADB, and such modifications must be set out in updates 
to the Procurement Plan; and

(c) (i) all Consulting Services obtained (including all computer hardware,
software and systems, whether separately procured or incorporated 
within other goods and services procured) do not violate or infringe any 
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party; 
and (ii) all contracts for the procurement of Consulting Services contain 
appropriate representations, warranties and. if appropriate, indemnities 
from the contractor, supplier, consultant or service provider with respect 
to the matters referred to in this subparagraph.



14
Schedule 4

Governance and Anticorruption

5. The Borrower shall ensure, and shall cause the PRF Executing Agency and
PRF Implementing Agencies to (a) comply with ADB's Anticorruption Policy (1998, as 
amended to date) and acknowledge that ADB reserves the right to investigate directly, or 
through its agents, any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or coercive practice relating to the 
PRF Activities; and (b) cooperate with any such investigation and extend all necessary 
assistance for satisfactory completion of such investigation.

6. The Borrower shall ensure, and shall cause the PRF Executing Agency and
PRF Implementing Agencies to ensure, that the anticorruption provisions acceptable to ADB 
are included in all bidding documents and contracts, including provisions specifying the right 
of ADB to audit and examine the records and accounts of the PRF Executing Agency, PRF 
Implementing Agencies and all contractors, suppliers, consultants, and other service providers 
as they relate to the PRF Activities.



