







































Untitled


LOAN NUMBER 3737-UZB(COL)

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

(Horticulture Value Chain Infrastructure Project) 

between

REPUBLIC OF UZBEKISTAN

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED MAY 2019

UZB 51041



LOAN AGREEMENT
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

LOAN AGREEMENT dated May 2019 between REPUBLIC OF
UZBEKISTAN (“Borrower”) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB”).

WHEREAS

(A) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a loan for the purposes of the 
Project described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(B) the Project will be carried out by AIFSA (as hereinafter defined), and for 
this purpose the Borrower will make available to AIFSA the proceeds of the loan provided for 
herein upon terms and conditions satisfactory to ADB and the Borrower; and

(C) ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the Borrower from 
ADB’s ordinary capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein and in the 
Project Agreement to be entered into between ADB and the ALC Management Company (as 
hereinafter defined);

NOW THEREFORE the parties agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All the provisions of ADB’s Ordinary Operations 
(Concessional) Loan Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 (“Loan Regulations”), are hereby 
made applicable to this Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully 
set forth herein, subject, however, to the following modifications:

(a) Section 2.01 (w) is deleted and the following is substituted therefor:

“Project Agreement” means the project agreement between ADB and 
ALC Management Company, as such agreement may be amended from 
time to time; and such project agreement includes all schedules to the 
project agreement; and

(b) The term “Project Executing Agency” appearing in Sections 6.01(a), 
8.01(d), 8.01(f), 8.01(k), 9.01(c) and 9.02(c) of the Loan Regulations 
shall be substituted by the term “ALC Management Company”.

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:



2

(a) “AIFSA” means the Agency for Implementation of. Projects in the Field, 
of Agro-industry and Food Security of the Borrower, or any successor 
thereto acceptable to ADB;

(b) “ALCs” means the agro-logistic centers to be established under the 
Project in Andijian and Samarkand regions of the Borrower; and “ALC” 
means either of them;

(c) “ALC Management Company" means a special purpose vehicle to be 
established as a limited liability company to operate and manage the 
ALCs, which shall be fully owned by the Borrower;

(d) “Consulting Guidelines” means the Guidelines on the Use of 
Consultants by Asian Development Bank and its Borrowers (2013, as 
amended from time to time);

(e) "Consulting Services" means the services to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan as described in paragraph 3 of Schedule 1 to this 
Loan Agreement;

(f) “EMP” means an environmental management plan for the Project, 
including any update thereto, incorporated in the respective IEE;

(g) “Environmental Safeguards” means the principles and requirements set 
forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of the 
SPS;

(h) “GAP” means the gender action plan for the Project, including any 
update thereto, prepared by the Borrower and cleared by ADB;

(i) “Goods" means equipment and materials to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan, including related services such as transportation, 
insurance, installation, commissioning, training, and initial maintenance, 
but excluding Consulting Services; .

(j) “iee” means an initial environmental examination for the Project, 
including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower 
and cleared by ADB;

(k) “Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards” means the principles and 
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 2, and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

(I) “LARP” means a land acquisition and resettlement plan for the Project, 
including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower 
and cleared by ADB;

(m) “Loan Disbursement Handbook” means ADB’s Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time);



3

(n) “MlFT” means the Ministry of Investment and Foreign Trade of the 
Borrower, or any successor thereto acceptable to ADB;

(o) “Output” means an output of the Project;

(p) “PAM” means the project administration manual for the Project dated 11 
October 2018 and agreed between the Borrower, through AIFSA, and 
ADB, as updated from time to time in accordance with the respective 
administrative procedures of the Borrower and ADB;

(q) “Procurement Guidelines" means ADB’s Procurement Guidelines 
(2015, as amended from time to time);

(r) “Procurement Plan” means the procurement plan for the'Project dated 
11 October 2018 and agreed between the Borrower, through AIFSA, 
and ADB, as updated from time to time in accordance with the 
Procurement Guidelines, the Consulting Guidelines, and other 
arrangements agreed with ADB;

(s) “Project Executing Agency” for the purposes of, and within the meaning 
of, the Loan Regulations means AIFSA or any successor thereto 
acceptable to ADB, which is responsible for the carrying out of the 
Project;

(t) “Safeguards Monitoring Report” means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower to ADB that describes progress with 
implementation of and compliance with the EMPs and the LARPs, 
including any corrective and preventative actions;

(u) “SPS” means ADB's Safeguard Policy Statement (2009); and

(v) “Works” means construction or civil works to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan, including services such as drilling or mapping, 
and project related services that are provided as part of a single 
responsibility or turnkey contract, but excluding Consulting Services.

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB’s
ordinary capital resources an amount of one hundred ninety-seven million Dollars 
($197,000,000).

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 20 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.



4

(c) The term “grace period” as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement

Section 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB an interest charge at the 
rate of 2% per annum during the grace period and thereafter, on the amount of the Loan 
withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time.

Section 2.03. The interest charge and any other charge on the Loan 
shall be payable semiannually on 15 May and 15 November in each year.

Section 2.04. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set forth 
in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.05. The currency of repayment of the principal amount of the 
Loan and the currency of payment of the interest charge for the purposes of Sections 4.03(a) 
and 4.04 of the Loan Regulations shall be the Dollar.

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. The Borrower shall make the proceeds of the Loan 
available to AIFSA upon terms and conditions satisfactory to ADB and the Borrower and shall 
cause AIFSA to apply such proceeds exclusively to the financing ofexpendituresonthe Project 
in accordance with the provisions of this Loan Agreement and the Project Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower shall 
procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds 
of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.04. Withdrawals from the Loan Account in respect of Goods, 
Works and Consulting Services shall be made only on account of expenditures relating to:

(a) Goods which are produced in and supplied from and Works and 
Consulting Services which are supplied from such member countries of 
ADB as shall have been specified by ADB from time to time as eligible 
sources for procurement; and

(b) Goods, Works and Consulting Services which meet such other eligibility 
requirements as shall have been specified by ADB from time to time.



5

Section 3.05. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 8.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 30 June 2024 or such other date as may from time to time be 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4.01. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set forth 
in Schedule 5 to this Loan Agreement and the Project Agreement.

Section 4.02. The Borrower shall enable ADB’s representatives to 
inspect the Project, the Goods and Works, and any relevant records and documents.

Section 4.03. (a) The Borrower shall cause AIFSA to (i) maintain
separate accounts and records for the Project; (ii) prepare annual financial statements for the 
Project in accordance with financial reporting standards acceptable to ADB; (Hi) have such 
financial statements audited annually by independent auditors whose qualifications, 
experience and terms of reference are acceptable to ADB, in accordance with auditing 
standards acceptable to ADB; (iv) as part of each such audit, have the auditors prepare a 
report, which includes the auditors’ opinion(s) on the financial statements and the use of the 
Loan proceeds, and a management letter (which sets out the deficiencies in the internal control 
of the Project that were identified in the course of the audit, if any); and (v) furnish to ADB, no 
later than six months after the close of the fiscal year to which they relate, copies of such 
audited financial statements, audit report and management letter, all in the English language, 
and such other information concerning these documents and the audit thereof as ADB shall 
from time to time reasonably request.

(b) ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the 
Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 days of the date 
of ADB’s confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADB’s website.

(c) The Borrower shall cause AIFSA to enable ADB, upon ADB’s request, 
to discuss the financial statements for the Project and AIFSA’s financial affairs where they 
relate to the Project with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(iii) hereinabove, 
and shall authorize and require any representative of such auditors to participate in any such 
discussions requested by ADB. This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted only 
in the presence of an authorized officer of AIFSA, unless AIFSA shall otherwise agree.

Section 4.04. The Borrower shall take all actions which shall be 
necessary on its part to enable the ALC Management Company to perform its obligations under 
the Project Agreement, and shall not take or permit any action which would interfere with the 
performance of such obligations.



6

ARTICLE V

Effectiveness

Section 5.01. A date 60 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of the Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.04 of the 
Loan Regulations.

ARTICLE VI

Delegation of Authority

Section 6.01. The Borrower hereby designates AIFSA as its agent for 
the purposes of taking any action or entering into any agreement required or permitted under 
Sections 3.02, 3.03 and 3.05 of this Loan Agreement and under Sections 5.01, 5.02, 5.03 and 
5.04 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 6.02. Any action taken or any agreement entered into by 
AIFSA pursuant to the authority conferred under Section 6.01 of this Loan Agreement shall.be 
fully binding on the Borrower and shall have the same force and effect as if taken by the 
Borrower.

Section 6.03. The authority conferred on AIFSA under Section 6.01 of 
this Loan Agreement may be revoked or modified by agreement between the Borrower and 
ADB.

ARTICLE VII

Miscellaneous

Section 7.01. The Minister of Finance of the Borrower is designated as 
representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 11.02 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 7.02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 11.01 of the Loan Regulations:

For the Borrower

Ministry of Finance
29 Istiqlol Street
Tashkent 100008
Republic of Uzbekistan



7

Facsimile Numbers:

(998-71)239-1128 
(998-71)239-1252.

For APB

Asian Development Bank 
6 ADB Avenue 
Mandaluyong City 
1550 Metro Manila 
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

(63-2) 636-2444 
(63-2)636-2017.



8

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

REPUBLIC OF UZBEKISTAN

ELYAR GANIEV 
Deputy Prime Minister

Vice President (Operations 1)



9

SCHEDULE 1

Description of the Project

1. The objective of the Project is to increase the production and value addition of
horticulture products in the territory of the Borrower.

2. The Project shall comprise the following Outputs:

(a) Output 1: Establishment of ALCs. This Output comprises:

(i) the establishment of an ALC in Andijan region with (A) 
approximately 25,000 square meters (m2) of trading area split 
evenly between wholesale and small farmer sales areas with an 
annual throughput of approximately 425,000 tons; (B) 
approximately 60,000 cubic meters (m3) of cold storage with an 
annual capacity of approximately up to 1.5 million tons; (C) 
approximately 12 processing lines with an approximate annual 
throughput of 600,000 tons for export and 80,000 tons for the 
domestic market; and (D) groundworks for future expansion of 
the ALC for an increased volume of horticulture produce and/or 
trading, storage and processing of alternative food products; and

(ii) the establishment of an ALC in Samarkand with: (A) 
approximately 35,600 m2 of trading area split evenly between 
wholesale and small farmer sales areas with an annual 
throughput of approximately 550,000 tons; (B) approximately 
60,000 m3 of cold storage with an annual capacity of 
approximately up to 1.5 million tons; (C) approximately 17 
processing lines with an approximate annual throughput of 
850,000 tons for export and 150,000 tons for the domestic 
market; and (D) groundworks for future expansion of the ALC for 
an increased volume of horticulture produce and/or trading, 
storage and processing of alternative food products.

(b) Output 2: Improvement of ALC Management Capacity. This Output 
comprises the development of institutional and operational capacity of 
various stakeholders in the horticulture value chain, including the 
assistance to MIFT in (i) establishing the ALC Management Company 
in accordance with best international practices; (ii) preparing operation 
and management guidelines for the ALCs; (iii) conducting training in 
management, operation, and maintenance of the ALCs; (iv) conducting 
training in horticulture business development and management; and (v) 
learning from successful international agro-logistic models.

3. The Project shall include the provision of Consulting Services for activities,
including those specified in paragraph 2(b) above.

4. The Project is expected to be completed by 31 December 2023.



10

• * The arrangements for payment are subject to the provisions of Sections 3.04 and 4.03 of the Loan Regulations.

The arrangements for payment are subject to the provisions of Sections 3.04 and 4.03 of the Loan Regulations.

Payment Due Payment of Principal 
expressed in US Dollars*

15 May 2042
15 November 2042
15 May 2043
15 November 2043

4,925,000
4,925,000
4,925,000
4,925,000

Total 197,000,000



12

SCHEDULE 3 

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category (“Table”). (Reference to “Category” in this Schedule is to a 
Category or Subcategory of the Table.)

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for 
each item of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Reallocation

3. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, by notice to the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the 
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan 
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of 
ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures; and (ii) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all. agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

4. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.

Conditions for Withdrawals from Loan Account

5. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Loan Agreement, no withdrawal
shall be made from the Loan Account in respect of Goods and Works (Turnkey Contract) until:

(a) the ALC Management Company has been duly established and is 
adequately staffed and fully operational in accordance with the laws of 
the Borrower;



13
Schedule 3

(b) the ALC Management Company has entered into the Project Agreement 
with ADB upon terms and conditions satisfactory to ADB; and

(c) ADB has received a satisfactory legal opinion confirming that the Project 
Agreement referred to in paragraph 5(b) above has been duly 
authorized by, and executed and delivered on behalf of, and is legally 
binding upon the ALC Management Company in accordance with its 
terms.



14
Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

* Exclusive of taxes and duties imposed within the territory of the Borrower.
** Subject to the conditions of withdrawal described in paragraph 5 of Schedule 3.

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item

Total Amount Allocated 
for ADB Financing 

$ 
Category

Basis for Withdrawal 
from the Loan Account

1 Goods and Works 
(Turnkey Contract) ** 187,119,707

100% of total expenditure 
claimed*

2

Other Expenditures, 
including for:
(a) Project Management 

and Supervision 
Consultants;

(b) Project Management;
(c) Resettlement;
(d) Project Financial 

Audit; and
(e) Environmental 

Management

9,880,293 100% of total expenditure 
claimed

TOTAL 197,000,000



15

SCHEDULE 4

Procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services

General

1. The procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services shall be subject to
and governed by the Procurement Guidelines, and the Consulting Guidelines, respectively.

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, Goods and Works shall be procured and
Consulting Services shall be selected and engaged only on the basis of the procurement 
methods and the selection methods set forth below. These methods are subject to, among 
other things, the detailed arrangements and threshold values set forth in the Procurement Plan. 
The Borrower may only modify the procurement methods and the selection methods or 
threshold values with the prior agreement of ADB, and modifications must be set out in updates 
to the Procurement Plan.

3. All terms used in this Schedule and not otherwise defined in this Loan
Agreement have the meanings provided in the Procurement Guidelines and/or the Consulting 
Guidelines, as applicable.

Goods and Works

4. Goods and Works shall be procured on the basis of the procurement methods
set forth below:

(a) International Competitive Bidding; and

(b) Shopping.

Conditions for Award of Contract

5. The Borrower shall not award and shall cause AIFSA not to award any Works
contract which involves environmental impacts until:

(a) the relevant environmental authority of the Borrower has granted the 
final approval of the applicable I EE; and

(b) AIFSA has incorporated the relevant provisions from the applicable 
EMP into the Works contract.

6. The Borrower shall not and shall cause AIFSA not to award any Works contract
which involves involuntary resettlement impacts, until AIFSA has prepared and submitted to 
ADB the final LARPs based on the Project's detailed design, and obtained ADB's clearance of 
such LARPs.

Consulting Services

7. Except as set forth in the paragraph below, the Borrower shall apply Quality-
and Cost-Based Selection for Consulting Services.



16
Schedule 4

8. The Borrower shall apply the following selection method for the specified
Consulting Services, in accordance with, among other things, the procedures set forth in the 
Procurement Plan: Least-Cost Selection for financial auditing.

Industrial or Intellectual Property Rights

9. (a) The Borrower shall ensure that all Goods and Works procured (including
without limitation all computer hardware, software and systems, whether separately procured 
or incorporated within other goods and services procured) do not violate or infringe any 
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.

(b) The Borrower shall ensure that all contracts for the procurement of 
Goods and Works contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, 
indemnities from the contractor or supplier with respect to the matters referred to in 
subparagraph (a) of this paragraph.

10. The Borrower shall ensure that ail ADB-financed contracts with consultants
contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from the 
consultants to ensure that the Consulting Services provided do not violate or infringe any 
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.

APB's Review of Procurement Decisions

11. Contracts procured under international competitive bidding procedures and
contracts for Consulting Services shall be subject to prior review by ADB, unless otherwise 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB and set forth in the Procurement Plan.

12. In the case of a contract for Goods or Works, which is subject to ADB’s prior
review, the Borrower shall seek ADB’s prior approval of any modification or waiver of the terms 
and conditions of the contract, including:

(a) granting an extension of the stipulated time for completion of a contract 
for a period of one month or more, or which is likely to require an 
extension of the Loan Closing Date, and

(b) increases in aggregate of the original price by more than 5% (for the 
avoidance of doubt, such increase shall take into account any previous 
change under such contract).

13. In the case of a contract for Goods or Works, which is subject to ADB’s post
review, ADB shall review the required contract modification or waiver and respond to the 
Borrower as soon as practicable, but not later than one month after the receipt of the required 
document.

14. The Borrower shall provide to ADB copies of all time extensions, modifications
or waivers to the contracts (including change orders) within one month following amendment 
of the contract.



17

SCHEDULE 5

Execution of Project; Financial Matters

Implementation Arrangements

1. The Borrower and AIFSA shall ensure that the Project is implemented in
accordance with the detailed arrangements set forth in the PAM. Any subsequent change to 
the PAM shall become effective only after approval of such change by the Borrower, through 
AIFSA, and ADB. In the event of any discrepancy between the PAM and this Loan Agreement, 
the provisions of this Loan Agreement shall prevail.

Safeguards

Environment

2. The Borrower shall and shall cause AIFSA to ensure that the preparation,
design, construction, implementation, operation and decommissioning of the Project and all 
Project facilities comply with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to 
environment, health and safety; (b) the Environmental Safeguards; and (c) all measures and 
requirements set forth in the lEEs, the EMPs, and any corrective or preventative actions set 
forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report.

Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement

3. The Borrower shall and shall cause AIFSA to ensure that all land and all rights-
of-way required for the Project are made available to the Works contractor in accordance with 
the schedule agreed under the related Works contract and all land acquisition and resettlement 
activities are implemented in compliance with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the 
Borrower relating to land acquisition and involuntary resettlement; (b) the Involuntary 
Resettlement Safeguards; and (c) all measures and requirements set forth in each LARP, and 
any corrective or preventative actions set forth in the Safeguards Monitoring Report.

4. Without limiting the application of the Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards or
each LARP, the Borrower shall and shall cause AIFSA to ensure that no physical or economic 
displacement takes place in connection with the Project until:

(a) compensation and other entitlements have been provided to affected 
people in accordance with each LARP; and

(b) a comprehensive income and livelihood restoration program has been 
established in accordance with each LARP.

Indigenous Peoples

5. The Borrower shall and shall cause AIFSA to ensure that the Project does not
have any indigenous peoples impacts within the meaning of the SPS. In the event that the 
Project does have any such impact, the Borrower shall take and shall cause AIFSA to take all 
steps required to ensure that the Project complies with the applicable laws and regulations of 
the Borrower and with the SPS.



18
Schedule 5

Human and Financial Resources to Implement Safeguards Requirements

6. The Borrower shall and shall cause AIFSA to make available necessary
budgetary and human resources to fully implement the EMPs and the LARPs.

Safeguards - Related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

7. The Borrower shall and shall cause AIFSA to ensure that all bidding documents
and contracts for Works contain provisions that require contractors to:

(a) comply with the measures relevant to the contractor set forth in the lEEs, 
the EMPs, and the LARPs (to the extent they concern impacts on 
affected people during construction), and any corrective or preventative 
actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report;

(b) make available a budget for all such environmental and social 
measures;

(c) provide the Borrower with a written notice of any unanticipated 
environmental, resettlement or indigenous peoples risks or impacts that 
arise during construction, implementation or operation of the Project that 
were not considered in the lEEs, the EMPs, and the LARPs;

(d) adequately record the condition of roads, agricultural land and other 
infrastructure prior to starting to transport materials and construction; 
and

(e) reinstate pathways, other local infrastructure, and agricultural land to at 
least their pre-project condition upon the completion of construction.

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

8. The Borrower shall cause AIFSA to do the following:

(a) submit semiannual Safeguards Monitoring Reports to ADB and disclose 
relevant information from such reports to affected persons promptly 
upon submission;

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts arise 
during construction, implementation or operation of the Project that were 
not considered in the lEEs, the EMPs, and the LARPs, promptly inform 
ADB of the occurrence of such risks or impacts, with detailed description 
of the event and proposed corrective action plan; and

(c) report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures 
and requirements set forth in the EMPs and the LARPs promptly after 
becoming aware of the breach.



19
Schedule 5

Prohibited List of Investments

9. The Borrower shall and shall cause AIFSA to ensure that no proceeds of the
Loan are used to finance any activity included in the list of prohibited investment activities 
provided in Appendix 5 of the SPS.

Labor Standards,, Health and Safety

10. The Borrower shall and shall cause AIFSA to ensure that the core labor
standards and the Borrower’s applicable laws and regulations are complied with during Project 
implementation. The Borrower shall cause AIFSA to include specific provisions in the bidding 
documents and contracts financed by ADB under the Project requiring that the contractors, 
among other things: (a) comply with the Borrower’s applicable labor law and regulations and 
incorporate applicable workplace occupational safety norms; (b) do not use child labor; (c) do 
not discriminate workers in respect of employment and occupation; (d) do not use forced labor; 
(e) allow freedom of association and effectively recognize the right to collective bargaining; 
and (f) disseminate, or engage appropriate service providers to disseminate, information on 
the risks of sexually transmitted diseases, including HlV/AIDS, to the employees of contractors 
engaged under the Project and to members of the local communities surrounding the Project 
area, particularly women.

11. The Borrower shall and shall cause AIFSA to ensure strictly monitor compliance
with the requirements set forth in paragraph 10 above and provide ADB with regular reports.

Gender and Development

12. The Borrower shall and shall cause AIFSA to ensure that (a) the GAP is
implemented in accordance with its terms; (b) the bidding documents and contracts include 
relevant provisions for contractors to comply with the measures set forth in the GAP; (c) 
adequate resources are allocated for implementation of the GAP; (d) progress on 
implementation of the GAP, including progress toward achieving key gender outcome and 
output targets, are regularly monitored and reported to ADB; and (e) key gender outcome and 
output targets include, but not limited to: (i) promote jobs'for female workers in the ALCs; (ii) 
improve entrepreneurial abilities for existing and potential women entrepreneurs; (iii) monitor 
employment cheated by the ALCs for female workers, and agribusiness start-ups by female 
entrepreneurs; (iv) recruit national social and gender officer in the project management office; 
(v) identify gender focal points in the ALC Management Company; and (vi) ensure collection 
of sex-disaggregated baseline and end-line information, and monitor trends on number of 
female beneficiaries.

Grievance Redress Mechanism

13. The Borrower shall cause AIFSA to ensure that a joint safeguards grievance
redress mechanism acceptable to ADB is established in accordance with the provisions of the 
lEEs, the EMPs, and the LARPs at the project management office, within three months of the 
Effective Date, to consider safeguards complaints.

14. The safeguards grievance redress mechanism referred to in paragraph 13
above shall function to (a) review and document eligible complaints of Project stakeholders; 
(b) proactively address grievances; (c) provide the complainants with notice of the chosen 



20
Schedule 5

mechanism and/or action; and (d) prepare and make available to ADB upon request periodic 
reports to summarize (i) the number of complaints received and resolved;, (ii) chosen actions; 
and (iii) final outcomes of the grievances.

Counterpart Support

15. The Borrower shall make available requisite counterpart support, including,
without limitation, by exempting taxes and duties imposed on the Goods and within the territory 
of the Borrower for the timely, smooth and successful implementation of the Project. In 
addition, the Borrower shall ensure that AIFSA, at all times, have sufficient funds to satisfy its 
obligations arising from any Goods, Works or Consulting Services contract.

Financial/Operational Covenants

16. The Borrower shall cause MIFT to establish the ALC Management Company
on or before 31 December 2019 to ensure professional, independent, efficient and smooth 
operations of the ALCs.

17. To enable the ALC Management Company to be operationally and
commercially autonomous, and free from any interference by state agencies and local 
administrations, the Borrower shall and shall cause MIFT to ensure that the ALC Management 
Company, among others, has:

(a) independent decision-making powers;

(b) the ability to own its assets;

(c) the power to incur liabilities, for and on its own behalf, and accept and 
enter into future obligations and commitments;

(d) the capacity to implement an appropriate accounting system to enable 
it to submit its accounts to the national tax authorities in accordance with 
the applicable laws of the Borrower;

(e) ’ the power to borrow and raise funds;

(f) the ability to function in a manner that shall generate sufficient revenue 
to keep the ALCs in good working conditions and to enable them to meet 
the commercial, social, and environmental criteria applicable to such 
ALCs;

(g) no involvement in trading activities at the ALCs; and

(h) capacity to comply with prevailing legal and regulatory requirements.

18. For the purposes of monitoring the performance of the ALC Management
Company, the Borrower shall cause MIFT to carry out an annual assessment of the ALC 
Management Company, starting from the second year after commencement of commercial 
operations of the ALCs, by employing, among others, a combination of following financial and 
physical indicators: (a) Financial - return on assets (of at least equal to annual inflation rate of 



21
Schedule 5

the reporting year plus 2%); and debt to equity (not exceeding 1.5 times); and (b) Physical - 
occupancy rate of the wholesale market area (of not less than 65%); occupancy rate of the 
small-farmers’ market area for each ALC (of no less than 70%); total processing throughput in 
each. ALC for export and domestic sales (of no less than 700,000 tons); and utilization rate of 
cold storage capacity in each ALC (of no less than 900,000 tons).

19. The Borrower shall ensure that ADB’s written consent is obtained at least three
months prior to the implementation of any of the following: (a) change in the ownership of the 
ALC Management Company, any asset, facility or structure constructed under the Project; (b) 
sale, transfer or assignment of interest or control in the ALC Management Company, any asset, 
facility or structure constructed under the Project; (c) creation of a lien or charge on any asset 
of the ALC Management Company as security to borrow or raise funds; or (d) lease or other 
contract or modification of the functions and authority of the ALC Management Company over 
the operation and maintenance of any asset, facility or structure constructed under the Project. 
The Borrower shall ensure that ADB is promptly notified of any proposal to implement any such 
changes and that the notification includes sufficient details regarding the change to be 
implemented. The Borrower shall ensure that any such change shall be carried out in a legal 
and transparent manner.

Governance and Corruption

20. The Borrower, AIFSA and the implementing agencies (a) comply with ADB’s
Anticorruption Policy (1998, as amended to date) and acknowledge that ADB reserves the 
right to investigate directly, or through its agents, any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or 
coercive practice relating to the Project; and (b) cooperate with any such investigation and 
extend all necessary assistance for satisfactory completion of such investigation.

21. The Borrower, AIFSA and the implementing agencies shall ensure that the
anticorruption provisions acceptable to ADB are included in all bidding documents and 
contracts, including provisions specifying the right of ADB to audit and examine the records 
and accounts of AIFSA, the implementing agencies and all contractors, suppliers, consultants, 
and other service providers as they relate to the Project.



