








































LOAN NUMBER 3731-BAN

LOAN AGREEMENT
(Ordinary Operations)

(Rural Connectivity Improvement Project)

between

PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC OF BANGLADESH

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED 13 JANUARY 2019

BAN 47243



LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations)

LOAN AGREEMENT dated 13 January 2019 between PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC 
OF BANGLADESH (“Borrower") and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB").

WHEREAS

(A) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a loan for the purposes of the 
Project described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(B) by a.project design advance agreement dated 5 July 2016 between ADB . 
and the Borrower (“PDA Agreement"), ADB provided a project design advance concessional 
loan (“PDA Loan") from ADB’s ordinary capital resources in an amount in various currencies 
equivalent to one million four hundred twenty-four thousand Special Drawing Rights 
(SDR1,424,000) for the purposes of preparatory activities for the Project;

(C) by a loan agreement of even date herewith between the Borrower and 
ADB (“Concessional Loan Agreement"), ADB has agreed to provide a concessional loan 
(“Concessional Loan") from its ordinary capital resources in the amount of one hundred million 
Dollars ($100,000,000) (“Concessional Loan") to the Borrower for the purposes of financing 
expenditures of the Project;

(D) the Project will be carried out by the Local Government Engineering 
Department (“LGED") of the Ministry of Local Government, Rural Development and 
Cooperatives (“MOLGRDC"), and for this purpose the Borrower will make available to LGED 
the proceeds of the loan provided for herein upon terms and conditions satisfactory to ADB; 
and

(E) ADB has agreed to make a loan to the Borrower from ADB’s ordinary 
capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein;

NOW THEREFORE the parties hereto agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All the provisions of ADB’s Ordinary Operations Loan 
Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 (“Loan Regulations"), are hereby made applicable to this 
Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully set forth herein.

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:



2

(a) “Community Development Framework" or “CPF” means the community 
development framework, including any update thereto, as .agreed to 
between the Borrower and ADB;

(b) "Consulting Services” means consulting services as described in the 
Procurement Regulations and set out in the Procurement Plan, and to 
be financed out of the proceeds .of the Loan and the Concessional Loan;

(c) “Department of Environment” means the Borrower’s Department of 
Environment or any successors thereto;

(d) “EMP” means the environmental management plan for the Project, 
including any update thereto, incorporated in the IEE;

(e) "Environmental Safeguards” means the principles and requirements set 
forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of the 
SPS;

(f) “GAP” means the gender action plan prepared for the Project, including 
any update thereto, and agreed to between the Borrower and ADB;

(g) "Goods” means equipment and materials as set out in the Procurement 
Plan and to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the 
Concessional Loan, including any related Nonconsulting Services such 
as transportation, insurance, installation, commissioning, training, and 
initial maintenance;

(h) "IEE” means the initial environmental examination for the Project, 
including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower 
and cleared by ADB;

(i) "Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards” means the principles and 
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 2, and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

(j) “Loan Disbursement Handbook” means ADB’s Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time);

(k) "Nonconsulting Services” means nonconsulting services as described in 
the Procurement Regulations and set out in the Procurement Plan, and 
to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the Concessional 
Loan;

(I) "PAM” means the project administration manual for the Project dated 17 
September 2018 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as 
updated from time to time in accordance with the respective 
administrative procedures of the Borrower and ADB;

(m) "Procurement Plan" means the procurement plan for the Project dated 
17 September 2018 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as 
updated from time to time in accordance with the Procurement Policyr 



3

the Procurement Regulations, and other arrangements agreed with 
ADB;

(n) “Procurement Policy* means ADB’s Procurement Policy - Goods, 
Works, Nonconsulting and Consulting Services (2017, as amended from 
time to time);

(o) “Procurement Regulations” means ADB’s Procurement Regulations for 
ADB Borrowers - Goods, Works, Nonconsulting and Consulting 
Services (2017, as amended from time to time);

(p) . “Project Executing Agency” for the purposes of, and within the meaning 
of, the Loan Regulations means LGED or any successor thereto 
acceptable to ADB, which' is responsible for the carrying out of the 
Project;

(q) “Project facilities* means the facilities to be improved, constructed or 
provided under the Project;

(r) “Safeguards Monitoring Report” means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower to ADB that describes progress with 
Implementation of and compliance with the EMP, Including any 
corrective and preventative actions;

(s) “Services” means Consulting Services and Nonconsulting Services;

(t) “SPS” means ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement (2009);

(u) “Target Areas” means the 34 districts in which the Project roads are 
located;

(v) “Tribes, Minor Races, Ethnic Sects and Communities Safeguards” 
means the principles and requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 
3, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of the SPS; and

(w) “Works” means construction or civil works as set out in the Procurement 
Plan and to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the 
Concessional Loan, including any related Nonconsulting Services and 
project related services that are provided as part of a single 
responsibility or turnkey contract.

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB’s
ordinary capital resources an amount of one hundred million Dollars ($100,000,000), as such 



4

amount may be converted from time to time through a Currency Conversion in accordance 
with the provisions of Section 2.06 of this Loan Agreement.

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 20 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.

(c) The term “grace period’1 as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Sec tion 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB interest on the principal 
amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding from time to time at a rate for each Interest 
Period equal tothe sum of:

(a) LIBOR;

(b) 0,60% as provided by Section 3.02 of the Loan Regulations less a credit
of 0.10% as provided by Section 3.03 of the Loan Regulations; and

(c) a maturity premium of 0.10% as provided by Section 3.03 of the Loan 
Regulations.

Section 2.03. The Borrower shall pay a commitment charge of 0,15% 
per annum. Such charge shall accrue on the full amount of the Loan (less amounts withdrawn 
from time to time), commencing 60 days after the date of this Loan Agreement.

Sec tion 2.04. Interest and other charges on the Loan shall be payable 
semiannually on 1 May and 1 November in each year.

Sec tion 2.05. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 2 to this 
Loan Agreement.

Sec tion 2.06. (a) The Borrower may at any time request any of the
following Conversions of the terms of the Loan in order to facilitate prudent debt management:

(i) a change of the Loan Currency of all or any portion of the 
principal amount of the Loan, whether withdrawn and 
outstanding or unwithdrawn, to an Approved Currency;

(ii) a change of the interest rate basis applicable to all or any portion 
of the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding 
from a Floating Rate to a Fixed Rate, or vice versa; and

(iii) the setting of limits on the Floating Rate applicable to all or any 
portion of the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and 
outstanding by the establishment of an Interest Rate Cap or 
Interest Rate Collar on said Floating Rate.

(b) Any conversion requested pursuant to subsection (a) hereinabove that 
is accepted by ADB shall be considered a "Conversion”, as defined in Section 2.01(f) of the 



5

Loan Regulations, and shall be effected In accordance with the provisions of Article V of the 
Loan Regulations and the Conversion Guidelines.

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to be 
applied exclusively to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the 
provisions of this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower shall 
procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds 
of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.04. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 9.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 31 May 2024 or such other date as may from time to time be 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4.01. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set forth 
in Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 4.02, (a) The Borrower shall (i) maintain separate
accounts and records for the Project; (ii) prepare annual financial statements for the Project in 
accordance with financial reporting standards acceptable to ADB; (iii) have such financial 
statements audited annually by independent auditors whose qualifications, experience and 
terms of reference are acceptable to ADB, in accordance with auditing standards acceptable 
to ADB; (lv) as part of each such audit, have the auditors prepare a report, which includes the 
auditors' opinion(s) on the financial statements and the use of the Loan proceeds, and a 
management letter (which sets out the deficiencies in the internal control of the Project that 
were identified in the course of the audit, if any); and (v) furnish to ADB, no later than 6 months 
after the end of each related fiscal year, copies of such audited financial statements, audit 
report and management letter, all in the English language, and such other information 
concerning these documents and the audit thereof as ADB shall from time to time reasonably 
request.



6

(b) ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the 
Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 days of the date 
of ADB’s confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADB’s website.

(c) The Borrower shall enable ADB, upon ADB's request, to discuss the 
financial statements for the Project and the Borrower’s financial affairs where they relate to the 
Project with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(iii) hereinabove, and shall 
authorize and require any representative of such auditors to participate in any such discussions 
requested by ADB. This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted only in the 
presence of an authorized officer of the Borrower, unless the Borrower shall otherwise agree.

Sec tion 4.03. The Borrower shall enable ADB’s representatives to 
Inspect the Project, the Goods, Works and Services, and any relevant records and documents.

ARTICLE V

Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity

Section 5.01, The following is specified as an additional event for 
suspension of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the 
purposes of Section 9.01 (m) of the Loan Regulations: the Concessional Loan has become 
liable for suspension or cancellation for any reason whatsoever.

Section 5.02. The following is specified as additional event for 
acceleration of maturity for the purposes of Section 9.07(a)(iv) of the Loan Regulations: either 
of the events specified in Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement shall have occurred.

ARTICLE VI

Effectiveness

Section 6,01. The following Is specified as an additional condition to the 
effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 10.01(f) of the Loan 
Regulations: the Concessional Loan Agreement has been duly executed and delivered, and 
all conditions precedent to its effectiveness (other than a condition requiring the effectiveness 
of this Loan Agreement) has been fulfilled or arrangements satisfactory to ADB shall have 
been made for the fulfillment thereof within a period of time satisfactory to ADB.

Section 6.02. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 10.04 of the 
Loan Regulations,



7

ARTICLE VII

Miscellaneous

Section 7.01. The Senior Secretary or Secretary or any Additional 
Secretary or Chief, Joint Secretary or Joint Chief, Deputy Secretary or Deputy Chief, Senior 
Assistant Secretary or Senior Assistant Chief, Assistant Secretary or Assistant Chief of the 
Economic Relations Division of the Ministry of Finance of the Borrower is designated as 
representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 12.02 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 7.02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 12.01 of the Loan Regulations:

For the Borrower

Economic Relations Division
Ministry of Finance
Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh
Sher-e-Bangla Nagar
Dhaka 1207, Bangladesh

Facsimile Number:

(880)2-918-0788

For APB

Asian Development Bank
6 ADB Avenue
Mandaluyong City
1550 Metro Manila
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

(632) 636-2444
(632) 636-2340,



8

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

PEOPLE’S . REPUBLIC OF
BANGLADESH

MONOWAR AHMED 
Secretary 

Economic Relations Division 
Ministry of Finance

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

MANMOHAN PARKASH 
Country Director 

Bangladesh Resident Mission



9

SCHEDULE 1

Description of the Project

1. The objective of the Project is to increase transport efficiency and to generate
related employment in the Target Areas.

2. The Project shall comprise:

(a) (i) improving the condition of approximately 1,700 km of rural roads to
all-weather standards which incorporate climate resilience and safety 
features; and (ii) maintaining approximately 242 km of such rural roads 
for a period of five years after completion of the Works;

(b) (i) provision of training for LGED on road asset management, road
safety, contract management, financial management and climate- 
resilient road design and construction; (ii) raising the awareness of road 
users on road safety, human trafficking, and prevention of sexually 
transmitted infections; and (iii) enhancing the skills of women workers 
on road construction and maintenance; and

(c) . upgrading the rural road masterplan for the entire territory of the 
Borrower, using a geographic information system for selecting priority 
rural roads.

3. The Project is expected to be completed by 30 November 2023. This is
expected to cover approximately 3 out of the 5 years under the maintenance period as referred 
to in paragraph 2(a) above.



10

SCHEDULE 2

Amortization Schedule

1. The following table sets forth the Principal Payment Dates of the Loan and the
percentage of the total principal amount of the Loan payable on each Principal Payment Date 
(Installment Share). If the proceeds of the Loan shall have been fully withdrawn as of the first 
Principal Payment Date, the principal amount of the Loan repayable by the Borrower on each 
Principal Payment Date shall be determined by ADB by multiplying (a) the total principal 
amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding as of the first Principal Payment Date; by (b) 
the Installment Share for each Principal Payment Date, such repayment amount to be 
adjusted, as necessary, to deduct any amounts referred to in paragraph 4 of this Schedule, to 
which a Currency Conversion applies.



2, If the proceeds of the Loan shall not have been fully withdrawn as of the first
Principal Payment Date, the principal amount of the Loan repayable by the Borrower on each 
Principal Payment Date shall be determined as follows:

(a) to the extent that any proceeds of the Loan shall have been withdrawn 
as of the first Principal Payment Date, the Borrower shall repay the 
amount withdrawn and outstanding as of such date In accordance with 
paragraph 1 of this Schedule; and

(b) any withdrawal made after the first Principal Payment Date shall, be 
repaid on each Principal Payment Date falling after the date of such 
withdrawal in amounts determined by ADB by multiplying the amount of 
each such withdrawal by a fraction, the numerator of which shall be the 
original Installment Share specified in the table in paragraph 1 of this 
Schedule for said Principal Payment Date (the Original Installment 
Share) and the denominator of which shall be the sum of all remaining 
Original Installment Shares for Principal Payment Dates falling on or 
after such date, such repayment amounts to be adjusted, as necessary, 
to deduct any amounts referred to In paragraph 4 of this Schedule, to 
which a Currency Conversion applies,

3. Withdrawals made within 2 calendar months prior to any Principal Payment
Date shall, for the purposes solely of calculating the principal amounts payable oh any Principal 
Payment Date, be treated as withdrawn and outstanding on the second Principal Payment 
Date following the date of withdrawal and shall be repayable on each Principal Payment Date 
commencing with the second Principal Payment Date following the date of withdrawal,

4, Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Schedule, upon a
Currency Conversion of all or any portion of the withdrawn principal amount of the Loan to an 
Approved Currency, the amount so converted in said Approved Currency that shall be 
repayable on any Principal Payment Date occurring during the Conversion Period, shall be 
determined by ADB by multiplying such amount In its currency of denomination immediately 
prior to said Conversion by either (a) the exchange rate that reflects the amounts of principal 
in said Approved Currency payable by ADB under the Currency Hedge Transaction relating to 



12

Schedule 2

said Conversion; or (b) if ADB so determines in accordance with the Conversion Guidelines; 
the exchange rate component of the Screen Rate.

5. If the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding from time to time
shall be denominated In more than one Loan Currency, the provisions of this Schedule shall 
apply separately to the amount denominated in each Loan Currency, so as to produce a 
separate amortization schedule for each such amount.



13

SCHEDULE 3 

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1, The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category (“Table"). (Reference to “Category" in this Schedule is to a 
Category of the Table,)

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2, Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for 
each item of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Reallocation

3. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, by notice to the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the 
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan 
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion Of 
ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

4. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.

Retroactive Financing

5. Withdrawals from the Loan Account may be made to finance eligible
expenditures incurred under the Project before the Effective Date, but not earlier than 12 
months before the date of this Loan Agreement in connection with Goods, Works and Services, 
subject to a maximum amount equivalent to 20% of the Loan amount



14

Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

*Exclusive of taxes and duties imposed within the territory of the Borrower,

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item

Total Amount Allocated 
for ADB Financing 

($) 
Category

Basis for Withdrawal from the 
Loan Account

1 Works 80,105,000 75% of total expenditure claimed
2 Equipment and Vehicles 3,375,000 75% of total expenditure claimed
3 Consulting Services 9,700,000 100% of total expenditure claimed*
4 Equipment Operation 

and Maintenance 
(Project Management)

1,140,000 100% of total expenditure claimed*

5 Unallocated 5,680,000
TOTAL 100,000,000



15

SCHEDULE 4

Execution of Project; Financial Matters

Implementation Arrangements

1. The Borrower shall ensure or cause LGED. to ensure that the Project is
implemented In accordance with the detailed arrangements set forth In the PAM. Any 
subsequent change to the PAM shall become effective only after approval of such change by 
the Borrower and ADB. In the event of any discrepancy between the PAM and this Loan 
Agreement, the provisions of this Loan Agreement shall prevail.

Procurement

2. The Borrower shall ensure or cause LGED to ensure that:

(a) the procurement of Goods, Works and Services is carried out in 
. accordance with the Procurement Policy and the Procurement 

Regulations;

(b) Goods, Works and Services shall be procured based on the detailed 
arrangements set forth in the Procurement Plan, including the 
procurement and selection methods, the type of bidding documents, and 
ADB’s review requirements, The Borrower may modify the detailed 
arrangements set forth in the Procurement Plan only with the prior 
agreement of ADB, and such modifications  set out in updates 
to the Procurement Plan; and

must.be

(c) (i) all Goods and Works procured and Services obtained (including all
computer hardware, software and systems, whether separately 
procured or incorporated within other goods and services procured) do 
not violate or infringe any industrial property or intellectual property right 
or claim of any third party; and (ii) all contracts for the procurement of 
Goods, Works and Services contain appropriate representations, 
warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from the contractor, supplier, 
consultant or service provider with respect to the matters referred to in 
this subparagraph.

3. The Borrower shall ensure that LGED does not award any Works or
Nonconsulting Services contracts which Involves environmental impacts until:

(a) the Department of Environment has granted the final approval of the 
IEE; and

(b) the Borrower has incorporated the relevant provisions from the EMP into 
the Works contract.

Community Participation Framework

4. The Borrower shall, or shall cause LGED to, implement the CPF as agreed with
ADB and in conformity with all relevant applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower.



16

Schedule 4

5. The Borrower shall ensure, or cause LGED to ensure, no section or part thereof
under any works contract awarded for the relevant Subproject shall be handed over to the 
contractor unless the applicable provisions of the CPF have been Implemented in full.

Operation and Maintenance

6. The Borrower shall ensure that it allocates sufficient funds for operation and
maintenance of the roads to be constructed or upgraded under the Project, and ensure that 
the funds are made available to LGED on a timely basis for the same purpose. This shall 
include providing financing for the remainder of the 5-year maintenance period under the 
maintenance contract financed by the Loan or the Concessional Loan after Project completion.

7. In relation to the 5-year maintenance contract financed by the Loan or the
Concessional Loan;

(a) the Borrower shall exercise its rights under such contract in such a 
manner as to protect the interests of the Borrower and ADB and to 
accomplish the purposes of the Loan or the Concessional Loan, as 
applicable; and

(b) in the event that a contractor fails to perform the maintenance of the 
Project roads required under such contract, the Borrower, through 
LGED, shall assume the maintenance responsibility by providing 
sufficient funds and making appropriate implementation arrangements.

Environment

8. The Borrower shall ensure or cause LGED to ensure that the preparation,
design, construction/implementation, operation and decommissioning of the Project and all 
Project facilities comply with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to 
environment, health and safety; (b) the Environmental Safeguards; and (c) all measures and 
requirements set forth in the IEE, the EMP, and any corrective or preventative actions set forth 
in a Safeguards Monitoring Report.

Involuntary Resettlement and Tribes, Minor Races. Ethnic Sects and Communities

9. The Borrower shall ensure or cause LGED to ensure that the Project does hot
have any Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards impacts or Tribes, Minor Races, Ethnic Sects 
and Communities Safeguards impacts. If the Project does have any such impacts, the 
Borrower shall take all steps required to ensure that the Project complies with the applicable 
laws and regulations of the Borrower and with the SPS.

Human and Financial Resources to Implement Safeguards Requirements

10. The Borrower shall make available or cause LGED to make available necessary
budgetary and human resources to fully implement the EMP.



17

Schedule 4

Safeguards - Related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

11. The Borrower shall ensure or cause LGED to ensure that all bidding documents
and contracts for Works contain provisions that require contractors to:

(c) comply with the measures relevant to the contractor set forth in the IEE 
and the EMP (to the extent they concern impacts on affected people 
during construction), and any corrective or preventative actions set forth 
in a Safeguards Monitoring Report;

(d) make available a budget for all such environmental and social 
measures;

(e) provide the Borrower with a written notice of any unanticipated 
environmental risks or impacts that were not considered in the IEE or 
the EMP or any resettlement or indigenous peoples risks or impacts that 
arise during construction, implementation or operation of the Project;

(f) adequately record the condition of roads, agricultural land and other 
infrastructure prior to starting to transport materials and construction; 
and

(g) reinstate pathways, other local infrastructure, and agricultural land to at . 
least their pre-project condition upon the completion of construction.

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

12. The Borrower shall cause LGED to do the following:

(a) submit semiannual Safeguards Monitoring Reports to ADB and disclose 
relevant information from such reports to affected persons promptly 
upon submission;

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts arise 
during construction, implementation or operation of the Project that were 
not considered in the IEE and the EMP, promptly inform ADB of the 
occurrence of such risks or impacts, with detailed description of the 
event and proposed corrective action plan; and

(c) report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures 
and requirements set forth in the EMP promptly after becoming aware 
of the breach.

Prohibited List of Investments

13, The Borrower shall ensure or cause LGED to ensure that no proceeds of the
Loan are used to finance any activity included in the list of prohibited investment activities 
provided in Appendix 5 of the SPS.



18

Schedule 4

Labor Standards, Health and Safety

14. The Borrower shall ensure or cause LGED to ensure that the core labor
standards and the Borrower's applicable laws and regulations are complied with during Project 
implementation. The Borrower shall ensure that LGED includes specific provisions In the 
bidding documents and contracts financed by ADB under the Project requiring that the 
contractors, among other things: (a) comply with the Borrower’s applicable labor law and 
regulations and incorporate applicable workplace occupational safety norms; (b) do not use 
child labor; (c) do not discriminate workers in respect of employment and occupation; (d) do 
not use forced labor; (e) allow freedom of association and effectively recognize the right to 
collective bargaining; and (f) disseminate, or engage appropriate service providers to 
disseminate, information on the risks of sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV/AIDS, to 
the employees of contractors engaged under the Project and to members of the local 
communities surrounding the Project area, particularly women.

15. The Borrower shall cause LGED to strictly monitor compliance with the
requirements set forth in paragraph 14 above and provide ADB with regular reports.

Gender and Development

16. The Borrower shall ensure or cause LGED to ensure that (a) the GAP is
implemented in accordance with its terms; (b) the bidding documents and contracts Include 
relevant provisions for contractors to comply with the measures set forth in the GAP; (c) 
adequate resources are allocated for implementation of the GAP; (d) progress on 
implementation of the GAP, including progress toward achieving key gender outcome and 
output targets, are regularly monitored and reported to ADB; and (e) key gender outcome and 
output targets include: (i) target at least 40% women participants in project orientation seminars 
and planning of project roads; (il) provide on-the-job training to all women workers on basic 
construction, improvement, reconstruction works and maintenance skills; (iii) target at least 
20% women workers to be employed for road improvement works; (iv) conduct awareness on 
sexually-transmitted infections including HIV/AIDS, and anti-human-trafficking to at least 40% 
of students, teachers and parents along the project roads; (v) implement core labor standards 
with' gender-inclusive provisions and women-friendly work environments; (vi) conduct road 
safety awareness programs to at least 40% of students, teachers and parents along the project 
roads; and (vil) conduct technical training of LGED staff including 30% women staff.

Counterpart Support

17. The Borrower shall ensure that LGED has sufficient funds to satisfy its liabilities
arising from any Works, Goods and/or Services contract.

Governance and Anticorruption

18, The Borrower shall, and shall ensure that LGED, (a) complies with ADB’s.
Anticorruption Policy (1998, as amended to date) and acknowledge that ADB reserves the 
right to investigate directly, or through its agents, any alleged corrupt fraudulent, collusive or 
coercive practice relating to the Project; and (b) cooperate with any such investigation and 
extend all necessary assistance for satisfactory completion of such investigation.



19

Schedule 4

19. The Borrower shall ensure or cause LGED to ensure that anticorruption
provisions acceptable to ADB are included in all bidding documents and. contracts, Including 
provisions specifying the right of ADB to audit and examine the records and accounts of the 
executing and implementing agencies and all contractors, suppliers, consultants, and other 
service providers as they relate to the Project.



