








































LOAN NUMBER 3570-CAM(COL)

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

(Tonle Sap Poverty Reduction and Smallholder Development Project - Additional Financing)

between

KINGDOM OF CAMBODIA

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED 9 JANUARY 2018

CAM 41435



LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

LOAN AGREEMENT dated 9 January 2018 between KINGDOM OF 
CAMBODIA ("Borrower”) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB”).

WHEREAS

(A) by a financing agreement dated 27 December 2009 between the 
Borrower and ADB (“ADB Financing Agreement”), ADB has agreed to provide a concessional 
loan from ADB’s ordinary capital resources in various currencies equivalent to two million one 
hundred thirty-two thousand Special Drawing Rights (SDR2,132,000) and a grant in an amount 
of twenty-seven million three hundred thousand Dollars ($27,300,000), for the purpose of the 
project described in Schedule 1 to the ADB Financing Agreement;

(B) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a concessional loan from ADB’s 
ordinary capital resources, for the purposes of the Project described in Schedule 1 to this Loan 
Agreement (“Project”);

(C) the Borrower has also applied for a grant from ADB’s special funds 
resources in an amount equivalent to four million two hundred seventy-five thousand Dollars 
($4,275,000) (“ADF Grant”) and ADB has agreed to make the ADF Grant to the Borrower for 
the purposes of the Project pursuant to a grant agreement of even date herewith between the 
Borrower and ADB (“ADF Grant Agreement”);

(D) the Borrower has also applied to the International Fund for Agricultural 
Development (“IFAD”) for a loan (“IFAD Loan”), to be partially administered by ADB in an 
amount of ten million Dollars equivalent ($16,000,000) to assist in financing a part of the 
Project, pursuant to an agreement to be entered into between the Borrower and IFAD (the 
“IFAD Financing Agreement”);

(E) the Project shall be carried out by the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry 
and Fisheries (“MAFF”) and the National Committee for Sub-National Democratic 
Development Secretariat (“NCDDS”), and for this purpose the Borrower shall make available 
to MAFF and NCDDS the proceeds of the loan provided herein and the ADF Grant upon terms 
and conditions satisfactory to ADB; and

(F) ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the Borrower from 
ADB’s ordinary capital resources upon terms and conditions set forth herein;

NOW THEREFORE the parties agree as follows:



2

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All provisions of ADB’s Ordinary Operations 
(Concessional) Loan Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 (“Loan Regulations”), are hereby 
made applicable to this Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully 
set forth herein.

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following.meanings:

(a) “Consulting Guidelines” means the Guidelines on the Use of 
Consultants by Asian Development Bank and its Borrowers (2013, as 
amended from time to time);

(b) “Consulting Services” means the services to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan as described in paragraph 3 of Schedule 1 to this 
Loan Agreement;

(c) “DRM” means disaster risk management;

(d) “DRR” means disaster risk reduction;

(e) "Environmental Assessment and Review Framework” or “EARF” means 
the environmental assessment and review framework for the Project, 
including any updates thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower 
and cleared by ADB; „

(f) "Environmental Management Plan” or “EMP” means an environmental 
management plan for a Subproject,' including any update thereto, 
incorporated in the IEE;

(g) “Environmental Safeguards” means the principles and requirements set 
forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of the 
SPS;

(h) “GAP” means the gender action plan prepared for the Project in 
consultation with the Borrower and approved by ADB;

(i) “Goods” means equipment and materials to be financed out of 
the proceeds of the Loan and/or ADF Grant, including related services 
such as transportation, insurance, installation, commissioning, training, 
and initial maintenance, but excluding Consulting Services; •

(j) “ICT” means information and communication technology;



3

(k) “Indigenous Peoples Plan” or “IPP” means the indigenous people plan 
for a Subproject, including any update thereto, prepared and submitted 
by the Borrower pursuant to the requirements of the IPPF and cleared 
byADB;

(I) “Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework” or “IPPF” means the 
indigenous peoples planning framework for the Project, including any 
updates thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower and cleared 
byADB;

(m) “Indigenous Peoples Safeguards” means the principles and 
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 3 and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

(n) “Initial Environmental Examination” or “IEE” means an initial 
environmental examination for a Subproject, including any update 
thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower pursuant to the 
requirements set forth in the EARF and cleared by ADB;

(o) “Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards” means the principles and 
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 2, and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

(p) “LIG” means a livelihood improvement group;

(q) “Loan Disbursement Handbook” means ADB’s Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time);

(r) “O&M” means operation and maintenance;

(s) “PAM” means the project administration manual for the Project dated 4 
August 2017 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated 
from time to time in accordance with the respective administrative 
procedures of the Borrower and ADB;

(t) “Participating Commune” means a participating commune located in 
one of the Participating Provinces included in the Project;

(u) “Participating Province” means a participating province included under 
the Projeqt;

(v) “Procurement Guidelines” means ADB’s Procurement Guidelines 
(2015, as amended from time to time);

(w) “Procurement Manual” means the Procurement Manual under the 
Standard Operating Procedures prepared by the Borrower and 
endorsed by ADB, which sets forth procurement-related policies and 
procedures for externally-financed projects and programs;

(x) “Procurement Plan” means the procurement plan for the Project dated 
4 August 2017 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated 



4

from time to time in accordance with the Procurement Guidelines, the 
Consulting Guidelines, and other arrangements agreed with ADB;

(y) “Project Executing Agency” for the purpose of, and within the meaning 
of, the Loan Regulations means each of MAFF and NCDDS, or any 
successors thereto acceptable to ADB, which is responsible for carrying 
out the Project;

(z) “Project facilities” means the facilities to be improved, rehabilitated, 
modernized, constructed, and/or maintained, and the equipment to be 
installed and maintained under the Project;

(aa) “Resettlement Framework” or “RF” means the resettlement framework 
for the Project, including any updates thereto, prepared and submitted 
by the Borrower and cleared by ADB;

(bb) “Resettlement Plan” or “RP” means the resettlement plan for a 
Subproject, including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by 
the Borrower pursuant to the requirements of the RF and cleared by 
ADB;

(cc) “Safeguard Policy Statement” or “SPS” means ADB’s Safeguard Policy 
Statement (2009);

(dd) “Safeguards Monitoring Report” means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower to ADB, that describes progress with 
implementation of, and compliance with, the EMP, the RP and the IPP 
(as applicable), including any corrective and preventative actions;

(ee) “Standard Operating Procedures” means the standard operating 
procedures of the Borrower dated 22 May 2012 (as amended from time 
to time) providing procedures applicable to all externally-financed 
projects and programs;

(ff) “Subproject” means a subproject under the Project that meets the 
subproject selection criteria set forth in herein and detailed in the PAM; 
and

(gg) “Works” means construction or civil works to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan, including services such as drilling or mapping, 
and project related services that are provided as part of a single 
responsibility or turnkey contract, but excluding Consulting Services.



5

ARTICLE I!

The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB's
ordinary capital resources an amount of forty-five million seven hundred twenty-five thousand 
Dollars ($45,725,000).

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 24 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.

(c) The term “grace period” as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB an interest charge at the 
rate of 1 % per annum during the grace period, and 1.5% per annum thereafter, on the amount 
of the Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time.

Section 2.03. The interest charge and any other charge on the Loan 
shall be payable semiannually on 15 March and 15 September in each year.

Section 2.04. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set forth 
in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement

Section 2.05. The currency of repayment of the principal amount of the 
Loan and the currency of payment of the interest charge for the purposes of Sections 4.03(a) 
and 4.04 of the Loan Regulations shall be the Dollar.

ARTICLE 111

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to be 
applied exclusively to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the 
provisions of this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower shall 
procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds 
of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement.



6

Section 3.04. The Loan Closing Date for.the purposes of Section 8.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 31 July 2023 or such other date as may from time to time be 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4.01. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set forth 
in Schedule 5 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 4.02. (a) The Borrower shall cause the Project Executing
Agencies to (i) maintain separate accounts, and records for the Project; (ii) prepare 
consolidated annual financial statements for the Project in accordance with financial reporting 
standards acceptable to ADB; (iii) have such financial statements audited annually by 
independent auditors whose qualifications, experience and terms of reference are acceptable 
to ADB, in accordance with auditing standards acceptable to ADB; (iv) as part of each such 
audit, have the auditors prepare a report, which includes the auditors’ opinion(s) on the 
financial statements and the use of the Loan proceeds and the ADF Grant proceeds, and a 
management letter (which sets out the deficiencies in the internal control of the Project that 
were identified in the course of the audit, if any); and (v) furnish to ADB, no later than 6 months 
after the end of each related fiscal year, copies of such audited financial statements, audit 
report and management letter, all in the English language, and such other information 
concerning these documents and the audit thereof as ADB shall from time to time reasonably 
request.

(b) ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the 
Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 days of the date 
of ADB’s confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADB’s website.

(c) The Borrower shall cause the Project Executing Agencies to enable 
ADB, upon ADB’s request, to discuss the financial statements for the Project and the 
Borrower's financial affairs where they relate to the. Project with the auditors appointed 
pursuant to subsection (a)(iii) hereinabove, and shall authorize and require any representative 
of such auditors to participate in any such discussions requested by ADB. This is provided that 
such discussions shall be conducted only in the presence of an authorized officer of the 
Borrower, unless the Borrower shall otherwise agree.

Section 4. 03. The Borrower shall cause the Project Executing 
Agencies to enable ADB’s representatives to inspect the Project, the Goods and Works, and 
any relevant records and documents.



7

ARTICLE V

Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity

Section 5. 01. The following are specified as additional events for 
suspension of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the 
purposes of Section 8.01 (m) of the Loan Regulations:

(a) the ADF Grant shall have become liable for suspension or cancellation; 
and

(b) the IFAD Loan shall have become liable for suspension or cancellation 
or shall have become repayable prior to its agreed maturity date.

Sec tion 5.02. The following is specified as an additional event for 
acceleration of maturity for the purposes of Section 8.07(d) of the Loan Regulations: any of 
the events specified in Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement shall have occurred.

ARTICLE VI

Effectiveness

Sec tion 6.01. The following are specified as additional conditions to the 
effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.01(f) of the Loan 
Regulations: .

(a) the ADF Grant Agreement shall have been duly authorized by, and 
executed and delivered on behalf of, the Borrower, and all conditions 
precedent to its effectiveness, other than a condition requiring the 
effectiveness of this Loan Agreement, shall have been fulfilled; and

(b) the IFAD Financing Agreement shall have been duly authorized, 
executed and delivered on behalf of the Borrower and all conditions 
precedent to its effectiveness shall have been fulfilled..

Sec tion 6.02. The following are specified as .additional matters, for the 
purposes of Section 9.02(d) of the Loan Regulations, to be included in the opinion or opinions 
to be furnished to ADB:

(a) th© ADF Grant Agreement has been duly authorized, executed and 
delivered on behalf of the Borrower, and is legally binding upon the 
Borrower in accordance with its terms; and

(b) the IFAD Financing Agreement has been duly authorized, executed and 
delivered on behalf of the Borrower, and is legally binding up'on the 
Borrower in accordance with its terms, to the extent applicable.



8

Section 6.03. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.04 of the 
Loan Regulations.

ARTICLE VII

Miscellaneous

Sec tion 7.01. The Minister of Economy and Finance of the Borrower is 
designated as representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 11.02 of the Loan 
Regulations.

Sec tion 7.02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 11.01 of the Loan Regulations:

For the Borrower

The Ministry of Economy and Finance
Street 92, Sangkat Wat Phnom
Khan Daun Penh, Phnom Penh
Cambodia

Facsimile Numbers:

(855-23) 427 798
(855-23) 428 424

For ADB

Asian Development Bank
6 ADB Avenue
Mandaiuyong City
1550 Metro Manila
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

(632) 636-2444 
(632)636-2231.



9

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

KINGDOM OF CAMBODIA

By
H.E. Dr. AUN PORNMONIROTH 

Senior Minister
Minister, Ministry of Economy and 

Finance

PMENT BANKASIAN DEVE

By
SAMIUELA TUKUAFU 

Country Director 
Cambodia Resident Mission



10

SCHEDULE 1

Description of the Project

1. The objective of the Project is to increase agricultural productivity, strengthen
climate and disaster resilience and improve access to markets in the Participating Communes 
in the Participating Provinces in the Tonle Sap Basin.

2. The Project shall comprise:

Output 1: Rural productive infrastructure and livelihood improved with
capacity in disaster risk management enhanced by:

(a) rehabilitating roads and upgrading irrigation infrastructure for at least 
two crops per year;

(b) strengthening existing LIGs and establishing additional LIGs in the 
Participating Communes and establishing aq LIG association to improve 
their sustainability; and

(c) strengthening of DRM in Participating Communes through training on 
identifying, planning and implementing DRR measures, including 
incorporation of DRR considerations in infrastructure Subprojects.

Out put 2: Enabling environment for increased agricultural productivity,
diversification and climate resilience created by:

(a) providing training on climate-smart agricultural practices through paddy 
selling groups, LIGs and market improvement groups;

(b) promoting the production of climate-resilient rice seed varieties upon 
confirmation of market demand; and

(c) improving value addition for rice, vegetables and chicken value chain 
through (i) establishing multi-stakeholder value chain platforms, (ii) 
establishing market improvement groups, (iii) strengthening existing 
small-scale agribusinesses; and (iv) establishing additional 
agribusinesses.

Out put 3: Project management strengthened by continuing support for-
Project staff at national, provincial, district and commune levels on Project 
management.

3. Consulting Services will be provided to support the above-stated activities.

4. The Project is expected to be completed by 31 January 2023.



13

SCHEDULE 3 

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category (“Table”). (Reference to “Category” in this Schedule is to a 
Category or Subcategory of the Table.)

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for 
each item of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Interest Charge

3. The amount allocated to Category “Financial charges during implementation -
Interest during construction” is for financing the interest charge on the Loan during the 
implementation period of the Project. ADB shall be entitled to withdraw from the Loan Account 
and pay to itself, on behalf of the Borrower, the amounts required to meet payments, when 
due, of such interest charge.

Reallocation

4. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, by notice the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the 
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan 
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of 
ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

5. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.



14

Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item

Total Amount Allocated 
for ADB Financing Percentage and Basis for 

Withdrawal from the Loan 
Accounti

Category Subcategory

1 Works 30,243,000 ■

1A Works-ADB 30,243,000 93% of total expenditure claimed

2 Livelihood inputs 2,118,000

2A Revolving fund J 225,000 5% of total expenditure claimed*

2B
Other livelihood inputs - 
ADB

1,893,000 100% of total expenditure claimed*

3 Goods and services 2,660,000

3B
Goods and services - 
ADB

2,660,000 100% of total expenditure claimed*

4
Capacity development 
and training

2,111,000 100% of total expenditure claimed

5 Consulting Services 5,445,000 100% of total expenditure claimed*

6 Recurrent costs 2,238,000

6B Operations and 
maintenance

/ 2,238,000 100% of total expenditure claimed

7

Financial charges 
during implementation -
Interest during 
construction

910,000 100% of amount due

TOTAL 45,725,000

*Exclustve of taxes and duties imposed within the territory of the Borrower.



15

SCHEDULE 4 

Procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services

General

1. The procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services shall be subject to
and governed by the Procurement Guidelines, and the Consulting Guidelines, respectively.

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, Goods and Works shall be procured and
Consulting Services shall be selected and engaged only on the basis of the procurement 
methods and the selection methods set forth below. These methods are subject to, among 
Other things, the detailed arrangements and threshold values set forth in the Procurement Plan. 
The Borrower may only modify the procurement methods and the selection methods or 
threshold values with the prior agreement of ADB, and modifications must be set out in updates 
to the Procurement Plan.

3. All terms used in this Schedule and not otherwise defined in this Loan
Agreement have the meanings provided in the Procurement Guidelines and/or the Consulting 
Guidelines, as applicable.

Goods and Works

4. Goods and Works  procured on the basis of the procurement methodsshall.be
set forth below:

(a) International Competitive Bidding;

(b) National Competitive Bidding; and

(c) Shopping.

Domestic Preference

5. The Borrower may grant a margin of preference in the evaluation of bids under
international competitive bidding in accordance with paragraphs 2.55(a) and 2.56 of the 
Procurement Guidelines for domestically manufactured Goods and paragraphs 2.55(b) and 
2.56 of the Procurement Guidelines for domestic Works. -

National Competitive Bidding

6. The Borrower and ADB shall ensure that, prior to the commencement of any
procurement activity under national competitive bidding, the Borrower’s national competitive 
bidding procedures are consistent with the Procurement Guidelines. Any modifications or 
clarifications to such procedures agreed between the Borrower and ADB shall be set out in the 
Procurement Plan. Any subsequent change to the agreed modifications and clarifications shall 
become effective only after approval of such change by the Borrower and ADB.



16

Schedule 4

Community Participation in Procurement ' ,

7. The Borrower may use community participation in procurement for operation
and maintenance for infrastructure in accordance with agreed procedures set out in the 
Procurement Plan.

Conditions for Award of Contract

8. The Borrower shall not award any Works contracts for a Subproject:

(a) involving environmental impacts, until (i) each Project Executing Agency 
has prepared and submitted to ADB each relevant final IEE for an 
applicable Subproject pursuant to the EARF and obtained ADB's 
clearance of such IEE; (ii) the Ministry of Environment has granted the 
final approval of each relevant IEE, if it is required by Sub-decree 72 
ANRK.BK on Environment Impact Assessment Process; and (iii) each 
Project Executing Agency has incorporated the relevant provisions from 
each relevant EMP into the Works contract for Category "B" Subprojects 
and the Project Environmental Code of Conduct for Category "C" 
Subprojects;

(b) involving involuntary resettlement impacts, until the Borrower has 
prepared and submitted to ADB each relevant final RP based on the RF 
and Subproject's detailed design, and obtained ADB's clearance of such 
RP; and

(c) involving indigenous peoples impacts, until each Project Executing 
Agency has prepared and submitted to ADB each relevant final IPP 
based on the IPPF and obtained ADB's clearance of such IPP.

Consulting Services

9. Except as set forth in the paragraph below, the Borrower shall apply Quality-
and Cost-Based Selection for Consulting Services.

10. The Borrower may apply the following selection method for the specified
Consulting Services, in accordance with, among other things, the procedures set forth in the 
Procurement Plan: Single Source Selection for Project implementation consultants.

11. The Borrower shall recruit the individual consultants in accordance with
procedures acceptable to ADB for recruiting individual consultants.

Industrial or Intellectual Property Rights

12. (a) The Borrower shall ensure that all Goods and Works procured (including
without limitation all computer hardware, software and systems, whether separately procured 
or incorporated within other goods and services procured) do not violate or infringe, any 
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.



17

Schedule 4

(b) The Borrower shall ensure that all contracts for the procurement of 
Goods and Works contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, 
indemnities from the contractor or supplier with respect to the matters referred to in 
subparagraph (a) of this paragraph.

13. The Borrower shall ensure that all ADB-financed contracts with consultants
contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from the 
consultants to ensure that the Consulting Services provided do not violate or infringe any 
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.

ADB’s Review of Procurement Decisions

14. All draft contracts procured under international competitive bidding procedures,
first draft contract procured under national competitive bidding procedures, first contracts 
procured under community participation for operations and maintenance and first draft contract 
procured under shopping and all draft contracts for‘Consulting Services shall be subject to 
prior review by ADB, unless otherwise agreed between the Borrower and ADB and set forth in 
the Procurement Plan.



18

SCHEDULE 5

Execution of Project; Financial Matters

Implementation Arrangements

1. The Borrower and the Project Executing Agency shall ensure that the Project is
implemented in accordance with the detailed arrangements set forth in the PAM. Any 
subsequent change to the PAM shall become effective only after approval of such change by 
the Borrower and ADB. In the event of any discrepancy between the PAM and this Loan 
Agreement, the provisions of this Loan Agreement shall prevail.

Counterpart Support and Q&M

2. The Borrower shall ensure that adequate counterpart funds for the Project are
provided on a timely basis. In addition to the foregoing, the Borrower shall ensure that the 
Project Executing Agencies have sufficient funds to satisfy their liabilities arising from any 
Works, Goods and/or Consulting Services contract.

3. The Borrower shall ensure the release of adequate funds to support the O&M
of irrigation schemes underThe Project and ensure that the irrigation is registered on the 
Borrower’s Information System on Irrigation Schemes to ensure eligibility for any government 
O&M funding. Additionally, the Borrower shall ensure that the roads are included in the 
Ministry of Rural Development inventory to ensure eligibility for any government O&M funding.

Subproject Eligibility and Selection Criteria

4. The Borrower shall ensure or shall cause the Project Executing Agencies to
ensure that all Subprojects are selected and implemented in accordance with the screening 
and eligibility criteria as agreed with ADB and set forth in Appendix 3 to the PAM.

Safeguards - Environment

5. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agencies to ensure
that the preparation, design, construction, implementation, operation and decommissioning of 
the Project, each Subproject and all Project facilities comply with (a) all applicable laws and 
regulations of the Borrower relating to environment, health and safety; (b) the applicable 
Environmental Safeguards; (c) the EARF; and (d) all measures and requirements set forth in 
the respective IEE, the EMP, and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in a 
Safeguards Monitoring Report.

6. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agencies to ensure
that no Subproject with Category A for environment as defined in the SPS is financed under 
the Project.

Safeguards - Involuntary Resettlement

7. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agencies to ensure
that all land and all rights-of-way required for the Project, each Subproject and all Project 
facilities are made available to the Works contractor in accordance with the schedule agreed 



19

Schedule 5

under the related Works contract and that all land acquisition and resettlement activities are 
implemented in compliance with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of Borrower relating to 
land acquisition and involuntary resettlement; (b) Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards; (c) the 
RF; and (d) all measures and requirements set forth in the respective RP, and any corrective 
or preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report.

8. Without limiting the application of the Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards, the
RF or any RP, the Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agencies to ensure 
that no physical or economic displacement takes place in connection with the Project or a 
Subproject until:

(a) compensation and other entitlements have been provided to affected 
people in accordance with the RP; and

(b) a comprehensive income and livelihood restoration program has been 
established in accordance with the RP.

9. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agencies to ensure
that no Subproject with Category A for involuntary resettlement as defined in the SPS is 
financed under the Project.

Safeguards - Ethnic Minorities

10. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agencies to ensure
that the preparation, design, construction, implementation and operation of the Project, each 
Subproject and all Project facilities comply with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the 
Borrower relating to ethnic minorities or indigenous peoples; (b) the Indigenous Peoples 
Safeguards; (c) the IPPF; and (d) all measures and requirements set forth in the respective 
IPP, and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report.

11. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agencies to ensure
that no Subproject with Category A for indigenous people or ethnic minorities under the SPS 
is financed under the Project

Human and Financial Resources to Implement Safeguards Requirements

12. The Borrower shall make available or cause the Project Executing Agencies to
make available, necessary budgetary and human resources to fully implement the EARF, the 
RF, the IPPF, each EMP, each RP and each IPP (if any).

Safeguards-related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

13. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agencies to ensure
that all bidding documents arid contracts for Works contain provisions that require contractors 
to:

(a) comply with the measures relevant to the contractor set forth in the IEE, 
the EMP, the RP and the IPP, if any (to the extent they concern impacts 
on affected people during construction), and any corrective or 



20

Schedule 5

preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report;

(b) make available a budget for all such environmental and social 
measures;

(c) provide the Project Executing Agencies with a written notice of any 
unanticipated environmental, resettlement or indigenous peoples risks 
or impacts that arise during construction, implementation or operation of 
the Project that were not considered in the IEE, the EMP, the RP or the 
IPP (if any);

(d) adequately record the condition of roads, agricultural land and other 
infrastructure prior to starting to transport materials and construction; 
and

(e) fully reinstate pathways, other local infrastructure, and agricultural land 
to at least their pre-Project condition upon the completion of 
construction.

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

14. The Borrower shall do, or cause the Project Executing Agencies to do the
following:

(a) submit social safeguards monitoring reports to ADB as part of the 
quarterly and annual progress reports, and environmental safeguards 
monitoring reports semiannually in January and July each year and 
disclose relevant information from such reports to affected persons 
promptly upon submission;

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts arise 
during construction, implementation or operation of the Project that were 
not considered in the IEE, the EMP, the RP or the IPP (if any), promptly 
inform ADB of the occurrence of such risks or impacts, with detailed 
description of the event and proposed corrective action plan; and

(c) report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures 
and requirements set forth in the EMP, the RP or the IPP (if any) 
promptly after becoming aware of the breach.

Grievance Redress Mechanism

15. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agencies to ensure
that a safeguards grievance redress mechanism acceptable, to ADB is established in 
accordance with the provisions of the relevant EARF, EMP, RF, RP (if any), IPPF or IPP (if 
any), within the timeframes specified in the relevant documents, to consider safeguards 
complaints.



21

Schedule 5

Prohibited List of Investments

16. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agencies to ensure
that no proceeds of the Loan and ADF Grant are used to finance any activity included in the 
list of prohibited investment activities provided in Appendix 5 of the SPS.

Labor Standards, Health and Safety

17. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the'Project Executing Agencies to ensure
that the core labor standards and the Borrower's applicable laws and regulations are complied 
with during Project implementation. The Borrower shall or cause the Project Executing 
Agencies to include specific provisions in the bidding documents and contracts financed by 
ADB-under the Project requiring that the contractors, among other things: (a) comply with the 
Borrower’s applicable labor law and regulations and incorporate applicable workplace 
occupational safety norms; (b) do not use child labor; (c) do not discriminate workers in respect 
of employment and occupation; (d) do not use forced labor; (e) do not restrict the workers from 
developing a legally permissible means of expressing their grievances and protecting their 
rights regarding working conditions and terms of employment; and (f) disseminate, or engage 
appropriate service providers to disseminate, information on the risks of sexually transmitted 
diseases, including HIV/AIDS, to the employees of contractors engaged under the Project and 
to members of the local communities surrounding the Project area, particularly women.

18, The Borrower shall cause the Project Executing Agencies to strictly monitor
compliance with the requirements set forth in paragraph 17 above and provide ADB with 
regular reports as part of the quarterly and annual progress reports.

Gender and Development

19. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agencies to ensure
that (a) the GAP is implemented in accordance with its terms; (b) the bidding documents and 
contracts include relevant provisions for contractors to comply with the measures set forth in 
the GAP; (c) adequate resources are allocated for implementation of the GAP; (d) progress on 
implementation of the GAP, including progress toward achieving key gender outcome and 
output targets, are regularly monitored and reported to ADB; and (e) key gender outcome and 
output targets include, but not limited to: (i) at least one women to be elected to join each 
management committee of the new LIGs and service teams, (ii) at least 25% of unskilled 
workers employed are women, (iii) at least 60% of rural loans are taken by women, (iv) 
commune councilors from selected target communes have received training on gehder- 
responsive DRM, (v) at least 200 agribusiness enterprises (30% owned by women) such as 
chick production and feed production are operational, and (vi) at least 40% of market 
improvement group and paddy selling group members are women.

Governance and Anticorruption

20. The Borrower and the Project Executing Agencies shall (a) comply with ADB's
Anti corrupt ion Policy (1998, as amended to date) and acknowledge that ADB reserves the 
right to investigate directly, or through its agents, any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or 
coercive practice relating to the Project; and (b) cooperate with any such investigation and 
extend all necessary assistance for satisfactory completion of such investigation.



22

Schedule 5

21. The Borrower and the Project Executing Agencies shall ensure that the
anticorruption provisions acceptable to ADB are included in all bidding documents and 
contracts, including provisions specifying the right of ADB to audit and examine the records 
and'accounts of the executing and implementing agencies and all contractors, suppliers, 
consultants, and other service providers as they relate to the Project. ,

22. The Borrower and the Project Executing Agencies shall disclose, through the
Project website, accessible by general public, information about various matters concerning 
the Project, including general project information, procurement, project progress, and contact 
details in the English and Cambodian languages, as applicable. The Project website shall also 
provide a link to ADB’s integrity office for reporting to ADB any grievances or allegations of 
corrupt practices arising out of the Project and its activities. With regard to procurement, the 
website shall include: (a) the list of participating bidders; (b) the name of the winning bidder; 
(c) the amount of the contracts awarded; (d) basic details on bidding procedures adopted; and 
(e) the list of Goods, Works and Consulting Services procured.



