







































Untitled


LOAN NUMBER 3745-VIE(COL)

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

(Water Efficiency Improvement in Drought-Affected Provinces Project)

between

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF VIET NAM

and 

J . i 4

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED Zf

VIE 49404



LOAN AGREEMENT
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

LOAN AGREEMENT dated MW between SOCIALIST
REPUBLIC OF VIET NAM ("Borrower”) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB").

WHEREAS

(A) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a loan for the purposes of the 
Project described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(B) the Project will be carried out by the Borrower’s Ministry of Agriculture 
and Rural Development (“MARD”) and the following provincial peoples’ committees: Binh 
Thuan Provincial People’s Committee, Dak Lak Provincial People’s Committee, Dak Nong 
Provincial People’s Committee, Khanh Hoa Provincial People’s Committee and Ninh Thuan 
Provincial People’s Committee (“Participating PPCs”), and for this purpose the Borrower will 
make available to the Participating PPCs the proceeds of the loan provided for herein upon 
terms and conditions satisfactory to ADB;

(C) by a grant agreement of even date herewith between the Borrower and 
ADB (“CCF Grant Agreement”), ADB has agreed to provide a grant from its Climate Change 
Fund ("CCF Grant’’) in an amount of three hundred thousand Dollars ($300,000) for the 
Project;

(D) by a grant agreement of even date herewith between the Borrower and 
ADB ("NTF Grant Agreement”), ADB has agreed to administer a grant provided by the 
Netherlands Trust Fund (“NTF Grant’’, and collectively with the CCF Grant, the “Grants”) 
under the Water Financing Partnership Facility in an amount of seven hundred fifty thousand 
Dollars ($750,000) for the purposes of the Project; and

(E) ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the Borrower from 
ADB’s ordinary capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein and in the 
Project Agreement dated 2? December 2018 between ADB and the Participating 
PPCs;

NOW THEREFORE the parties agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All the provisions of ADB’s Ordinary Operations 
(Concessional) Loan Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 ("Loan Regulations"), are hereby 
made applicable to this Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully 
set forth herein, subject however, to the following modifications:



2

(a) Section 2.01 (w) is deleted and the following is substituted therefor:

“Project Agreement” means the project agreement of even date 
herewith between ADB, and the Binh Thuan Provincial People’s 
Committee, Dak Lak Provincial People’s Committee, Dak Nong 
Provincial People’s Committee, Khanh Hoa Provincial People’s 
Committee and Ninh Thuan Provincial People’s Committee, as such 
agreement may be amended from time to time; and such project 
agreement includes all schedules to the project agreement;

(b) The term “Project Executing Agency” appearing in Sections 6.01(a), 
8.01(d), 8.01(f), 8.01(k), 9.01(c) and 9.02(c) of the Loan Regulations 
shall include the Binh Thuan Provincial People’s Committee, Dak Lak 
Provincial People’s Committee, Dak Nong Provincial People’s 
Committee, Khanh Hoa Provincial People’s Committee and Ninh 
Thuan Provincial People’s Committee, as context requires.

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:

(a) “Consulting Guidelines” means the Guidelines on the Use of 
Consultants by Asian Development Bank and its Borrowers (2013, as 
amended from time to time);

(b) “Consulting Services” means the services to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan and the Grants as described in paragraph 3 of 
Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(c) “EA" (or “Project Executing Agency”) for the purposes of, and within 
the meaning of, the Loan Regulations means MARD, and the 
Participating PPCs or any successors thereto acceptable to ADB, 
which are responsible for the carrying out of the Project;

(d) “EMP" means each environmental management plan for the Project, 
including any update thereto, incorporated in the IEE;

(e) “Environmental Safeguards’’ means the principles and requirements 
set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of 
the SPS;

(f) “Ethnic Minorities Safeguards” means the principles and requirements 
set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 3, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of 
the SPS;

(g) “GAP” means the gender action plan prepared for the Project, 
including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower 
and cleared by ADB;



3

(h) “Goods" means equipment and materials to be financed out of 
the proceeds of the Loan, including related services such as 
transportation, insurance, installation, commissioning, training, and 
initial maintenance, but excluding Consulting Services;

(i) “HIV/AIDS” means human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immune 
deficiency syndrome;

(j) “IEE” means each initial environmental examination for the Project, 
including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower 
and cleared by ADB;

(k) “Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards” means the principles and 
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 2, and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

(I) “Loan Disbursement Handbook" means ADB’s Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time);

(m) “MARD” means the Borrower’s Ministry of Agriculture and Rural 
Development, or any successor thereto;

(n) “PAM" means the project administration manual for the Project dated 
30 August 2018 and agreed between the Borrower, through MARD, 
and ADB, as updated from time to time in accordance with the 
respective administrative procedures of the Borrower and ADB;

(o) “Participating PPCs” means all and any of the provincial peoples’ 
committees of Binh Thuan, Dak Lak, Dak Nong, Khanh Hoa and Ninh 
Thuan, or any successor thereto, which are responsible for the 
carrying out of their respective Subprojects under the Project;

(p) “Procurement Guidelines" means ADB’s Procurement Guidelines 
(2015, as amended from time to time);

(q) “Procurement Plan” means the procurement plan for the Project dated 
30 August 2018 and agreed between the Borrower, through MARD, 
and ADB, as updated from time to time in accordance with the 
Procurement Guidelines, the Consulting Guidelines, and other 
arrangements agreed with ADB;

(r) “REMDP” means the resettlement and ethnic minorities development 
plan, including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by each 
Participating PPC for relevant Subprojects (if required) under the 
Project and cleared by ADB;

(s) “Safeguards Monitoring Report” means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower, through MARD, to ADB that describes 
progress with implementation of and compliance with the EMP, the RP 
and the IPP (as applicable), including any corrective and preventative 
actions;



4

(t) “SPS” means ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement (2009);

(u) “Subproject" means a part or component under the Project that is
carried out by the corresponding Participating PPC and described in 
greater detail in the PAM;

(v) “Subsidiary Loan Agreement” means the agreement(s) between the 
Borrower and the Participating PPCs, as described in Section 3.01 of 
this Loan Agreement; and

(w) “Works” means construction or civil works to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan, including services such as drilling or mapping, 
and project related services that are provided as part of a single 
responsibility or turnkey contract, but excluding Consulting Services.

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB’s
ordinary capital resources an amount of one hundred million Dollars ($100,000,000).

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 20 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.

(c) The term “grace period” as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB an interest charge at the 
rate of 2% per annum during the grace period and thereafter, on the amount of the Loan 
withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time.

Section 2.03. The interest charge and any other charge on the Loan 
shall be payable semiannually on 15 April and 15 October in each year.

Section 2.04. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set 
forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.05. The currency of repayment of the principal amount of 
the Loan and the currency of payment of the interest charge for the purposes of Sections 
4.03(a) and 4.04 of the Loan Regulations shall be the Dollar.



5

ARTICLE III 

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. (a) The Borrower shall provide the proceeds of the
Loan to the Participating PPCs through (i) budgetary grant transfers; and (ii) relending to the 
Participating PPCs under Subsidiary Loan Agreements upon terms and conditions 
satisfactory to ADB.

(b) The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to be applied 
exclusively to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the provisions 
of this Loan Agreement and the Project Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower 
shall procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan 
Agreement.

Section 3.04. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 8.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 30 June 2026 or such other date as may from time to time 
be agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4.01. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set 
forth in Schedule 5 to this Loan Agreement and the Project Agreement.

Section 4.02. The Borrower shall enable ADB's representatives to 
inspect the Project, the Goods and Works, and any relevant records and documents.

Section 4.03. The Borrower shall take all actions which shall be 
necessary on its part to enable the Participating PPCs to perform their obligations under the 
Project Agreement, and shall not take or permit any action which would interfere with the 
performance of such obligations.

Section 4.04. (a) The Borrower shall exercise its rights under the
Subsidiary Loan Agreements in such a manner as to protect the interests of the Borrower 
and ADB and to accomplish the purposes of the Loan.



6

(b) No rights or obligations under the Subsidiary Loan Agreements shall 
be assigned, amended, or waived without the prior concurrence of ADB.

ARTICLE V

Effectiveness

Section 5.01. The following are specified as additional conditions to 
the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.01(f) of the Loan 
Regulations:

(a) the CCF Grant Agreement shall have been duly executed and 
delivered, and all conditions precedent to its effectiveness (other than 
a condition requiring the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement) shall 
have been fulfilled; and

(b) the NTF Grant Agreement shall have been duly executed and 
delivered, and all conditions precedent to its effectiveness (other than 
a condition requiring the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement) shall 
have been fulfilled.

Section 5. 02. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.04 of the 
Loan Regulations.

ARTICLE VI

Miscellaneous

Section 6. 01. The Minister of Finance of the Borrower is designated 
as representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 11.02 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 6. 02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 11.01 of the Loan Regulations:

For the Borrower

Ministry of Finance
No. 28 Tran Hung Dao Street
Hoan Kiem District
Ha Noi, Viet Nam

Facsimile Number:

(84-4) 2220-8020



7

For APB

Asian Development Bank 
6 ADB Avenue 
Mandaluyong City 
1550 Metro Manila 
Philippines
Facsimile Numbers:

(632) 636-2444 
(632) 636-2231.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

DINH TIEN DUNG
Minister

Ministry of Finance

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

ERIC SIDGWICK
Country Director

Viet Nam Resident Mission



8

SCHEDULE 1

Description of the Project

1. The objective of the Project is to establish climate-resilient and modernized
irrigation systems in the provinces of Binh Thuan, Dak Lak, Dak Nong, Khanh Hoa and Ninh 
Thuan.

2. The Project shall comprise:

(a) Strengthening of irrigation management services, which includes 
support to:

(i) irrigation water allocation and delivery services; and

(ii) maintenance of irrigation systems;

(b) Modernizing 8 irrigation Subprojects to provide water on-demand to 
farmers cultivating high value crops;

(c) Adopting efficient "on-farm" water management practices, which 
includes:

(i) providing farmers with information and training on best 
irrigation practices to improve their water productivity; and

(ii) providing farmers with technical advice on identifying and 
developing appropriate micro irrigation systems that meet their 
individual requirements.

3. The Project includes provision of Consulting Services, as detailed in the PAM.

4. The Project is expected to be completed by 31 December 2025.

SCHEDULE 3 

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category (“Table”).

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage 
for each item of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Reallocation

3. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, by notice to the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the 
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan 
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of 
ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

4. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.

Condition for Withdrawals from Loan Account

5. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Loan Agreement, no withdrawals
shall be made from the Loan Account for project expenditures under a Subproject until the 
Borrower has furnished to ADB a written confirmation that the respective Participating PPC 
had executed a Subsidiary Loan Agreement(s) on terms and conditions consistent with this 
Loan Agreement. For avoidance of doubt, this withdrawal condition applies individually and 
severally to each Participating PPC.



11

Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item
Total Amount Allocated 

for ADB Financing 
($) 

Category

Basis for Withdrawal from the 
Loan Account

1 Binh Thuan Province 
(Works, Goods, 
Consulting Services)*

17,826,000 100% of total expenditure claimed**

2 Ninh Thuan Province 
(Works, Goods, 
Consulting Services)*

29,495,000 100% of total expenditure claimed**

3 Khanh Hoa Province 
(Works, Goods, 
Consulting Services)*

15,113,000 100% of total expenditure claimed**

4 Dak Nong Province 
(Works, Goods, 
Consulting Services)*

17,641,000 100% of total expenditure claimed**

5 Dak Lak Province 
(Works, Goods, 
Consulting Services, 
Project Administration)*

19,925,000 100% of total expenditure claimed**

TOTAL 100,000,000

*Subject to the condition for withdrawal described in paragraph 5 of Schedule 3.
**Exclusive of taxes and duties imposed within the territory of the Borrower.



12

SCHEDULE 4 

Procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services

General

1. The procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services shall be subject to
and governed by the Procurement Guidelines, and the Consulting Guidelines, respectively.

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, Goods and Works shall be procured
and Consulting Services shall be selected and engaged only on the basis of the procurement 
methods and the selection methods set forth below. These methods are subject to, among 
other things, the detailed arrangements and threshold values set forth in the Procurement 
Plan. The Borrower may only modify the procurement methods and the selection methods or 
threshold values with the prior agreement of ADB, and modifications must be set out in 
updates to the Procurement Plan.

3. All terms used in this Schedule and not otherwise defined in this Loan
Agreement have the meanings provided in the Procurement Guidelines and/or the 
Consulting Guidelines, as applicable.

Eligible Source of Procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services

4. Goods, Works and Consulting Services may also be procured under the
Project from non-member countries of ADB.

Goods and Works

5. Goods and Works shall be procured on the basis of the procurement methods
set forth below:

(a) International Competitive Bidding; and

(b) National Competitive Bidding.

National Competitive Bidding

6. The Borrower and ADB shall ensure that, prior to the commencement of any
procurement activity under national competitive bidding, the Borrower’s national competitive 
bidding procedures are consistent with the Procurement Guidelines. Any modifications or 
clarifications to such procedures agreed between the Borrower and ADB shall be set out in 
the Procurement Plan. Any subsequent change to the agreed modifications and clarifications 
shall become effective only after approval of such change by the Borrower and ADB.

Conditions for Award of Contract

7. The Borrower shall not, and shall ensure that each Participating PPC does
not, award any Works contract which involves environmental impacts until:

(a) ADB has granted the final approval of the updated EMP, which is 
prepared based on the relevant Subproject’s detailed design; and



13

Schedule 4

(b) the Participating PPC has incorporated the relevant provisions from 
the updated EMP into the relevant Works contract

8. The Borrower shall not, and shall ensure that each Participating PPC does
not, award any Works contract which involves land acquisition and/or involuntary 
resettlement impacts, and/or impacts on ethnic minorities, until the relevant Participating 
PPC has prepared and submitted to ADB the final REMDP based on the relevant 
Subproject’s detailed design, and obtained ADB’s clearance of such REMDP.

Consulting Services

9. Except as set forth in the paragraph below, the Borrower shall apply Quality-
and Cost-Based Selection for Consulting Services.

10. The Borrower shall apply the following selection methods for the specified
Consulting Services, in accordance with, among other things, the procedures set forth in the 
Procurement Plan:

(a) Fixed Budget Selection;

(b) Consultants’ Qualifications Selection; and

(c) Single Source Selection.

Industrial or Intellectual Property Rights

11. (a) The Borrower shall ensure that all Goods and Works procured
(including without limitation all computer hardware, software and systems, whether 
separately procured or incorporated within other goods and services procured) do not violate 
or infringe any industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.

(b) The Borrower shall ensure that all contracts for the procurement of 
Goods and Works contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, 
indemnities from the contractor or supplier with respect to the matters referred to in 
subparagraph (a) of this paragraph.

12. The Borrower shall ensure that all ADB-financed contracts with consultants
contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from the 
consultants to ensure that the Consulting Services provided do not violate or infringe any 
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.

ADB’s Review of Procurement Decisions

13. Contracts procured under international competitive bidding procedures and
contracts for Consulting Services shall be subject to prior review by ADB, unless otherwise 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB and set forth in the Procurement Plan.



14

SCHEDULE 5

Execution of Project; Financial Matters

Implementation Arrangements

1. The Borrower and the Participating PPCs shall ensure that the Project is
implemented in accordance with the detailed arrangements set forth in the PAM. Any 
subsequent change to the PAM shall become effective only after approval of such change by 
the Borrower and ADB. In the event of any discrepancy between the PAM and this Loan 
Agreement, the provisions of this Loan Agreement shall prevail.

Environment

2. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Participating PPCs to ensure that the
preparation, design, construction, implementation, operation and decommissioning of the 
Project and all Project facilities comply with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the 
Borrower relating to environment, health and safety; (b) the Environmental Safeguards; and 
(c) all measures and requirements set forth in the lEEs, the EMPs, and any corrective or 
preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report.

3. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Participating PPCs to ensure that
their respective Subprojects are carried out in accordance with environmental assessment 
procedures provided in the lEEs as agreed between MARD and ADB.

Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement

4. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Participating PPCs to ensure that all
land and all rights-of-way required for the Project are made available to the Works contractor 
in accordance with the schedule agreed under the related Works contract and all land 
acquisition and resettlement activities are implemented in compliance with (a) all applicable 
laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to land acquisition and involuntary resettlement; 
(b) the Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards; and (c) all measures and requirements set forth 
in the REMDP, and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in the Safeguards 
Monitoring Report.

5. Without limiting the application of the Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards or
the REMDP, the Borrower shall ensure or cause the Participating PPCs to ensure that no 
physical or economic displacement takes place in connection with the Project until:

(a) compensation and other entitlements have been provided to affected 
people in accordance with the REMDP; and

(b) a comprehensive income and livelihood restoration program has been 
established in accordance with the REMDP.

Ethnic Minorities

6. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Participating PPCs to ensure that the
preparation, design, construction, implementation and operation of the Project and all Project 



15

Schedule 5

facilities comply with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to ethnic 
minorities; (b) the Ethnic Minorities Safeguards; and (c) all measures and requirements set 
forth in the REMDP, and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards 
Monitoring Report.

Human and Financial Resources to Implement Safeguards Requirements

7. The Borrower shall make available or cause the Participating PPCs to make
available necessary budgetary and human resources to fully implement the EMPs and the 
REMDP.

Safeguards - Related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

8. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Participating PPCs to ensure that all
bidding documents and contracts for Works contain provisions that require contractors to:

(a) comply with the measures relevant to the contractor set forth in the 
lEEs, the EMPs and the REMDP (to the extent they concern impacts 
on affected people during construction), and any corrective or 
preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report;

(b) make available a budget for all such environmental and social 
measures;

(c) provide the Borrower with a written notice of any unanticipated 
environmental, resettlement or indigenous peoples risks or impacts 
that arise during construction, implementation or operation of the 
Project that were not considered in the lEEs, the EMPs and the 
REMDP;

(d) adequately record the condition of roads, agricultural land and other 
infrastructure prior to starting to transport materials and construction; 
and

(e) reinstate pathways, other local infrastructure, and agricultural land to at 
least their pre-project condition upon the completion of construction.

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

9. The Borrower shall do the following or cause the Participating PPCs to do the
following:

(a) submit semiannual Safeguards Monitoring Reports to ADB and 
disclose relevant information from such reports to affected persons 
promptly upon submission;

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts 
arise during construction, implementation or operation of the Project 
that were not considered in the lEEs, the EMPs and the REMDP, 



16

Schedule 5

promptly inform ADB of the occurrence of such risks or impacts, with 
detailed description of the event and proposed corrective action plan; 
and

(c) report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures 
and requirements set forth in the EMPs and the REMDP promptly after 
becoming aware of the breach.

Prohibited List of Investments

10. The Borrower shall ensure that no proceeds of the Loan are used to finance
any activity included in the list of prohibited investment activities provided in Appendix 5 of 
the SPS.

Labor Standards, Health and Safety

11. The Borrower shall ensure that the core labor standards and the Borrower’s
applicable laws and regulations are complied with during Project implementation. The 
Borrower shall include specific provisions in the bidding documents and contracts financed 
by ADB under the Project requiring that the contractors, among other things: (a) comply with 
the Borrower's applicable labor law and regulations and incorporate applicable workplace 
occupational safety norms; (b) do not use child labor; (c) do not discriminate workers in 
respect of employment and occupation; (d) do not use forced labor; (e) do not restrict the 
workers from developing a legally permissible means of expressing their grievances and 
protecting their rights regarding working conditions and terms of employment; and (f) 
disseminate, or engage appropriate service providers to disseminate, information on the risks 
of sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV/AIDS, to the employees of contractors 
engaged under the Project and to members of the local communities surrounding the Project 
area, particularly women.

12. The Borrower shall strictly monitor compliance with the requirements set forth
in paragraph 11 above and provide ADB with regular reports.

Gender and Development

13. The Borrower shall ensure that (a) the GAP is implemented in accordance
with its terms; (b) the bidding documents and contracts include relevant provisions for 
contractors to comply with the measures set forth in the GAP; (c) adequate resources are 
allocated for implementation of the GAP; and (d) progress on implementation of the GAP, 
including progress toward achieving key gender outcome and output targets, are regularly 
monitored and reported to ADB; and (e) key gender outcome and output targets include: (i) 
equality of project benefits and opportunity-sharing between men and women; (ii) reduction in 
gender inequalities and social risks (HIV/AIDS transmission prevention, human trafficking 
prevention during construction of works); (Hi) training of women (including those from ethnic 
minorities) on micro irrigation and in overall system management and operations; (iv) 
increased representation of women in decision-making bodies; and (v) collection of sex- 
disaggregated data for benefit monitoring and evaluation.



17

Schedule 5

Operations and Maintenance

14. The Borrower shall cause each of the Participating PPCs to (a) adopt a tariff
structure in accordance with the Borrower’s appropriate regulations, whereby the tariffs are 
set at levels as to enable each Participating PPC, at a minimum, to fully recover Its respective 
operations and maintenance costs; and (b) launch its implementation in the Project financed 
irrigation schemes.

Counterpart Support

15. The Borrower, through the Participating PPCs, shall make available, promptly
as and when needed, the funds, facilities, services, land, and other resources as shall be 
necessary or required, in addition to the proceeds of the Loan, for the carrying out of the 
Project and for the operation and maintenance of the Project facilities. The Borrower shall 
furnish to ADB, promptly at its reasonable request, evidence satisfactory to ADB that such 
funds, facilities, services, land and other resources are available for purposes related to the 
Project. In addition to the foregoing, the Borrower shall ensure that the Participating PPCs 
have followed applicable procedures to budget for, and have obtained sufficient funds to 
satisfy their liabilities arising from any Works, Goods and/or Consulting Services contract.

Grievance Redress Mechanism

16. Within 12 months from the date of the Effective Date, each Participating PPC
shall ensure that a safeguards grievance redress mechanism in accordance with the 
provisions of the lEEs and the Participating PPC’s corresponding REMDP, and acceptable to 
ADB, is established. The grievance redress mechanism shall be translated to the local 
dialect and disclose in a place that are accessible to the local communities to make them 
aware of the grievance mechanism and their potential involvement and responsibilities in the 
project activities. The grievance redress mechanism shall include the names of the focal 
persons in the provincial project management units and the procedures for submitting 
complaints.

Governance and Anticorruption

17. The Borrower and the Participating PPCs shall (a) comply with ADB’s
Anticorruption Policy (1998, as amended to date) and acknowledge that ADB reserves the 
right to investigate directly, or through its agents, any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or 
coercive practice relating to the Project; and (b) cooperate with any such investigation and 
extend all necessary assistance for satisfactory completion of such investigation.

18. The Borrower and the Participating PPCs shall ensure that the anticorruption
provisions acceptable to ADB are included in all bidding documents and contracts, including 
provisions specifying the right of ADB to audit and examine the records and accounts of the 
executing and implementing agencies and all contractors, suppliers, consultants, and other 
service providers as they relate to the Project.

19. The Borrower shall disclose, through the websites of the Participating PPCs,
information about various matters concerning the Project, including general project 
information, procurement, Project progress, and contact details in the English and 



18

Schedule 5

Vietnamese languages. The website will also provide a link to ADB’s Office of Anticorruption 
and Integrity (http://www.adb.org/site/integrity/main) for reporting to ADB any grievances or 
allegations of corrupt practices arising out of the Project and Project activities. With regard to 
procurement, the website will include information on the list of participating bidders, name of 
the winning bidder, basic details on bidding procedures adopted, amount of contract 
awarded, and the list of Goods, Works and Consulting Services procured.



