





















































50013-002: Sustainable Tourism Development Project


LOAN NUMBER 3787-MON

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations)

(Sustainable Tourism Development Project)

between

MONGOLIA

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED. J2.lune 2.019

MON 50013



LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations)

LOAN AGREEMENT dated between
MONGOLIA (“Borrower”) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB").

WHEREAS

(A) the Borrower has applied to ADB for two loans for the purposes of the 
Project described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(B) by an agreement of even date herewith between the Borrower and ADB 
(“Concessional Loan Agreement”) ADB has agreed to lend to the Borrower from ADB’s 
Ordinary Capital Resources, on concessional terms, nineteen million Dollars ($19,000,000) in 
connection with the Project; and

(C) ADB has agreed to make a loan to the Borrower from ADB’s ordinary 
capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein;

NOW THEREFORE the parties hereto agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All the provisions of ADB’s Ordinary Operations Loan 
Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 ("Loan Regulations”), are hereby made applicable to this 
Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully set forth herein, except 
that the term “Project Executing Agency" appearing in Sections 7.01 (a)(i), 9.01(d), 9.01(f), 
9.01(k), 10.01(c) and 10.02(c) of the Loan Regulations shall be substituted by the term "the 
Ministry of Environment and Tourism of Mongolia or any successor thereto acceptable to ADB”.

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:

(a) "CKTC" means the Chinggis Khaan Tourism Complex in OBNP, as 
further described in the PAM;

(b) “Consulting Services” means consulting services as described in the 
Procurement Regulations to be financed out of the proceeds of the 
Loan;



2

(c) “Environmental Management Plan" or "EMP" means the environmental 
management plan for the Project, including any update thereto, 
incorporated in the IEE;

(d) “Environmental Safeguards" means the principles and requirements set 
forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of the 
SPS;

(e) “Goods’* means equipment and materials as set out in the Procurement 
Plan and to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan, including any 
related Nonconsulting Services such as transportation, insurance, 
installation, commissioning, training, and initial maintenance;

(f) “Indigenous Peoples Safeguards" means the principles and 
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 3, and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

(g) "Initial Environmental Examination” or “IEE" means the initial 
environmental examination for the Project, including any update thereto, 
prepared and submitted by the Borrower and cleared by ADB;

(h) "Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards” means the principles and 
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 2, and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

(i) “KLNP" means Khuvsgul Lake National Park;

(j) “Loan Disbursement Handbook” means ADB’s Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time);

(k) “MoF” means the Ministry of Finance of the Borrower or its successor;

(I) ‘'Nonconsulting Services'* means nonconsulting services as described In 
the Procurement Regulations to be financed out of the proceeds of the 
Loan;

(m) “OBNP” means Onon-Balj National Park;

(n) "PAM" means the project administration manual for the Project dated 
14 March 2019 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated 
from time to time in accordance with the respective administrative 
procedures of the Borrower and ADB;

(o) "PILI" means the project implementation unit to be established at the 
Project Executing Agency as described in the PAM;

(p) “Procurement Plan” means the procurement plan for the Project dated 
14 March 2019 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated 
from time to time in accordance with the Procurement Policy, the 
Procurement Regulations, and other arrangements agreed with ADB;



3

(q) "Procurement Policy” means ADB’s Procurement Policy - Goods, 
Works, Nonconsulting and Consulting Services (2017, as amended from 
time to time);

(r) “Procurement Regulations” means Procurement Regulations for ADB 
Borrowers - Goods, Works, Nonconsulting Services and Consulting 
Services (2017, as amended from time to time);

(s) “Project Executing Agency” means the Ministry of Environment and 
Tourism of the Borrower or any successor thereto acceptable to ADB;

(t) “Project Implementing Agencies" means the Department of Protected 
Area Management and Department of Tourism Policy Coordination 
under the Project Executing Agency or any successor thereto 
acceptable to ADB;

(u) “Safeguards Monitoring Report” means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower to ADB that describes progress with 
implementation of and compliance with the EMP, including any 
corrective and preventative actions;

(v) “SGAP" means the social and gender action plan for the Project 
including any updates thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower 
and cleared by ADB;

(w) “SPS” or "Safeguard Policy Statement" means ADB's Safeguard Policy 
Statement (2009); and

(x) ‘Works” means construction or civil works as set out in the Procurement 
Plan and to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan, including any 
related Nonconsulting Services and project related services that are 
provided as part of a single responsibility or turnkey contract.

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB’s
ordinary capital resources an amount of nineteen million Dollars ($19,000,000), as such 
amount may be converted from time to time through a Currency Conversion in accordance 
with the provisions of Section 2.06 of this Loan Agreement.

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 21 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.



4

(c) The term "grace period" as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB interest on the principal 
amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding from time to time at a rate for each Interest 
Period equal to the sum of:

(a) LIBOR;

(b) 0.60% as provided by Section 3.02 of the Loan Regulations less a credit
of 0.10% as provided by Section 3.03 of the Loan Regulations; and

(c) a maturity premium of 0.10% as provided by Section 3,03 of the Loan 
Regulations.

Section 2.03. The Borrower shall pay a commitment charge of 0.15% 
per annum. Such charge shall accrue on the full amount of the Loan (less amounts withdrawn 
from time to time), commencing 60 days after the date of this Loan Agreement,

Section 2.04. Interest and other charges on the Loan shall be payable 
semiannually on 15 November and 15 May in each year.

Section 2.05. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 2 to this 
Loan Agreement.

Section 2.06. (a) . The Borrower may at any time request any of the
following Conversions of the terms of the Loan in order to facilitate prudent debt management:

(i) a change of the Loan Currency of all or any portion of the 
principal amount of the Loan, whether withdrawn and 
outstanding or unwithdrawn, to an Approved Currency;

(ii) a change of the interest rate basis applicable to all or any portion 
of the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding 
from a Floating Rate to a Fixed Rate, or vice versa; and

(iii) the setting of limits on the Floating Rate applicable to all or any 
portion of the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and 
outstanding by the establishment of an Interest Rate Cap or 
Interest Rate Collar on said Floating Rate.

(b) Any conversion requested pursuant to subsection (a) hereinabove that 
is accepted by ADB shall be considered a “Conversion”, as defined in Section 2.01(f) of the 
Loan Regulations, and shall be effected in accordance with the provisions of Article V of the 
Loan Regulations and the Conversion Guidelines.



5

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to be 
applied exclusively to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the 
provisions of this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower shall 
procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds 
of the Loan in accordance with the Procurement Plan.

Section 3.04. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 9.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 30 June 2025 or such other date as may from time to time be 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4.01. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set forth 
in Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement

Section 4.02. (a) The Borrower shall (i) maintain separate
accounts and records for the Project; (ii) prepare annual financial statements for the Project in 
accordance with financial reporting standards acceptable to ADB; (iii) have such financial 
statements audited annually by independent auditors whose qualifications, experience and 
terms of reference are acceptable to ADB, in accordance with auditing standards acceptable 
to ADB; (iv) as part of each such audit, have the auditors prepare a report, which includes the 
auditors’ opin ion (s) on the financial statements and the use of the Loan proceeds, and a 
management letter (which sets out the deficiencies in the internal control of the Project that 
were identified in the course of the audit, if any); and (v) furnish to ADB, no later than 6 months 
after the end of each related fiscal year, copies of such audited financial statements, audit 
report and management letter, all in the English language, and such other information 
concerning these documents and the audit thereof as ADB shall from time to time reasonably 
request.

(b) ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the 
Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 days of the date 
of ADB’s confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADB’s website.



6

(c) The Borrower shall enable ADB, upon ADB's request, to discuss the 
financial statements for the Project and the Borrower's financial affairs where they relate to the 
Project with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(iii) hereinabove, and shall 
authorize and require any representative of such auditors to participate in any such discussions 
requested by ADB. This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted only in the 
presence of an authorized officer of the Borrower, unless the Borrower shall otherwise agree.

Section 4. 03. The Borrower shall enable ADB's representatives to 
inspect the Project, the Goods and Works, and any relevant records and documents.

ARTICLE V

Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity

Section 5. 01. The following is specified as an additional event for 
suspension of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the 
purposes of Section 9.01 (m) of the Loan Regulations: the Borrower shall have failed to perform 
any of its obligations under the Concessional Loan Agreement.

Section 5. 02. The following is specified as an additional event for 
acceleration of maturity for the purposes of Section 9.07(a)(iv) of the Loan Regulations: the 
event specified in Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement shall have occurred.

ARTICLE VI

Effectiveness

Section 6. 01. The following is specified as an additional condition to the
effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 10.01(f) of the Loan 
Regulations: the Concessional Loan Agreement shall have been duly executed and delivered 
on behalf of the Borrower and shall have become fully effective and binding upon the Borrower 
in accordance with its terms, subject only to the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement.

Section 6.02. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 10.04 of the 
Loan Regulations.



7

ARTICLE VII

Miscellaneous

Section 7. 01. The Minister of MoF of the Borrower is designated as 
representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 12.02 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 7. 02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 12.01 of the Loan Regulations:

For the Borrower

Ministry of Finance
Government Building 2
S. Danzan Street 5/1 
Ulaanbaatar 15160 
Mongolia

Facsimile Number:

+976 51 267-468

For APB

Asian Development Bank 
6 ADB Avenue 
Mandaluyong City
1550 Metro Manila 
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

+63 2 636-2444 
+63 2 636-2534.



8

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly.authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

MONGOLIA

By

Ministry of Finance

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

Mongolia Resident Mission



9

SCHEDULE 1

Description of the Project

1. The objective of the Project is the achievement of sustainable and inclusive
tourism in the KLNP and OBNP.

2. The Project shall comprise:

Component 1: Enhance inclusive planning and capacity for community based 
tourism through strengthening the institutional framework for tourism planning 
and increasing the number of local beneficiaries from tourism by: (a) revising 
development plans for the three largest settlements at the KLNP and OBNP (two 
at the KLNP and one at the OBNP) to include livelihood targets, natural resource 
use and spatial planning for residents; (b) developing and implementing two 
tourism concession manuals, and an ecotourism certification program, for KLNP 
and OBNP; (c) strengthening the KLNP tourism council and creating a tourism 
council at OBNP; (d) installing information facilities in the Khuvsgul Aimag capital 
to promote KLNP products and services; and (e) increasing employment and 
business opportunities for local residents by providing vocational training for 
small businesses and installing tourist markets.

Component 2: Construct enabling infrastructure for tourism, comprising: (a) at 
KLNP (i) upgrade unsealed roads, (ii) construct car parks and (iii) improve traffic 
control and safety; and (b) at OBNP (i) construct the CKTC, (ii) establish 
supporting infrastructure, (iii) upgrade an access road and (iv) extend a power 
line to the CKTC site.

Component 3: Scale up waste management, including: (a) plan and coordinate 
the installation, operation and maintenance of low-cost sanitation systems at 
KLNP and OBNP; (b) construct three wastewater treatment plants suitable for 
cold climate; and (c) upgrade three landfill sites and establish new procedures 
for recycling and for leachate and waste management.

Component 4: Strengthen park management by: (a) constructing a KLNP 
headquarters and visitor center, two fee collection stations and a road control 
station; (b) rehabilitating public trails; (c) revising KLNP's and OBNP’s 
management plans; (d) preparing an action plan for each of KLNP and OBNP; 
and (e) training park and soum government staff to implement the revised plans.

3. The Project is expected to be completed by 31 December 2024.



10

SCHEDULE 2

Amortization Schedule

1. The following table sets forth the Principal Payment Dates of the Loan and the
percentage of the total principal amount of the Loan payable on each Principal Payment Date 
(Installment Share). If the proceeds of the Loan shall have been fully withdrawn as of the first 
Principal Payment Date, the principal amount of the Loan repayable by the Borrower on each 
Principal Payment Date shall be determined by ADB by multiplying (a) the total principal 
amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding as of the first Principal Payment Date; by 
(b) the Installment Share for each Principal Payment Date, such repayment amount to be 
adjusted, as necessary, to deduct any amounts referred to in paragraph 4 of this Schedule, to 
which a Currency Conversion applies.

Date Payment 
Due



2. If the proceeds of the Loan shall not have been fully withdrawn as of the first
Principal Payment Date, the principal amount of the Loan repayable by the Borrower on each 
Principal Payment Date shall be determined as follows:

(a) to the extent that any proceeds of the Loan shall have been withdrawn 
as of the first Principal Payment Date, the Borrower shall repay the 
amount withdrawn and outstanding as of such date in accordance with 
paragraph 1 of this Schedule; and

(b) any withdrawal made after the first Principal Payment Date shall be 
repaid on each Principal Payment Date falling after the date of such 
withdrawal in amounts determined by ADB by multiplying the amount of 
each such withdrawal by a fraction, the numerator of which shall be the 
original Installment Share specified in the table in paragraph 1 of this 
Schedule for said Principal Payment Date (the Original Installment 
Share) and the denominator of which shall be the sum of all remaining 
Original Installment Shares for Principal Payment Dates failing on or 
after such date, such repayment amounts to be adjusted, as necessary, 
to deduct any amounts referred to in paragraph 4 of this Schedule, to 
which a Currency Conversion applies,

3. Withdrawals made within 2 calendar months prior to any Principal Payment
Date shall, for the purposes solely of calculating the principal amounts payable on any Principal 
Payment Date, be treated as withdrawn and outstanding on the second Principal Payment 
Date following the date of withdrawal and shall be repayable on each Principal Payment Date 
commencing with the second Principal Payment Date following the date of withdrawal.

4. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Schedule, upon a
Currency Conversion of all or any portion of the withdrawn principal amount of the Loan to an 
Approved Currency, the amount so converted in said Approved Currency that shall be 
repayable on any Principal Payment Date occurring during the Conversion Period, shall be 
determined by ADB by multiplying such amount in its currency of denomination immediately 



12
Schedule 2

prior to said Conversion by either (a) the exchange rate that reflects the amounts of principal 
in said Approved Currency payable by ADB under the Currency Hedge Transaction relating to 
said Conversion; or (b) if ADB so determines in accordance with the Conversion Guidelines, 
the exchange rate component of the Screen Rate.

5. If the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding from time to time
shall be denominated in more than one Loan Currency, the provisions of this Schedule shall 
apply separately to the amount denominated in each Loan Currency, so as to produce a 
separate amortization schedule for each such amount.



13

SCHEDULE 3 

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category ("Table”). (Reference to “Category" in this Schedule is to a 
Category or Subcategory of the Table.)

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items of expenditure and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for 
each item of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Interest and Commitment Charges

3. The amount allocated to Category "Interest and Commitment Charges” is for
financing interest and commitment charges on the Loan during the implementation period of 
the Project, ADB shall be entitled to withdraw from the Loan Account and pay to itself, on behalf 
of the Borrower, the amounts required to meet payments, when due, of such interest and 
commitment charges.

Reallocation

4, Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, by notice to the Borrower, (I) reallocate to such Category, to the 
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan 
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of 
ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until ail 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

5. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.



14
Schedule 3

Condition for Withdrawals from Loan Account

6. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Loan Agreement, no withdrawals
shall be made from the Loan Account until the PIU has been established and has engaged a 
qualified project coordinator, financial specialist and procurement specialist.



15
Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

* Subject to the condition for withdrawal described in paragraph 6 of Schedule 3.
** Proceeds of the Concessional Loan Agreement for the corresponding category are to be fully utilized prior to 
disbursement of this loan for this category

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item

Total Amount Allocated 
for ADB Financing

................... (S)........
Category

Basis for Withdrawal from the 
Loan Account

1 Civil Works* 13,870,238 100.0% of total expenditure 
claimed**

2

Goods, Consulting 
Services, Community 
Contracts, Workshops, 
PIU operating costs*

3,614,862 100.0% of total expenditure claimed**

3 Interest and
Commitment Charges 1,514,900 100.0% of amounts due

TOTAL 19,000,000



16

SCHEDULE 4

Execution of Project

Implementation Arrangements

1. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that the
Project is implemented in accordance with the detailed arrangements set forth in the PAM. Any 
subsequent change to the PAM shall become effective only after approval of such change by 
the Borrower and ADB. In the event of any discrepancy between the PAM and the Loan 
Agreements, the provisions of the Loan Agreements shall prevail.

2. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure close
coordination in implementing the Project with all relevant ministries, relating especially to the 
ministries that will be responsible for operation and maintenance of the project roads, landfill 
sites, wastewater treatment plants, and power lines. Without limiting the foregoing, a steering 
committee for the project shall be established by the Project Executing Agency and shall meet 
not less than quarterly during Project Implementation to oversee and ensure well-coordinated 
implementation of the Project. The steering committee shall be chaired by the State Secretary 
of the Project Executing Agency and shall comprise high-level officers from at least the 
ministries responsible for roads and transport, construction, urban development and energy, 
as well as from relevant departments of the Project Executing Agency,

Project Specific Assurances

Supporting Project Implementation

3. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that the
Project Executing Agency, Khuvsgul Aimag government and the Khentii Aimag government 
will not issue any commercial tourism licenses or land entitlements for business activities within 
the KLNP or OBNP (including the OBNP buffer zone in Dada I Soum) until the following have 
been (a) completed, (b) approved by the Project Executing Agency, the aimag and soum 
governments, and ADB, (c) adopted by the Project Executing Agency and/or local government, 
and (d) commenced implementation: (i) tourism concession manuals for KLNP and OBNP; 
(ii) the Khankh Soum development plan for KLNP; and (iii) revised Khatgal Town development 
plan for KLNP and revised Dadal Soum development plan for OBNP.

4. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall provide or cause to
be provided adequate start-up capital to establish the holding company for the CKTC, as 
described in the PAM, to cover the costs of at least the first year of CKTC's operation and to 
cover further costs of operating CKTC until visitor revenue is sufficient to fund CKTC’s 
operating expenses.

5. The Borrower shall ensure that the Khentii Aimag power station and the power
transmission line from Ondorkhaan Town (also known as Chinggis Khaan Town) to Dadal 
Soum, are upgraded before the completion of construction of the CKTC to the extent necessary 
to ensure an adequate and reliable power supply to operate the CKTC.



17
Schedule 4

6. The Borrower shall ensure that the road from Onddrkhaan Town (also known
as Chinggis Khaan Town) to Dadal Soum is upgraded to repair the most damaged sections of 
the existing, unpaved, portions of the road and shall further exert best efforts to ensure paving 
and upgrading of the entire road (including the section of road from the Dadal Soum center to 
the CKTC) in close consultation with the Project Executing Agency, the Project Implementing 
Agencies and the PIU so as to ensure coordination and planning with the needs of the Project.

Supporting implementation of Project Safeguards

7. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall appoint officers to
act as focal points for the EMP and SGAP and ensure that these officers undertake regular 
coordination with and support for the environment and social specialists to be recruited by the 
PIU as provided in the PAM.

8. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that the
Khatgal Town power substation (in Khuvsgul Almag) and Dada! Soum power substation (in 
Khentii Aimag) are adequately maintained and managed in order to: (a) provide the required 
power for Project facilities, especially the KLNP headquarters and visitor center in Khatgal 
Town and the CKTC in Dadal Soum; (b) ensure there is no disruption to the existing power 
supply for communities and services, including during winter and times of peak demand. If 
any changes are planned that may adversely affect the capacity or function of these power 
stations the Borrower shall: (a) inform ADB of the proposed changes; (b) if there is any potential 
adverse impact on the Project or any Project facilities, prepare and implement a corrective 
action plan as agreed with ADB.

9. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that the
Project Executing Agency, Project Implementing Agencies and PIU to, ensure that: (a) public 
services for power, water supply, and wastewater collection at the KLNP and OBNP will be 
maintained for communities during the Project civil works; (b) any interruptions to such services 
which result from Project works will be as limited as possible; and (c) prior to any planned 
interruptions, meaningful consultations are held with all affected communities.

10. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that all
planting activities under the Project (a) occur only for rehabilitation of construction sites; 
(b) except as provided in (c), below, use only species that are native to Khuvsgui Almag, for 
KLNP, and that are native to Dadal Soum, for OBNP, and utilizing seedlings that are sourced 
from local stocks within Khuvsgul Aimag and Khentii Almag, respectively; (c) If fast-growing 
non-native species (e.g. grasses) are required for stabilizing bare surfaces of construction 
sites, use for such purpose only sterilized seedlings that cannot propagate; (d) do not use any 
invasive plant species; and (e) do not use pesticides or top-dressing fertilizers.

Tariffs for Wastewater and Solid Waste Management

11. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that the
Project Implementing Agencies or Khuvsgul Aimag and Khentii Aimag governments (a) make 
continuous efforts to increase wastewater tariffs and solid waste management tariffs 
progressively to achieve full cost recovery and in accordance with national tariff policies and 
regulations; and (b) undertake at least once a year a periodic review of tariffs and fees including 
an assessment of their impact on the poor.



18
Schedule 4

12. During the process of adjusting wastewater tariffs and solid waste management
tariffs, the Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that the Project 
Implementing Agencies or Khuvsgul Aimag and Khentii Aimag governments take into 
consideration (a) the minimum tariff level to cover basic operating costs, debt service and 
capital replacement; (b) users’ affordability and willingness to-pay data from available surveys; 
and (c) recent tariff escalations. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall 
ensure that the Project Implementing Agencies or Khuvsgul Aimag and Khentii Aimag 
governments include public consultation in their tariff setting processes.

Governance

13. The Borrower shall not withdraw any ADB loan proceeds until the Project
Executing Agency has engaged a project coordinator and Project financial specialist and a 
procurement specialist in accordance with the PAM.

Design and Quality Control Requirements

14. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, Project Implementing
Agencies and PIU to, shall ensure that:

(a) the detailed designs for the Project are completed in accordance with 
the Project implementation schedule as set forth in the PAM, but not 
later than 2 months before the start of the concerned Works;

(b) construction management, quality control, contract management, final 
completion and acceptance of all Works comply with all applicable laws 
and regulations of the Borrower and with all applicable requirements of 
ADB; and

(c) al! structures and facilities constructed or installed under the Project are 
well operated and maintained, and all operation and maintenance staff 
are fully trained in monitoring, operating, and maintaining the structures 
and/or facilities for which they are responsible.

Procurement

15. The Borrower shall, through the Project Executing Agency, ensure that:

(a) the procurement of Goods, Works and Services is carried out in 
accordance with the Procurement Policy and the Procurement 
Regulations;

(b) Goods, Works and Services shall be procured based on the detailed 
arrangements set forth in the Procurement Plan, including the 
procurement and selection methods, the type of bidding documents, and 
ADB’s review requirements. The Borrower may modify the detailed 
arrangements set forth in the Procurement Plan only with the prior 
agreement of ADB, and such modifications must be set out in updates 
to the Procurement Plan; and



19
Schedule 4

(c) (i) all Goods and Works procured and Services obtained (including all
computer hardware, software and systems, whether separately 
procured or incorporated within other goods and services procured) do 
not violate or infringe any industrial property or intellectual property right 
or claim of any third party; and (ii) all contracts for the procurement of 
Goods, Works and Services contain appropriate representations, 
warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from the contractor, supplier, 
consultant or service provider with respect to the matters referred to in 
this subparagraph.

Safeguards

Conditions for Award of Works Contracts

16, The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that no
Works contract which involves environmental impacts is awarded until:

(a) the Project Executing Agency has endorsed the IEE; and

(b) the Project Executing Agency or the relevant Project Implementing 
Agency has incorporated the relevant provisions from the EMP into the 
Works contracts.

Environment

17, The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, the Project Executing
Agency, Project Implementing Agencies and PIU to, shall ensure that the preparation, design, 
construction, implementation, operation and decommissioning of the Project and ali Project 
facilities comply with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to 
environment, health and safety; (b) the SPS; arid (c) all measures and requirements set forth 
in the IEE and EMP and any corrective or preventative actions (i) set forth in a Safeguards 
Monitoring Report, or (ii) which are subsequently agreed between ADB and the Project 
Executing Agency.

18. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the Project Executing Agency
shall ensure that: (a) during detailed engineering design of the CKTC, meaningful consultations 
are held with local residents, civil society organizations and other stakeholders to assess 
community concerns about the siting of the CKTC and its access road and to identify 
community-led or other solutions to address any community concerns; (b) the consultations 
include dissemination of all site-related information collected for the detailed designs, including 
the exact proposed location for the CKTC and access road; (c) if, following consultations, some 
stakeholders oppose the location of the CKTC, the PIU delivers a report and recommendations 
for resolution to the project steering committee and ADB and that the project steering 
committee confers with ADB on next steps; and (d) that design work and other preparation for 
the CKTC is suspended until siting issues are resolved in a manner acceptable to ADB.



20
Schedule 4

No Involuntary Resettlement or Indigenous Peoples Impacts

19. The Borrower shall ensure and shall cause the Project Executing Agency to
ensure that the Project does not have any involuntary resettlement impacts or indigenous 
peoples impacts within the meaning of the S PS. In the event that the Project does have any 
such impacts, the Borrower shall, and shall cause the Project Executing Agency, Project 
Implementing Agencies and PIU to, take all steps required to ensure that the Project complies 
with the applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower and with the SPS.

Human and Financial Resources to Implement Safeguards Requirements

20. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall make available
necessary budgetary and human resources to fully implement the EMP.

Safeguards - Related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

21. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that all
bidding documents and contracts for Works contain provisions that require contractors to:

(a) comply with the measures relevant to the contractor set forth in the I EE 
and the EMP (to the extent they concern impacts on the respective 
affected people under ADB’s Environmental Safeguards during 
construction), and the domestic environmental impact assessments, 
and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in (i) a Safeguards 
Monitoring Report, or (if) subsequently agreed between ADB and the 
Project Executing Agency;

(b) make available a budget for all such environmental and social 
measures;

(c) provide the Project Executing Agency with a written notice of any 
unanticipated environmental, resettlement or indigenous peoples risks 
or impacts that arise during construction, implementation or operation of 
the Project that were not considered in the IEE and the EMP;

(d) adequately record the condition of roads, agricultural land and other 
infrastructure prior to starting to transport materials and construction; 
and

(e) reinstate pathways, other local infrastructure, and agricultural land to at 
least their pre-project condition upon the completion of construction.

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

22. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall do the following:

(a) submit Safeguards Monitoring Reports to ADB in respect of 
implementation of and compliance with Environmental Safeguards and 
the EMP, semiannually during construction and the implementation of 



21
Schedule 4

the Project and the EMP, and thereafter annually during operation, until 
the issuance of ADB's Project completion report unless a longer period 
is agreed in the EMP; and disclose relevant information from such 
reports to the respective affected people under the Environmental 
Safeguards, the Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards and the 
Indigenous Peoples Safeguards promptly upon submission;

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts arise
during construction, implementation or operation of the Project that were 
not considered in the IEE and the EMP, promptly inform ADB of the 
occurrence of such risks or impacts, with detailed description of the 
event and proposed corrective action plan; and

(c) report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures 
and requirements set forth in the EMP promptly after becoming aware 
of the breach.

Prohibited List of Investments

23. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that no
proceeds of the Loan are used to finance any activity included in the list of prohibited 
investment activities provided in Appendix 5 of the SPS.

Labor Standards, Health and Safety

24 The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that the core
labor standards and the Borrower’s applicable laws and regulations are complied with during 
Project implementation. The Borrower shall cause the Project Executing Agency or the 
relevant Project Implementing Agency to include specific provisions in the bidding documents 
and contracts financed by ADB under the Project requiring that the contractors, among other 
things: (a) comply with the Borrower’s applicable labor law and regulations and incorporate 
applicable workplace occupational safety norms; (b) do not use child labor; (c) do not 
discriminate workers in respect of employment and occupation; (d) do not use forced labor; 
(e) allow freedom of association and effectively recognize the right to collective bargaining; 
and (f) disseminate, or engage appropriate service providers to disseminate, information on 
the risks of sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV/AIDS, to the employees of contractors 
engaged under the Project and to members of the local communities surrounding the Project 
area, particularly women.

25. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall strictly monitor
compliance with the requirements set forth in paragraph 24 above and provide ADB with 
regular reports as provided in the PAM.

Gender and Development

26. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that (a) the
SGAP is implemented in accordance with its terms; (b) the bidding documents and contracts 
include relevant provisions for contractors to comply with the measures set forth in the SGAP; 
(c) adequate resources are allocated for implementation of the SGAP; and (d) progress on 



22
Schedule 4

implementation of the SGAP, including progress toward achieving key gender and social 
outcome and output targets, are regularly monitored and reported to ADB.

27. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that the
“Consultation and Participation Plan" and “Stakeholder Communication Strategy” for the 
Project are fully implemented in accordance with their terms and that activities thereunder are 
regularly monitored and reported to ADB.

Counterpart Support

28. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall, and shall cause the
Project Executing Agency the Khuvsgul Aimag government, the Khentii Almag government 
and other government agencies to, ensure that (a) counterpart funds are made available to the 
Project in a timely manner, including any additional counterpart funds, as and when required, 
to meet any Project shortfall or cost overruns during Project implementation; and (b) operation 
and maintenance of all Project facilities is fully and timely funded. In addition to the foregoing, 
the Borrower shall ensure that the Project Executing Agency and Project Implementing 
Agencies have sufficient funds to satisfy their liabilities arising from any Works, Goods and/or 
Consulting Services contract.

Governance and Anticorruption

29. The Borrower shall, and shall cause the Project Executing Agency, the Project
Implementing Agencies and the PIU to, (a) comply with ADB's Anticorruption Policy (1998. as 
amended to date); (b) acknowledge that ADB reserves the right to investigate directly, or 
through its agents, any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or coercive practice relating to the 
Project; and (c) cooperate with any such investigation and extend all necessary assistance for 
satisfactory completion of such investigation.

30. The Borrower shall, and shall cause the Project Executing Agency, the Project
Implementing Agencies and the PIU to, ensure that anticorruption provisions acceptable to 
ADB are included in all bidding documents and contracts related to the Project, including 
provisions specifying the right of ADB to audit and examine the records and accounts of the 
Borrower, the Project Implementing Agency, the Project Executing Agencies, the PIU and all 
contractors, suppliers, consultants and other service providers as they relate to the Project.

Grievance Redress Mechanism

31. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that a
safeguards grievance redress mechanism acceptable to ADB is established at the Project 
Executing Agency and each Project Implementing Agency in accordance with the provisions 
of the IEE and EMP, within the timeframe specified in the I EE and EMP, to consider safeguards 
complaints.

Ownership and Control of Project facilities

32. In the event any change in ownership or control of any Project facilities is
anticipated, the Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall consult with ADB at 
least 6 months prior to the implementation of such change, and shall ensure that no change 



23
Schedule 4

will be made that will have an adverse impact on the implementation of the Project in 
accordance with the Project Agreement and the PAM.



