















































 

PUBLIC 
SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE 

 
 
 

DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

GUYANA 
 
 
 
 
 
 

SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM 
 
 

(GY-L1060) 
 
 
 
 

LOAN PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
  



PROJECT SUMMARY  
GUYANA 

SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM 

(GY-L1060) 

Financial Terms and Conditions 

Borrower: Co-operative Republic of 

Guyana 

 

 OC FSO 

Amortization Period: 30 years 40 years 

Executing Agency: Ministry of Agriculture    

Disbursement Period: 5.5 years 5.5 years 

Source Amount (US$) % Grace Period: 6 years 40 years 

IDB (OC): 7,500,000 50 Supervision and Inspection Fee: (a)  NA 

IDB (FSO): 7,500,000 50 Interest rate: FU fixed (b)  0.25% 

Total: 15,000,000 100 
Credit Fee: (a)  NA 

Currency of Approval: US$ US$ 

Project at a Glance 

Project Objective/Description: Increase productivity of the agricultural sector while maintaining a sustainable 

and climate resilient use of natural resources in Guyana. The specific objectives are: (i) produce high quality data 
for the agricultural sector; (ii) increase productivity, especially for medium and small farmers; and (iii) increase 
sanitary and phytosanitary (SPS) standards and access to meat processing facilities. Higher productivity will also 
contribute to reduce pressure on forest and fragile ecosystems, and at the same time, increase income for small 
and medium-sized farmers. 

Special contractual conditions prior to the first disbursement of the financing: (i) the presentation of 

evidence that the Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) has selected a program coordinator, a financial officer and a 
procurement officer according to the terms and conditions previously agreed with the Bank (¶3.1); (ii) approval 
and entry into effect of the Program Operating Manual (POM) according to the terms and conditions previously 
agreed with the Bank (¶3.4); and (iii) presentation of an initial report, including, the Program’s Pluri-annual 
Execution Plan (PEP), the Procurement Plan, the Financial Plan and the Results Matrix according to the terms 
and conditions previously agreed with the Bank (¶3.12).  

Special contractual execution conditions: (i) prior to the implementation of the activities related to the Guyana 

Bureau of Statistics (GBS) under Component 1, the subscription and entry into effect of an agreement between 
the MoA and the GBS, according to the terms and conditions previously agreed with the Bank (¶3.2); (ii) prior to 
the bidding of infrastructure works under Components 2 and 3, the subscription and entry into effect of an 
agreement between the MoA and the EPA, according to the terms and conditions previously agreed with the 
Bank (¶3.2); (iii) prior to the building of infrastructure works related to the meat processing facilities financed 
under Component 3, the subscription and entry into effect of an agreement between the MoA and a producer’s 
association responsible for operating the abattoir, according to the terms and conditions previously agreed with 
the Bank (¶3.7); and (iv) compliance with the environmental and social conditions established in Section VI of the 
Environmental and Social Management Report (ESMR). 

Exceptions to Bank Policies: None 

Strategic Alignment 

Challenges
(c)

: SI 
 

PI 
 

EI 
 

Cross-Cutting Themes
(d)

: GD 
 

CC 
 

IC 
 

(a)
 The credit fee and inspection and supervision fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors during 

its review of the Bank’s lending charges, in accordance with the relevant policies. 
(b) 

   The borrower shall pay interests on the outstanding balance of the Ordinary Capital loan at a Libor based rate. Each time 
the outstanding balance reaches 25% of the net approved amount or $3 million, whichever is greater, the interest rate will 
be fixed. 

(c)
 SI (Social Inclusion and Equality); PI (Productivity and Innovation); and EI (Economic Integration). 

(d)
 GD (Gender Equality and Diversity); CC (Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability); and IC (Institutional Capacity 

and Rule of Law).
 



- 2 - 

 

I. DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING 

A. Background, Problem Addressed, Justification
1
 

1.1 Guyana’s green economy development model. Guyana has 10 administrative 
regions and more than 75% of the territory is 
covered with forest. Savannahs represent 
10% of the territory. Forest and savannah 
ecosystems offer a wide range of goods and 
environmental services, necessary for 
agricultural development. Since 2009, 
Guyana in partnership with Norway started a 
payment-for-performance, forest conservation 
program. This partnership aims to maintain or 
reduce deforestation rates, currently at 
0.56%, one of the lowest in the world. 
Because agriculture is one of the drivers of 
deforestation in Guyana, increased 
production and productivity need to consider 
secondary effects on forests and savannahs.   

1.2 Agricultural Production. In 2014, agriculture represented almost 18% of total 
Gross Domestic Product (GDP), contributed 20% of employment (70% in rural 
areas), and is one of the main sources of foreign exchange earnings, representing 
19% of total exports (GBS, 2016). Coastal regions (2, 3, 4 and 5, mostly) 
concentrate in agricultural production especially export crops like sugar and rice. 
Although Guyana experienced high rates of economic growth between 2009 and 
2013 (4.5% annual average), the share of agriculture in GDP (and natural 
resources in general) has decreased consistently (Modeste, 2016). This is in part 
due to lower international prices for commodities, but also low productivity, 
especially among small farmers.  

1.3 Although small farmers produce most of the fruits and vegetables grown in Guyana 
(80% of the country’s grains, 60% of coconuts, and 40% of all coconut oil [FAO, 
2012]); productivity is still considered low compared to other countries with similar 
farm production systems (yields of corn, beans, and small scale rice, on average, 
are 40% lower than the Caribbean average). Livestock production is focused on 
poultry, with cattle and small ruminants produced mainly on small farms, with 
similarly low productivity (FAO, 2012). In the aggregate, as a result of the farming 
structure and low levels of agricultural services, the sector’s efficiency, as part of 
Total Factor Productivity (TFP) is one of the lowest in Latin America and the 
Caribbean (LAC) (Nin-Pratt, et al., 2015). As Fuglie and Rada (2013) have shown, 
45% of growth in productivity in the agricultural sector (global average) can be 
attributed to the adoption of better technologies.  

1.4 Low productivity is not the only challenge. Agriculture in Guyana is also affected by 
changes in weather patterns, particularly drought severity. The drought of      

                                                 
1
  References included in this document can be found in IDBDocs40279510 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40279510/R


- 3 - 

 

2014–2015 was one of the longest and most severe of the last two decades, 
extending the dry days from 145 to 189 (OCC-MP, 2016). Such drought poses 
enormous risk to farmers, and food security, particularly those in the hinterlands 
(Region 9), where water availability is one of the main constraints to agriculture 
and livestock development. Climate change impacts, including intensified drought 
as well as flooding, increase the need to facilitate the identification and adoption of 
adaptation measures, both for large and small farmers (IFPRI, 2009).  

1.5 Agricultural production in Regions 9 and 10 requires the adoption of practices 
tailored to ensure long–term conservation and ecosystem service supply in these 
environments. Although more than 90% of households in the hinterlands practice 
agriculture, most are subsistence–based with only 35% with agriculture as their 
main source of income. This low percentage is the function of precipitation patterns 
in the region (six months on average with less than 50mm of rainfall per month), 
little information on regionally appropriate agricultural practices and a lack of       
all-weather road connection with Georgetown. Improved technologies and 
practices for water management and use are critical in these regions where 
seasonal variation in precipitation induces drought stress as well as flooding.  

1.6 A study commissioned by the Bank (2016) analyzed the relative support to 
producers using the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development 
(OECD) methodology (Derlagen, 2016). The main findings show that the 
Government of Guyana employs various policy instruments in support of the 
agricultural sector, including trade policies, fiscal measures as well as public 
investment in infrastructure, research, extension services and marketing. During 
the preparation of the Program, a diagnostic of these services was clustered in 
three sections: (i) information systems; (ii) research, innovation and extension; and 
(iii) SPS standards and compliance. These sub–sectors represent the bulk of 
public goods and services provided by the Government. Through these services 
the Government has the opportunity to improve productivity and the sustainable 
use of natural resources.  

1.7 Agricultural information system (AIS). The MoA has a Monitoring and 
Evaluation (M&E) Unit created in 2014 that aggregates information produced by 
the Guyana Marketing Corporation (GMC); National Agricultural Research and 
Extension Institute (NAREI), the Guyana Livestock Development Agency (GLDA), 
the Guyana Sugar Corporation (GUYSUCO) and the Guyana Rice Development 
Board (GRDB), among others. An assessment carried out by the FAO in 2015 
showed that nine agencies of the MoA collect statistical data, but standards and 
consistency are lacking (see Optional Link 2). The last national agricultural census 
was implemented in 1952 and there is scant information on the current 
configuration of farmers, farming systems and cost structures across the country. 
Regional and national development plans are based on population censuses, with 
little or anecdotal information about production activities or productivity. The 
evidence and historical experience is clear and unambiguous: strategic 
investments in agricultural sector information increase productivity (Alston, 2010) 
and private sector investment (Fuglie, 2016). 

1.8 Limitations of the AIS. Because data from non-traditional crops are collected on 
an ad hoc basis, farmer characteristics, particularly in the hinterlands, are not well 
known and therefore provide little input into the preparation of regional 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40663628/R


- 4 - 

 

development plans and policies. Land use and pressure on the environment can 
currently only be assessed on an anecdotal basis. Furthermore, as the 
assessment of the agricultural information system of the MoA shows, data 
collection, processing, and reporting protocols and standards need to be 
established and staff trained as a prerequisite to improving the AIS (see Optional 
Link 2). Lack of quality data present problems for suppliers, by also for users, like 
the Government, private investors and development agencies. Fundamentally, a 
comprehensive census is needed to provide the necessary basis for data-driven, 
evidence-based policy and decision making, robust survey design for commodity 
and sector specific analysis; and an accurate portrayal of agriculture’s contribution 
to economic growth. In the absence of this information, both the public and private 
sectors develop their policies and investments in an environment of high 
uncertainty and risk; they face higher costs as a result, and; their probabilities of 
success are much lower than in environments where information is available and 
credible. 

1.9 Research, innovation and technology transfer. NAREI, established in 2011, is 
the leading research and extension agency in Guyana. NAREI has 30 researchers 
(three PhD and four MSc) and 20 experiments under implementation, but no 
research programs. NAREI has released at least 10 new varieties of                 
non-traditional crops and five new technologies in the last five years, but adoption 
is difficult to assess or quality of the genetic material. NAREI has a budget of   
US$4 million annually. Also, GUYSUCO and GRDB have their own research 
facilities and personnel to develop technologies for the sugar and rice industries. 
Together they invest approximately US$0.5 million annually in research and 
innovation. NAREI and GLDA only have 35 technical staff dedicated to extension 
and technology transfer, which given the number of farmers in Guyana, this is well 
below international best practices (FAO, 2008). Medium and large sugar and rice 
farmers are the ones benefiting most from current investment in research and 
innovation.  

1.10 Analysis at the regional (Avila et. al, 2010) and global level (Heisey, 2001) show 
that a higher proportion of research, innovation and technology transfer of the 
agricultural GDP is correlated with higher productivity and incomes. On average, 
for LAC, an increase in 10% in public expenditure in public services (including 
research, innovation and technology transfer) results in a 5% increase in the 
agricultural sector value added per capita (Foster, et. al. 2016). However, the total 
research budget of Guyana represented just 0.86% of the agricultural GDP in 
2014, which is below the average of 1.15% observed for LAC and the Anglophone 
Caribbean (Stads, et. al., 2016). Based on a systematic review, Waddington et. al. 
(2014) reported that access to extension and innovation increases revenues and 
use of sustainable practices, by 25% and 60% respectively. Moreover, a World 
Bank study (2011) of 86 impact evaluations (15 in LAC), found strong effects of 
research and extension on yields, income and productivity. An increase in 
productivity may result in less area used for pastures, reducing pressure on forest 
and ecosystems. Furthermore a survey conducted during the preparation of this 
loan showed that only 3% of farmers reported having received some kind of 
technical assistance; only 8% have access to credit and do not have access to 
public infrastructure. IFPRI (2009) reports a likely 25% fall in yields for an average 
of three global models for Guyana. Experience in LAC (Salazar, 2015; Mullally and 
Maffioli, 2014) show that a combination of technical assistance with incentives for 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40663628/R
pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40663628/R
http://www.fao.org/nr/gen/gen_081001_en.htm


- 5 - 

 

adoption of new technologies have a positive effect on productivity and incomes, 
especially for small farmers.  

1.11 Limitations of the research, innovation and extension services in Guyana. 
Guyana lacks the necessary infrastructure and research programs to promote 
agricultural production, especially for non–traditional crops. Furthermore, although 
NAREI and GLDA have access to research stations, the scientific rigor of research 
program design and implementation is unlikely to generate substantive gains (see 
Optional Link 3). Limitations to collaborate with international research programs 
and institutions need to be resolved to access genetic material and reduce costs of 
validation and technology transfer in Guyana. In addition, little agricultural research 
and extension has been carried out in the ecologically (and socially) distinct 
savannahs of Regions 9 and 10 and thus knowledge of appropriate technologies is 
similarly lacking. High transaction costs, associated with the lack of research and 
innovation and the size of the market, limit the exposure of small famers in the 
target area to new technologies (Agriculture SFD). Increased attention is needed 
toward the identification and adoption of sustainable and climate resilient practices 
which protect fragile ecosystems and watersheds (including pasture/crop rotation, 
fertilizer use, and improved water storage and management), and reduce the risks 
of losses and food insecurity. 

1.12 Animal Health and Sanitary and Phytosanitary framework. GLDA was 
established in 2010. Its main objective is to provide services and research for the 
livestock industry. The GLDA is a semi-autonomous organization of the MoA and 
has offices in all regions, except Regions 1 and 8. GLDA staff is comprised of 148 
people and provides inspection and technical assistance services. GLDA also has 
eight authorizing officers that enforce the Animal Health Act in the country; the 
Veterinarian Act; and the Guyana Livestock Development Authority Act. Although 
the Animal Health Act was approved in 2011, regulations are still pending.  

1.13 Guyana has 10 registered abattoirs all of which are in poor condition and do not 
comply with current standards (see Optional Link 5). The Georgetown abattoir is 
the main abattoir and slaughters approximately 60% of all animals slaughtered in 
Guyana. Small producers in Region 9 process 35 animals per month, out of a 
current potential of 100. Overall, opportunities for the export of meat from Guyana 
are severely constrained by lack of infrastructure, adequate regulations, trained 
inspectors and supporting policies. Noncompliance increases risks of animal 
diseases (like foot and mouth) and compromises human health and environmental 
quality. OVE (2015) reports that investments in sanitary and phytosanitary 
activities increased competitiveness and productivity in the countries analyzed. 
Better access to infrastructure and technical assistance will increase productivity 
and prices for small producers, through higher quality and better prices (Agriculture 
SFD, 2016).  

1.14 Problems with meat processing and SPS standards. Current standards in 
Guyana compromise human health and environmental quality, as well as access to 
revenue from export markets. Meat inspections are carried out under the authority 
of the Public Health Ordinance of 1915 with updates circa 1977, as well as 
sections of the Food and Drug Act of 1972, also updated in 1977. Waste disposal 
is also under the Public Health Ordinance and the Environmental Protection Act, 
1996, that created the Environmental Protection Agency. Regulations of this act 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40663634/R
pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40589854/R


- 6 - 

 

are not available. Standards for abattoirs, are based on standards from India 
dating from 1979, and are outdated. A comprehensive analysis of the costs of 
complying with local and international standards is not available in Guyana. 
Practical implementation of standards and regulations is not readily available to the 
private sector to evaluate the feasibility of medium and large investments. There 
are important public goods associated with SPS standards, but small farmers also 
lack access to capital and knowledge to improve practices (Agriculture SFD). 
Access to processing facilities will generate incentives for higher productivity and 
quality, as demonstrated by Ding (2014). 

1.15 Bank interventions and other investments. The Bank has supported the country 
in the modernization of the agricultural sector since 2004 through operations 
1558/SF-GY and 1929/BL-GY. Also, operations 3106/BL-GY and 3422/BL-GY 
helped the Government to implement a Low Carbon Development Strategy, which 
included support for the agricultural sector. These two operations helped the 
Government of Guyana (GoG) to comply with agreements with the Government of 
Norway that aim to reduce the deforestation below 0.56% annually. 1558/SF-GY 
improved the competitiveness of the agricultural sector through investment in 
drainage and irrigation systems and 1929/BL-GY focused on non-traditional 
agricultural export like aquaculture, fruits, vegetables and livestock. It also 
facilitated the creation and startup of NAREI and GLDA. The MIF approved three 
projects for the agriculture sector (ATN/ME-12052-GY, ATN/ME-11699-GY and 
GY-L1062) and Compete Caribbean has financed two projects. The International 
Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) is preparing a new investment loan for 
up to US$9 million that will target Region 9 and Region 1. Also the European 
Union is financing a US$9 million project to facilitate the diversification of the sugar 
sector and the GRIFF is financing the land titling program in the hinterlands.  

1.16 Additionally, the Ministry of Business, with support from the Bank is preparing loan 
GY-L1059 (Enhancing the National Quality Infrastructure for Economic 
Diversification and Trade Promotion). Laboratories to be implemented with        
GY-L1059 funding will support a national system, for calibration and standards. 
Laboratories planned for Region 9 and Region 10 financed by the Program will be 
small facilities for soil analysis to support, mainly, research activities. However, 
investments in national standards and metrology supported by GY-L1059 will 
facilitate the implementation of Component 3 of this Program.  

1.17 Lessons learned. The proposed operation draws lessons from the final evaluation 
of loans 1929/BL-GY, 3106/BL-GY and 3422/BL-GY, and lessons from IFAD’s 
project 742-GY final evaluation – draft (see Table I-1). 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



- 7 - 

 

Table I-1. Lessons learned from projects implemented by the Bank and IFAD 

Lessons learned How it was addressed in the design 

Legal framework and regulations take 
time to be reviewed and agreed 

The Program will facilitate the update and drafting of legislation 
and regulations focusing on meat processing (¶1.26). 
Documents to be updated have been identified and activities 
financed by the Program will target specific parts of the 
legislation to facilitate the implementation of pilot facilities 
(¶1.26).  

Support to farmers and producers 
associations are part of the social 
capital needed for success 

Producers associations will manage pilot facilities. Two 
producers associations have been identified and strengthening of 
their administrative, institutional and technical capacities will be 
implemented before the infrastructure is delivered (¶3.7).  

Infrastructure is a basic input, but 
needs to be accompanied with training, 
management and maintenance 
provisions 

The Program will finance training and startup operations of 
agriculture centers and pilot facilities (¶1.24 and ¶1.26). 
Research programs have been prepared in collaboration with 
NAREI and GLDA (¶1.24) and will include collaboration with 
international research institutions.  

Enforcement of environment 
management and mitigation measures 
has to be included in the design 

To ensure compliance with local legislation and Bank’s policies, 
the Program will finance the monitoring and supervision of 
environmental impact evaluations (¶1.24). The Program will also 
include training for MoA staff to facilitate the preparation of ToR, 
bidding documents and supervision as it related to environmental 
management. 

Baseline and monitoring need to start 
implementation before the project is 
approved 

During the preparation of the Program, a survey was 
implemented in Regions 5, 9 and 10. This baseline provided 
valuable information to prepare the impact evaluation and 
economic analysis (¶1.21).  

1.18 Conceptualization. This Program will contribute to the MoA strategy for the 
development of Guyana’s agricultural sector. Most agriculture is concentrated in 
the coast, facing climate change risks and reduced availability of water and 
suitable land. The MoA wants to increase production in the hinterlands (Regions 
10 and 9) where natural resources are available. By generating the necessary 
capacity for data collection and analysis, the MoA will be in the position to propose 
policy and investments that generate the highest return for the country, in line with 
the National Strategy for Agriculture (2013 – 2020). This document includes 
objectives for the collection and analysis of statistical information. Preparation of 
agricultural policies and regional plans will benefit from better information. Better 
information will reduce uncertainty and risk in both public and private investments 
of all scales, and will result in higher production and incomes. Productivity gains 
will be achieved through scientifically rigorous research program design and 
implementation, and an expansion of Guyana’s capacity to transfer these 
technologies to farmers. Farmers will have access to genetic material, practices 
and technologies not currently available, which will increase yields, production, 
incomes and food security. Improved agriculture and livestock technology will 
reduce pressure on fragile ecosystem and facilitate adaptation to climate change if 
sufficient guidance and adequate support is provided. Guyana’s ability to produce 
livestock safe for domestic and export consumption will be enhanced, spurring 
investment and growth. Public goods supported by the Program (¶1.8, ¶1.11 and 
¶1.14) will be enhanced with incentives for technology adoption (¶1.25) and 
access to infrastructure to add value to production (¶1.26) that address the costs 
and access to knowledge in Regions 9 and 10.  

1.19 Gender and diversity inclusion strategy. Twenty-eight percent of households in 
the target area are headed by women. Only 1.9% of women head of households in 



- 8 - 

 

Regions 5, 9 and 10 reported access to technical assistance and a very low use of 
sustainable agricultural practices (23%). Extension services will be implemented at 
the community level and will include strategies to promote the participation of 
women (for example providing childcare and food for the participants). Members of 
livestock producers associations are more than 50% women and will receive 
training and technical assistance. The agriculture census will assess the 
involvement of women and other vulnerable groups in agriculture. Because a large 
share of households in Region 9 is comprised of Amerindian communities, a 
specific strategy for technology transfer has been prepared for this region.   

1.20 Strategic alignment. This operation is consistent with the IDB Country Strategy 
with Guyana (GN-2690) through the priority area “Natural resources management” 
and cross-cutting issues related to indigenous population in Guyana. The Program 
is consistent with the Update to the Institutional Strategy (UIS) 2010-2020         
(AB-3008) and is strategically aligned with the development challenge of 
productivity and innovation by increasing productivity of farmers in Guyana (impact 
indicators). The Program is also aligned with the cross-cutting themes of:              
(i) climate change and environmental sustainability by reducing the pasture area 
allocated to livestock production; and (ii) institutional capacity and rule of law by 
the improvement of SPS regulations. The Program also contributes to gender 
equality and diversity by increasing the participation of women in agricultural 
technical assistance. Additionally, the Program will contribute to the Corporate 
Results Framework (CRF) 2016-2019 (GN-2727-6) by increasing the number of 
farmers that improve the use and management of natural capital. This operation is 
also consistent with: (i) the Food Security SFD (GN-2825-3), contributing to two 
sources of food security: (a) access, and (b) availability; (ii) the Agriculture and 
Natural Resources SFD (GN-2709-5); and (iii) Gender and Diversity SFD         
(GN-2800), promoting livelihood opportunities for indigenous peoples.  

B. Objective, Components and Cost 

1.21 The main objective of the Program is to increase productivity of the agricultural 
sector while maintaining a sustainable and climate resilient use of natural 
resources in Guyana. The specific objectives are to: (i) produce high quality data 
for the agricultural sector; (ii) increase productivity, especially for medium and 
small farmers; and (iii) increase SPS standards and access to meat processing 
facilities. Higher productivity will also contribute to reduce pressure on forest and 
fragile ecosystems, and at the same time, increase incomes for small and  
medium-sized farmers. 

1.22 Target population. The main beneficiaries of the Program will be farmers of 
Regions 5, 9 and 10 and the MoA and its agencies (see Optional Link 9). The 
Population Census 2012 identifies 29,457 households in these regions (13,847 in 
Region 5, 4,929 in region 9, 10,681 in Region 10), of which 35% are farmers 
according to the 2002 estimation provided by the Guyana Bureau of Statistics 
(GBS). A survey prepared for the design of this operation shows that farmers in 
these regions are small on average. The Program will target 5,000 farmers in 
these three regions (out of a total of 10,310), 89% of them, cultivating less than 
five Ha. The main annual crops are cassava, beans and corn. Average annual 
household income for these farmers is US$4,649, with agriculture, livestock and 
forestry production accounting for more than 25% (up to 50% in Region 9). 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40588061/R


- 9 - 

 

Agricultural productivity is low, averaging 260 USD/Ha/year (and only 200 
USD/Ha/year in Region 9), compared to other countries of similar development. 
Only 3.6% of interviewed farmers report technical assistance and 8% have access 
to finance or equipment for agricultural production. Forty-eight percent report to be 
part of Amerindian communities (93% in Region 9) and have some productive 
activities at the community level.   

1.23 Component 1: Information for policy making and natural resource 
management (US$4.17 million). This component will enhance the capabilities of 
the MoA for data collection, analysis and dissemination. Data collected will be 
based on a nationwide agricultural census. This new information will be used not 
only by the Government, but also by the private sector to develop investments in 
agriculture, in line with the Green Development Strategy.

2
 Land use plans and 

promotion of sustainable practices will draw from the results of the census. The 
census will also contribute to monitoring of other variables, for example Monitoring, 
Reporting and Verification (MRV) related to the Guyana REDD+ Investment Fund 
(GRIF). The MoA through the M&E Unit will produce reports based on the census 
and data collected with support of the Program. The Program will finance:            
(i) strengthening of the MoA’s Agricultural Information System. This will include 
strengthening of the MoA’s M&E Unit; update of regulations and legal framework, 
training of MoA and the Guyana Bureau of Statistics staff, purchase of equipment 
and software, and dissemination; and (ii) the implementation of a national 
agricultural census. The agricultural census will collect data from all regions of 
Guyana and will use the latest technology for collection, analysis and quality 
control. Among other topics, the census will assess the involvement of women and 
vulnerable groups in the agricultural sector. Field activities will include training, 
pilot testing and a communication strategy. The implementation of the census will 
require the training of more than 600 enumerators and interviewing more than 
120,000 households.  

1.24 Component 2: Strengthening the agricultural innovation and extension 
system (US$6.39 million). This component will finance the implementation of 
research programs in Region 9 and Region 10, including the setup of an extension 
strategy tailored to the different groups of beneficiaries. Adoption of sustainable 
practices will be promoted through an incentives scheme targeting small farmers / 
communities. The main activities to be financed are: (i) the design and construction 
of an agricultural center in Region 9. This agriculture center will house research 
programs to be implemented by NAREI, GLDA and the Hydrometeorological 
Service. The agriculture center will also have facilities for the Guyana School of 
Agriculture (GSA) and the National Drainage and Irrigation Authority (NDIA);       
(ii) design and construction of a water reservoir for the agricultural center in Region 
9. This reservoir will harvest rainfall that will facilitate irrigation and livestock 
research in the agriculture center in Region 9; (iii) design and upgrade of facilities 
in Region 10 to implement a fully functional agricultural center in Ebini;                 
(iv) implementation of soil laboratories in both Region 9 and Region 10 for 
research purposes. These laboratories will facilitate the preparation of fertility 
maps for Region 9 and Region 10 and support extension services;                       
(v) implementation of research programs in each agricultural center. During 

                                                 
2
  Guyana’s Green Development Strategy is the strategy being developed by the current Government. It has 

four pillars: energy, environment security, ecological services and enterprise and employment.  



- 10 - 

 

preparation of the loan the following crops/areas of research were identified, 
among others: cassava, peanuts; orchards, livestock (cattle and small ruminants); 
and pastures. The POM will describe eligibility criteria to include other crops/areas 
of research in the Program. The design of these research programs, include the 
financing for visiting researchers; inputs for agricultural research; equipment and 
training for NAREI and GLDA staff; (vi) preparation and implementation of an 
extension strategy that will include incentives for technology adoption for small 
farmers. This strategy will include specific activities to include women in training 
events. Extension will be based on individual visits and group activities, centered in 
demonstration plots; and (vii) support to the EPA for environmental monitoring.  
The MoA has already requested the lease of land for the agriculture center in 
Region 9 to the GL&SC, which indicated that it is available.  

1.25 This component will also finance incentives targeting individual small farmers, and 
will be complementary to investments being prepared with IFAD funding. The IFAD 
funded project will provide support at the group (producer association or 
cooperative) and individual levels. Incentives will facilitate technology adoption and 
enhance the probability of increases in productivity. Farmers / communities will 
receive an incentive for at least 50% of the cost of the technology package 
financed by the Program. The POM will detail the process to identify and 
implement the incentives strategy (see ¶3.6).  

1.26 Component 3: Support for compliance with sanitary and phytosanitary 
standards (US$2.8 million). This component will finance the provision of technical 
assistance to develop the legal and regulatory framework and specific investments 
to improve SPS standards for meat processing. These investments will increase 
the volume of meat processed in accord to sanitary standards and lead to the 
attainment of better prices. The validation of the enforcement process and control 
will improve the safety of meat products for Guyanese and visitors and in the 
longer term, position the Food Safety System to be recognized by international 
trading partners and open the opportunity for export of meat products. The 
Program will finance the: (i) development and implementation of a simplified 
grading system for beef; (ii) update of abattoir standards and preparation of legal 
framework; (iii) technical assistance for the adaptation of the International Codex 
Alimentarius to the Guyana context; (iv) provision of support to GLDA to enforce 
standards; (v) technical assistance for the preparation of regulations pertaining to 
the new Food Safety Act; (vi) financing of two meat processing centers (one in 
Region 9 and one in Region 5), that will include infrastructure for processing, 
waste management, and equipment. These facilities will be managed by producers 
associations, which are 50% women (¶3.7). The Rupununi Livestock Producers 
Association (RLPA) and the Weste Berbice Sheep and Goat Association (WBSGA) 
have been identified to manage these facilities. Processing facilities will include all 
environmental mitigation activities described in the ESMR; (vii) training of GLDA 
staff in meat inspection, effective enforcement and audit; and members of selected 
producers associations members in management; standards; best practices; and 
environment protection; and (viii) strengthening of producers associations to 
enhance management. 



- 11 - 

 

C. Key Results Indicators 

1.27 The MoA and the Bank have agreed on a Results Matrix for the Program. The 
principal results of the Program are: (i) higher private investment in the agricultural 
sector; (ii) regional development plans prepared based on the agricultural census; 
(iii) higher productivity at the farm level; (iv) adoption of sustainable agricultural 
practices; (v) higher value of products processed by pilot facilities; and                
(vi) increase in the use of practices that reduce pressure on ecosystems. At the 
end of the Program, productivity (measured as the gross value of production per 
hectare per year) will increase and pressure on fragile ecosystems will be reduced 
(see Annex 2).   

Table I-2. Principal indicators of the Program 

Impact indicators 
Proposed 

measurement 
Justification 

Gross value of farm’s agricultural 
production (increase expected) 

US$ per farm 
per year 

Higher gross value reflects higher productivity 
and lead to higher incomes 

Gross value of farm’s livestock 
production (increase expected) 

US$ per farm 
per year 

Higher gross value reflects higher productivity 
and lead to higher incomes 

Reduction of the area allocated to 
pastures for livestock production 

Area (hectares) Higher efficiency in land use reduces pressure 
on ecosystems and increases sustainability 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS 

A. Financing Instruments 

2.1 The total Program amount is estimated at US$15,000,000 of which US$7,500,000 
will be financed by Ordinary Capital and US$7,500,000 will be financed by the 
FSO. The disbursement period will be 66 months. Table II-1 provides the cost 
summary by investment categories and components. The budget includes all costs 
associated with risks mitigation measures identified in the ESMP and the risk 
analysis. 

Table II-1. Costs and sources of financing (US$) 

 IDB Total % 

Component 1 4,170,000 4,170,000 27.8% 

Component 2 6,398,000 6,398,000 42.7% 

Component 3 2,800,000 2,800,000 18.7% 

Monitoring and Evaluation 400,000 400,000 2.7% 

Program Administration 1,232,000 1,232,000 8.2% 

Total 15,000,000 15,000,000 100% 

2.2 The Program is a specific investment operation and it is designed to be disbursed 
in five years and six months. The disbursement calendar is presented in Table II-2 
and it is based on the PEP (see Required Link 1).  

Table II-2. Disbursement projections (US$) 

 Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Year 6
1
 Total 

IDB 1,326,935 3,633,645 5,218,345 3,163,525 1,111,475 546,075 15,000,000 

% 8.8% 24.2% 34.8% 21.1% 7.4% 3.6% 100% 

Total 1,326,935 3,633,645 5,218,345 3,163,525 1,111,475 546,075 15,000,000 
1 

Last year of implementation is only six months. 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40647380/R
pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40564707/R


- 12 - 

 

B. Economic viability 

2.3 The ex-ante economic evaluation includes all components of the Program, 
following the vertical logic (see ¶1.18). The analysis was undertaken in two stages 
and follows best practices (World Bank, 2011). In the first stage, a break-even 
analysis was conducted in an optimization and cost benefit analytical framework to 
estimate the minimum net economic return per adopting farming household 
required for the net present value (NPV) of the Program to be equal to zero at a 
12% discount rate (2017 to 2040). Costs follow directly from the PEP and include: 
Program costs estimated in the design stage, and operations and maintenance 
costs of the agricultural research centers and processing facilities. Costs also 
include opportunity costs of training for farmers. Key assumptions in the analysis 
are: the technological adoption ceiling, assumed to be 20% of the 5,000 targeted 
farming household beneficiaries, and the adoption path which is assumed to follow 
a logistical functional form. The minimum return per adopting household for the 
Program to be economically viable is US$2,196 per household/year.   

2.4 The second stage of the analysis characterized the current farming System 1 
based on the farming household survey described in Optional Link 11. Key 
variables include area planted, harvest output, prices, yields and costs. System 2 
is the potential farming system that the Program aims to achieve. The crops bora 
bean and cassava, as well as livestock were chosen to characterize System 2, 
based on Program design. Yields to characterize System 2 crops were extracted 
from statistics on actual national average yields supplied by NAREI and the 
Ministry of Agriculture (2014), while beef cattle yields were drawn from FAO 
(2013). 

2.5 Yields reported in the household farm survey are considerably lower than those 
reported by NAREI and FAO and therefore a conservative approach to scenario 
design was pursued. Three scenarios are evaluated: an average scenario where 
achieved yields are 35% of those reported by NAREI and FAO; an optimistic 
scenario where 50% of potential yields are achieved, and; a pessimistic scenario 
where only 25% of potential yields are achieved. Across scenarios, a low adoption 
ceiling of 20% of potential new beneficiaries and current farmers is used. The 
average scenario results in a net present value (NPV) US$1,531,706 and an 
internal rate of return (IRR) of 14%; the optimistic scenario generates a NPV of 
US$17,762,431 and an Internal Rate of Return (IRR) of 31%, and the pessimistic 
scenario resulted in a negative NPV of US$8,243,387. Sensitivity analysis around 
the adoption ceiling shows that the Program breaks even when the adoption 
ceiling is 16.25% or greater, which is considered low in comparison to similar 
investments in agricultural research, extension and information.    

C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Risks 

2.6 The Program is classified as Category “B” pursuant to the Bank's Environment and 
Safeguards Compliance Policy (OP-703) and an Environmental and Social 
Analysis (ESA) was conducted which incorporated inputs from consultations with 
stakeholders, via meetings and a public consultation. The main direct impacts of 
the project relate to inadequate siting, design and operation of the facilities, 
especially animal welfare and waste management from the abattoirs and the high 
water use for both the abattoir and research station. Additionally, given the 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40588061


- 13 - 

 

sensitive nature of the ecosystem (especially in Region 9) and the emphasis on 
sustainable agriculture there is a need to ensure that training and research does 
not lead to unsustainable agricultural development in the region. These programs 
must not lead to the introduction of invasive species, the excessive use of 
pesticides and herbicides or high water demands. These measures help reduce 
the Program’s indirect impacts.  

2.7 Based on the ESA, specific management actions and mitigation measures were 
recommended to address the Program’s direct and indirect impacts. The measures 
are incorporated into the procedures and requirements for execution as part of the 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP). The main mitigation 
measures identified in the Plan include effective measures for site selection, 
design and construction to high standards for all new infrastructures, ensuring 
capacity for the supervision of construction and operation, and ensuring training 
courses are inclusive of indigenous groups and women, and do not result in the 
introduction of invasive species. The Environmental and Social Management 
Report (ESMR) provides a summary of the ESA and ESMP in relation to Bank 
policies.  

2.8 The ESMP describes how the Program complies with the Disaster Risk 
Management Policy (OP-704), the policies on Indigenous Peoples (OP-765) and 
on Gender and Equality (OP-761).

3
 The Program will promote risk reduction, 

climate change adaptation and the building of resilience to natural disasters and 
climate change. The Program also promotes opportunities and empowerment for 
low income women and indigenous peoples participating in agricultural activities. 

D. Fiduciary Risk 

2.9 The Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) has the lead responsibility for reporting on 
fiduciary matters and overall Program progress to the Ministry of Finance and the 
IDB. Based on discussions with the MoA during Program preparation, the 
Agricultural Service Development Unit (ASDU) will serve as the project 
implementation unit. As described in Annex III to the present POD, the fiduciary 
risk has been ranked as medium. The main fiduciary risks relate to:                        
(i) procurement processing delays due duplication of efforts to meet internal 
controls requirements for multiple approvals within the MoA and at the national 
level as per GoG national procurement regulations; (ii) most activities will be 
implemented in Region 9 and 10, which will require a high level of coordination;  
and (iii) budget and institutional capacity constraints due to ability to retain qualified 
technical  consultants (e.g., engineers, contractors) to provide technical assistance 
on some procurements.  

2.10 These are being addressed through: (i) the design of an Program Operating 
Manual (POM) which seeks to provide adequate guidance and mitigation 
measures to discharge all fiduciary duties in accordance with the Bank’s rules and 
procedures; (ii) continuous support to streamline the timely execution of all 
fiduciary activities; and (iii) providing continuous technical supervision and training 

                                                 
3
  Section 6 of the ESMP describes in detail expected impacts and proposed mitigating activities. Section 7 

describes the management plan for all mitigating activities.  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40664054
pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40564651/R


- 14 - 

 

in financial management and procurement staff who will be responsible for 
fiduciary activities under the present Loan. 

E. Other Risks 

2.11 The design of the Program used the methodology “Program Risk Analysis for 
Sovereign Guaranteed Loans”. Besides environmental and fiduciary risks, this 
analysis identified the following risks: (i) coordination between agencies (a national 
and regional coordinating committees will support the MoA, ¶3.3); and (ii) delays in 
the design, environmental and social impact evaluation and procurement of 
infrastructure (two procurement specialists will support the ASDU in the 
implementation, ¶2.6).  

2.12 Agriculture centers in Regions 9 and 10 will be managed, maintained and 
supported by the MoA. Specific budget lines are available in NAREI and GLDA 
budgets.  

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN 

A. Summary of Implementation Arrangements 

3.1 The Borrower is the Co-operative Republic of Guyana. The executing agency is 
the MoA, which will implement the Program through its ASDU. The ASDU is a 
specialized unit under the Permanent Secretary (PS) of the MoA. The ASDU will 
be responsible for all the fiduciary obligations to manage the Program, including:  
(i) planning of the technical and fiduciary aspects related to the Program activities; 
(ii) procurement of goods, works and services for the Program; (iii) the oversight 
and evaluation of Program activities; (iv) financial and accounting management of 
the Program, including the submission of disbursement requests and preparation 
of financial reports; and (v) risk management. The Program will strengthen the 
ASDU to facilitate the implementation of the Program, through the financing of 
specialized personnel dedicated to the Program, including among others; program 
coordinator; procurement officer; financial officer; civil engineer; and administrative 
assistant. The presentation of evidence that the Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) 
has selected a program coordinator, a financial officer and a procurement 
officer according to the terms and conditions previously agreed with the 
Bank will be a special contractual condition prior to first disbursement of the 
financing.  

3.2 Support to partner agencies. Additionally, the Program aims at strengthening the 
capacity of GBS and EPA, through the financing of consulting services to support 
supervision and monitoring. For this purpose, the MoA will subscribe an agreement 
with each GBS and EPA, which shall include, inter alia, a description of the roles 
and responsibilities of each entity in the implementation of the Program activities. 
The subscription and entry into effect of an agreement between the MoA and the 
GBS, according to the terms and conditions previously agreed with the Bank will 
be a special contractual condition prior to the implementation of the agricultural 
census included in Component 1. The subscription and entry into effect of an 
agreement between the MoA and the EPA, according to the terms conditions 



- 15 - 

 

previously agreed with the Bank will be a special contractual condition prior to the 
bidding of infrastructure works under Components 2 and 3. 

3.3 Institutional coordination. Coordination at the national level will use the same 
structure proposed by the IFAD funded loan. A National Steering Committee 
(NSC) will be established, and it will include: (i) the MoA; (ii) the Ministry of 
Indigenous People’s Affairs; (iii) Ministry of Public Health; (iv) Ministry of Business;        
(v) Ministry of Natural Resources (MNR); (vi) the Office of Climate Change at the 
Ministry of the Presidency; and (vii) the Ministry of Finance. The responsibilities 
and composition of the NSC will be detailed in the POM, but it will include:             
(i) support the implementation of loan; (ii) provide institutional and technical advice 
and support; and (iii) coordinate field activities. At the regional level, technical 
coordination will be implemented through the establishment of a Regional 
Management Committee (RMC). This RMC will include: (i) Regional Chairman;    
(ii) Regional representative of the Ministry of Indigenous People’s Affairs;            
(iii) Regional representative of the MNRE; (iv) Regional representative of each 
NAREI or GLDA; and (v) a regional representative of the beneficiaries. The roles 
and responsibilities of each of the members of the RMC, composition and its 
functions will be detailed in the POM, which will include: (i) support the 
implementation of the Program at the Regional level; (ii) support the ASDU in the 
implementation of the AOP; (iii) provide guidance to the AOP; and (iv) collaborate 
in coordinating with local and community leaders. 

3.4 Program Operating Manual (POM). The POM; which establishes standards and 
procedures for the MoA with regard to programming activities, procurement audits, 
and monitoring and evaluation, among others, will govern Program execution. The 
POM will include: (i) a detailed description of the implementation agreement of 
each component; (ii) roles and responsibilities of the agencies involved in the 
implementation of the Program; (iii) criteria and procedures to select and contract 
goods, services and works; (iv) criteria and procedures for management and 
financial control of the Program; (v) monitoring and evaluation arrangements; and 
(vi) specific criteria for environmental and social management of the Program, as 
described in the ESMR. The approval and entry into effect of the POM 
according to the terms and conditions previously agreed with the Bank will 
be a special contractual condition prior to first disbursement of the 
financing. 

3.5 Incentives for technology adoption. Research programs under Component 3 
will generate technology packages to be transferred to farmers. To increase the 
likelihood of adoption, the Program will finance incentives to adopt new 
technologies targeting small farmers. The eligibility criteria will be: (i) area under 
production / fallow; (ii) agriculture / forestry is the main source of income;            
(iii) farmer have farms located in Region 5, 9 or 10; and (iv) evidence that the 
farmer has the property rights, possession, community rights or rights of use of the 
land, as applicable. 

3.6 The steps to identify and select participants in the incentives program are detailed 
in the POM, and will be: 



- 16 - 

 

a. Farmers will be selected from the lists prepared by the MoA during the 
promotion of the Program. The target number of beneficiaries for the 
incentives is 2,000.   

b. Farmers will be selected from a random sample of communities. As a part of 
the registration process, each farmer will sign an implementation agreement 
with the MoA. However, during the preparation of the loan, a progression of 
500, 700, 800 farmers per year was suggested (see Optional Link 8 and 12).  

c. Farmers will select the technologies they want to implement from the 
packages offered by the MoA. Each package will include: (i) inputs; (ii) land 
preparation; (iii) equipment; and (iv) technical assistance. Packages will be 
designed for a specific unit of production. 

d. Each farmer will receive the incentive in designated bank accounts or 
through vouchers, based on verification of the implementation of the 
technologies, according to the conditions established in the POM. Vouchers 
will be redeemed by service providers after verification from the MoA. The 
MoA will verify the implementation of the technology in the field and prepare 
a report.  

e. Additionally, an external verification process will be implemented. This 
verification process will review, at random, the implementation of 
technologies; support provided by the MoA; and financial flows. 

3.7 Management of meat processing facilities. The implementation of the meat 
processing facilities under Component 3 requires the strengthening of the 
producers associations, which will manage these facilities. The associations will 
sign an agreement with the MoA to manage the facilities, that will include: (i) the 
length of the lease or other form of transfer; (ii) responsibilities of the association, 
in terms of payments or fees to be paid to the MoA, liabilities, limitations of the 
agreement in terms of responsibilities of the MoA; and penalties; and                  
(iii) monitoring and evaluation to be implemented by the MoA. The subscription 
and entry into effect of an agreement between the MoA and a producer’s 
association responsible for operating the abattoir, according to the terms and 
conditions previously agreed with the Bank will be a special contractual condition 
prior to the building of infrastructure works related to the meat processing facilities 
financed under Component 3. 

3.8 Procurement. All Program related procurement activities will be performed 
following Bank’s Procurement Policies: Policies for the Procurement of Goods and 
Works financed by the Bank (GN-2349-9) and Policies for the Selection and 
Contracting of Consultants financed by the Bank (GN-2350-9) as applicable.  

3.9 The Program is currently looking into the possibility of a Direct Contract with the 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) for a total of   
US$4 million. This Direct Contract would be based on the FAO’s experience in 
carrying out Agricultural Surveys as described in Component 1 of the present Loan 
and hence, the request for same would be grounded on Section 3.10 (d) of       
GN-2350-9, which foresees that “Single-source selection may be appropriate only 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40587606/R
pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40588248/R


- 17 - 

 

if it presents a clear advantage over competition: […] (d) when only one firm is 
qualified or has experience of exceptional worth for the assignment”

4
.  

3.10 Retroactive financing. The Bank may finance retroactively under the loan up to 
the amount US$350,000 (2.33% of the proposed loan amount), eligible expenses 
incurred by the Borrower prior to the date of loan approval to: (i) design, 
environmental and impact evaluation, and supervision of the infrastructure 
included in Components 2 and 3; (ii) contract specialized personnel of the ASDU 
dedicated to the Program; and (iii) finance the travel, per diem expenses and office 
supplies, provided that all the requirements substantially similar to those set out in 
the loan agreement requirements are adhered to. These expenses must have 
been incurred on or after June 16

th
, 2016 (PP approval date), and under no 

circumstances shall expenditures incurred more than 18 months prior to the loan 
approval date be included.  

3.11 Auditing. The Program will submit to the Bank the following documents:              
(i) semiannual financial reports of the Program are to be included in the 
semiannual progress report which will be submitted by the MoA to the Bank;         
(ii) annual financial statements of the project, audited by the Auditor General of 
Guyana are to be submitted to the Bank within 120 days at the end of each fiscal 
year, beginning with the fiscal year in which the first expenditures are incurred; and 
(iii) a final financial audit report of the Program is to be submitted by MoA within 
120 days after the date of the last disbursement. 

B. Summary of Arrangements for Monitoring Results 

3.12 Monitoring. Indicators and targets will be monitored using the Agricultural 
Information System and the Results Matrix. The M&E Unit of the MoA will collect 
the data and prepare the reports. The Program will prepare reports for the Bank 
every six months, which will be submitted no later than 45 days after the end of 
each semester. Also, the MoA will submit to the Bank an Annual Operations Plan 
(AOP) no later than 45 days prior to the beginning of each calendar year. The AOP 
will include the update of the PEP and will detail the activities and procurement 
proposed for the year. The presentation by the Borrower of an initial report, 
including, the Program’s Pluri-annual Execution Plan (PEP), the Procurement 
Plan, the Financial Plan and the Results Matrix according to the terms and 
conditions previously agreed with the Bank, will be a special contractual 
condition prior to first disbursement of the financing. 

3.13 Evaluation. Two independent evaluations will be contracted by the MoA:              
(i) mid–term evaluation, to be implemented when 50% of the resources have been 
committed or thirty months after the date of effectiveness of the loan contract, 
whichever comes first; and (ii) a final impact evaluation, to be implemented when 
90% of the resources have been committed. These reports will be contracted 
based on Terms of Reference agreed with the Bank (see Required Link 3). 

                                                 
4
  This does not constitute a request for approval/no objection to the Direct Contract. Such request will be 

processed in accordance with the applicable rules during execution. FAO is a specialized agency of the 
United Nations and has executed similar censuses around the world. It is the only agency worldwide with 
this kind of experience, except national statistic agencies.  

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40564750/R


- 18 - 

 

3.14 Impact evaluation. The impact evaluation will have two parts. First, investments in 
Component 1 and Component 2 will be evaluated through a quasi–experimental 
design. The planned evaluation intends to assess the impact of data availability 
and research and extension services and seeks to answer the question whether 
these services, provided through the agricultural census, newly constructed 
agriculture centers, improved the production, productivity, and income of 
beneficiary farmer households. In order to answer this question, the evaluation 
relies on a difference-in-difference approach paired with randomized order of 
phase-in (see Optional Link 8). Specifically, the evaluation will take advantage of 
the staggered implementation of the Program over three years by using beneficiary 
farmers in later cohorts as the control group for the early treatment group. In this 
manner, the evaluation can control for potential bias from self-selection among 
beneficiary farmers and ensure a reliable impact estimate. A carefully planned 
selection mechanism (clustered randomized assignment) at the community level 
further allows the inclusion of such farmers who live in close proximity to 
beneficiaries and may enjoy indirect spillover effects that could increase program 
impact. The evaluation will rely on three rounds of surveys: (i) a baseline survey 
administered in year one prior to the provision of extension services to the first 
cohort; (ii) the first follow-up survey administered in year two prior to the provision 
of extension services to the second cohort; and (iii) a final follow-up survey 
administered in year three prior to the provision of extension services to the third 
cohort. A final impact evaluation report will be due at the end of year six of 
Program implementation. 

3.15 The second part of the evaluation will use a before – after approach to evaluate 
the impact of investments in pilot facilities for meat processing proposed under 
Component 3.  As a key impact indicator, livestock production (volume of meat, 
number of animals) will be measured both at the farm level and at the processing 
facility level. Also, prices received by farmers will be recorded to reflect changes in 
sales due to higher quality and compliance with sanitary and phytosanitary 
standards.  

