















































PUBLIC 
SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE 

DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK  
 

 

 

 

BRAZIL 

 

 

 

PROGRAM TO MODERNIZE AND STRENGTHEN AGRICULTURAL HEALTH AND 
FOOD SAFETY SERVICES (PRODEFESA) 

(BR-L1496) 

LOAN PROPOSAL 
 
 
 

PROJECT SUMMARY 

BRAZIL 
PROGRAM TO MODERNIZE AND STRENGTHEN  

AGRICULTURAL HEALTH AND FOOD SAFETY SERVICES (PRODEFESA) 
(BR-L1496) 

 

Financial Terms and Conditions 

Borrower: Federative Republic of Brazil 
Flexible Financing Facility(a) 

Amortization period: 25 years 

Executing agency: Federative Republic of Brazil, through the 
Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Supply (MAPA) 

Disbursement period: 5 years 

Grace period: 5.5 years(b) 

Interest rate: LIBOR-based 

Source Amount (US$) % Credit fee: (c) 

IDB (Ordinary Capital)(e) 195,000,000 97.5 Inspection and supervision fee: (c) 

Local 5,000,000 2.5 Weighted average life (WAL): 15.25 years(d) 

Total 200,000,000 100.0 Approval currency: United States Dollars 

Project at a Glance 

Project objectives/description: The overall objective of the operation is to help increase agricultural productivity and improve 
access to domestic and international markets by strengthening the country’s agricultural health services. 

Special contractual conditions precedent to the first disbursement of the loan based on results (Components 1 and 2): 
(i) approval and entry into force of the program Operating Regulations, under the terms agreed with the Bank (paragraph 3.9); 
(ii) creation of the program coordinating unit (PCU) and appointment of its members (paragraph 3.4); and (iii) contracting of the 
consulting services responsible for external results verification, in accordance with the terms of reference agreed beforehand with 
the Bank (paragraph 3.6). 

Special contractual conditions precedent to the first disbursement of the technical cooperation loan (Component 3): 
(i) approval and entry into force of the program Operating Regulations, under the terms agreed with the Bank (paragraph 3.9); and 
(ii) creation of the PCU and appointment of its members (paragraph 3.4). 

Special contractual condition for execution of the technical cooperation loan (Component 3): signing and entry into force of 
the technical cooperation agreement between the MAPA and the National Council for Scientific and Technological Development 
(CNPq) to conduct research activities and award postgraduate grants (paragraph 3.12).  

Exceptions to Bank policies: None 

Strategic Alignment 

Challenges:(f) SI 
 

PI 
 

EI 
 

Crosscutting themes:(g) GD 
 

CC 
 

IC 
 

 
(a) Under the terms of the Flexible Financing Facility (FN-655-1), the borrower has the option of requesting changes to the amortization schedule as well 

as currency and interest rate conversions. The Bank will take operational and risk management considerations into account when reviewing such 
requests. 

(b) Under the flexible repayment options of the Flexible Financing Facility, changes to the grace period are permitted provided that they do not entail any 
extension of the original weighted average life of the loan or the last payment date as documented in the loan contract. 

(c) The credit fee and inspection and supervision fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors as part of its review of the Bank’s 
lending charges, in accordance with applicable policies. 

(d) The original weighted average life may be shorter, depending on the signature date of the loan contract. 

(e) The total Bank loan proceeds will be used to finance program implementation through the two investment loan instruments, namely: (i) results based 
(Components 1 and 2); and (ii) technical cooperation loan (Component 3), in accordance with this document. Component 4 will be funded by the local 
counterpart. Funding will be formalized through a single loan contract to be entered into between the borrower and the IDB, in accordance with the 
financial terms and conditions and the special contractual conditions envisaged in the project summary. 

(f) SI (Social Inclusion and Equality); PI (Productivity and Innovation); and EI (Economic Integration). 
(g) GD (Gender Equality and Diversity); CC (Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability); and IC (Institutional Capacity and Rule of Law). 

 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1211145217-31
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1211145217-31


 
 

I. DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING 

A. Background, problems to be addressed, and rationale 

1.1 The Government of Brazil has asked for support to finance a program to strengthen 
the Agricultural Health Services of the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, and 
Supply (MAPA) combining a loan based on results (LBR) and a technical 
cooperation loan.  

1.2 Sector context. Brazil’s agricultural sector is extremely important to its economy, 
representing 22% of gross domestic product (Ribeiro et al., 2015),1 44% of exports, 
and 37% of employment. According to the 2006 Agricultural Census, agricultural 
activities take place on 5 million farms covering 850 million hectares. The sector has 
grown significantly in recent decades. From 1976 to 2011 the area under cultivation, 
output, and yield of cereals and oilseeds grew by 32%, 240%, and 257%, 
respectively (Pereira et al., 2012). Output also rose in the case of sugar (369%), 
chicken (from 1 million to 13 million tons), pork (from 1 million to 2.1 million tons), 
and beef (2.1 million to 9.1 million tons). This growth has continued in recent years, 
with an annual increase in value of output of 3.8% in 2001-2014 (USDA, 2018), and 
has been associated with significant improvements in productivity. Between 1986 
and 2016, the area devoted to cereal production shrank by 10%, while output rose 
by 95% (FAOStat, 2018). Beef farming productivity reached 49 kg per hectare, 
compared with 40 kg in Uruguay, 34 kg in Argentina, and 28 kg in Paraguay. The 
Brazilian agricultural sector’s total factor productivity growth is one of the highest in 
Latin America (Nin-Pratt, A. et al., 2015). 

1.3 Trade in agricultural products has benefited from the sector’s growth. Brazil went 
from importing 30% of food consumed in the 1960s to being the world’s third largest 
exporter of agricultural produce. It is the top producer of soy, coffee, sugar, orange 
juice, chicken, and ethanol, and the second largest producer of beef, maize, 
soybean oil and soybean flour, third largest producer of cotton, and fourth largest of 
pork. Agricultural exports in 2017 came to a value of US$96 billion. Meat exports 
between 2015 and 2017 were worth US$5.9 billion a year (Brazilian Association of 
Meat Exporters (ABIEC), 2018). 

1.4 Agricultural health. Protecting animal health is a public good and is one of the main 
functions of the public bodies concerned with agriculture (OVE, 2015). Their main 
functions are: epidemiological and plant health oversight; health barrier and 
quarantine controls; and control and eradication of diseases and pests. 

1.5 Empirical evidence shows that agricultural health has significant effects on 
agricultural productivity and market access, and in the case of zoonoses, can affect 
consumers’ health (IDB, 2016). Agricultural health system failures cause enormous 
economic losses through reduced productivity caused by pests and diseases, as 
well as restrictions on market access. For example, outbreaks of foot-and-mouth 
disease (FMD) in 2001 in the United Kingdom and Uruguay caused losses of over 
US$10 billion (Bates, 2016) and US$80 million (FAO, 2002), respectively; an 
outbreak of classical swine fever (CSF) in the Netherlands in 1997 caused losses of 
US$2.3 billion (Terpstra and de Smit, 2000); the epidemic of highly pathogenic avian 
influenza (HPAI) in the United States caused losses of US$500 million in 2013 

                                                
1  See Technical References. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1211145217-27


 - 2 - 
 
 

 
(USDA, 2016). The detection of the Mediterranean fruit fly in New Zealand led to a 
two-year stop on exports of kiwifruit to China (Kiwifruitvine, 2014). The United States 
has imposed restrictions on the import of agricultural produce from countries in which 
certain pests are present (such as a ban on citrus fruit and peppers from Guyana to 
avoid introducing the carambola fruit fly (Aphis 2015 and 2018)). 

1.6 Faced with these risks, there are two main reasons for investments in agricultural 
health services: (i) maintaining and raising productivity, respectively, by avoiding 
losses caused by new diseases and pests, and reducing the impact of existing ones; 
and (ii) facilitating foreign trade by complying with health and safety standards that 
enable access to external markets, which often offer higher prices than domestic 
markets.  

1.7 Although investments in agricultural health services do not entirely eliminate the risk 
of impacts on output from disease and pests, they are highly cost-effective. An 
evaluation by OVE (2015) of six agricultural health projects shows that disease 
control and eradication campaigns by agricultural health organizations were 
successful at reducing the impacts of disease and pests on output. Peru’s fruit-fly 
eradication program increased fruit production by 65% (Salazar et al., 2016). In 
1995, the USDA estimated the net benefit of controlling the carambola fruit fly in 
South America at US$800 million. 

1.8 International evidence also shows benefits for trade. In Uruguay, obtaining FMD-free 
status without vaccination in 1996 increased the value of meat exports to the 
United States by more than 50% and saved US$8 million a year in vaccines (Knight-
Jones and Rushton, 2013; Otte et al., 2004). On losing this status in 2001, exports 
fell by 40% from 2000 levels (Ilundain et al., 2004). The price of beef exports from 
FMD-free countries is 93% higher than those from countries affected by the disease 
(ICA and CID, 2008). 

1.9 Agricultural health in Brazil. The agricultural health situation in Brazil has made 
significant progress over the last decade, opening up access to new international 
markets, particularly for meat and fruit. For example, the World Organisation for 
Animal Health (OIE) declared Brazil FMD-free (with and without vaccination) in 
2018. However, the size of the country, its diversity of ecosystems, and the length 
of its land borders (17,000 kilometers) with ten countries, and the scale of its 
agricultural trade, result in major health risks and challenges. The emergence of 
outbreaks of diseases such as FMD or the spread of pests such as fruit flies to other 
regions could have immediate impacts on costs, exports, and jobs. For example, the 
appearance of FMD in the State of Mato Grosso do Sul in 2005 resulted in the death 
of 78,000 head of cattle, a 15% drop in meat prices, closure of access to markets in 
over 30 countries, and a 40% reduction in exports. Between 2012 and 2013 the 
appearance in Mato Grosso and Bahía of Helicoverpa armigera, a pest affecting 
cotton and soy, raised spending on pesticides by 10% and resulted in losses of 
US$800 million in 2013 alone (Pomari-Fernandes et al., 2015). 

1.10 Agricultural health services in Brazil. The country has a long history of agricultural 
health, with an old and fragmented legal framework, including 12 laws and over 
150 regulations. The decrees enacting the agricultural health services date back to 
1934. More recently, the Unified Agricultural Health System (SUASA) was created2 

                                                
2  Law 8,171 of 17 January 1991, regulated by Decree 5,741 of 30 March 2006. 



 - 3 - 
 
 

 
as a mechanism for involving the Federal government (MAPA), State governments 
(Agriculture Secretariats) and Municípios (Agriculture Secretariats). 

1.11 Within the MAPA, the Secretariat for Agricultural Protection (SDA) is responsible for 
agricultural health and food (and beverage) safety measures and for the quality of 
agricultural inputs. Its main responsibilities are: (i) agricultural oversight at airports 
and borders; (ii) issuing regulations on the control and eradication of pests and 
diseases; (iii) approval of diagnostic methods; (iv) drafting health regulations for the 
import and export of animals and plants, and their products and byproducts; 
(v) registration of plants and products; (vi) inspection of products of animal and plant 
origin and agricultural inputs; and (vii) auditing, supervision, evaluation, and 
coordination of state and municipio agricultural health activities. 

1.12 In 2016 the government drafted the Agricultural Protection Plan (PDA) (MAPA, 
2016) defining the priorities for agricultural health policies. It has a ten-year horizon 
and six strategic pillars: (i) modernization and cutting red-tape, (ii) regulatory 
framework; (iii) knowledge and strategic intelligence; (iv) technical programs and 
projects; (v) sustainability of agricultural protection; and (vi) monitoring and 
evaluation. This operation aims to support implementation of the PDA over the next 
five years, focusing on the challenges in five of the six strategic pillars. 

1.13 “Modernization and cutting red tape” and “strengthening and modernizing the 
regulatory framework” strategic pillars. Their objective is to turn the Secretariat 
for Agricultural Protection (SDA) into an effective, efficient results-oriented 
organization by strengthening its main services. The program will support the 
following services:  

a. National Agricultural Laboratories (LANAGRO). This comprises a network 
of six laboratories performing the diagnostic tests necessary to monitor 
compliance with health standards, verify product quality, and identify disease 
outbreaks. Assessments of the Lanagro show that they face various problems, 
operate in an uncoordinated way, lack standardization of processes and 
procedures for important tasks such as receiving samples or purchasing 
supplies, lack planning of demand for laboratory tests, and have little or no 
process automation. Thirty percent of diagnostic tests take longer than 
standard times and the sample rejection rate is high. For example, 17% of 
physical-chemical tests and products of animal origin and 11% of wastes and 
food contaminants are rejected (optional link 7).  

b. International health monitoring. The International Agricultural Monitoring 
System (Vigiagro) is responsible for controlling and monitoring imports, 
exports, and international transit of persons and goods through ports, airports, 
and border crossings. It is of strategic importance for the country: in 2017, 
1.5 million import and export cargo inspections were carried out. Inspections 
are characterized by a low level of computerization, automation, or process 
standardization, and the failure to apply risk analysis. This results in 
shortcomings in inspections (Furlan, 2013), and long wait times for cargo at 
ports and airports, generating costs for importers and exporters. Cargo release 
takes an average of 4.5 days, against a target of 3 days (European Union 
average) (optional link 8).  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=%09EZSHARE-1211145217-33
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=%09EZSHARE-1211145217-34


 - 4 - 
 
 

 
c. Inspection, registration, and authorization. Health inspection and the 

issuance of authorizations for the import of live animals and animal products, 
inspection and authorization of beverage exports, and the registration of 
products of animal origin, are all performed manually or in a semiautomated 
manner and in the presence of the interested parties. This results in processes 
that are slow and costly for the Agricultural Protection Secretariat (SDA) and 
for users. For example, registration of products of animal origin takes an 
average of 120 days, and inspection and authorization of beverage exports 
45 days (optional link 9). 

d. Regulatory good practices. The SDA is responsible for drafting and 
publishing regulatory acts concerning the management of agricultural health 
and the regulation of agricultural inputs and services, as well as products of 
animal and plant origin. Many of the regulations are out of date, do not conform 
to current technologies, and do not set clear limits of action and competencies 
(optional link 10). As a first step towards improving the management of 
standards, in 2015 the Manual of Regulatory Good Practices was approved, 
with a view to harmonizing regulatory activities. 

1.14 “Implementation and strengthening of priority technical programs and 
projects” strategic pillar. This includes 18 projects and programs, prioritizing six: 
(i) fruit fly control; (ii) border monitoring and protection; (iii) FMD eradication and 
prevention; (iv) eradication and control of brucellosis and tuberculosis; 
(v) eradication of classical swine fever (CSF); and (vi) modernization of laboratories. 
This operation will support three of these programs (FMD, CSF and carambola fruit 
fly) considering that: (i) FMD and CSF are the most critical livestock diseases for 
exports, as their mere presence prevents access to overseas markets, and their 
spread to other areas could have serious impacts on producers’ costs; (ii) there are 
synergies in the implementation of FMD and CSF control, as they are carried out by 
the same veterinary services; (iii) the carambola fruit fly may significantly reduce fruit 
exports if it spreads to fruit producing areas; and (iv) tuberculosis and brucellosis do 
not affect exports and are not considered endemic in Brazil, such that their 
eradication is not envisaged in the medium term. 

a. Foot-and-mouth disease (FMD). In May 2018, the OIE declared Brazil 
FMD-free with vaccination (the state of Santa Catarina is free without 
vaccination). Brazil currently has a Strategic Plan under the National FMD 
Eradication Program (PNEFA), covering the period 2017-2026, which 
envisages the entire country being free of the disease without vaccination as 
of 2023 (optional link 11). This change would allow the country to access new 
export markets and command better prices (Alves and Martins, 2014). Brazil 
has not had access to the highest paying meat markets for several decades 
(Japan, South Korea, Canada, and the United States) as they do not import 
from countries with FMD (Miranda, 2001). FMD is one of the most frequent 
causes of non-tariff barriers to exports of beef and pork (Junqueira et al., 2007). 
It has a direct negative impact on production and results in high control and 
eradication costs (US$220 million a year). Over the past ten years, FMD 
outbreaks caused losses of animals and falling prices (paragraph 1.9). 
Vaccination also results in lower productivity: 70% of livestock develops 
abscesses with an average of loss of 1.3 kg of meat in the affected area (Moura 
and Junqueira, 1999). 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=%09EZSHARE-1211145217-35
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=%09EZSHARE-1211145217-36
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=%09EZSHARE-1211145217-37


 - 5 - 
 
 

 
b. Classical swine fever (CSF). In 2016, the OIE declared approximately half of 

the country by area, 84% of livestock, and almost the entire industry to be free 
of CSF. The CSF program aims to obtain a declaration of CSF-free status for 
the entire country (optional link 11). The presence of the disease is limited to 
the states in the north and north-east regions, where output is low and 
subsistence-oriented. Nevertheless, it affects the reliability of disease-free 
areas, and consequently their market access, as well as representing a risk of 
spread to states from which it has been eradicated (Freitas et al., 2007). It also 
affects productivity through a reduction in the number of piglets born and higher 
mortality rates (Zuge, 2018; ADAPEC, 2018). During an outbreak in 
Rio Grande do Sul in 1987 a mortality rate of 20% of live births was recorded, 
and mortality was also higher at other stages of production (Barcellos, 1992). 

c. Carambola fruit fly. The Carambola fruit fly (Bactrocera carambolae) was 
reported in Suriname in 1975 (Sauers-Muller, 1991), subsequently spreading 
to Guyana, French Guiana, and Brazil. It is currently present in three states in 
the north of Brazil (Amapá, Roraima, and Pará). The Carambola fruit fly can 
attack 75 species of plant, including mango, avocado, papaya, citrus fruit, 
guava, and carambola (star fruit). In Brazil it has been detected in a smaller 
number of species (Lemos et al., 2014) and it is the only fruit fly not currently 
affecting export production zones. The risk of spread by movements of people 
and goods is high, with potential losses estimated at $150 million a year due 
to export restrictions on the affected areas (optional link 12). The country is 
implementing an oversight and control program, with 7,774 fruit fly detection 
traps across the country, concentrated in the three states affected (7,284). In 
recent years the fly capture index in these three states has been brought down 
from 0.18 in 2013 to 0.02 in 2017.3 

1.15 Knowledge strengthening and strategic support strategic pillar. The 
Agricultural Protection Plan (PDA) and MAPA studies (optional link 13) show that 
the effectiveness of agricultural health services is affected by shortcomings in 
employee competencies, lack of intelligence tools to support decision-making, and 
inadequate research and knowledge generation. The PDA therefore proposes: 
(i) skills development; (ii) application of strategic intelligence; (iii) support for 
research and development; (iv) building and strengthening of the network of partner 
entities; (v) implementing an international exchange program; (vi) building a 
technology park; and (vii) harmonization and standardization of how risk analysis is 
used. The program will support six (items (i) to (vi)) of these seven lines of action. 

1.16 Monitoring and evaluation strategic pillar. This addresses the lack of automation 
in the monitoring and evaluation of agricultural health services and managing for 
results. According to MAPA reports (optional link 14), the use of inappropriate tools 
and the failure to set targets undermines activities focused on results and processes 
that need improvement. 

1.17 Climate change. There is a link between climate change and agricultural health, 
and interventions in this area are an important adaptation (Forman et al., 2008) and 
mitigation strategy (Stoot et al., 2010). Increases in temperature and changes in 
relative humidity cause changes in habitat that influence the emergence and spread 

                                                
3  The flies per trap per day (FTD) index measures the density of captured flies and is revised twice monthly. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=%09EZSHARE-1211145217-37
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=%09EZSHARE-1211145217-38
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=%09EZSHARE-1211145217-40
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=%09EZSHARE-1211145217-41


 - 6 - 
 
 

 
of plant and animal pathogens, requiring control strategies under changing 
environmental conditions (INIA, 2018). The main concern is the spread of pests and 
diseases to new areas (Cifuentes and Meza, 2008), with possible effects on access 
to international markets and increased inspection and treatment costs. The 
greenhouse-gas (GHG) emissions reduction achievable through reduced and more 
efficient use of pesticides stands out, given that those used to tackle the carambola 
fruit fly are particularly carbon intensive (Lal, 2004). Moreover, evidence shows that 
improved animal health raises productivity and reduces livestock’s carbon footprint 
(Kenyon et al., 2013; Stott et al., 2010). The expansion of agricultural activities into 
forest areas has been the main source of GHG emissions in Brazil (FAO, 2016; 
Gouvello, 2010, Rivero et al., 2009). Increased productivity associated with lower 
rates of diseases such as FMD and CSF therefore helps reduce GHG emissions 
and ease the pressure on forest areas (MAPA, 2010; Embrapa, 2018, Arias et al., 
2017). 

1.18 In short, the operation is aligned with the MAPA’s strategic priorities, as formulated 
in its PDA. It will contribute via its five strategic pillars, which seek to modernize the 
SDA, cut red tape, strengthen the regulatory framework, generate knowledge and 
strategic intelligence, and implement priority technical projects, ensuring agricultural 
health services are sustainable by means of strong monitoring and evaluation 
systems. The aim of focusing on these priorities is to strengthen agricultural health 
to increase access to international markets and raise agricultural productivity 
(paragraph 1.12). 

1.19 Theory of change. The program’s theory of change is based on the same 
challenges identified by the MAPA, including restrictions on access to external 
markets and the potential loss of productivity caused by the existence of high 
economic impact diseases and pests (which also give rise to high control and 
eradication costs) and the low efficiency of the services monitoring and controlling 
the health of imports and exports. Institutional shortcomings in these services, such 
as low professional specialization and high turnover of technical staff, scant 
investment in research, and failure to use risk analysis in its operations, makes the 
MAPA unable to perform its agricultural health responsibilities effectively. 

1.20 Against this backdrop, Components 1 and 2 support the expansion of existing animal 
and plant health programs and initiatives to improve the efficiency of the main 
agricultural health services. For Component 1, the automation of agricultural health 
service processes (laboratories, Vigiagro, inspection, records and authorizations, 
good practices) will reduce processing times and increase service efficiency. For 
Component 2, priority disease and pest (carambola fruit fly, FMD, and CSF) control 
and eradication measures will enable current health status to be maintained and 
expanded. Component 3 will support institutional changes in the management of 
agricultural health, strengthening human resource capacities, and funding research 
into agricultural health. By means of studies and research, training in priority 
competencies, and studies to evaluate a technology park as a means of scientific 
integration between various institutions, it is anticipated that the availability and 
dissemination of relevant information and competencies for more efficient 
agricultural health services will be enhanced. Lastly, Component 4 supports the 
continuous monitoring of activities and managing for results. Over the long term, 
these improvements aim to raise the quality, reliability, and efficiency of international 
trade in Brazilian agricultural produce.  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1211145217-26


 - 7 - 
 
 

 
1.21 The Bank’s experience. Between 2002 and 2014 the IDB approved 17 investment 

loans to strengthen agricultural health and food safety systems in the region for 
US$359 million, approximately 10% of the total sector portfolio (OVE, 2015). 
Drawing on these operations, those recently approved (Peru 4457/OC-PE, Uruguay 
3800/OC-UR, Bolivia 3797/BL-BO, Guyana 3798/BL-GY, and Mexico 3864/OC-ME, 
totaling US$292 million), and the conclusions and recommendations of OVE (2015), 
the main lessons learned and how they have been incorporated into the design of 
the proposed operation are included in Table 1. 

 

Table 1. Incorporation of lessons learned 

Lesson learned Reflected in program design 

1. The decisions of the health services should be 
independent and based on purely scientific 
grounds, due to the nature of the threats they 
have to respond to and the need for credibility, 
locally and internationally. 

The program aims to enhance the scientific 
basis of the SDA to improve its management 

and decision-making capacity. 

2. Health control institutions require ongoing 
programs to update and train their officials. 

Measures are envisaged to improve the 
technical competencies of SDA staff. 

3. The private sector’s participation is essential to 
bolster the success of health programs. 

The private sector will be involved in the design 
of automation processes, disease control, and 
research and development. No private goods 
will be financed.  

4. Use of results indicators more readily 
attributable to projects.  

The results matrix incorporates this lesson, 
particularly for the indicators linked to 
disbursements. 

5. It is important to focus efforts to avoid diluting 
resources.  

The program: (i) focuses on results and 
(ii) supports specific activities within a broad 
government program (the PDA). 

 

1.22 Strategic alignment. The operation is consistent with the Update to the Institutional 
Strategy (UIS) 2010-2020 (document AB-3008) and will contribute to the Corporate 
Results Framework 2016-2019 (CRF) (document GN-2727-6) through the 
development challenges of: (i) productivity and innovation, contributing to the 
indicator of government agencies benefited by projects that strengthen technological 
and managerial tools to improve public service delivery; and (ii) economic 
integration, through the indicator of instruments contributing to regional and extra-
regional trade. It is also aligned with the following crosscutting themes: (i) climate 
change and environmental sustainability through the development, transfer, and 
adoption of innovative technologies and approaches to implement adaptation 
measures; and (ii) institutional capacity and the rule of law through the strengthening 
of public agricultural health services. Approximately 17.44% of the operation’s 
resources are invested in climate change adaptation activities, according to the 
multilateral development banks’ joint methodology for tracking climate finance. 
These resources contribute to the IDB Group’s target of increasing the financing of 
climate-change-related projects to 30% of all operational approvals by the end of 
2020. 

1.23 The operation is consistent with the IDB Country Strategy with Brazil (2016-2018) 
(document GN-2850), in the dialogue on policies and sustainable development of 

https://publications.iadb.org/handle/11319/8505


 - 8 - 
 
 

 
agriculture and contributes to the implementation approach to reducing regional 
socioeconomic inequalities, given that the poorest regions (Northeast and North) are 
those hardest hit by the diseases and pests this program will address. The operation 
is included in the Update of Annex III of the 2018 Operational Program Report for 
Brazil (document GN-2915-2). It is also consistent with: the Agriculture and Natural 
Resources Management Sector Framework Document (document GN-2709-5), 
which gives priority to increasing the region’s agricultural productivity and 
strengthening the provision of public goods; the Food Security Sector Framework 
Document (document GN-2825-8), which aims to promote food security by 
increasing production and productivity; the Integration and Trade Sector Framework 
Document (document GN-2715-6), which gives priority to integration and foreign 
trade through improvements to security and dispatch times, and reducing the cost 
of foreign trade; and with the Integrated Strategy for Climate Change Adaptation and 
Mitigation, and Sustainable and Renewable Energy (document GN-2609-1) and the 
Climate Change Sector Framework Document (document GN-2835-3) by promoting 
increased agricultural productivity by adopting climate change adaptation practices. 

B. Objectives, components, and cost 

1.24 The overall objective of the operation is to help increase agricultural productivity and 
improve access to domestic and international markets by strengthening the 
country’s agricultural health services. To this end the operation plans to contribute 
to the implementation of the Government of Brazil’s PDA through the components 
detailed below. The first and second of these components will be financed by the 
LBR, the third by the technical cooperation loan, and the fourth by the local 
counterpart. The main beneficiaries are the approximately 14 million agricultural 
producers and other participants in the production chains supported, together with 
the country’s 210 million consumers. 

1.25 Component 1. Improving the efficiency of agricultural health services 
(IDB: US$23 million). The outcome of this component will be improvements in the 
performance of the SDA’s services, as detailed in its subcomponents: 

a. National Agricultural Laboratories (LANAGRO). The outcome will be a 
reduction in: (i) laboratory test times; and (ii) rejection of samples on receipt at 
the LANAGRO laboratories. Automation of the following key processes will be 
financed: (i) receipt of samples, laboratory analyses, and delivery of results; 
(ii) procurement and contracts; (iii) laboratory accreditation; (iv) demand 
management; and (v) inventory control. The initial focus will be on processes 
relating to antiparasitic and salmonella tests. In addition, demand for laboratory 
tests will be organized and prioritized, and the technical/administrative 
management will be modernized using harmonized quality management 
systems. 

b. International Agricultural Oversight System (Vigiagro). The outcome will 
be to shorten average export and import cargo release times at ports. The 
implementation of a harmonized management system for the international 
transit of agricultural products (termed the “SIGVIG”) will be financed. In 
particular, work will focus on exports of soybeans and frozen and chilled meat, 
and imports of fruits (apples) and agricultural inputs (mineral fertilizer and 
pesticides). 



 - 9 - 
 
 

 
c. Improvements to inspection, registration, and authorization services. 

This will aim to reduce the average time taken by product inspection, 
registration, and authorization services by financing the design and automation 
of services that are currently performed manually or in a semiautomated 
manner in person. It includes systems for: (i) beverage exports; (ii) imports of 
animal genetic material and live animals; and (iii) registration of products of 
animal origin. 

d. Implementation of regulatory good practices. The outcome will be a 
reduction in the average time taken by the SDA to draft and publish regulations 
and ordinances. The cost of developing and implementing a system for the 
real-time monitoring of the entire process of drafting, analysis, publication, and 
implementation of regulatory instruments will be financed. 

1.26 Component 2. Control and eradication of pests and diseases (IDB: 
US$137 million). The objective is to improve the control of high economic impact 
diseases and pests subject to quarantine, focusing on controlling FMD, CSF, and 
the carambola fruit fly. A description of the subcomponents and their outcomes is 
provided below. 

a. Carambola fruit fly. The outcome will be to keep the 24 states in which this 
pest is not currently present free of the carambola fruit fly.4 It will finance the 
costs associated with continuing implementation of the SDA program to control 
and eradicate the carambola fruit fly and expanding it to strengthen control 
stations on the border and inside the state of Amapá (the state most affected 
by the fly). It includes monitoring of traps throughout the country and measures 
to control and eradicate the fly in areas where it is detected. This 
subcomponent also includes training technical staff of the institutions involved, 
and health education campaigns for producers. 

b. Foot-and-mouth disease (FMD). The outcome will be to maintain the 
27 states of the country free of FMD, with or without vaccination, funding the 
implementation of the PNEFA, which has a scaled strategy, dividing the 
country into five groups of states in which achieving FMD-free status without 
vaccination will be pursued by group. The PNEFA includes: regulation, 
capacity building at federal and state levels, audits of state veterinary services, 
and development of action plans for states. These actions are defined by an 
Action Plan, which is monitored semiannually by the MAPA. 

c. Classical swine fever (CSF). The outcome will be an increase in the number 
of states recognized by the MAPA as CSF-free from 16 at present to 23 in 
2023. State-level actions will be financed (incorporated in the action plans 
indicated in the preceding paragraph), including: (i) activities reports on the 
state action plans; (ii) approved Quali-SV audit reports on state veterinary 
services in areas that are both CSF-free and not CSF-free; (iii) approved 
epidemiological study proposal; (iv) reports on epidemiological studies 
conducted in states with areas that are not CSF-free; (v) declaration of new 

                                                
4   Eradication in the states of Amapá, Roraima, and Pará is not feasible within the program execution period, 

particularly as it would require actions in neighboring countries (Guyana and Suriname). 



 - 10 - 
 
 

 
CSF-free areas; (vi) stepping up controls on pig movements; (vii) training of 
official state veterinary services; and (viii) health education for rural producers. 

1.27 Component 3. Knowledge and innovation for the agricultural health of the 
future (IDB: US$35 million). The objective of this component is to support the 
implementation of the PDA’s Knowledge and Intelligence pillar (paragraph 1.15). 
The component’s strategic and innovation actions will support and complement the 
activities of Components 1 and 2, including development of technical assistance, 
capabilities, knowledge and innovation in the agricultural health system, and 
definition of strategies for agricultural health services to address the future 
challenges, including the impacts of climate change. Accordingly, the component 
includes the following subcomponents: 

a. Modernization of federal agricultural protection. This will support the 
process of modernizing the SDA by financing studies to support the following 
strategic actions: (i) implement a new model of institutional management, with 
a redefinition of procedure manuals, adjustment or redesign of computerized 
systems, and training and consulting; (ii) strengthen coordinated joint action by 
federal, state, and municipal agencies and between these agencies and the 
sector; and (iii) update and adapt legal and regulatory instruments, matching 
procedures and teams. 

b. Competency building. This will finance: (i) short courses developed with 
Brazilian and foreign universities; (ii) the “Excellentia” program, with grants for 
practitioners to undertake specific work at universities, research centers or 
agricultural heath institutions in Brazil or abroad; and (iii) a strictly postgraduate 
grant program for studies on critical issues for agricultural heath. 

c. Knowledge and intelligence. This has the aim of aggregating information and 
knowledge on an ongoing basis by financing the implementation of an 
integrated plant-health monitoring and information system (Strategic 
Agricultural Defense Intelligence System (IEDA)) that will manage strategic 
information to support decision-making, centralizing all the data existing in 
other automated systems. 

d. Agricultural health research. The objective of this subcomponent is to close 
research gaps related to agricultural health, supporting the development of at 
least 10 research projects selected on a competitive basis in line with the 
thematic priorities defined by the SDA. It also includes the financing of grants 
for strategic agricultural health projects.  

e. Technology park. As part of its modernization strategy, the SDA is seeking to 
promote a model of technology research and development that facilitates an 
exchange of experience between different sectors (public, private, and 
academic) and scientific integration to promote innovation in agricultural 
health. This subcomponent will finance studies to evaluate the viability of 
promoting the creation of a technology park on the Lanagro campus in Minas 
Gerais. 

1.28 Component 4. Monitoring, evaluation, and learning (Local: US$5 million). This 
component will generate a monitoring and evaluation system for the program and 
will build the MAPA’s capacity to monitor and evaluate its agricultural health 
services, contributing to managing for results. 



 - 11 - 
 
 

 
C. Key results indicators 

1.29 The program’s impact will be measured using the following indicators: (i) increase in 
the number of health agreements with importer countries; and (ii) increased value of 
meat at the farm. 

1.30 The outcome indicators to be used for disbursements are: Component 1: 
(i) processing speed of Lanagro laboratories (in days); (ii) decrease in average 
import and export cargo release times in ports (in days); (iii) promptness of 
inspection, registration, and authorization services, which will include: average 
processing time for beverage exports (in days); and (iv) average time to draft and 
publish regulatory instructions and ordinances (in days). Component 2: (i) number 
of states kept without occurrence of Carambola fruit fly; (ii) number of states 
recognized as being FMD-free with or without vaccination; and (iii) number of states 
recognized as being CSF-free. The indicators and amounts associated with each 
are specified in the disbursement matrix (optional link 5). Additional indicators not 
associated with disbursements in the Results Matrix (see Annex II) are: (i) average 
sample rejection by Lanagro; (ii) recognition of states as FMD-free without 
vaccination; (iii) average processing time for imports of animal genetic material and 
live animals (in days); (iv) average time to register products of animal origin (in days); 
(v) improved agricultural protection competencies (level of training in priority 
competencies), (vi) legal establishment of a Technology Park; (vii) the number of 
accesses to the intelligence system; and (viii) number of technical studies with 
results of research projects published or available online.  

1.31 Economic analysis. An ex ante economic analysis was performed to evaluate the 
economic viability of the program. The benefits stem from more efficient agricultural 
health service processes and pest and disease control and are estimated to be: 
(i) avoided losses in exports of beef and pork products by preserving the country’s 
status as free of high impact diseases such as FMD and CSF; (ii) avoided losses in 
fruit exports by preventing the expansion of the Carambola fruit fly; and (iii) more 
efficient agricultural health services. The analysis considered a horizon of 20 years 
and a discount rate of 12%. The program is considered economically viable with an 
economic internal rate of return (EIRR) of 32.37% and net present value of 
US$223 million. Based on the worst-case scenarios for the subcomponents 
analyzed, the sensitivity analysis yielded an EIRR of 21%. 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS 

A. Financing instruments 

2.1 Rationale for the use of the financing instruments. This operation will be 
financed by two investment loan instruments: an LBR and reimbursable technical 
cooperation funding. The operation meets the requirements for an LBR 
(document GN-2869-1) as Components 1 and 2: (i) support state programs 
delivering results through the financing of their expenditure framework (paragraph 
1.26); (ii) support changes to government practices incorporating good practices 
(paragraph 1.25); (iii) promote improved performance of existing government 
programs by emphasizing their achievement of results (paragraph 1.25); and 
(iv) promote the use of the executing agency’s fiduciary systems (paragraphs 2.7 
and 3.10). Moreover, the institutional capacity assessment showed that the MAPA 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=%09EZSHARE-1211145217-30
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1211145217-28


 - 12 - 
 
 

 
has appropriate legal powers, governance, and institutional environment, and the 
necessary institutional, management, technical, and fiduciary (procurement and 
financial) capacity to ensure the delivery of the results and execute and monitor an 
LBR (see Annex III). Integrity risk is medium/low, and program actions reduce it by 
adopting transparent procedures and automating health permit issuance and other 
agricultural health services. 

2.2 Component 3 fulfills the requirements for the use of the reimbursable technical 
cooperation instrument (document GN-2470-2), as it will be focused on supporting 
institutional changes in the management of agricultural health in Brazil, building the 
MAPA’s institutional capacities and financing research studies into agricultural 
health. These technical assistance activities are essential to achieving the 
envisaged outcomes of the LBR in the framework of Components 1 and 2. The LBR 
instrument is not suited to these investments as they are not related to the 
simultaneous completion of an outcome but require a substantial flow of finance from 
the early stages of execution. The proposed financing structure enables the 
comprehensive financing of the interventions, permitting the achievement of the 
program objectives. 

2.3 Cost. The total cost of the operation is US$200 million, of which $195 million will be 
financed from the Bank’s Ordinary Capital and US$5 million by the local counterpart. 
The planned disbursement period is five years. Table 2 itemizes the cost per 
component. 

 

Table 2. Program costs and financing (US$ million) 

Investment component IDB Local Total % 

C1. Improving the efficiency of agricultural health 
services 

23.00 0.00 23.00 11.50 

C2. Control and eradication of pests and diseases 137.00 0.00 137.00 68.50 

C3. Knowledge and innovation for the agricultural 
health of the future 

35.00 0.00 35.00 17.50 

C4. Monitoring, evaluation, and learning 0.00 5.00 5.00 2.50 

Total 195.00 5.00 200.00 100.00 

 

2.4 Table 3 presents the disbursement schedule for the Bank financing. 

 
Table 3. Disbursement schedule (as %) 

Component Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Total 

C1. Improving the efficiency of 
agricultural health services 3.0 2.8 2.1 2.0 1.9 11.8 

C2. Control and eradication of 
pests and diseases 13.5 14.1 14.2 14.2 14.2 70.3 

C3. Knowledge and innovation for 
the agricultural health of the future 1.2 4.6 4.9 4.0 3.3 17.9 

Total 17.7 21.5 21.2 20.2 19.4 100.0 

 

B. Environmental and social risks 

2.5 Pursuant to Directive B.13 of the Environment and Safeguards Compliance Policy 
(Operational Policy OP-703) this operation does not require classification, as it is 



 - 13 - 
 
 

 
a loan based on results and its impacts cannot be subject to “ex ante” evaluation. 
However, no negative environmental or social impacts are envisaged from the 
implementation of Components 1 and 2, or Component 3, and no physical 
infrastructure or physical changes to the environment are involved. Lanagro 
laboratories have an environmental and social management system based on best 
practices and standards, accredited under ISO standard 17025, which establishes 
guidelines for documented operating procedures (SOPs) for the management of 
laboratory and environmental waste. Moreover, depending on its level of 
biosecurity (BSL3AG), each laboratory has more specific manuals, covering the 
management of materials, wastes, and rules for hygiene, safety, and employees’ 
working conditions. The pest and disease eradication and control programs will 
apply internationally recognized good practices, including the use of integrated 
control techniques. 

2.6 In addition, the independent consulting services contracted to verify the results will 
review the ISO-17025 accreditation, make visits to laboratories to verify that the 
biosecurity manuals are being applied, and that good practices are being followed 
in the disease and pest control programs. 

C. Fiduciary risks 

2.7 The results of the ICAP and Program Risk Management (PRM) analysis 
demonstrated that the executing agency has a low level of fiduciary risk for the 
execution of the results-driven components (Annex III). The evaluations indicate 
that the MAPA’s fiduciary systems are backed by a legal framework providing the 
foundations for sound management of administrative, financial, control, and 
procurement procedures, in accordance with the principles of transparency, 
economy, and efficiency.  

2.8 The medium-level risks identified are: (i) limited experience of the executing 
agency with IDB policies; and (ii) possible delay in purchase of the software 
needed for activities in Components 1 and 3. To mitigate the first of these risks, 
the Inter-American Institute for Cooperation on Agriculture (IICA) will be contracted 
directly as a specialized executing agency to manage part of the consulting 
services under Component 3. The IICA offers technical advantages on account of 
its experience and effective capacity to select and hire consultants familiar with 
Bank policies and with topics linked to the agrifood sector. This has been 
demonstrated in the execution of a number of MAPA initiatives and in loans with 
external resources, including those of the IDB (paragraph 3.11). To mitigate the 
second risk, the results-based disbursement mechanism will create an incentive 
to speed up processes, and the IDB will support preparation of the terms of 
reference.  



 - 14 - 
 
 

 
D. Other project risks and key issues 

Table 4. Other identified risks 

Taxonomy Risk Level Mitigation 

1.  Public 
management and 
governance 

Changes in authorities 
and technical areas in the 
MAPA and changes in 
staff could result in delays 
in execution of actions, 
outcomes, and 
disbursements.  

Medium 
High 

Inclusion in the loan contract 
of the condition precedent to 
the first disbursement 
(creation of the program 
coordinating unit (PCU) and 
appointment of its 
members). 

Dialogue with authorities on 
key aspects of the program. 

Training of new authorities 
and technical staff. 

2. Macroeconomic 
and fiscal 
sustainability 

Continuity of the fiscal 
situation of the Federal 
Government and the 
states, and limitations on 
the use of the allocated 
budget may reduce the 
resources available for 
agricultural health 
services, delay execution, 
achievement of outcomes, 
and disbursements.  

Medium 
High 

Audit of expenses linked to 
outcomes and return of 
amounts not applied to 
outcomes constitute an 
incentive to avoid budgetary 
limitations.  

Dialogue with authorities on 
key aspects of the program 
and functioning of the LBR. 

3. Macroeconomic 
and fiscal 
sustainability 

The Brazilian economy is 
recovering slowly and 
strong growth is not 
expected. A drop in 
economic activity would 
reduce tax revenues and 
the budget allocated to 
agricultural health 
services.  

Medium 
Low 

Audit of expenses linked to 
outcomes and return of 
amounts not applied to 
outcomes constitute an 
incentive to avoid budgetary 
limitations.  

Dialogue with authorities on 
key aspects of the program 
and functioning of the LBR. 

4. Development Failures in border checks 
or an increase in the 
epidemiological risk from 
neighboring countries 
could result in the 
reintroduction of FMD, 
delaying achievement of 
the outcomes.  

Medium 
Low 

Component 1 includes 
measures to strengthen 
health checks at the 
borders. 

Subcomponent 2.2 includes 
measures to strengthen 
controls and barriers.  

5. Reputation, 
monitoring, and 
accountability 

Private sector pressures 
may affect health 
monitoring and the 
credibility of health 
services and the program, 
resulting in temporary 
closure of export markets, 
and delays in achieving 
outcomes, and in 
disbursements. 

Medium 
Low 

The program includes 
measures to automate and 
standardize processes and 
move formalities online, 
reducing face-to-face 
interactions and the scope 
for discretionary decisions. 
Studies will support 
institutional changes in 
agricultural health services 
to reduce these problems. 

 



 - 15 - 
 
 

 
2.9 Sustainability. The Government of Brazil has been financing its pest and disease 

control programs for many years. Even in times of deep recession and public 
spending constraints, these programs have not been affected. Moreover, one of 
the aims of the institutional reforms being undertaken by the MAPA and of various 
program activities is to increase efficiency and reduce costs. In addition, the salary 
costs of technical staff, who are important for the sustainability of all the 
components, given that they are knowledge intensive, are fixed costs that cannot 
be subject to budget cuts.  

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN 

A. Summary of implementation arrangements 

3.1 The borrower for the operation will be the Federative Republic of Brazil. The 
program executing agency will be the MAPA through its Agricultural Protection 
Secretariat (SDA). A PCU will be created within the SDA’s structure, which will be 
the MAPA’s point of contact for the IDB. It will also be responsible for coordinating 
with all the MAPA areas executing program activities, giving them guidance on the 
program’s operational, administrative, and financial standards and procedures, 
preparing the reports envisaged under the contract, and proposing measures for 
improving execution and achievement of the outcomes, etc. The actions in 
Components 1 and 2 will be the responsibility of six SDA divisions or general 
coordination units, while the CGOP will be responsible for Components 3 and 4. 
The program Operating Regulations set out the details of the roles of the PCU and 
the various SDA areas. 

3.2 For execution of Component 3, the PCU will be supported by the services of the 
IICA, as a specialized agency, for the contracting of consulting services, and it will 
have the technical cooperation of the CNPq for the funding of strategic research 
projects and postgraduate grants (paragraph 3.12). The eligibility criteria for the 
research projects and grants will be set out in the program’s Operating Regulations. 
The remainder of the component, which includes improving the SDA’s information 
systems, will be executed directly by the MAPA. 

3.3 The SDA’s Executive Management Committee, comprising its departmental heads, 
will act as the program’s Steering Committee, providing strategic guidance, 
facilitating coordination between the PCU and the various MAPA units, approving 
the annual work plan (AWP), monitoring progress of execution and achievement of 
program targets, and proposing measures to streamline execution. 

3.4 The PCU will have a core team comprising a coordinator and an executive manager, 
together with the technical and administrative staff necessary for execution 
coordination tasks. It will be supported by other MAPA units on administrative, 
financial, accounting, procurement, and auditing matters. Setting up the PCU and 
appointing its members will be a special contractual condition precedent to 
the first disbursement of the proceeds of the loan based on results 
(Components 1 and 2) and to the first disbursement of the technical 
cooperation loan (Component 3). This condition is considered essential for 
guaranteeing to the Bank that the executing agency will be ready with an appropriate 
team to start execution. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1211145217-31


 - 16 - 
 
 

 
3.5 External results verification. The loan based on results envisages verification 

independent of the IDB and the MAPA/SDA to evaluate fulfillment of the outcomes 
as a requirement for processing disbursements. 

3.6 The MAPA will contract individual consulting services for this purpose. Optional 
link 5 presents the protocol for verification of each disbursement indicator. The 
consultant’s report should: (i) provide an opinion on the accuracy, reliability, validity, 
and consistency of the information on the outcomes; (ii) determine the value of the 
outcome indicators; (iii) make recommendations to enhance program execution and 
address deviations from achievement of results in advance. Under the terms of 
reference agreed in advance with the Bank, the contracting of consulting 
services for external results verification will be a special condition precedent 
to the first disbursement of loan proceeds for Components 1 and 2, as is 
envisaged in the policy on loans based on results (document GN-2869-1). 

3.7 Disbursement mechanism. For Components 1 and 2, the MAPA will prepare a 
progress report on program execution and achievement of the results indicators 
used for annual disbursements (paragraph 1.30), and this report will be sent for 
external results verification. The independent external evaluator will verify that the 
results have been achieved in accordance with the objectives mentioned 
(paragraph 3.6) and by the deadlines set in the terms of reference. Once 
achievement of the disbursement results has been verified, the MAPA will send the 
disbursement request to the IDB, which will make the corresponding disbursement 
when the results of the external verification show that the value of the indicator in 
question is equal to or greater than the established target. If below the target, the 
disbursement will be proportional to the extent to which the target has been met. 
Unused balances may be rescheduled for subsequent disbursements. 

3.8 For Component 3, disbursements will take the form of advances of funds based on 
semiannual financing plans. For the disbursement of advances subsequent to the 
first, the IDB will require justification of at least 80% of the cumulative balance 
pending justification. 

3.9 Program Operating Regulations. The program Operating Regulations will 
describe the execution arrangements for the operation, including: (i) the program’s 
organizational structure; (ii) technical and operational arrangements for program 
execution; (iii) arrangements for scheduling, monitoring, and evaluation of results; 
(iv) operating procedures; and (v) a detailed description of the results indicators, 
particularly those relating to disbursements and verification protocols. The 
approval and entry into force of the program Operating Regulations, under 
the terms agreed with the Bank, will be a special contractual condition 
precedent to the first disbursement of the loan based on results 
(Components 1 and 2) and the first disbursement of the technical 
cooperation loan (Component 3). The Bank’s experience in the region has 
shown that approval of the program Operating Regulations before the first 
disbursement contributes to the internal organization of the executing agency for 
program execution. 

3.10 Procurement of works, goods and nonconsulting services, and consulting 
services. The execution of Components 1 and 2 envisages the use of executing 
agency systems for procurement, in accordance with requirements for loans based 
on results (document GN-2869-1). For Component 3, procurement financed with 


 
IDB funds will comply with the “Policies for the Procurement of Works and Goods 
Financed by the IDB” (document GN-2349-9) and “Policies for the Selection and 
Contracting of Consultants Financed by the IDB” (document GN-2350-9). The 
Procurement Plan contains details of procurement during program execution in 
relation to Component 3 and the procedures applied by the IDB for its review. The 
independent verification entity will be selected in accordance with the Policies for the 
Selection and Contracting of Consultants Financed by the IDB (document 
GN-2350-9). 

3.11 Direct contracting. The IICA will be contracted directly as a specialized agency 
to manage procurement and contracting of approximately US$20 million under 
Component 3. The main functions of the IICA will be: (i) supporting consultant 
selection; and (ii) contract management. This contracting is justified under 
paragraph 3.10(d) of the Policies for the Selection and Contracting of Consultants 
(document GN-2350-9), which provides for direct contracting “when only one firm 
is qualified or has experience of exceptional worth for the assignment” (see 
Annex III, paragraph 5.4). 

3.12 Funding of grants and research projects. Component 3 envisages the funding of 
strategic research projects and postgraduate grants (US$6 million). These activities 
will be carried out through the CNPq, an agency with its own legal status that is 
linked to the Ministry of Science, Technology, Innovation, and Communication 
(MCTIC). The CNPq’s main duties are to promote scientific and technology research 
and promote the training of Brazilian researchers (see Annex III). The MAPA and 
the CNPq will sign a cooperation agreement to establish the institutions’ roles and 
responsibilities. The eligibility and selection criteria for research projects and grants 
will be set out in the program’s Operating Regulations. To formalize the roles of both 
parties and minimize risks in financial and technical management, the signing and 
entry into force of the technical cooperation agreement between the MAPA and the 
CNPq for the execution of research activities and the award of postgraduate grants 
will be a special contractual condition for execution of the financing under 
Component 3. 

3.13 Retroactive financing and recognition of expenditures. The Bank may 
retroactively finance, as a charge against the loan proceeds, eligible expenses 
incurred by the borrower prior to the loan approval date, for the procurement of 
consulting services and studies directly related to Component 3 up to the amount of 
US$7 million (20%), provided that requirements substantially analogous to those set 
forth in the loan contract have been fulfilled. Similarly, under Component 4, the Bank 
may recognize expenses against the local contribution up to US$500,000 (10%) for 
consultants and the purchase of software. These expenses must have been incurred 
no earlier than 6 June 2018 (project profile approval date), and under no 
circumstances may expenses incurred more than 18 months before the date of loan 
approval by the Bank’s Board of Executive Directors be included. 

3.14 Audited financial statements (AFSs). During program execution, AFSs will be 
submitted annually no later than 120 days after the end of each fiscal period, or the 
date of the last disbursement in the case of final AFSs. The program’s external audit 
will be carried out by the Office of the Comptroller General (CGU), as the body 
responsible for the external oversight of federal government projects executed with 



 - 18 - 
 
 

 
external financing. For Components 1 and 2, the final AFSs will include an analysis 
of possible differences between the actual program costs and the sums disbursed. 

B. Summary of arrangements for monitoring results 

3.15 Monitoring and Evaluation Plan. The Results Matrix indicators will be used for 
monitoring, with the following instruments: AWP, multiyear execution plan, 
procurement plan, semiannual progress reports, and supervision visits. The MAPA 
will prepare and send monitoring reports to the Bank no later than 60 days after 
the end of each six-month period. These reports will focus on the fulfillment of 
results and output indicators, identify issues encountered, and describe corrective 
measures adopted. Additionally, for Component 3 the MAPA will submit, to the 
Bank’s satisfaction, the AWP for the following year, no later than the fourth quarter 
of each year. 

3.16 The executing agency will submit the following evaluations to the Bank, in 
accordance with the scope agreed with the Bank: (i) midterm evaluation, once 50% 
of the loan proceeds are disbursed and justified or after 30 months of execution, 
whichever occurs first; and (ii) final evaluation, no later than 90 days after the date 
of the last disbursement. 

3.17 The Monitoring and Evaluation Plan includes the description of the impact evaluation 
methodology, together with the indicators to be evaluated, the parties responsible 
for gathering the information, the schedule, and budget. The plan proposes a 
quasiexperimental evaluation utilizing the gradual expansion of PNEFA activities 
funded by the program, in order to measure increases in the value of annual 
agricultural output at farm level. The methodology that will be used for this purpose 
is a combination of statistical pairing and differences in differences. 

