















































PUBLIC 
SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE 

DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 

URUGUAY 

RURAL PRODUCTIVE DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM II 

(UR-L1147) 

LOAN PROPOSAL 



PROJECT SUMMARY 

URUGUAY 
RURAL PRODUCTIVE DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM II 

(UR-L1147) 
 

Financial Terms and Conditions 

Borrower: Eastern Republic of Uruguay 
Flexible Financing Facility(a) 

Amortization period: 24 years 

Executing agency: The borrower, through the Ministry of Livestock, 
Agriculture, and Fisheries (MGAP) 

Disbursement period: 6 years 

Grace period: 6.5 years(b) 

Interest rate: LIBOR-based 

Source Amount (US$) % Credit fee: (c) 

IDB (Ordinary Capital) 24,232,000 89 Inspection and supervision fee: (c) 

Local 2,889,000 11 Weighted average life: 15.25 years(d) 

Total 27,121,000 100 Approval currency: United States dollars 

Project at a Glance 

Project objective/description: To help improve the sustainability of small and medium-sized family-owned agricultural production units. 
The specific objectives are to increase the adoption of climate-smart technologies and to build capacities for technology generation and 
transfer, technical assistance, and rural extension. 

Special contractual conditions precedent to the first loan disbursement: Submission, to the Bank’s satisfaction, of evidence of the 
entry into force of the program Operating Regulations, including the environmental and social management plan (ESMP), in accordance 
with the terms previously agreed with the Bank (paragraph 3.1). 

For contractual conditions of a socioenvironmental nature, see Annex B of the environmental and social management report (ESMR). 

Special contractual conditions for execution: For the use of resources allocated to subcomponents (i), (iii), and (iv) of Component II, 
the signing and entry into force of Standard Framework Agreements between the MGAP (through the Rural Development Bureau 
(DGDR)), and the National Agricultural Research Institute (INIA) and Nonstate Public Institutes (IPNEs) (paragraph 3.2). 

Exceptions to Bank policies: None 

Strategic Alignment 

Challenges:(e) SI 
 

PI 
 

EI 
 

Crosscutting themes:(f) GD 
 

CC 
 

IC 
 

 
(a) Under the terms of the Flexible Financing Facility (document FN-655-1), the borrower has the option of requesting changes to the amortization schedule, 

as well as currency and interest rate conversions. The Bank will take operational and risk management considerations into account when reviewing such 
requests. 

(b) Under the flexible repayment options of the Flexible Financing Facility, changes to the grace period are permitted provided that they do not entail any 
extension of the original weighted average life of the loan or the last payment date as documented in the loan contract. 

(c) The credit fee and the inspection and supervision fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors as part of its review of the Bank’s 
lending charges, in accordance with applicable policies. 

(d) The original weighted average life of the loan may be shorter, depending on the signature date of the loan contract. 

(e) SI (Social Inclusion and Equality); PI (Productivity and Innovation); and EI (Economic Integration). 
(f) GD (Gender Equality and Diversity); CC (Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability); and IC (Institutional Capacity and Rule of Law). 

 
 

 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-39
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-41


 
 

I. PROJECT DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING 

A. Background, problem addressed, and rationale1 

1.1 The agriculture sector: importance, features, and challenges. The agricultural 
sector2 is of critical importance for Uruguay’s economy. In 2016, it accounted for 7% 
of GDP, or 12% of GDP when associated food industries are included (Ackermann 
et al., 2018). It represented 15% of employment and more than 75% of total exports, 
the main categories being beef, agricultural produce, dairy products, and forestry 
products (Uruguay XXI, 2016). Compared with other productive activities, the sector 
has the greatest multiplier effect on the economy (6.22, versus 5.47 for the 
manufacturing industry and 6.08 for services) and the greatest impact on 
employment (0.42, versus 0.33 for the services sector) (Terra et al., 2009). The 
sector received annual support equivalent to 0.58% of GDP over the 2014-2016 
period, of which 63% was for general services and 37% consisted of producer 
support (direct or price support) (Ackermann et al., 2018).3 

1.2 Between 1981 and 2012, total agricultural productivity in Uruguay grew at a higher 
average rate than in the region as a whole (1.5%, compared to 1.2%) (Nin-Pratt, 
Falconi, Ludena, & Martel, 2015). This growth has been uneven, however, with small 
and medium-sized family producers left behind (Instituto National de Investigación 
Agropecuaria [National Agricultural Research Institute] (INIA), 2016). Family 
systems account for more than 70% of farm enterprises and contribute around 25% 
of gross agricultural product. They are characterized by low levels of technology 
adoption and production efficiency, with high levels of variation from one year to the 
next (Albin, 2017); they are also focused primarily (60%) on livestock (Dirección 
General de Desarrollo Rural [Rural Development Bureau] (DGDR) and the Ministry 
of Livestock, Agriculture, and Fisheries (MGAP), 2018c). Climate variability and 
change have a particular impact on small and medium-sized producers (MGAP, 
2017a), as it is reported that family-owned livestock farms tend to be located in areas 
of greater climate vulnerability (de Torres Álvarez et al., 2014). 

1.3 Against this backdrop, the sustainability of smaller-scale production units faces 
challenges across two main dimensions: 

1.4 Dimension 1 – Productive. The productivity of smaller-scale units could be 
enhanced by technical assistance and technology adoption. The results of the 2014 
dairy survey show that the level of productivity is, in general, directly related to farm 
size (Instituto Nacional de la Leche [National Dairy Institute] (INALE), 2017). Based 
on the same survey, Pérez-Quesada and García-Suárez (2016) report that 
productivity can be increased among smaller producers because their level of 
technical efficiency stands at 74%. This indicates that they can use available inputs 
and technologies more efficiently in order to increase production (by 26% on 
average). These authors also indicate that agronomic, veterinary, or accounting 
technical assistance is associated with higher production efficiency. Nonetheless, 
knowledge management difficulties and limited access to extension services are 
barriers that have a particularly marked impact on smaller-scale producers (INIA, 
2016). In 2011, only 46% of farms received technical assistance (Hegedus, 2013), 

                                                
1  See bibliographical references. 
2  Includes forestry and agroindustrial activities. 
3  Estimate based on the methodology of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD). 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-8
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-8
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-27


 - 2 - 
 
 
 

while it has been observed that technical assistance coverage increases in tandem 
with farm size (Arboleya, 2018). 

1.5 This production gap may also be narrowed through technology adoption, including 
improved management practices. In the case of cattle ranching, for example, 
producers that have not received technical assistance report average annual beef 
yields of 50-70 kg per hectare, versus 250 kg per hectare in specialized 
establishments (World Bank and the International Center for Tropical Agriculture, 
2015). A recent project demonstrated the potential for increasing beef productivity 
levels from 70 kg per hectare to 100 kg by using existing technologies and 
implementing practices based on the improved the use of available resources 
(Gómez Miller, 2017). In the case of family-owned dairy producers, a project aimed 
at improving production practices—coordinated by INALE in partnership with dairy 
cooperatives—indicates that 70% of beneficiaries either maintained or increased 
production over the 2013-2017 period, even under extreme climatic conditions 
(Arboleya, 2018). 

1.6 Despite the potential for increased productivity, there are significant barriers to the 
adoption of agricultural technologies. In Uruguay, this is influenced by farm size, 
access to information, technical and managerial capacities, costs, risk, and the 
availability of appropriate technologies (Gómez Miller, 2017; Saravia and Gómez, 
2013). Technology adoption is also directly linked to technical assistance and rural 
extension services (Saravia and Gómez, 2013), and technological change requires 
the identification, validation, and dissemination of technologies that are appropriate 
for family agriculture (Comisión Nacional de Fomento Rural [National Rural 
Development Commission], 2009). 

1.7 Social factors. Knowledge and adoption of technologies is influenced by social 
networks, which are an important source of information and learning that strengthen 
producers’ capabilities (Aramburu et al., 2014; Doss, 2006). Rural associations 
provide positive externalities and produce public and semi-public goods, in addition 
to serving as a tool for economic and social inclusion (Bijman et al., 2012). The 
experience in Latin America indicates that membership of such associations among 
rural extension users helps to overcome scale constraints, as it allows them to 
access the services offered by rural organizations (Escobar, 2012). Collective 
processes are therefore important for family agriculture, and support is needed to 
strengthen these organizations (de Torres Álvarez et al., 2014). 

1.8 In Uruguay, rural associations (cooperatives, rural development enterprises, and 
agricultural trade associations) have sought to meet the diverse needs of producers, 
with the existence of around 200 such organizations with the potential for 
implementing rural technical assistance and extension (RTAE) services (Arboleya, 
2018). In family agriculture, collective approaches have proven effective in 
supporting technological changes, reduced price variability, integration into value 
chains, lower transaction costs, and access to goods and services (Programa Fida 
Mercosur Claeh and Centro Cooperativista Uruguayo, 2014), as well as participation 
in programs to support technology adoption (DGDR/MGAP, 2018a). There is 
evidence of the effectiveness of collective strategies for supporting production: 
increased implementation of such strategies is correlated with economic and 
production improvements (66% increase in per capita farm earnings and 39% in 
liters per hectare) (García Ferreira et al., 2011). Collective approaches also help to 



 - 3 - 
 
 
 

ensure that producers continue to implement activities once an intervention has 
been completed (Universidad de la República, 2006). Nonetheless, collective 
activities aimed at facilitating access to technology face difficulties in terms of access 
to capital; minimum scales for achieving economic and organizational viability; 
visualization of the benefits from an activity (particularly where the impact is long 
term); and a scarcity of the skills necessary for collective work (INIA & DGDR, 2016). 
With respect to RTAE, the critical factors for improving these services include the 
training of technical staff, interagency coordination, and the availability of suitable 
technologies (Hegedus, 2013). 

1.9 At the same time, there are gender and age gaps in access to government rural 
development policies, technical assistance, access to land, assets, own revenues, 
independent work, and farm titles (DGDR, 2018). For example, women account 
for just one in four beneficiaries of policies to improve the productivity and income 
of family producers (compared to 44% of potential beneficiaries), while data from 
the 2011 Agricultural Census indicate that women producers receive less technical 
assistance (38% versus 43% for producers) (Mascheroni, 2016). Likewise, the 
advancing age of producers in the sector (MGAP, 2017b) is a barrier to increased 
productivity, as producer age is inversely correlated with the use of new 
technologies (INIA, 2016). 

1.10 Dimension 2 – Environmental. Climate change magnifies the aforementioned 
problems, as the country is vulnerable to extreme events. For example, preliminary 
estimates by the MGAP indicate that the immediate impact of the 2017-2018 drought 
caused agricultural sector losses equivalent to US$560 million. This amount rises 
by more than US$600 million if delayed impacts are taken into account, relating to a 
decline in the number of calves born and the consequent impact on future exports. 
The sector is also the main source of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions (74% of the 
total in 2012). Within this, beef production accounts for more than 66% of emissions 
(Eastern Republic of Uruguay, 2017). This underscores the importance of 
implementing adaptation and mitigation measures. In fact, Uruguay’s production 
strategy is to rely on technological innovation and inclusion in value chains to double 
output by 2050 in a sustainable and inclusive manner, with greater climate resilience 
and lower rates of emissions (MGAP, 2017b). In addition, the objectives of the First 
Nationally Determined Contribution include reducing the rate of emissions from food 
production, while also indicating the priority given to adaptation in the agricultural 
sector (Eastern Republic of Uruguay, 2017). 

1.11 To achieve these proposals, climate-smart agricultural technologies warrant 
particular consideration, as these either maintain or enhance productivity while 
reducing emissions and/or contributing to climate resilience (World Bank and the 
International Center for Tropical Agriculture, 2015). Accordingly, the 2010 
“Agrointelligent Uruguay” policy has promoted the incorporation of climate-smart 
measures to enhance productivity in an environmentally sustainable manner 
(Ministry of Housing, Land Management, and the Environment, 2016). For example, 
implementation of the policy has facilitated a reduction in emissions rates for beef 
production through the use of feed management technologies and animal husbandry 
methods that help to boost productivity (Eastern Republic of Uruguay, 2017). In 
family-based livestock farming, specifically, estimates indicate that climate-smart 
practices (focused on adjustments in the number of animals per hectare, the use of 
rotational grazing systems, and herd optimization) can increase productivity by 25% 



 - 4 - 
 
 
 

and reduce emission rates by 30%, while simultaneously improving drought 
resilience (Ministry of Housing, Land Management, and the Environment, 2017). 
This reduction in GHG emissions through the implementation of climate-smart 
technologies tends to increase over time, reaching up to 40% in the third year in 
some cases (INIA, 2018). 

1.12 Previous experience. The Food and Agriculture Organization (2009) identifies the 
central elements of agricultural policy that agricultural institutions should focus their 
efforts on. These include government policies to protect and support weaker 
economic sectors; strengthening of the institutional framework for agriculture; and 
the provision of technology transfer and rural extension services. 

1.13 In this sphere, with respect to the implementation of differentiated policies for family 
agriculture in Uruguay, the following issues have been identified as important: 
(i) ensuring strong interagency coordination; (ii) creating synergies with other policy 
instruments (e.g., the promotion of collective endeavors and support for investments 
to enhance resilience); (iii) establishing a technical assistance network consisting of 
professionals committed to the programs and involved in them; (iv) working with 
producers that are nonbeneficiaries of public programs, as well as with those already 
served to incorporate more complex technologies or processes; and (v) leveraging 
the potential of rural organizations to facilitate the promotion and implementation of 
activities (Arboleya, 2018). The importance of addressing these factors is consistent 
with the findings of the Rural Productive Development Program (RPDP) (loan 
2595/OC-UR), whose impact evaluation showed a significant effect on beneficiaries’ 
productivity, with an increase of at least 10% in milk and beef yields per hectare 
(Aguirre et al., 2018). This study also reports that the impact is generally greater 
among those benefiting from MGAP support for the first time, and it indicates that 
the program has helped to strengthen beneficiary organizations, with an 
improvement in their collective processes. Nonetheless, data on program 
participation (DGDR/MGAP, 2018a) show that there is potential for improving the 
inclusion of women and young people as beneficiaries (44% of potential 
beneficiaries are women, yet only 25% benefited, while in the case of young people4 
4% of the total benefited, compared to a potential of 12%) (Beneficiaries of RPDP 
requests for proposals). 

1.14 An analysis carried out for Latin America (Food and Agriculture Organization and 
the IDB, 2016) indicates the need for government funding to ensure that the most 
vulnerable producers are able to access RTAE. It also reports that for these services 
to be effective, they should have a territorial approach, involve the participation of 
public and private stakeholders, provide continuous training for their human 
resources, and be linked to the research. Cumulative experience points to the 
following good practices: emphasizing the inclusion of smaller-scale producers that 
face greater hurdles to increased productivity; the participation of producers in 
determining their needs and prioritizing their problems; the provision of information 
and alternatives based on local agroecological and socioeconomic conditions; the 
simultaneous provision of public and private services at the regional level; and the 
incorporation of information and communication technologies (ICTs) to help reach 
producers and provide information and services to them (Escobar, 2012). ICTs can 
help foster the adoption of technologies to optimize production and increase farmer 

                                                
4  Individuals 15 to 29 years of age, according to the National Youth Institute. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-48
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-32
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-33
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-33


 - 5 - 
 
 
 

incomes (Jack & Tobias, 2017). Evidence from small-scale farmers in India indicates 
that cellphone-based technical assistance helped to increase yields (28% for cumin 
and 9% for cotton), with an estimated private return of US$10 for each dollar 
invested in the service (Cole & Fernando, 2016). 

1.15 Recent Bank experience. The RPDP, which was approved in 2011 with a final 
disbursement date of 31 December 2018, is executed by the MGAP through its Rural 
Development Bureau (DGDR). Its objective is to help improve the incomes of small- 
and medium-scale farmers, by increasing their productivity through the adoption of 
new technologies. To this end, the program focused on providing financing for: 
(i) production support for technology transfer; (ii) the promotion of research into 
adaptive technologies; and (iii) institutional strengthening of the DGDR. The 
operation’s intervention mechanism was based on requests for proposals for group 
management plans, and this serves as the foundation for this program. Its 
outcomes—some of which were measured in the aforementioned impact evaluation 
(paragraph 1.13)—include the following: (i) increases in average agricultural and 
livestock yields; (ii) the incorporation of new technologies validated under family 
agriculture condition; (iii) increases in the number of family producers belonging to 
rural organizations; and (iv) strategic territorial plans approved. 

1.16 Lessons learned. Lessons learned during execution of the RPDP, in particular, 
have been taken into account in the proposed program, together with experiences 
from similar operations (lons 1463/OC-UR, 2443/OC-DR, 1800/OC-PR, 2055/BL-NI, 
and 2223/BL-BO) and the Office of Evaluation and Oversight’s (OVE) Review of the 
Bank’s Support to Agriculture, 2002-2014. These lessons and way in which they 
have been incorporated into the program are presented in Table 1. 

 
Table 1. Lessons learned and their incorporation into program design 

Lessons learned Incorporation into program design 

In the RPDP5 

Coverage  

- Include incentives aimed at incorporating 
RPDP non-beneficiary producers. 

- The lack of information is an obstacle to 
producers’ participation in DGDR programs. 

- Lower proportion of women and young people 
among beneficiaries.  

- Creation and/or strengthening of synergies 
with rural organizations or public 
institutions. 

- Strengthening of program dissemination. 

- Requests for proposals targeting 
exclusively women and young people.  

Technical assistance  

- Assistance provided by individual technicians 
has posed limitations for: (i) the 
comprehensive, multidisciplinary 
consideration of technological options; 
(ii) reaching producers in remote or isolated 
areas; and (iii) high turnover.  

- Introduction of comprehensive technical 
assistance arrangements provided by 
multidisciplinary teams linked to rural 
organizations and/or public institutions. 

                                                
5  See Aguirre et al. (2018), DGDR/MGAP (2018) (Encuesta a Productores/as Familiares No Beneficiarios 

de Convocatorias de la DGDR), DGDR/MGAP (2018a) and Mendoza (2018) (Evaluación del PDPR). 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-34
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-34
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-35


 - 6 - 
 
 
 

Lessons learned Incorporation into program design 

Monitoring and evaluation  

- Monitoring and evaluation require the 
availability and implementation of instruments 
for gathering and analyzing information. 

- The detailed prior design of the impact 
evaluation is essential for the robust analysis 
of program effectiveness. 

- A good practice yet to be implemented 
involves the categorization of technologies 
financed by the program, with a view to 
facilitating the monitoring and evaluation of 
expected outcomes and impacts.  

- Incorporation of instruments that facilitate 
dynamic monitoring and allow evaluation of 
the effectiveness of execution processes.  

- Design of the impact evaluation, and the 
identification and planning of the 
instruments to be used for information 
gathering.  

- Inclusion of typologies of technologies and 
technology packages.  

In similar operations 

Provision of technical assistance and 
technology linkage 

 

- The limited scale, high number, and scattered 
nature of smaller-scale producers lead to high 
costs in providing technical assistance and 
technology adoption on an individual basis. In 
addition, the development and/or adaptation 
of technologies for these producers is limited 
by a disconnect with researchers.  

- Promotion of the creation of groups of 
producers and linkages with rural 
organizations and public institutions to 
provide technical assistance more 
efficiently. 

- Activities that foster interaction between 
producers and technology 
researchers/developers. 

Sustainability of technology adoption  

- Projects frequently provide one-off 
improvements without altering the structural 
barriers experienced by beneficiaries; this 
reduces the sustainability of benefits over 
time. 

- Long-term sustainability is sought through 
the work with rural organizations, 
complementary multidisciplinary technical 
assistance offered by the private and public 
sectors, and technologies designed and 
adapted for the target population.  

 

1.17 Intervention strategy. The proposed program is based on the evidence presented 
above, and it seeks to continue improving the productive and environmental 
sustainability of small-scale agricultural units. To this end, it focuses on technology 
adoption, with particular attention devoted to market failures casued by: information 
asymmetries (paragraphs 1.4 and 1.6), human capital (paragraphs 1.7 and 1.9), and 
coordination (paragraphs 1.10 and 1.11). Using the RPDP as a foundation, the 
lessons learned and good practices identified through the experiences of the MGAP, 
the Bank, and the region were incorporated into the program’s design in order to 
amplify its reach and impact (paragraphs 1.10 to 1.14). These elements are 
summarized in Table 2. 

 



 - 7 - 
 
 
 

Table 2. Summary of key elements of program design 

Targeting 

- Emphasis on new beneficiaries. 

- Previous producers may benefit, but with more complex technologies. 

- Producers determine their needs and priorities, but solutions focus on climate-smart technologies 
(inputs and processes, including ICTs). 

- Special consideration for women and young people. 

Structure 

- Strengthening of interagency coordination and synergies. 

- A territorial approach with the participation of rural organizations and key institutions that 
contribute to promotion and implementation of the program. 

- Comprehensive technical assistance provided by multidisciplinary teams that are committed to 
the program and involved in it. 

- Public and private sector participation. 

 

1.18 Strategic alignment. The program is consistent with the Update to the Institutional 
Strategy 2010-2020 (document AB-3008) and is expected to contribute to the 
Corporate Results Framework 2016-2019 (document GN-2727-6) through the 
development challenge of productivity and innovation, as it fosters increased 
productivity through the adoption of new technologies. It also contributes to the 
indicator of government agencies benefited by projects that strengthen technological 
and managerial tools to improve public service delivery. It is also aligned with the 
crosscutting themes of: (i) gender equity, with a special focus on women’s 
participation, thus contributing to the indicator of women beneficiaries of economic 
empowerment initiatives; and (ii) climate change and environmental sustainability, 
as it includes climate-smart technologies that contribute to resilient, low-carbon, 
sustainable development and thus supports farmers through access to improved 
agricultural services and investments (see Table 3 for specific indicators). It also 
contributes to the Sector Framework Documents on Agriculture and Natural 
Resources Management (document GN-2709-5), Food Security (document 
GN-2825-8); Climate Change (document GN-2835-5); and Innovation, Science, and 
Technology (document GN-2791-8). This is a result of its focus on the following 
dimensions of success, respectively: high levels of agricultural productivity and the 
management of climate impacts in the sector; reducing the vulnerability of food 
systems to climate change and natural disasters; progress in the countries on 
including climate considerations in the sectors; and investment in innovation, 
science, and technology. In addition, it supports the results matrix for the IDB 
Country Strategy with Uruguay 2016-2020 (document GN-2836), as it is linked to 
the strategic pillar of productivity and competitiveness through its support for 
innovation. It is also included in the Update of Annex III of the 2018 Operational 
Program Report for Uruguay (document GN-2915-2). 

1.19 It is estimated that 100% of the operation’s funds will be invested in climate change 
adaptation and mitigation activities, based on the multilateral development banks’ 
joint methodology for estimating climate finance (Climate Change). These funds 
contribute to the IDB Group’s target of increasing financing for climate-change 
related projects to 30% of all approved operations by the end of 2020. 

B. Objectives, components, and cost 

1.20 Objective. To help improve the sustainability of small and medium-sized family-
owned agricultural production units. The specific objectives are to increase the 

https://publications.iadb.org/handle/11319/8505
https://publications.iadb.org/handle/11319/8505
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-36


 - 8 - 
 
 
 

adoption of climate-smart technologies and to build capacities for technology 
generation and transfer, technical assistance, and rural extension. 

1.21 Climate-smart technologies help to strengthen climate resilience and/or reduce 
GHG emissions while also improving performance in terms of yield or return. Based 
on this criterion, priority will be given to those aligned with the actions identified in 
the First Nationally Determined Contribution. 

1.22 Component I. Improved productivity through technology adoption and 
alliance-building (IDB: US$17.94 million; local: US$380,000). This component 
focuses on financing the implementation of plans to improve productivity while 
taking climate considerations into account. It will provide direct support to 
producers who, as a group and in response to open and competitive requests for 
proposals organized by the MGAP, submit management plans that propose the 
use of climate-smart technologies to address their challenges. Groups of at least 
three producers (family, small, and medium-sized) will be eligible, the majority 
being family producers and not necessarily members of rural organizations. 
Support for the implementation of these plans will comprise financing for: 
(i) investments in technology, providing up to 50% of the total cost of materials, 
inputs, and specialized technical assistance for technology adoption (with a 
maximum value of US$8,000 per producer); and (ii) comprehensive technical 
assistance. The comprehensive technical assistance will consist of support and 
training in the areas of production, marketing/value added, and administration, 
provided by teams set up in either rural organizations or public institutions. 

1.23 Support will be differentiated, emphasizing the participation of beneficiaries who 
have not previously received support from the DGDR. In the case of beneficiaries 
who have already received DGDR assistance, the management plans will need to 
include more advanced technologies (as defined in the Technology evaluation). In 
no case will support be provided for practices that have already received 
cofinancing. New beneficiaries will also have the option of receiving greater 
comprehensive technical assistance as determined by the management plan and 
the technology selected (this support will be determined, in due time, in the 
documentation for the request for proposals). To encourage greater participation by 
women and young people, requests for proposals will be issued exclsuively for these 
groups, offering them up to 80% financing for technology adoption and alliance-
building processes. 

1.24 Component II. Capacity-building in technology generation and transfer, 
technical assistance, and rural extension (IDB: US$5.2 million; local: 
US$1.97 million). This componenent involves financing for activities aimed at 
generating and transferring technologies, as well as strengthening the delivery of 
rural technical assistance and extension (RTAE). To this end, strategic partnerships 
will be established with key rural organizations and/or nonstate public institutes 
(IPNEs) that have a local presence and work directly with producers. The component 
encompasses the following subcomponents: 

a. Generation and adaptation of climate-smart technology for family 
agriculture. This seeks to spark the development of new technologies or 
adjustments to existing ones through farm-based research and 
experimentation, based on strategic partnerships between producers’ 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-8
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-37


 - 9 - 
 
 
 

associations and public and/or private research entities. This will allow newly 
developed or adapted technologies to meet to the needs of producers. 

b. Strengthening of private sector RTAE capacities. This focuses on 
strengthening the ability of rural organizations to provide services to producers. 
It includes the creation of multidisciplinary teams to provide comprehensive 
technical assistance, training, as well as programs to disseminate and build 
awareness of the requests for proposals. 

c. Strengthening of public sector RTAE capacities. This is focused on 
improving capacities and coordination between the MGAP and IPNEs to 
support the delivery of RTAE to producers. 

d. Promotion and adoption of ICTs in family agriculture. This encompasses 
support for the use, dissemination, and development of ICTs for family 
agriculture through strategic partnerships with key entities. 

1.25 Monitoring and administrative costs (IDB: US$1.09 million; local: 
US$540,000). This includes the costs of administration, monitoring, audit, 
determination of baselines and final targets, and the midterm and final evaluations. 

C. Key results indicators 

1.26 A total of 3,100 producers are expected to benefit directly from the program, of 
which 50% have not previously benefited from DGDR support. Of this total number 
of beneficiaries, 32% are expected to be women (see Gender annex), with young 
people accounting for 11%. The expected impacts are increased productivity and 
reduced GHG emissions. The following intermediate outcomes are expected: 
(i) increased adoption and availability of climate-smart technologies; (ii) increased 
participation of new beneficiaries, women, and young people; and (iii) greater use 
of agricultural services, including technical assistance. Key indicators are 
presented in Table 3. 

 

Table 3. Main indicators in the results matrix 

Impact indicators 
Timing of 

measurement 
Rationale for selection 

Increase in partial land productivity (kg of 
meat/hectare, liters of milk/hectare) 

Impact 
evaluation 

Measures the contribution to the 
production dimension of sustainability 

Reduction in emissions per unit of output 
(kgs CO2 equivalent/kg of meat) 

Years 1 and 6 Measures the contribution to the 
environmental dimension of 
sustainability 

Increase in the rate of adoption of 
climate-smart technologies by 
beneficiaries  

Years 1 and 6 These measure the use of climate-
smart technologies, a proxy that 
indicates that producers have improved 
their climate resilience and reduced 
emissions  

Increase in the percentage of 
beneficiary producers that manage their 
lands with a safe carrying capacity 

Years 1 and 6 

Increase in the percentage of beneficiary 
family producers that continue to receive 
comprehensive technical assistance once 
the plan has been completed  

Years 1 and 6 Indicator of the intervention’s 
sustainability 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-52


 - 10 - 
 
 
 

Impact indicators 
Timing of 

measurement 
Rationale for selection 

Increase in the percentage of users of 
services provided by rural organizations.  

Years 1 and 6 The supply of services provided by rural 
organizations is a proxy that indicates 
whether producers are better able to 
buy inputs, sell their products, and/or 
purchase services on a group basis, 
thus favoring productivity levels 

Increase in new technologies validated 
for family production 

Years 1 and 6 Measures the availability of new 
technologies for family agriculture 

Increase in the rate of adoption of ICTs 
by family production units  

Years 1 and 6 Measures the effectiveness of training 
and other efforts to promote the use of 
ICTs by family producers 

Increase in the percentage of new 
beneficiaries 

Years 1 and 6 Indicates whether targeting and 
promotion efforts were effective in 
encouraging the participation of new 

beneficiaries 

Increase in the percentage of women 
beneficiaries  

Years 1 and 6 Indicates whether targeting and 
promotion efforts were effective in 
encouraging women’s participation 

Increase in the percentage of young 
beneficiaries  

Years 1 and 6 Indicates whether targeting and 
promotion efforts were effective in 
encouraging youth participation  

 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS 

A. Financing instruments 

2.1 Program cost and financing. Total program cost is US$27.12 million, of which 
US$24.23 million (89%) will be financed through a specific investment loan from the 
Bank’s Ordinary Capital. Table 4 presents the costs broken down by component. 

 

Table 4. Program cost and financing (US$ million) 

Investment component IDB 
Local 

counterpart 
Total % 

I.  Improved productivity through technology 
adoption and alliance-building 

17.94 0.38 18.32 68 

i. Individual plans 17.09 0.38 17.47 64 

ii. Plans, women and young people  0.85 0.00 0.85 3 

II. Capacity-building in technology generation 
and transfer, technical assistance, and 
rural extension 

5.20 1.97 7.17 26 

i. Generation and adaptation pf climate-
smart technologies 

0.42 0.13 0.55 2 

ii. Strengthening of private RTAE 4.26 0.96 5.22 19 

iii. Strengthening of public RTAE 0.19 0.79 0.98 4 

iv. Promotion and use of ICTs 0.33 0.09 0.42 2 

Administration and monitoring 1.09 0.54 1.63 6 

Total (US$) 24.23 2.89 27.12 100 

% 89.00 11.00 100.00  

 



 - 11 - 
 
 
 

2.2 The disbursement period will be six years, based on the expected annual budgetary 
space in the national budget, and also to allow the impacts in the producers’ 
management plans to materialize. See Table 5 for disbursement details. 

 
Table 5. Disbursement schedule (US$ million) 

Year 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 Total 

Amount 4.0 5.9 4.9 4.4 3.5 1.5 24.2 

% 16.5 24.4 20.2 18.2 14.5 6.2 100 

 

2.3 Economic viability. Based on the experience and evaluation of the RPDP, the level 
of support for technology implementation is maintained at up to 50% of total costs, 
with a maximum of US$8,000 per producer. Analyses of the ex ante economic 
evaluation show that subsidies of 50% are sufficient to ensure that investments yield 
a return over that time period (Mendoza, 2018). In camparative terms, a similar 
World Bank program currently under way in Uruguay provides maximum support of 
80% of an investment of up to US$16,000 per producer. However, financing is 
limited to activities with substantial positive environmental externalities (reductions 
in pollution in tributaries and improvements in the efficiency of water usage). 

2.4 The program’s economic viability is based on the cost-benefit analyses carried out 
using a model of the support for climate-smart technology adoption by producers. 
Economic benefits were estimated by calculating the value of increased productivity 
in the targeted farms. Support to producers will be concentrated mainly in the 
segments of livestock farming for beef and wool (65%) and dairy (16%), which will 
be offered incentives for a wide variety of climate-smart technologies. For the 
program as a whole (including both administration, supervision, and monitoring 
costs and investments to strengthen the rural organizations supporting adoption by 
the producers), an internal rate of return of 15.4% was obtained, with a net present 
value of US$5.0 million (based on a 10-year time horizon and a discount rate of 
12%). In light of these results, the benefit/cost ratio is 1.11 for each unit invested. 
The results were subject to a sensitivity analysis indicating that even under more 
conservative assumptions (relating to the technology adoption process, higher 
costs, limitations in access to technical assistance once the intervention has been 
completed), program returns remain above 12%. The program also offers parallel 
benefits in terms of the reduction in GHG emissions, which are accounted for 
separately (Program economic evaluation). 

B. Environmental and social risks 

2.5 This program has been classified as Category B operation in accordance with the 
Environment and Safeguards Compliance Policy (Operational Policy OP-703), as its 
potential direct and indirect impacts are reversible and temporary, of low magnitude, 
and localized in nature. Well-known measures are readily available to mitigate and 
compensate for them, and the implementation thereof is viable. It has also been 
determined that the level of natural disaster risk is low to moderate, taking into 
account the focus on climate-smart technologies. At the same time, highly positive 
effects are expected from the delivery of agricultural extension services, training, 
and climate-smart technology packages that will impact producers and the different 
beneficiaries throughout the entire production chain, as well as consumers across 
the country. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-38


 - 12 - 
 
 
 

2.6 An environmentaland social analysis was prepared for the program, and its 
corresponding environmental and social management plan (ESMP) sets out 
procedures, responsibilities, guidelines, and criteria for identifying, evaluating, 
avoiding, mitigating, and monitoring the environmental and social impacts of the 
specific actions financed. A significant consultation process was implemented during 
preparation of the operation, and there is no evidence of any environmental or social 
liabilities or compliance failures that could affect the future performance of this new 
initiative. 

2.7 The ESMP will be included as an annex to the program Operating Regulations, and 
both documents will establish environmental and social requirements to ensure that 
the project is executed in compliance with the Bank’s safeguards and the conditions 
included in Annex B of the environmental and social management report (ESMR). 

2.8 Environmental and social sustainability risks. Adverse climate conditions 
represent a medium risk to the program. In order to mitigate this, the program will 
focus on climate-smart technologies; requests for proposals that support the 
development and adaptation of climate-smart technologies; the development of 
ICTs that contribute to adaptation to climate change and variability; and the inclusion 
of climate risk management in training for associations, technical staff, and 
producers. 

C. Fiduciary risks 

2.9 Based on the MGAP’s prior experience in executing similar operations, no specific 
weaknesses have been identified in its institutional capacity. Neither the fiduciary 
activities included in the Procurement Plan nor the financial management activities 
are regarded as complex, thus confirming—together with the executing agency’s 
track record of performance and compliance—the low level of risk for this project 
(see Annex III). 

D. Other project risks 

2.10 Development risks. There is a medium level of risk associated with farm 
management plans lacking a comprehensive approach and difficulties in attracting 
new beneficiaries. To mitigate the former, the following activities are planned: 
training for each request for proposals, with specific training regarding the 
comprehensive approach; periodic monitoring and territorial coordination meetings; 
and preparation of a dissemination plan. In the case of the second risk, in addition 
to a dissemination plan, adjustments are planned to the requirements in the requests 
for proposals, as well as the signing of agreements with other public institutions. 

2.11 Macroeconomic risk. The new regional context poses a medium level of 
macroeconomic risk over the next few years for growth in Uruguay, trends in the 
dollar, and the resulting impact on inflation. Nonetheless, country risk remains low 
and stable (172 basis points in September 2018). At the same time, the increase in 
the dollar exchange rate may favor the competitiveness of the export-oriented 
agricultural sector. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-621703441-9
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-41


 - 13 - 
 
 
 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN 

A. Summary of execution arrangements 

3.1 The borrower will be responsible for program execution, through the Ministry of 
Livestock, Agriculture, and Fisheries (MGAP). The MGAP, in turn, will act through 
the Rural Development Bureau (DGDR) with support from the Project Management 
Unit (PMU). The DGDR will be responsible for technical execution and the direction 
of the program, while the PMU will be responsible for fiduciary and administrative 
matters (see Organizational chart). The guidelines and procedures for program 
execution are set out in the program Operating Regulations. As a special 
contractual condition precedent to the first loan disbursement, evidence will 
be provided to the Bank’s satisfaction that that the program Operating 
Regulations (including the ESMP) have entered into force, in accordance with 
the terms previously agreed with the Bank. The aim of this is to establish the 
guidelines and procedures to be followed for successful program execution. 

3.2 Special contractual conditions for execution. Standard Framework Agreements 
are expected to be signed with the National Agricultural Research Institute (INIA) 
and other Nonstate Public Institutes (IPNEs) that are considered key to the execution 
of certain program activities. For the use of resources allocated to subcomponents 
(i), (iii), and (iv) of Component II, the signing and entry into force of Standard 
Framework Agreements between the MGAP (through the DGDR) and the INIA and 
IPNEs will be a special contractual condition for execution. The signing of these 
agreements is essential for implementation of the activities financed under each of 
the subcomponents. 

3.3 Execution arrangements are based on those used during implementation of the 
RPDP, with adjustments aimed at incorporating lessons learned. Details of the 
arrangements are provided in the draft program Operating Regulations, and Table 6 
provides a summary of their key features. 

 

Table 6. Key implementation features 

Technologies financed. These will be determined based on the producers’ needs, taking into 
account local conditions, technical viability, and contribution to climate change mitigation and/or 
adaptation. Multidisciplinary technical teams—the formation of which is supported under 
Component II—will prepare the management plans. 

Management plans. A management plan is considered implemented once at least 60% of the 
activities included in the approved plan have been fulfilled and an evaluation of technology adoption 
has been completed. 

Rural organizations. As part of execution, rural organizations interested in becoming Regional 
Rural Development Agents (ATDRs) will be convened and selected. The ATDRs are rural 
organizations authorized by the DGDR to provide support for the following activities: (i) raising 
awareness among producers; (ii) training for technical staff and producers; (iii) dissemination of the 
requests for proposals; (iv) provision of comprehensive technical assistance; (v) preparation of 
management plans; and (vi) monitoring of the implementation of approved plans. The program will 
finance institutional strengthening of the ATDRs, training of their human resources, and the services 
of promotion, extension, and technical assistance that they provide. 

Program dissemination. The requests for proposals will be widely publicized, using communication 
and awareness-building strategies by the DGDR and the ATDRs. 

 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-64
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-39


 - 14 - 
 
 
 

3.4 Procurement of goods, works, and consulting and nonconsulting services. 
Procurement financed in whole or in part with Bank resources will be conducted in 
accordance with the Policies for the Procurement of Goods and Works Financed by 
the IDB (document GN-2349-9) and Policies for the Selection and Contracting of 
Consultants Financed by the IDB (document GN-2350-9). The Procurement Plan 
contains details of the procurement processes that will be implemented during 
execution, as well as the procedures used by the Bank for their review. 

3.5 Direct contracting. Direct contracts totaling US$6,048,153 are envisaged, of which 
US$4,025,963 will be financed with Bank resources and the rest with local 
counterpart funds. The Bank-financed amount will be used to renew the contracts of 
consultants belonging to the RPDP team (US$3,885,736) and for fuel purchases 
(US$140,227). 

3.6 Single-source selection of consultants is permitted under sections 3.10(a) and 3.11 
of the Policies for the Selection and Contracting of Consultants Financed by the IDB 
(document GN-2350-9), which establish the principle of continuity of service where 
such continuity is more efficient than a new competition. In this case: (i) initial 
selection of the consultants was done on a competitive basis in 2012 and received 
the Bank’s prior no objection; (ii) the consultants whose contracts are to be renewed 
are subject to an annual performance evaluation; and (iii) in the event of 
unsatisfactory results, a consultant’s contract will not be renewed and alternative 
human resources will be sought through a competitive process. With regard to the 
direct purchase of fuel from the state-run Administración Nacional de Combustibles, 
Alcohol y Pórtland [National Fuel, Alcohol, and Cement Administration] (ANCAP), 
this is based, first, on the requirements of section 3.6(c) of the Policies for the 
Procurement of Goods and Works Financed by the IDB (document GN-2349-9), 
which allow direct contracting in cases where a product may only be obtained from 
one source, and, second, on section 33.C.1 of the Texto Ordenado de Contabilidad 
y Administración Financiera [Consolidated Text on Accounting and Financial 
Administration] (TOCAF), which indicates that government bodies or departments 
may engage in direct contracting with each other. 

3.7 The fiduciary agreements and requirements (Annex III) establish the framework for 
financial management and planning, as well as the supervision and execution of 
procurement applicable to program execution. 

3.8 Disbursements. The primary disbursement modality will be advances of funds 
based on actual liquidity needs. These advances will preferably be made every six 
months, once reporting has been filed for at least 70% of the amount advanced. As 
documentary support, the accounting forms will need to be presented along with the 
financial planning spreadsheet. Documentation will be subject to ex post review. 

3.9 Audit. For the duration of program execution, the PMU will submit the program’s 
audited financial statements on an annual basis in accordance with Bank 
requirements. As agreed with the executing agency, audits will be performed by the 
Tribunal de Cuentas de la República [National Audit Office] (TCR). The audited 
annual financial statements will be submitted within 120 days after the end of each 
fiscal year or, in the case of the final statements, within 120 days following the date 
of final disbursement. 



 - 15 - 
 
 
 

B. Summary of arrangements for monitoring results 

3.10 Throughout program execution, the DGDR, in coordination with the PMU, will 
prepare semiannual progress reports and submit them to the Bank within 60 days 
after the end of each six-month period. These reports will indicate the level of 
physical and financial progress toward the indicators and activities included in the 
results matrix, the annual work plan, and the procurement plan, analyzing any 
problems encountered and describing the corrective measures adopted to resolve 
them. The monitoring reports for the second half of each year will include the annual 
work plan for the following year, the updated procurement plan, the status and 
maintenance plan for the executed works, as well as the status of compliance with 
the environmental and social requirements established for the program in the ESMP. 

3.11 The DGDR, in coordination with the PMU, will also submit two evaluation reports: 
(i) midterm, within 90 days after the date on which 50% of resources have been 
committed, or after 50% of the execution period has elapsed, whichever occurs first; 
and (ii) final, within 90 days after the date on which 95% of resources have been 
disbursed. These reports, which will be prepared independently using loan 
resources, will include (i) financial execution by subcomponent and source of 
financing; (ii) progress toward attainment of the outputs, outcomes, and impacts 
contained in the results matrix; (iii) fulfillment of the ESMP; and (iv) a summary of 
the financial accounts, procurement, disbursements, and internal control. 

3.12 The monitoring and evaluation plan agreed with the MGAP and considered in the 
budget includes detailed information on indicators and means of verification; the 
critical path for activities and outputs; monitoring instruments; responsible parties; 
and the methodology and budget for implementation of the plan. 

C. Impact evaluation 

3.13 A quasi-experimental impact evaluation will be conducted that makes use of 
producers’ voluntary registration for the requests for proposals, implementing a 
random promotion to increase the participation rate in a randomly selected treatment 
group. This promotion will be used as an instrumental variable for evaluating the 
program’s impact on beneficiary productivity. A pilot test will be carried out at the 
end of 2018 with a view to selecting an effective promotion tool. Once this tool has 
been fine-tuned, the evaluation will be conducted for the meat and dairy segments 
at a minimum, given that these are representative of the majority of program 
beneficiaries. The source of information for this analysis will consist of surveys 
administered before and after the intervention (in 2019 and 2024), with a total 
sample of approximately 1,000 producers. 




 


 
 