

























President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of
Liberia for the Rural Community Finance
Project



Republic of Liberia

Rural Community Finance Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of Liberia

Executing agencies: Technical Assistance and Supervision Unit (TASU) and
Technical Assistance and Supervision Company
(TASC), and Central Bank of Liberia (CBL)

Total project cost: US$10.86 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 4.01 million (equivalent to approximately
US$5.5 million)

Amount of IFAD grant: SDR 0.38 million (equivalent to approximately
US$0.5 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional: maturity period of 40 years,
including a grace period of 10 years, with a service
charge of 0.75 per cent per year

Contribution of borrower: US$0.54 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$4.39 million including US$3.2 million frombeneficiaries, US$1.1 million from RCFIs and US$0.09
million from CBL

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD




1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of Liberia for the Rural Community Finance Project as
contained in paragraph 45.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Liberia for the
Rural Community Finance Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Despite significant improvements since the end of its civil war, Liberia remains a

fragile state with weak institutions, policies and governance. The outbreak of Ebola
virus disease has further constrained Liberia’s limited institutional capacity and
impacted its economy, threatening post-war gains. Liberia is classified as a Least
Developed Country and a Low-Income Food-Deficit Country,1 and relies heavily on
foreign assistance. The gross national income per capita was US$400 in 20142 and,
according to the 2014 Human Development Index, increased by 68.2 per cent
between 2000 and 2013. With a 2013 Human Development Index score of 0.412,
Liberia ranked 175 out of 187 countries in human development.

2. According to United Nations statistics, the population is estimated at 4.4 million
with an annual growth rate of 2.6 per cent. Liberia has a large youth population: in
2013, 42.9 per cent of the population was estimated to be less than 14 years old.
Poverty is widespread in Liberia, and is particularly acute in rural areas. An
estimated 51 per cent of the population lives in rural areas where poverty is heavily
concentrated, and a high percentage lack access to basic infrastructure and social
services, with poor road conditions leaving many areas inaccessible. Approximately
55 per cent of rural Liberian households are food insecure.3

3. The agricultural sector is the primary source of livelihood for 48.9 per cent of the
active population – mainly in smallholder and subsistence farming. There are also
cash-crop plantations including rubber, cocoa, coffee, palm oil and sugar cane.
Although agriculture is the largest contributor of GDP, small-scale farmers are
among the poorest in the country. Liberia has signed the Comprehensive Africa
Agricultural Development Programme (CAADP) Compact, committing to the Maputo
Protocol goal of 10 per cent national budget expenditure on agriculture by 2017
(the current level is 3 per cent of the national budget). As a result of low
agricultural production and productivity, Liberia imports between 50 per cent and
60 per cent of its staple food requirements, leaving the country vulnerable to price
fluctuations in global markets.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and RB-
COSOP

4. IFAD’s results-based country strategic opportunities programme (RB-COSOP) for
Liberia for the period 2011-2015 is aligned with the CAADP and national policies,
especially the Liberia Agriculture Sector Investment Program. Three
IFAD-supported projects are currently contributing to the RB-COSOP: (i) the
Agriculture Sector Rehabilitation Project; (ii) the Smallholder Tree Crop

1 Low-Income Food-Deficit Countries list for 2014, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
2 World Bank World Development Indicators: gross national income per capita, Atlas Method (Current US$).
3 Liberia Comprehensive Food Security and Nutrition Survey, June 2013.



2

Revitalization and Support Project; and (iii) the support to the Farmers’ Union
Network.

5. As the Liberia RB-COSOP reached its midway point, its performance and relevance
were reviewed to identify the way forward for future IFAD support under the 2013-
2015 performance-based allocation system. The findings of the 2013 review
revealed that the strategic objectives under the RB-COSOP continue to be relevant,
with the provision that the transition from an emergency situation to a development
approach is realized. The needs and priorities of smallholder farmers and their
organizations are changing. Their growing interest in investing in agriculture and in
other microenterprises and small business is generating greater demand for credit
and will necessitate better access to rural finance. This demand has been
recognized in government efforts to promote growth in the local economy and
reduce poverty in the long term. The Government’s interest in building the rural
finance sector has been mirrored by the CBL. With the current RB-COSOP set to
end in 2015, the new RB-COSOP will require a stronger focus on rural finance.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
6. Project area. The project will facilitate the creation of new rural community

finance institutions (RCFIs) in selected areas throughout the country. RCFI locations
will be identified through feasibility studies and criteria including the degree of
commitment by host communities, absence of banking facilities and viability. CBL’s
strategic goals and objectives will also be taken into account. Priority will be given
to locations with significant business potential, including central towns with high
demand for financial services. The project area will also include all locations with
existing RCFIs.

7. Although the project will be nationwide in scope (excluding urban Montserrado
county), its coverage may initially be divided into implementation clusters. At the
district or county level, the following criteria will be used to identify suitable
communities: (i) social, poverty and demographic indicators for identifying
vulnerable communities with high potential; (ii) complementarities with ongoing
and planned initiatives; (iii) the potential for commercial activity, including the
production of cocoa and coffee, and value addition; (iv) the potential for poverty
reduction and employment creation; (v) the potential for mobilization of shares and
savings; and (vi) demand for financial services, particularly among low-income
groups.

8. Target group. The primary target group will be the economically active rural
population: petty traders, smallholder farmers, food processors, local transporters,
craftsmen, artisans and ex-combatants. Special attention will be given to reaching
women and youth, and small-scale entrepreneurs, especially women. As a project
designed to improve access to rural finance, targeting will be inclusive: by virtue of
the fact that the RCFIs will be community-owned, access to the financial services
will be open to the entire community. The project will directly target 24,000
shareholders, at least 50 per cent of them women, and 25 per cent of them young
men and women.

9. The proposed project will complement ongoing initiatives through partnerships to
maximize the impact on the target group. This includes partnerships with farmers’
organizations supported by existing projects that show interest in financial services.

B. Project development objective
10. The overall development goal of the project is to reduce rural poverty and

household food insecurity on a sustainable basis by facilitating access to finance for
at least 24,000 rural individuals and their families. The project’s development
objective is to improve access to rural financial services on a sustainable basis,



3

enabling the development of the rural sector. This project development objective
will be assessed through three indicators, namely that at least: (i) 20 per cent of
the adult rural population (over 16 years) in the project area uses the financial
services of RCFIs supported by the project; (ii) 50 per cent of RCFI shareholders
have received at least one loan; and (iii) 75 per cent of RCFIs supported by the
project achieve 100 per cent operational self-sufficiency (OSS) by the project end.

C. Components/outcomes
11. This five-year project will aim to enhance access to sustainable and affordable rural

financial services in Liberia. The three main outcomes of the project are that: (i)
RCFIs deliver demand-driven and efficient financial services to their clients; (ii)
professional and efficient technical support and supervision services are provided to
RCFIs by an apex body – the Technical Assistance and Supervision Unit/Technical
Assistance and Supervision Company (TASU/TASC)4 and; (iii) a more conducive
regulatory and supervisory environment promotes the rural financial sector. The
project will comprise three components: (i) Rural financial services; (ii) Enabling
environment for rural finance; and (iii) Project management and coordination.

12. Rural financial services. This component includes three subcomponents:
(i) direct support in the creation of 10 RCFIs and extended support to nine existing
RCFIs with support from CBL and a commercial bank; (ii) creation of a TASU/TASC
within CBL to implement the subcomponent 1.1 and support RCFIs; and (iii) a
country-specific grant to mitigate the impacts of the Ebola virus disease outbreak.
Given negative impacts of Ebola virus disease on household incomes, earning
capacity, financial and other reserves, and saving capacity, IFAD will support the
recovery of existing RCFIs and the establishment of new ones with US$0.5 million.

13. Enabling environment for rural finance. This component will provide technical
assistance to CBL for developing a sound regulatory framework for deposit-taking
and credit-only financial institutions. There will be a focus on rationalizing Liberia’s
the regulatory environment, including policies and reporting formats for RCFIs,
microfinance institutions (MFIs) and credit unions. This will be achieved in an open
manner that ensures stakeholder participation.

14. Project management and coordination. Component 3, comprising
project-related coordination, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), reporting, financial
management and procurement oversight, will be undertaken by the programme
implementation unit (PIU) operating under the supervision of the programme
management unit (PMU) within the Ministry of Agriculture. The PMU is responsible
for the coordination and harmonization of all donor-funded agricultural projects.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
15. The institutional design of the project is simple: the existence of a centralized PIU

for all Ministry of Agriculture projects supported by IFAD makes it possible to
coordinate the rural finance activities assigned to TASU/TASC and CBL. The main
institutional responsibilities comprise: (i) implementation of all grass-roots activities
under component 1 by TASU/TASC; (ii) implementation of component 2 activities,
which are related to CBL’s core mandate, by CBL; (iii) PIU implementation of all
activities related to its mandate (see paragraph 19); and (iv) guidance on major
issues, which will be provided by a project steering committee (PSC).

4 The TASU will be established within the Central Bank of Liberia and will develop over time until
deemed sufficiently strong for transformation into an independent company (TASC), providing services
to member institutions in exchange for a fee.




4

16. TASU/TASC and CBL will share responsibility for implementation. This complies with
the international consensus that central banks’ project interventions should be
limited to activities clearly related to their primary mandates. In this case,
regulation and supervision of financial institutions fall under the mandate of CBL.
Memorandums of agreement will be signed by the PIU, TASU/TASC and CBL.
Memorandums of agreement will also be signed by TASU/TASC and each affiliated
RCFI.

B. Organizational framework
17. The project will operate under the guidance of a PSC composed of representatives

from the Ministry of Agriculture, the Ministry of Finance and Development Planning,
and CBL. The PSC will provide project oversight, approve all manuals and revisions,
approve the annual workplan and budget before its submission to IFAD, receive
draft annual reports and decide on major issues. According to PIU implementation
guidelines, all sector-specific projects must have their own PSC with the necessary
technical requirements and expertise.

18. The PMU was established under the supervision of the Ministry of Agriculture and is
affiliated with that ministry’s Department of Planning and Development . The PMU is
a shared unit in charge of implementing all donor-funded projects in the agricultural
sector. The PMU is responsible for overall coordination of activities and information
exchange among partners, ministries and other stakeholders, and for ensuring
synergy among the project implementation units of the various donors.

19. Within the PMU, the IFAD PIU in Monrovia is responsible for the implementation of
all IFAD-funded projects in Liberia related to agriculture. The mandate of the PIU
comprises: project accounting, withdrawals, consolidating annual workplans and
budgets, preparing annual reports, corresponding with government authorities on
issues related to the financing agreement (excluding technical implementation),
documentation, procurement, submitting reports to IFAD and other agencies, M&E,
supervision of support and midterm review (MTR) missions, impact assessment and
end-of-project evaluation.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

20. A system to integrate planning, M&E, and knowledge management will be
developed at start-up to: (i) provide stakeholders with the data required to steer
implementation; (ii) provide the Ministry of Agriculture and other stakeholders with
information on progress in order to measure the project’s success in increasing
access to finance and other indicators; (iii) support coordination and synergies with
other development projects; (iv) monitor the project’s success in building
participatory processes that ensure the full involvement of rural poor people;
(v) provide participating communities and RCFIs with regular feedback and
analytics; and (vi) provide information on the achievement of RB-COSOP targets.
The PIU will manage this system in collaboration with partners.

B. Financial management, procurement and governance
21. Country context and risk rating. The inherent risk in Liberia is assessed as

medium. Liberia’s Corruption Perceptions Index score has decreased slightly from
41 in 2012 to 38 in 2013 and to 37 in 2014. According to the latest IMF Public
Expenditure and Financial Accountability Assessment conducted in 2012, Liberia’s
Government has made significant improvements since the 2007 assessment, but
the overall state of the public financial management remains somewhat weak. As
part of the project design, a financial management assessment of the PIU
responsible for implementing existing IFAD projects was undertaken. The
assessment found that the existing PIU’s financial management arrangements and
capacity are adequate to meet IFAD requirements. However, since the financial




5

management arrangements of the main implementing partner TASU/TASC are not
yet in place, the initial risk rating was determined to be medium.

22. Financial management. The main responsibility for the project’s financial
management will rest with the PIU. The PIU will maintain a full set of accounts
according to IFAD’s requirements and internationally accepted accounting
standards. The PIU will prepare periodic interim financial reports and annual project
financial statements according to accounting standards acceptable to IFAD. All
financial management arrangements will be detailed by the PIU in a financial
procedures manual or equivalent guideline to be approved by the Fund.

23. Flow of funds. There will be two designated bank accounts in United States dollars
held by CBL – one for the IFAD loan and one for the IFAD grant. In addition, two
operating accounts in United States dollars in a commercial bank acceptable to
IFAD will receive funds from the designated accounts. There will also be an
operating account to receive government counterpart funds. Once the IFAD
financing has entered into force, IFAD will make an initial deposit into the
designated accounts equal to the requirements of six months of implementation
(authorized allocation). IFAD financing will be disbursed following certified
withdrawal applications in accordance with IFAD disbursement procedures, which
will be specified in the letter to the borrower.

24. Procurement. Procurement for the project will be carried out according to national
procedures as long as they comply with IFAD guidelines. By default, the project will
utilize the procurement committee established within the Ministry of Agriculture’s
PIU.

25. Audit arrangements. The PIU will appoint independent auditors acceptable to
IFAD under terms of reference cleared by IFAD and in line with IFAD’s guidelines for
project audits. An audited annual consolidated financial statement for the entire
project together with a management letter on audit observations of internal
controls shall be submitted to the Fund within six months of each fiscal year end.

D. Supervision
26. The project will be directly supervised by IFAD. Annual supervision missions,

including follow-up missions whenever needed, will be organized with the
participation of the Ministry of Agriculture, the Ministry of Finance and Development
Planning, CBL, TASU/TASC, RCFIs and beneficiaries. Supervision will not be
conducted as general inspections, but as opportunities to assess achievements and
lessons learned, and to reflect on how to improve implementation and impact.
Missions will be an integral part of the knowledge management cycle, with mission
members supporting project and implementing agencies’ staff.

IV. Project costs, financing and benefits
A. Project costs
27. The total investment and incremental recurrent costs, including price and physical

contingencies, are estimated at US$10,860,000; contingencies account for
3 per cent of these costs. The foreign exchange component is estimated at
US$3,006,000 (28 per cent). Taxes represent US$404,000. The total base cost is
US$10,426,000 while price and other contingencies account for US$434,000.
Significant contributions will be made by beneficiary communities (purchase of
shares), RCFIs (contributions to operating costs of RCFIs and TASU/TASC) and CBL
(staff time). The total costs by component and subcomponent are summarized by
financier in table 1 below.

28. The base cost of component 1 – Rural financial services – represents an investment
of US$9.7 million (93 per cent of the total base cost) while component 2 – Enabling
environment for rural finance, accounts for US$313,000 (3 per cent of the total





6

base cost). Project management and coordination under component 3 account for
4 per cent of the base cost, or US$417,000.

Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component
Government IFAD IFAD grant RCFIs Liberia Beneficiaries Total
Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1.  Rural financial
services

i. RCFIs 239 3.3 2 693 36.8 - - 1 139 15.6 - - 3 240 44.3 7 310 72.2

ii. TASC 114 4.9 2 108 91.1 - - - - 92 4.0 - - 2 313 22.9
iii. Grant for

economic
recovery
after
Ebola virus
disease 8 1.7 - - 490 98.3 - - - - - - 498 4.9

Subtotal 361 3.6 4 800 47.4 490 4.8 1 139 11.3 92 0.9 3 240 32.0 10 121 93.2
2.  Enabling

environment for
rural finance
i  Technical

assistance
to CBL 5 1.8 277 98.2 - - - - - - - - 364 2.6

3.  Project
management
and coordination 31 6.7 426 93.3 - - - - - - - - 591 4.2

Total 400 3.7 5 500 50.6 490 4.5 1 139 10.5 92 0.8 3 240 29.8 10 860 100.0

B. Project financing
29. The project will be financed by the Government, IFAD, CBL, RCFIs and their clients.

IFAD will finance 55 per cent of the project costs through a loan on highly
concessional terms to the Government of US$5.5 million and a grant of
US$0.49 million. The RCFI contribution to operating costs is estimated at
US$1.1 million (11 per cent) and the shareholders’ contribution to share capital is
estimated at US$3.2 million (30 per cent). For the first 30 months, CBL will house
the TASU/TASC and provide a manager, with a total cost of US$0.09 million
(1 per cent). The Government’s contribution will be in the form of waived taxes and
duties on imported and local goods and services as per standard regulations for
IFAD funding (US$0.4 million, representing 4 per cent of the total cost). Total cost
financing arrangements by category of expenses are summarized in the table 2
below.




7

Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure
category

Government IFAD IFAD grant RCFIs Liberia Beneficiaries Total Foreign (Excl.
Duties

and
Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % exch. taxes) taxes

I. Investment
costs

A. Consulting
services - - 467 95.3 23 4.7 - - - - - - 521 3.7 490 - -

B. Workshops
and training 129 6.8 1 667 87.6 108 5.7 - - - - - - 2 494 17.9 190 1 585 127

C. Works 39 5.6 667 94.4 - - - - - - - - 1 020 7.3 106 565 35
D. Vehicles

equipment
and material 112 14.2 611 77.5 66 8.4 - - - - - - 1 036 7.4 568 110 110

E. Grant - - - - 140 100 - - - - - - 140 1 - 140 -
F. RCFI

capitalization - - - - - - - - - - 3 240 100 4 210 30.1 - 3 240 -
G. Rural

finance
facility - - 111 100 - - - - - - - - 111 1.1 - 111 -

Subtotal I 280 3.8 3 522 47.7 336 4.6 - - - - 3 240 43.9 7 378 67.9 1 354 5 751 273
II. Recurrent

costs

A. Salaries - - 1 222 48.0 124 4.9 1 139 44.7 61 2.4 - - 2 546 23.4 1 273 1 273 -
B. Operating

costs 120 12.8 756 80.8 29 3.1 - - 31 3.3 - - 935 8.6 468 354 114

Subtotal II 120 3.5 1 978 56.8 153 4.4 1 139 32.7 92 2.6 - - 3 482 32.1 1 741 1 627 114

Total 400 3.7 5 500 50.6 490 4.5 1 139 10.7 92 0.8 3 240 29.8 10 860 100 3 095 7 379 387

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
30. The project will generate a wide range of direct benefits for: (i) approximately

24,000 shareholders and users, and their household members; (ii) RCFIs; and
(iii) the economies of the communities where RCFIs will be located. At the macro
level, the project will bring informal financial transactions into the formal sector and
make decentralized rural financial institutions more viable. The Government will
benefit from additional tax revenues payable by the RCFIs. The entire country will
benefit from a strengthened network of financial institutions, through which
remittances and transfers can be made from within and outside the country. Finally,
the country will benefit from higher confidence in the financial sector, especially in
rural areas, as a result of the improved regulatory framework and supervisory
systems under the guidance of the CBL. Other macro-level benefits are not
quantifiable using classical methods of economic and financial analysis, such as
increased deposits in formal financial institutions, higher confidence in the formal
financial sector and a larger network for transfers and payments.

31. Total project benefits are expected to increase from US$50,050 in year 1, to
US$2.71 million in year 5, and will remain at approximately US$2.8 million during
years 7-15. The economic analysis shows that the project will generate an
economic rate of return (ERR) of 17 per cent over a 15-year period, with a net
present value of US$5.5 million. Given that many of its benefits are not
quantifiable, the actual ERR will likely be higher. Sensitivity analysis shows that in
the event of adverse factors, the ERR is relatively robust with regard to higher
costs, lower benefits and time lags.

32. The highest contribution to the ERR derives from investments made by borrowers
from RCFIs. The number of investments is constrained by the number of RCFIs
created. The number of RCFIs that can be created through the project is likewise





8

constrained by the funding available for financial and technical support. There is a
potential to increase the number of new RCFIs beyond the 10 for which funding is
available. If additional funds are provided, the ERR will be higher than the projected
17 per cent.

D. Sustainability
33. The project will support the creation of 10 new RCFIs and consolidate the nine

existing ones. The detailed projections, which are based on conservative
assumptions, show that the new RCFIs will break even in years 3 or 4 without
project support, and in years 1, 2 or 3 with project support. Two years are needed
to mobilize a sufficient number of shareholders and depositors, an adequate volume
of shares and deposits, and to disburse a sufficient number of loans with good
repayment performance. The learning curves for administrative procedures (in the
first three months) and loan management (in months six to twelve) are expected to
be steep. The sustainability of access to financial services will also improve as
RCFIs mature since they are likely to attract more customers over time. This will
create additional benefits for the economy.

34. The projections for this project compare well with the results of the Rural Finance
and Community Improvement Programme, a similar initiative in neighbouring
Sierra Leone that is also based on the Rural Community Finance Project concept.
Out of the 51 financial service associations created, 41 (or 80 per cent) had an OSS
of 100 per cent at project end. Out of 17 newly created community banks, 14 (82
per cent) had an OSS of 100 per cent at project end.

35. The projections for TASC show that this apex body of RCFIs will be able to generate
income from audit services and from fee-based support services. The resulting
income will cover related operating expenses in a progressive manner, from
0 per cent in year 1 to 26 per cent in year 5. This result will largely depend on the
quality of services, which in turn depends on the volume of shares and deposits,
and the number of RCFIs included in the TASC. If the number of RCFIs increases,
the sustainability of TASC will improve accordingly. However, this depends on the
availability of funding.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
36. The main risks related to project implementation include: (i) competition from

subsidized credit programmes; (ii) caps on interest rates; (iii) a lack of interest
from local communities; (iv) the reluctance of CBL to delegate supervision authority
to TASC; and (v) weak cooperation from the microfinance sector in efforts to
improve regulatory frameworks. Adequate risk mitigation measures have been
introduced, and the residual risk ratings after risk mitigation are rated as low or
moderate.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
37. The project design is aligned with IFAD’s: (i) Strategic Framework 2011-2015;

(ii) Policy on Targeting Policy (2006); (iii) Policy on Gender Equality and Women’s
Empowerment; (iv) Rural Finance Policy; (v) Private-Sector Strategy; (vi) Rural
Enterprise Policy; (vii) Policy on Supervision and Implementation Support;
(viii) Climate Change Strategy (2010); (ix) Environment and Natural Resource
Management Policy (2012); and (x) Environmental and Social Assessment
Procedures.

B. Alignment and harmonization
38. Strategy for financial inclusion. With its 2009 Liberian Strategy for Financial

Inclusion (2009-2013), the Government aims to create an inclusive financial
environment by enabling open access to financial services. The overall objective of
inclusive finance is to establish viable microfinance providers that facilitate




9

micro-entrepreneurs’ sustained access to a diverse range of financial services. In
order to enhance sustainability, efficiency, outreach and good governance, financial
service providers will receive assistance from various actors, including CBL. The
strategy for financial inclusion will work at three levels: (i) establishing sustainable
microfinance providers at the micro level; (ii) building a supportive infrastructure at
the intermediate level; and (iii) creating an enabling policy and regulatory
environment at the macro level.

39. CBL has recently begun drafting the new Liberian Strategy for Financial Inclusion
2014-2018. Its vision is to build a sustainable financial sector that provides access
to and enhances the use of a wide range of affordable financial services in Liberia.
Its objectives are to: deliver financial services; enhance access to finance,
particularly credit; integrate the informal sector into the formal economy; improve
the environment for small and medium-sized enterprises; enhance financial
literacy; and improve consumer protection. These objectives have been
consolidated in a plan of action, which places the responsibility for establishing
RCFIs with CBL, the Ministry of Finance and Development Planning, and one
commercial bank.

C. Innovations and scaling up
40. Several of the approaches adopted by this project are innovative: the creation of a

new type of financial institution in Liberia builds on the experience of several other
West African countries. Other innovations include the creation of an apex body to
support RCFIs, the biometric identification of shareholders in order to offer new
products at reduced costs, and the emulation of indigenous rural finance practices.
The project is in itself part of IFAD’s scaling-up process in West Africa following the
Rural Finance and Community Improvement Project in Sierra Leone. Upon the
successful trial of the implementation model, it will be possible to increase the
number of RCFIs beyond those created in Liberia through this project.

D. Policy engagement
41. Liberia’s microfinance sector does not have the clear regulations needed for its

development. One project component (under CBL supervision) is exclusively aimed
at developing a new legal framework for this sector and training actors on the new
regulations and reporting formats.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
42. A project financing agreement between the Republic of Liberia and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as
appendix 1.

43. The Republic of Liberia is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

44. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.




10

VII. Recommendation
45. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Republic of Liberia in an amount equivalent to four million ten thousand
special drawing rights (SDR 4,010,000), and upon such terms and conditions
as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions
presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
Liberia in an amount equivalent to three hundred fifty-eight thousand special
drawing rights (SDR 358,000) and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President



