



































President’s report

Proposed grant to the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic
Strategic Support for Food Security and
Nutrition Project – Global Agriculture and
Food Security Program (GAFSP) funds


Lao People’s Democratic Republic

Strategic Support for Food Security and Nutrition Project
– Global Agriculture and Food Security Program (GAFSP)
funds

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Recipient: Ministry of Finance

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry

Total project cost: US$38.8 million

Amount of Global Agriculture and Food
Security Program (GAFSP) grant funds:

US$24 million
(supervised by IFAD)

US$6 million
(supervised by the World Food Programme [WFP])

Amount of cofinancing: Private sector: US$459,000

Contribution of recipient: US$5.4 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$2.9 million

Appraising institutions: IFAD and the GAFSP steering committee

Cooperating institutions: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
grant to the Lao People’s Democratic Republic for the Strategic Support for Food
Security and Nutrition Project, as contained in paragraph 37.

Proposed grant to the Lao People’s Democratic Republic
for the Strategic Support for Food Security and Nutrition
Project – Global Agriculture and Food Security Program
(GAFSP) funds

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Over the last two decades, the economy of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic

has experienced an average annual growth rate of 7 per cent, sustained by
macroeconomic liberalization, market-based reforms and large flows of foreign
direct investment into natural resource-based industries (such as mining and
hydroelectricity) and agriculture.

2. While the gross domestic product (GDP) share of agriculture declined from
53 per cent to 27.5 per cent between 2000 and 2014, this sector remains the
largest source of employment, with more than 70 per cent of the population
deriving its livelihoods from agriculture. This indicates that economic growth has
created few jobs in other sectors. The agriculture sector’s annual growth rate
averaged nearly 5 per cent at the end of the 1990s, but declined to just 2 per cent
in 2012. Much of the country’s growth has resulted from the expansion of
cultivation areas to accommodate a rural workforce that is growing by 2.5 per cent
per year. But overall productivity is still low in the farming sector and per capita
income is less than half the national average. Most of the country’s
650,000 farming households are engaged in subsistence and low-productivity
agriculture.

3. Economic growth has resulted in a steady decline of the national poverty index,
which dropped from 46 per cent of the population in the mid-1990s to 23 per cent
in 2012. Poverty and extreme poverty are most common in mountainous regions,
where the majority of the country’s indigenous peoples live. In upland areas, the
national poverty rate is as high as 43 per cent, compared with 28 per cent in the
lowlands. The country moved from a rice deficit in 1996 to surplus production in
2006. However, accessibility to rice and protein sources is highly contingent upon
geography and income. Malnutrition is high, with 44 per cent of children under 5 in
rural areas suffering from stunting (chronic undernutrition). The communities most
prone to undernutrition live in upland areas, where household economic activities
are increasingly constrained by unsustainable farming practices, large-scale land
concessions, limited adaptation to climate change and a lack of financing, access to
markets and support services.

4. In June 2015, the Global Agriculture and Food Security Program (GAFSP) – a multi-
donor financing facility – approved a US$30 million proposal presented by the
Government of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic in support of food security and
nutrition. IFAD was selected as the supervising entity for the investment and the
World Food Programme (WFP) was chosen as the supervising entity for technical
assistance.



EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

2

5. According to the provisions of the GAFSP Trust Fund transfer agreement entered
into by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) (as
trustee) and IFAD, IBRD shall transfer to IFAD the funds approved by the GAFSP
steering committee for project implementation. These funds shall be used by IFAD
in accordance with its policies and procedures, and in line with the decisions of the
GAFSP steering committee as specified in the approved project document.

6. In line with the transfer agreement, IFAD shall enter into an agreement with the
Government of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic in accordance with the policies
and procedures of the Fund.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
results-based COSOP

7. The GAFSP grant for the Strategic Support for Food Security and Nutrition Project
(SSFSNP) is designed to pilot new approaches and technologies, and scale up
existing technologies and systems to accelerate the Government’s progress towards
national food security and improved nutrition. The SSFSNP is one of the first
development projects in the country to comprehensively address the agricultural
constraints to improved nutrition within the framework of the convergence
approach, as stipulated in the National Nutrition Strategy to 2025 and Plan of
Action 2016-2020 (NNSPA).

8. Project interventions will focus on the implementation of four nutrition-sensitive
agricultural activities among the NNSPA’s 22 priority interventions. Other
development partners’ projects and government programmes are addressing the
remaining interventions. The project will focus on building an enabling environment
for sustainable market-led improvements in nutrition-rich and diverse agricultural
production, and rural employment through: (i) participatory, bottom-up
village-level public investment planning and implementation; (ii) the empowerment
of women to improve family diets, especially during the first 1,000 days of life;
(iii) the development of farmer organizations linking men and women farmers to
markets; (iv) the application of a demand-driven extension approach emphasizing
decentralized farmer-to-farmer and enterprise-to-farmer extension; and (v) support
for private agribusiness investment, seeking business models that are clearly
aligned with both development and growth objectives. In addition, the project will
promote “green technology”, with all interventions having a neutral or positive
impact on communities’ ability to adapt to climate change.

9. The financing for SSFSNP is in line with the country strategic opportunities
programme (COSOP) 2011–2016, which comprises three strategic objectives:
(i) community-based access to and management of land and natural resources;
(ii) access to advisory services and inputs for sustainable, adaptive and integrated
farming systems; and (iii) access to markets.

II. Project Description
A. Project area and target group
10. Project area: The project will be implemented in 12 districts and approximately

400 villages in the four provinces of Oudomxay, Phongsali, Xiangkhouang and
Houaphan in the northern part of the country. The villages will be selected based
on: (i) poverty data; (ii) potential for agriculture-led growth, including expansion of
the agriculture and forest resource base, irrigation development and market
access; (iii) commitment of village leadership; (iv) an assessment of climate
change vulnerability; and (v) opportunities for convergence with other ongoing or
planned projects.

11. Target population: The target group will comprise poor rural households in the
400 selected villages. To ensure that women have equal and priority access to
project benefits, SSFSNP will include measures to increase women’s participation



EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

3

and influence in their communities, including equal gender representation in
SSFSNP village development committees.

B. Project development objective
12. The goal of the project is to reduce extreme poverty and malnutrition in the poorest

communities. The development objective is to ensure that improved and diversified
agricultural production and household nutrition enhance livelihoods and well-being.

C. Components/outcomes
13. The project has three main components as well as a component for project

management:

Component 1: Strengthened public services. This component will underpin the
development of government capacities, procedures and technical skills to support –
and converge – community implementation of selected national nutrition strategy
interventions. It comprises: (i) the establishment of a tiered project planning,
supervision, monitoring and knowledge management system within the Ministry of
Agriculture and Forestry; and (ii) strengthening the capacities of district
departments of agricultural extension, district technical service centres and the
National Agriculture and Forestry Research Institute to deliver sustainable
climate-adapted and nutrition-sensitive agriculture and natural resource
management technologies and training.

Component 2: Community-driven agriculture-based nutrition interventions.
This component will be supervised by WFP. It has two subcomponents:

(i) Planning for improved nutritional outcomes. This comprises support for
multi-sector convergence planning at the district level to accelerate the
implementation of the NNSPA. It includes the mapping of various
stakeholders’ programmes and infrastructure assets to identify development
gaps at the village level. Simultaneously, the project will support improved
village development planning by building the capacity of village stakeholders
to lead the development process in their communities. The preparation of
three-year multi-sector, nutrition-sensitive village development plans (VDPs)
will be supported by experienced community planning service providers.

(ii) Women-led improvement in household nutrition. This encompasses the
rollout of a social behavioural change communication programme jointly
supported by SSFSNP and the World Bank-financed Health Governance and
Nutrition Development Project in all project villages. It aims to encourage
nutrition-enhancing behaviours that maximize the benefit of the project’s
investments in the four NNSPA agriculture interventions. The project will
support the establishment of monthly village-level “farmer nutrition schools”
to balance agricultural production, wild food collection and food purchase
throughout all seasons of the year. It will enable villages to increase the
availability of food for improved dietary diversity.

Component 3: Sustainable and inclusive market-driven partnerships. This
component includes two subcomponents:

(i) Profitable investment in nutrient-sensitive, climate-adapted
agriculture. The project will identify commodities that have investment
potential and that comply with the provincial socioeconomic development
plans. Commodities will be selected based on: their potential for commercial
production of nutritious food for export or import substitution; and the
likelihood of poor rural households to invest in increasing their production and
expanding employment. Strategic investment plans will be prepared in all
selected communities. These plans will inform the VDP process and provide a
framework for forming agriculture production groups and inviting
entrepreneurs to invest in the project area. Based on this exercise, the project



EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

4

will co-finance VDP-identified communities’ and farmer organizations’
investments in profitable and sustainable, nutrient-sensitive agricultural
production through a village development fund.

(ii) Linking Farmers to markets. With support from the Ministry of Planning
and Investment, and the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry, the project will
include a review of the current contract farming programme in the project
area and propose amendments to government legislation, regulations and
implementation procedures underpinning contract farming agreements. The
aim is to establish more equitable and productive agreements that benefit
farmers and investors alike. This will include technical assistance in support
of improved contract farming policies. Based on this experience, the project
will pilot the use of public-private partnership funding to promote investments
and job opportunities among rural enterprises and households.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
14. The SSFSNP will be implemented over a six-year period. Nutrition has been

mainstreamed into all three project components, and each activity will contribute to
improved nutrition. Simultaneous actions on food, childcare and feeding practices,
access to quality health care and water and sanitation will be undertaken for
greatest impact. The management structure will be based on the lessons learned
through previous IFAD projects in the country and the region, and will avoid parallel
management systems while implementing transparent mechanisms for financial
management and fund transfer.

B. Organizational framework
15. A national project steering committee will be responsible for overall direction of the

project and for the convergence of SSFSNP activities with those of other
development partners. This committee will comprise representatives from the
Ministries of Agriculture and Forestry; Finance; Planning and Investment; and
Health and from the National Chamber of Commerce and Industry, in addition to
the four provincial governors or vice-governors. It will be co-chaired by the Vice-
Ministers of Agriculture and Forestry, and Health. Steering committees will also be
established at the provincial level. Through its Department of Planning and
Cooperation, the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry will be the lead agency, with
overall responsibility for project implementation. This ministry will delegate
responsibilities to district administrations and to the national project coordination
office (NPCO) based in Vientiane. The NPCO will be supported by an internationally
recruited chief technical advisor.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

16. Planning, monitoring and evaluation. The project’s monitoring and evaluation
system will: (i) guide project implementation through the assessment and analysis
of project outputs, outcomes and impacts on poor households’ nutrition and
livelihoods; and (ii) share knowledge by capturing lessons learned, good practices
and successful innovations, and publishing them on knowledge platforms. The
system will monitor both operational and financial aspects of the project.

17. Learning and knowledge management. The project’s knowledge management
and learning processes will: identify, analyse, document and share knowledge,
support innovation dissemination; identify issues for advocacy with policymakers;
and provide information to support scaling up. This will include: (i) study tours,
discussions and workshops for project and ministry staff at the national and district
levels to promote nutrition-rich upland agriculture initiatives; and (ii) various



EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

5

formats for dissemination of results, including farmer-to-farmer and enterprise-to-
farmer extension.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
18. Financial Management. As custodian of funds in the project account, the NPCO

will be responsible for project financial management. The NPCO will also be
accountable to the Government and IFAD for the proper use of funds in line with
the legal agreements and contractual arrangements for service providers. It will
provide detailed financial statements of project operations, resources and
expenditures for each fiscal year in accordance with standards and procedures
acceptable to IFAD. The financial management assessment of the project rated the
fiduciary risk as high. Mitigation measures will include close supervision, support
and oversight from the IFAD subregional office for: (i) the installation of
professional accounting software; (ii) the recruitment  of competent and qualified
financial management staff; (iii) the development of a financial manual integrating
controls linked to operations; (iv) bi-annual supervision missions from the
subregional office; and (vi) a control framework integrating periodic internal audits
and independent external audits.

19. Flow of funds. Project funding will flow from the GAFSP account to IFAD and WFP
in accordance with their assigned roles and established legal agreements. For
IFAD-managed funds (GAFSP grant), the Ministry of Finance shall open a
designated account denominated in United States dollars in the Central Bank of the
Lao People’s Democratic Republic. The designated account will be maintained and
managed by the Ministry of Finance. IFAD will advance funds to the designated
account in accordance with imprest account modalities.

20. The NPCO shall open and maintain a designated account denominated in Lao kips
(LAK) for project operations. The NPCO will submit replenishment requests to IFAD
through the Ministry of Finance with appropriate supporting documentation.

21. Procurement. The procurement of goods, works and consulting services financed
through this project will be carried out in accordance with IFAD Procurement
Guidelines. For component 2, WFP’s procurement rules will apply. National
procurement procedures and regulations will be applied provided that they are
consistent with IFAD’s guidelines.

22. Governance. The NPCO will prepare a project framework for investment
transparency and publicity. This framework will include provisions to ensure that
procurement (whether carried out by the districts or by the NPCO) is carried out in
accordance with IFAD rules and specifications. Measures will include: (i) the
publication of all procurements, calls for proposals, contract awards and business
partnership details in local newspapers and at district and provincial offices;
(ii) participation of end user representatives in bid assessments; and (iii) prompt
communication with bidders. The framework will also include an internal code of
conduct to be signed by all staff engaged in project implementation.

E. Supervision
23. The project will be jointly supervised by IFAD and WFP. WFP will focus on

component 2 while IFAD will supervise the remaining components and provide
overall financial management. A joint midterm review will be organized by the
government, IFAD and WFP before the end of 2018.



EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

6

IV. Project costs, financing, and benefits
A. Project costs
24. The total cost for the project is estimated at US$38.8 million as indicated in Table 1.

Table 1
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(In thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

GAFSP
IFAD

GAFSP
WFP

Government–
parallel

investment Private sector Beneficiaries Government Total
Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Civil works 318 86.1 - - - - - - 51 13.9 370
2. Vehicles 1 089 100 - - - - - - - - 1 089
3. Equipment 477 100 - - - - - - - - 477
4. Agricultural inputs 865 58.9 73 5 - - - - - - 531 36.1 1 469
5. Matching grant 13 881 72.9 1 800 9.5 459 2.4 2 900 15.2 - - 19 040
6. National technical

assistance 2 176 47.2 1 775 38.5 - - - - - - 658 14.3 4 608
7. International technical

assistance 362 26.5 1 003 73.5 - - - - - - - - 1 364
8. Capacity-building and

learning 1 714 35.2 3 150 64.8 - - - - - - - - 4 864
9. Salaries and

allowances 1 292 42.0 - - - - -- - 1 787 58.0 3 078
10. Other operating costs 1 827 75.0 - - - - - - 609 25.0 2 435

Total 24 000 61.9 6 000 15.5 1 800 4.6 459 1.2 2 900 7.5 3 635 9.4 38 794

B. Project financing
25. The project will be financed by a GAFSP grant of US$30 million. The private sector

is expected to contribute US$459,000 and beneficiaries will provide US$2.9 million.
The Government’s contribution is estimated at US$5.4 million comprising taxes,
duties, infrastructure, land use registration and project management staff costs. Of
the total US$30 million in GAFSP funding, IFAD will manage US$24 million
(components 1 and 3) and WFP will manage US$6 million (component 2 and
technical assistance under component 1). See table 2 for costs by component and
financier.
Table 2
Project costs by component and financier
(In thousands of United States dollars)

GAFSP
IFAD

GAFSP
WFP

Government
– parallel

investment
Private
sector Beneficiaries Government Total

Component Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount
1. Strengthened public

services 3 285 1 003 -- -- - 265 4 552
2. Community-driven

agriculture-based
nutrition interventions - 4 997 - - - 444 5 441

3. Sustainable and
inclusive market-
driven partnerships 16 167 - 1 800 459 2 900 525 21 851

4. Project
management 4 548 - - - - 2 402 6 950

Total 24 000 6 000 1 800 459 2 900 3 635 38 794

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
26. The cost-benefit analysis of the project is based upon the connections among

nutrition, education and income. The analysis compares the discounted stream of
incremental expected lifetime income to the discounted stream of SSFSNP costs. It
is assumed that the project interventions will impact beneficiary children’s ability to
complete school and earn higher wages in their adult lives. The overall project



EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

7

economic rate of return is 8.7 per cent. The cost-benefit ratio of 2.92 indicates a
return of approximately US$3 for every US$1 invested. The sensitivity analysis
indicates a robust economic internal rate of return.

27. The project will target at least 400 villages – or 34,000 households. Assuming a
60 per cent success rate, the SSFSNP will lift approximately 20,400 households out
of poverty by project end. Direct benefits are expected to include diversification of
homestead food production, investments in agricultural production infrastructure,
and improved farming system productivity. These improvements will include: the
introduction of small and micro-irrigation; the introduction of forage and cash crops
into crop rotations; improved upland and lowland rice production; the introduction
of livestock enterprises such as fish and pigs; and expanded harvesting and
processing activities.

D. Sustainability
28. The project emphasizes capacity-building of public institutions from the village to

the national levels. This investment in public capacity will enable sustainable food
and nutrition security activities to remain embedded within the country’s civil
service and the society it serves. Once developed, public-sector capacity can be
expanded throughout the country as systems improve in the target provinces and
districts. The project will also emphasize the development of self-sustaining
community-based organizations and village users’ groups, which will play an
important role in the implementation and ongoing management of project activities.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
29. The main risks to this project’s success are in the areas of institutions, markets and

policy. Institutional risks include the prolonged approval processes and weak
technical capacities of public agencies. Mitigation measures include the
establishment of clear criteria and formats for all planning processes, and the
rollout of annual capacity-assessment and capacity-development plans. Market
risks include volatile commodity prices and difficulties in forging public-private
partnerships because of the dispersed and small-scale nature of poor farmers’
production. To mitigate these risks, the project will promote diversified production
and the delivery of market information at the local level, and provide training for
communities and farmer groups in order to aggregate production and improve
quality. Policy risks include the limited application of national contract-farming
frameworks and limited awareness of climate-change policies. Mitigation comprises
continuous policy dialogue at the national and provincial levels, with an emphasis
on practical approaches for contract farming arrangements and climate-change
adaptation.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
30. The project design is guided by the IFAD’s policies and strategies on targeting,

gender, indigenous peoples, environment and natural resource management, and
private sector engagement. In terms of environmental impact, the majority of
activities fall under Category C, while a limited number are classified under
Category B. The project is also in line with the 2011-2015 COSOP for the Lao
People’s Democratic Republic.

B. Alignment and harmonization
31. As noted above, the SSFSNP will be fully aligned with government priorities and

GAFSP targets, and implemented in the context of IFAD’s COSOP for the country. In
addition, the project will be aligned with regional and national development projects
including: the Lao People's Democratic Republic – Upland Food Security
Improvement Project; the Health, Nutrition and Population Global Practice; the
Poverty Reduction Fund Project and the Health Governance and Nutrition



EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

8

Development Project, all supported by the World Bank; and the IFAD-supported
Food and Nutrition Security and Market Linkages Programme and Soum Son Seun
Jai Programme; the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA)-supported
Project for Enhancing Capacity in PIP Management; the European Union-supported
Global Climate Change Alliance programme; WFP’s Mother and Child Health and
Nutrition project, and Food Assistance for Assets programme; and several NGO-led
initiatives.

C. Innovations and scaling up
32. The most important innovation promoted by the SSFSNP is the convergence

approach, which aims to consolidate the impacts of complementary government
and development partner-implemented programmes for improved nutrition. This
approach, which addresses all 22 interventions in the Government’s nutrition
strategy, can be replicated and scaled up throughout the country. Good practices
will be identified and shared within the SSFSNP and with other projects by
developing linguistically and culturally appropriate learning approaches that take
into account beneficiaries’ low literacy.

D. Policy engagement
33. IFAD is the co-chair on the Agriculture and Rural Development Sector Donor Group.

While the investment made through this project is unlikely to influence national
policy, IFAD’s collective project experience will form the basis for ongoing policy
engagement by the IFAD Country Office and the subregional hub. Focus areas of
policy dialogue will include participatory decentralized planning, public-private
partnership frameworks, contract farming and mainstreaming of nutrition into
agricultural production. The Sector Group is one important platform where these
issues will be raised.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
34. A project financing agreement between the Lao People’s Democratic Republic and

IFAD will constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached in appendix I.

35. The Lao People’s Democratic Republic is empowered under its laws to receive
financing from IFAD.

36. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
37. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a grant under the Global Agriculture
and Food Security Program to the Lao People’s Democratic Republic in the
amount of twenty-four million United States dollars (US$24,000,000) upon
such terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the
terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President



