








































President’s report

Proposed grant to the Republic of Burundi for
the Value Chain Development Programme –
Phase II (PRODEFI-II)


Republic of Burundi

Value Chain Development Programme – Phase II
(PRODEFI-II)

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Recipient: Republic of Burundi

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock

Total programme cost: US$44.8 million

Amount of IFAD Debt Sustainability
Framework (DSF) grant:

SDR 26.1 million (equivalent to approximately
US$36.6 million)

Amount of IFAD Adaptation for
Smallholder Agriculture Programme
grant:

SDR 3.51 million (equivalent to approximately
US$4.9 million)

Contribution of Government: US$3.1 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$0.3 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD


Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
grant to the Republic of Burundi for the Value Chain Development Programme –
Phase II (PRODEFI-II), as contained in paragraph 64.

Proposed grant to the Republic of Burundi for the Value
Chain Development Programme – Phase II (PRODEFI II)

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Rural development and poverty. Burundi is among the world’s poorest countries,

ranking 178th of 187 according to the Human Development Index. In 2013, despite a
growth rate of 4.5 per cent, GDP per capita (US$298) was lower than in 1990
(US$497). The incidence of poverty remains high, with 67 per cent of the population
living below the poverty line.

2. More than 90 per cent of people living in Burundi derive their livelihoods from
agriculture. Family farming, which provides 95 per cent of the food supply, does not
meet nutritional needs, and the rate of self-sufficiency in food production1 is
estimated at just over 42 per cent. Malnutrition affects 70 per cent of children in
poor households, mainly in rural areas.

3. Most rural poor people are smallholders – mainly women and orphan heads of
household – cultivating plots of less than one hectare and subsisting on the food
crops they grow. Their poverty is attributable mainly to low productivity as a result
of: (i) extremely small landholdings, hence the need to intensify production; (ii) poor
soil fertility in the absence of livestock and manure, and soil degradation from
erosion; (iii) a lack of equipment and technical and financial capital; (iv) a lack of
inputs such as seed and fertilizer owing to limited purchasing power; (v) a lack of
technical knowledge; (vi) prolonged dry periods in recent years and reduced periods
of rainfall; (vii) the lack of water management systems; (viii) poor processing and
marketing capacity countrywide; (ix) emerging farmers organizations that have not
yet developed profitable activities to ensure sustainability; and (x) poorly managed
markets.

4. Policy, governance and institutions, political and economic issues. Burundi’s
economy is characterized by structural weaknesses, in particular isolation, poor
diversification, uncompetitive agricultural products and high demographic growth.

5. The Government undertook, in its Vision 2025, to lower the rate of demographic
growth to 2 per cent and, in the National Agricultural Investment Plan (PNIA), to
boost growth in the agriculture sector to 6 per cent per annum. In 2013, the country
joined the Scaling Up Nutrition movement and the Multi-sector Food and Nutritional
Security Platform in order to achieve the first Millennium Development Goal.

6. The electoral process now under way risks slowing expected progress as a result of
putting in place policies and regulatory frameworks, both at the macro-economic
level and in implementing programmes and projects.

1 Source: PNIA, "The food deficit for the year 2010 is evaluated at 471,884 tonnes of grain equivalents (GEs), out of total
estimated needs of 817,000 tonnes of GEs nationally, representing an unmet basic needs rate of close to 58 per cent".



2

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities
7. PRODEFI is the cornerstone of the country programme in that it encompasses

common implementation functions at the central and regional level, such as
procurement and financial management.

8. Needed action includes: (i) completing activities2 under PRODEFI and replicating
them on a larger scale to achieve sufficient production volume (milk and rice), to
facilitate structuring the value chains; and (ii) better supporting actors throughout
the value chain by linking activities under the rural youth employment component
with core programme activities.

9. In view of the agriculture sector’s vulnerability to climate change, IFAD proposes to
provide a complementary grant under the Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture
Programme (ASAP).

10. Nutritional considerations will be introduced into PRODEFI-II to raise awareness
around adopting best practices in diet and hygiene.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
11. The PRODEFI-II programme area will be identical to that of the first phase, i.e. the

provinces of Bubanza, Cibitoke, Gitega, Karusi, Kayanza, Muramvya and Ngozi, as
well as the province of Muyinga. The programme interventions will be implemented
in communes adjacent to those covered by the Agricultural Intensification and Value-
enhancing Support Project (PAIVA-B).

12. This decision is fully aligned with the strategy adopted by IFAD on geographical
concentration around managed wetlands to enhance the visibility and scale of
impact.

13. Targeting will be simultaneously by activity, by province and by commune. The
priority target group of PRODEFI-II will be smallholders, crop and livestock farmers,
women and rural young people promoting economic initiatives upstream, within and
downstream of the rice and milk value chains and other secondary value chains such
as bean, maize, plantain and banana.

B. Programme development objectives
14. Overall objective. The overall objective of PRODEFI-II will be to promote increases

in incomes and improvements in food security for poor households in the programme
area.

15. Development objective. The specific PRODEFI-II objectives are as follows:
increase physical productive capital by building the resilience of production systems
to climate change; intensify crop and livestock farming to improve nutritional status
and, ultimately, structure the milk and rice value chains, inter alia, to promote youth
employment and strengthen capacity of the actors.

C. Components/outcomes
16. The programme is structured around three main components:

Component 1: Sustainable growth in productive capital and institutional
capacity-building for value chain actors

17. The activities implemented under subcomponent 1.1 – Hydro-agricultural
improvements and infrastructure – will be as follows: (i) development of 2,330 ha of
new wetlands on nine sites; (ii) rehabilitation of 147 km of tracks over nine sections
of access roads to open up access to the new wetland sites identified and one stretch
of track for a developed wetland straddling the provinces of Karusi and Ngozi; (iii)
development of 23,300 ha of watersheds around the new wetland sites identified and

2 This will also provide an opportunity to complete PAIVA-B activities in shared intervention areas.



implementation of the second phase of watershed development in 17 wetlands,
undertaken under IFAD projects (10 PRODEFI sites and seven PAIVA-B sites), of
which close to 10 per cent are financed under ASAP; and (iv) capacity-building for
four communal land registration offices to accelerate the issuance of 5,000 titles.

18. Subcomponent 1.2 – Adaptation to climate change – will be divided into three
sections: (i) integrated protection of investments against climate risk at the
watershed level, over 1,000 ha (Ruvubu watershed); (ii) adaptation of rural
engineering designs to climate variability by setting national technical standards;
and (iii) building the resilience of erosion control structures and crops to climate
change by intensifying forage and legume crops.

19. Activities under subcomponent 1.3 – Agricultural intensification – will be as follows:
(i) input supply (e.g. quality seed, fertilizer and manure, phytosanitary products);
(ii) strengthening the community livestock solidarity chain (3,000 cattle) by
promoting small livestock among young people; and (iii) building the capacities of
crop and livestock farmers with farmers field schools (FFS) (39, 112 and 100 FFS for
rice, food crops and livestock, respectively). A climate early warning system will be
developed using ASAP financing.

20. Activities under subcomponent 1.4 – Inclusive community organization and
institutional linkages – will be as follows: (i) capacity-building for Burundi public and
private institutions such as the community development committees (CDC) and
communal community development committees (CCDC); (ii) development of a
gender equality strategy for IFAD-funded projects in Burundi; and (iii) awareness-
raising around fundamental women’s rights, adult functional literacy, support for
organizing and financing solidarity groups, legal and psycho-social support for
victims and post-traumatic reconstruction, and reduction of women’s workload.

21. Subcomponent 1.5 – Combating chronic malnutrition – will include the following
activities: (i) training 2,000 people in the home nutritional learning (FAN) method for
preventing chronic malnutrition; (ii) setting up 350 FAN; (iii) awareness-raising for
community leaders, including 200 rural development actors; and (iv) implementation
of 350 microprojects in livestock (pigs, chickens, rabbits, goats) and market
gardening (kitchen gardens).

Component 2: Value-addition and strengthening of value chains

22. Support provided under subcomponent 2.1 – Organizational framework and value
chain financing – will cover the following activities: (i) development of financial
instruments adapted to the programme area to finance production cycles and
storage and processing cycles; and (ii) professionalization of dairy cooperatives, rice
growers cooperatives and the three cooperatives operating in the maize value chain,
to enable them to provide services to their members.

23. Subcomponent 2.2 – Support for priority value chains – will have two sections.

24. Dairy value chain. Support will be provided to: (i) complete the installation of
facilities to secure milk (refrigerated tanks and milk collection centres in areas where
dairy livestock is already kept; (ii) promote the installation of sales points with a
target of one or two per milk collection centre; (iii) install two mini-dairies in areas
with high dairy potential (Gitega and Ngozi); and (iv) establish partnerships with
private actors.

25. Rice value chain. Support will be provided to: (i) install drying infrastructure
(7,800 m² of new drying areas) and storage infrastructure (2,600 m² of new
warehouses); (ii) set up two improved husking units and two mini-rice mills for
quality rice marketing; and (iii) strengthen the consultative platform for value chain
actors.

26. Secondary value chains. Support will be provided to: (i) lift constraints on
segments of the major value chains (bean, maize, banana) in the event of



bottlenecks, such as the lack of healthy varieties of banana, the lack of bean
varieties tolerant of higher temperatures; and (ii) install storage infrastructure and
processing equipment.

27. Under component 2.3 – Improving sustainable and decent employment for rural
young people – the following activities will take place: (i) put in place an enabling
institutional environment for youth employment; (ii) strengthen specialized
proximity structures (research, innovation and training centres) to enable them to
provide employment-related services to young people; and (iii) create jobs for 150
young entrepreneurs, and income-generating activities for 1,500 rural young people.

Component 3: Organizational support, knowledge management and
facilitation.

28. This component calls for good coordination and sound and transparent management
of the programme.

29. Subcomponent 3.1 calls for: (i) providing the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock,
specifically the provincial departments of agriculture and livestock (DPAE), including
at the communal level, with monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and planning
assistance to contribute to participatory planning of programme activities,
monitoring of implementation and dissemination of results; and (ii) capacity-building
for regional coordination units.

30. Under subcomponent 3.2: (i) overall coordination and administrative, financial and
procurement functions will be centralized in Bujumbura; (ii) technical functions will
be decentralized to facilitate the implementation and close monitoring of activities by
regional coordination units; and (iii) the PRODEFI programme facilitation and
coordination unit (PFCU) will manage the programme at the national level and two
regional facilitation and coordination units will manage it at the regional levels, one
in the centre covering Gitega, Karusi and Muramvya and one in the north covering
Kayanza and Ngozi.

III. Programme execution
A. Approach
31. The intervention will be based on the following approach: (i) expansion of activities

in the PRODEFI area such that the technical package is implemented in its entirety;
(ii) development of new wetland sites; (iii) gradual implementation of nutritional
activities in areas where dairy, rice, legume and food production has increased under
PRODEFI; (iv) implementation of rural employment activities in areas where
PRODEFI has successfully set up milk collection centres and dehusking units; and (v)
implementation of activities to intensify and develop forage crops under an ASAP
grant in areas where PRODEFI was first active. The aim is to consolidate PRODEFI
activities and gradually expand the intervention area to the new wetlands identified.

B. Organizational framework
32. Programme oversight and steering. The Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock will

continue to oversee PRODEFI-II. The strategic steering committee, which will provide
general steering and coordination, and the technical steering committee, which will
report to the Government on programme implementation and general
administration, will continue to be the supervisory bodies, one at the strategic level
and the other at a more technical level.

33. Organization and management. The regional coordination units will be set up by
redeploying the PRODEFI branch office heads, including two regional coordinators,
and the other branch office heads will be assigned to M&E or regional components.
Part of the PRODEFI technical staff will also be redeployed to regional coordination
units and additional staff will be recruited in the regions as needed.


C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

34. Monitoring and evaluation. The M&E manual used during the first phase of
PRODEFI will be updated to include a limited number of files. In addition, steps will
be taken to address the constraints encountered in the last phase, such as the lack
of centralized data, poor data analysis and insufficient capacity for information
systems management. The overall organization of M&E arrangements will be based
on the information provided by DPAE and communal technicians providing
government functions at the local level.

35. Learning, capitalization and knowledge management. The knowledge
generated by the M&E system, beneficiaries and exchanges of experience between
IFAD projects and those funded by other technical and financial partners will be
capitalized on. PRODEFI-II will draw on lessons learned during implementation of the
first phase of PRODEFI and of PAIVA-B, particularly in terms of organizing value
chains.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
36. Capacity-building will be provided for the PRODEFI financial management team to

ensure better use of the TOM2PRO software (multi-site model) on all financial
matters: accounting, commitments, financial statements, budgetary monitoring, etc.
The PFCU will be responsible and accountable to the Government and to IFAD for
using the programme resources in compliance with the financing agreement signed
with IFAD. The accounting system will be consistent with internationally accepted
accounting principles and standards set by the Government of Burundi. The PFCU
will draw up quarterly statements of the accounting and financial situation and
transmit them regularly to the Government and to IFAD. The unit will also prepare
consolidated financial statements each year on the programme operations, resources
and expenditures. The financial management risk for PRODEFI is deemed moderate.

37. Procurement. The works, goods and specialized or consulting services required to
implement the programme and funded under the financing agreement, as amended
where applicable, will be provided in accordance with the procurement code
prevailing in Burundi. A procurement plan based on the AWP/B and stipulating
procurement methods, estimated costs and timelines will be prepared each year at
the national and regional levels.

38. Governance. To apply the principles of good governance and transparency in
programme implementation, the decentralized territorial collectivities will take part
in the planning process and in the monitoring of results.

39. M&E tools in the form of feedback and participatory evaluation workshops will be
built into the planning and M&E system to ensure beneficiaries transparency and
opportunities for continual feedback and to ensure that their recommendations are
taken into account in implementation.

E. Supervision
40. The programme will be supervised jointly by IFAD and the Government of Burundi.

One or two supervision missions will take place each year, in addition to missions in
support of implementation as activities are carried out. In addition, four internal
management control mission (quarterly audits) will be held each year at the central
and regional levels. A midterm review will be conducted jointly by IFAD and the
Government at the end of year three.

IV. Programme cost, financing, benefits
A. Programme cost
41. PRODEFI-II is being financed by a DSF grant from IFAD in the amount of US$36.6

million and an ASAP grant in the amount of US$4.9 million, cofinancing from the


Government of Burundi in the amount of US$3.1 million and a contribution in cash
and in kind from beneficiaries in the amount of US$0.3 million. Investment
expenditures are US$40.9 million, or 91.5 per cent of total cost, and recurring
expenditures are US$3.8 million, or 8.5 per cent of total cost. This is attributable to
the fact that the PRODEFI team already in place will be responsible for implementing
the second phase.
Table 1
Programme cost by component and by financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD grant ASAP Beneficiaries
Borrower/

counterpart Total
Component Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount

1. Sustainable
improvement in
productive capital
and capacity-
building for value
chain actors 26 578 4 926 - 2 584 34 087

2. Value-addition and
strengthening of
value chains 4 849 - 285 222 5 356

3. Organizational
support, knowledge
management and
facilitation 5 214 - - 334 5 548

Total 36 641 4 926 285 3 140 44 991

B. Programme financing
42. The DSF grant provided by IFAD represents 81.8 per cent of the total investment

and the ASAP grant 11 per cent. Cofinancing from the Government is estimated at
approximately 6.5 per cent of total investment, mainly in the form of tax waivers
and a contribution to the monitoring costs of the programme.

43. The beneficiaries will make a financial contribution to certain investments, including
those intended to add value to agricultural products. They will also contribute to
some development work such as levelling. The contribution of beneficiaries
represents 0.6 per cent of total additional costs.




Table 2
Programme cost by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category
IFAD grant ASAP Beneficiaries

Borrower/
counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount
1. Civil and rural

engineering 10 794 71 1 635 11 8 0.6 2 750 18 15 277
2. Transportation

equipment 4 588 95 73 1.5 156 3.2 4 816
3. Studies, training,

technical assistance
and service agreements 7 573 86 1 231 14 19 0.2 8 823

4. Support fund 9 886 82 2 060 17 114 1 12 060
5. Operating and

maintenance 761 76 216 .24 977
6. Salaries 3 039 100 3 039

Total 36 641 81.8 4 926 11 285 0.6 3 140 6.5 44 992

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
44. Benefits. Development of paddy production in wetlands. Crop intensity with

and without the programme is 0.7 and 1, respectively. Rice generates annual
revenues of US$169 per ha, or US$0.46 per day on average, with economic value
addition of labour equal to US$3.04 per day worked. In total, an average plot of 0.28
ha generates US$67.92 per ha per year without the programme compared to
US$88.3 in the scenario with the programme. Additional paddy production will be
about 10,000 tonnes annually.

45. Development of paddy transformation. Two improved huskers are to be
installed. The quantity of paddy that could be processed by the two huskers planned
is 8,000 tonnes per year, with a maximum of 15 per cent broken grains. The huskers
to be installed with the new financing will have a theoretical production capacity of
5,205 tonnes of superior quality rice per year (realistic scenario), reduced by 20 per
cent to come closer to reality in financial and economic analysis. This represents a
total increase in capacity for paddy transformation of 6,000 tonnes per year. The
husking units will generate net annual revenues of US$140,550, for an annual
increase of US$122,746.

46. Increase in milk production. The new financing will make it possible to purchase
and put to work 3,000 cattle by the end of the programme in 2021. Total milk
production will be about 4,000 tonnes per year – 40 per cent for self-consumption
and 60 per cent for sale.

47. Development of milk marketing. Four 1,000 litre capacity and two 500 litre
capacity milk collection centres will be created with the new financing. This new
financing will therefore make it possible to increase collection and storage capacity
by four tonnes per day, or 1,460 tonnes of fresh milk per year.

48. Employment benefits. Agricultural intensification will enable a high proportion of
small and medium-sized farmers to increase their incomes. Intensification will also
result in increased labour needs for these farms. The increase in work days will
initially reduce underemployment at the family level and then at the local level, as
wage workers are hired.

49. Improvements in employment and incomes for women and young people.
PRODEFI-II proposes to reach women and young people at the rate of at least 30
per cent for women, including women heads of household (widows), as a priority,
and 30 per cent young entrepreneurs/ farmers, including those who are landless, for
marketing activities and to take employment in marketing agricultural products or
providing services.



50. The programme will provide representatives of farmers organizations with training
and technical support, particularly in the organization and management of wetlands
and watersheds. Better structuring of farmers organizations will ensure sustainability
of the programme impact.

51. Economic and financial analysis (2016-2021). Based on the general
assumptions and financial models used, the financial internal rate of return (FIRR)
for this second phase is 18.5 per cent, which is high for an integrated agricultural
development programme implemented in marginal areas with land and infrastructure
protection problems. Based on the general assumptions and assumptions of pricing
and economic benefits, the economic internal rate of return (EIRR) for the second
phase is 17.3 per cent. Both the FIRR and the EIRR are highly satisfactory as all
financial and economic costs have been taken into consideration while some of the
benefits have not been quantified, such as those relating to ASAP-funded activities
that will bring results over the long term.

D. Sustainability
52. The community and participatory development approach is a guarantee that the

beneficiaries will take ownership of the programme initiatives and achievements.
They will set up management committees responsible for maintaining and properly
managing the investments under the supervision of local authorities, supported in
turn by the programme to enable them to monitor activities following programme
completion.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
53. The risks to PRODEFI-II during implementation include: (i) an uncertain political

situation; (ii) limited capacity of actors to implement the hydro-agricultural
improvements; (iii) structuring and professionalization of organizations, which could
take more time than the programme duration; (iv) the random nature of the quality
of administrative and financial management; (v) deficiencies in terms of financial
reporting; and (vi) the lack of an internal audit function. Risk mitigation measures
are as follows: (i) adoption of a programme approach to recycle programme teams
already familiar with IFAD financial procedures; (ii) strengthening of long-term
international technical assistance for high-cost activities (hydro-agricultural
improvements); (iii) continuity and complementarity between old and new financing
in the same provinces, to develop value chains and build capacity among
organizations; (iv) organized redeployment of the team between the central and
regional levels; (v) establishment of a culture of communicating financial information
to ensure monitoring of management processes, specifically disbursements (reports
generated by accounting software); and (vi) creation of an internal audit unit to be
shared by all IFAD projects in the country to ensure compliance with procedures.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
54. PRODEFI-II is aligned with IFAD’s Strategic Framework 2011-2015, in particular with

the objectives of achieving “a natural resource and economic asset base for poor
rural women and men that is more resilient to climate change, environmental
degradation and market transformation” and “access for poor rural women and men
to services to reduce poverty, improve nutrition, raise incomes and build resilience in
a changing environment”.

55. In addition, PRODEFI-II is aligned with the objective of “poor rural women and men
and their organizations able to manage profitable, sustainable and resilient farm and
non-farm enterprises or take advantage of decent work opportunities”.

56. The programme is aligned with IFAD’s policy on rural finance in that it will promote
access by beneficiaries and cooperatives to financial instruments, and with the policy
on gender equality and women’s empowerment as women and young people will



benefit from the same services as men. It is also aligned with the policy to improve
access to land and land tenure security in providing support for communal land
registration offices to issue land titles.

B. Alignment and harmonization
57. This second phase will also gradually harmonize IFAD-funded project and

programme structures, such as PFCUs, and will take another step towards setting up
the five regional facilitation and coordination units following the first phase of
creating two regional coordination offices as part of implementing PNSADR-IM (one
in the west for the provinces of Bubanza and Cibitoke and one in the east for the
provinces of Cankuzo, Rutana and Ruyigi). PRODEFI-II will be the third programme,
after PAIVA-B (additional financing) and PNSADR-IM, to align itself with the IFAD
country programme approach.

C. Innovation and scaling up
58. Innovations introduced under PRODEFI warrant scaling up during this second phase

and beyond. Among them are integrating nutritional activities and linking them to
agricultural intensification, and integrating rural youth employment activities with
value chain development. These two innovations, as well as those under the Project
to Accelerate Achievement of the Millennium Development Goals (PROPA-O) relating
to nutrition, could be integrated systematically in future projects and programmes
and lay the groundwork for drafting national legislation.

D. Policy engagement
59. The main contribution by PRODEFI-II to policy engagement will be through

implementation of subcomponent 1.2, which calls for establishing design standards
for infrastructure (hydro-agricultural improvements, tracks and storage
warehouses).

60. Moreover, PRODEFI-II will contribute to operationalizing the national youth
employment strategy developed under the rural youth employment component and
adopted by Parliament.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
61. A financing agreement between the Republic of Burundi and IFAD will constitute the

legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the beneficiary country. A
copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as an appendix.

62. The Republic of Burundi is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

63. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Lending Policies and Criteria.

VII. Recommendation
64. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a grant under the Debt Sustainability
Framework to the Republic of Burundi in the amount of twenty-six million one
hundred thousand special drawing rights (SDR 26,100,000), and upon such
terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant under the Adaptation
for Smallholder Agriculture Programme (ASAP) to the Republic of Burundi in an
amount equivalent to three million five hundred ten thousand special drawing
rights (SDR 3,510,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President



