


































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Kenya
and proposed grant under the country-specific
grants window to the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations for the Kenya
Cereal Enhancement Programme – Climate-
Resilient Agricultural Livelihoods Window (KCEP-
CRAL)

Republic of Kenya

Kenya Cereal Enhancement Programme – Climate-
Resilient Agricultural Livelihoods Window (KCEP-CRAL)

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower/recipient: Republic of Kenya

Recipient: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations (FAO)

Executing agency: State Department of the Ministry of Agriculture,
Livestock and Fisheries

Total KCEP-CRAL cost: US$118.0 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 43.85 million (equivalent to approximately
US$61.8 million)

Amount of Adaptation for
Smallholder Agriculture Programme
(ASAP) grant:

SDR 7.10 million (equivalent to approximately
US$10.0 million)

Amount of IFAD grant to FAO: US$2.0 million

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional

Cofinancier: European Union

Amount of cofinancing: European Union: EUR 9.5 million (equivalent to
US$11.7 million)

Terms of cofinancing: Grant

Contribution of borrower/recipient: US$1.5 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: Beneficiaries: US$29.1 million
Financial institutions: US$1.9 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/114/R.9

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of Kenya and to the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations for the Kenya Cereal Enhancement Programme – Climate-
Resilient Agricultural Livelihoods Window (KCEP-CRAL), as contained in
paragraph 51.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Kenya and
grant under the country-specific window to the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations for the
Kenya Cereal Enhancement Programme – Climate-
Resilient Agricultural Livelihoods Window (KCEP-CRAL)

I. Strategic context and rationale
Country and rural development and poverty contextA.

1. Socio-economic background. Kenya has a total land area of 582,646 km2 and
an estimated population of 43 million people. High fertility combined with declining
mortality has contributed to a population growth rate estimated at 2.6 per cent.
Kenya’s arid and semi-arid lands (ASALs) make up more than 80 per cent of the
country’s land mass and are home to approximately 36 per cent of its population.
The remaining 64 per cent of the population lives in medium- and high-potential
areas in the central and western parts of the country, where the population density
is up to ten times the national average of 69 people/km2. In October 2014, Kenya
became a low-middle-income country. Despite uncertainties in the period leading
up to elections, rising insecurity and erratic weather, growth is expected to
continue in the next five years at an annual average of 5.9 per cent, facilitated by
ongoing infrastructure development. However, the challenges of poverty and
income inequality remain.

2. Agriculture and smallholder farming. The agriculture sector is the backbone of
Kenya’s economy, employing 70 per cent of the rural population and accounting for
65 per cent of export earnings. However, its share of GDP has declined from nearly
40 per cent in the 1970s to 25.3 per cent in 2013. Production of industrial and food
crops and horticulture accounts for 82 per cent of agricultural GDP and 94 per cent
of export earnings from agriculture. The remaining three subsectors of agriculture
– livestock, fisheries and forestry – account for the remaining 18 per cent of
agricultural GDP and 8 per cent of export earnings from agriculture, with significant
potential for added growth.

3. Rural poverty. The poverty rate in Kenya dropped from 52.2 per cent in 1997 to
45.2 per cent in 2009,1 and the Human Development Report 2013 ranked the
country 145th of 186 rated, with a human development index of 0.519.2 Over
75 per cent of Kenya’s population lives in rural areas, where, in 2009, poverty was
estimated at 50 per cent of the population. ASALs have the lowest development
indicators and the highest incidence of poverty in the country.

1 Kenya Integrated Household Budget Survey (KIHBS), 2005/06; Exploring Kenya’s Inequality (Kenya National Bureau of
Statistics and Society for International Development, 2013).
2 Human Development Report 2013 (New York: United Nations Development Programme, 2013), p. 146.



EB 2015/114/R.9

2

4. Food security and nutrition. Food security remains a major challenge for the
Government of Kenya. According to the Global Hunger Index,3 Kenya remains a
food-insecure country despite a slight reduction in hunger. Approximately 10
million Kenyans suffer from chronic food insecurity and poor nutrition.

5. Vulnerability to climate change. According to the Stockholm Environment
Institute,4 if climate change in Kenya is not addressed, the economic costs of its
impact are estimated at 3 per cent of GDP per year by 2030, and could reach
5 per cent by 2050. The agriculture sector, which contributes over 25 per cent of
annual GDP, is particularly affected by changing climatic conditions. Nearly
98 per cent of crop production is rainfed,5 and almost 50 per cent of animal
production occurs in ASALs. The increased incidence of drought and unreliable
rainfall are expected to significantly affect the sector.

Rationale and alignment with government priorities andB.
RB-COSOP

6. Programme rationale. Kenya is a food-deficit country that imports up to
20 per cent of its annual cereal requirements. Improvement in cereal production,
including maize, sorghum, millet and associated pulses, is constrained by the
limited adoption of improved crop technologies and practices. ASALs are an
important producing area: they account for 30 per cent of cereal production and
54 per cent of pulses produced in the country. Semi-arid areas have a comparative
advantage in the production of pulses, accounting for 99 per cent of the production
of pigeon pea, 95 per cent of green gram, 93 per cent of cowpea and 60 per cent
of millet. Semi-arid areas are also central to the production of sorghum, accounting
for 48 per cent of the total. In addition, 37 per cent of beans and 26 per cent of
maize are produced in semi-arid lands.

7. Alignment with government priorities and IFAD RB-COSOP. The KCEP-CRAL
is consistent with the country’s agriculture-sector development strategy 2010-
2020. The strategy’s main objectives are to achieve an agricultural growth rate of
7 per cent per year and reduce food insecurity by 30 per cent by promoting
innovative, commercially oriented and climate-smart modern agriculture. The
programme is also aligned with IFAD’s results-based country strategic
opportunities programme (RB-COSOP) 2013-2018, which recognizes that Kenya’s
food requirements go beyond increased food production in high- and medium-
potential areas, and calls for increased production in ASALs. Finally, IFAD’s support
in ASALs is guided by its Climate Change Strategy and Environment and Natural
Resource Management Policy. IFAD will mobilize resources from its Adaptation for
Smallholder Agriculture Programme (ASAP) to assist smallholders in improving
their livelihoods and becoming more resilient to climate change in the fragile ASAL
ecosystem.

II. Programme description
Programme area and target groupA.

8. Programme area. The programme area covers eight semi-arid counties in the
eastern and coastal regions of Kenya, with a combined population of over 5 million
people: Embu, Tharaka Nithi, Kitui, Machakos, Makueni, Taita Taveta, Kwale and
Kilifi. These counties were included based on: (i) agroecological suitability and
production potential of maize, sorghum, millet and associated pulses, which are
important to Kenya’s food security; (ii) incidence of poverty; (iii) vulnerability to
climate change; (iv) geographical concentration to maximize impact; and
(v) presence of similar development programmes (to avoid duplication). Within
these counties, 25 subcounties will be selected at start-up using the same criteria.

3 International Food Policy Research Institute, 2014.
4 Stockholm Environment Institute, 2009.
5 World Resources Institute et al., 2007.



EB 2015/114/R.9

3

9. Target group. The KCEP-CRAL will reach 100,000 smallholder farmers whose
livelihoods depend on maize, sorghum, millet and associated pulses, including:

(a) 60,000 food-insecure smallholder farmers, who will be supported in
graduating from recurring food insecurity and climate vulnerability to food
security and then to market-oriented commercial farming; and

(b) 40,000 smallholder subsistence farmers, who will be supported in graduating
into commercial farming.

10. Of these 100,000 smallholder farmers, the programme aims to sustainably lift
80,000 out of poverty (80 per cent of targeted farmers). There will be a special
focus on woman-headed households and on youth, given the constraints they face
in accessing agricultural services and inputs. The programme will also empower
county governments and communities to manage their natural resources more
sustainably and consensually, and will build their resilience to climate change
through community investments. A secondary target group will consist of
stakeholders along agricultural value chains – such as agro-dealers, private
extension services, buyers, processors and lead farmers providing support services
to smallholders – and who will facilitate smallholder access to enhanced agricultural
services.

Programme development objectiveB.
11. The overall development goal of the KCEP-CRAL is to reduce rural poverty and food

insecurity among smallholders in Kenya’s ASALs by developing their economic
potential, while improving their natural resource management capacity and
resilience to climate change in an increasingly fragile ecosystem. This goal will be
pursued through: (i) graduation of smallholder farmers to commercially oriented,
climate-resilient agricultural practices through improvements in productivity, post-
production management practices and market linkages for targeted value chains;
and (ii) empowerment of county governments and communities to sustainably and
consensually manage their natural resources and build resilience to climate change.

Components/outcomesC.
12. Programme components. The KCEP-CRAL is structured around three technical

components, supported by programme management:

13. Component 1. Capacity-building for climate-resilient productivity
enhancement and natural resource management. Through an e-voucher
platform giving smallholder farmers access to improved agricultural inputs and
technologies, the programme will enhance farmers’ productivity with a view to
commercialization. Activities in this component will support farmers in establishing
productive and climate-resilient crop enterprises suited to ASALs, and in improving
productivity through the adoption of good agricultural practices, such as
conservation agriculture and associated water conservation practices. The
programme will also support targeted counties in planning adaptation strategies,
adopting sustainable natural resource management practices and building
resilience to climate change.

14. Component 2. Post-production management and market linkages. The
programme aims to support farmers in capitalizing on productivity gains by
promoting improved on-farm grain handling and management, access to storage,
and warehouse receipt systems. These activities are expected to increase
smallholders’ access to markets and build their capacity to sell their produce at
more favourable prices.

15. Component 3. Financial services. This component is designed to: link farmers
to financial services in order to boost yields and income for reinvestment in their
farming businesses; and build the capacity of value-chain stakeholders, including
youth, to profitably engage in the provision of agricultural services.



EB 2015/114/R.9

4

III. Programme implementation
ApproachA.

16. The KCEP-CRAL is an expansion to ASALs of the Kenya Cereal Enhancement
Programme (KCEP), which began in April 2014 through a partnership involving the
Government, the European Union and IFAD. Its programme approach is based on
an expanded strategic partnership of the Government, the European Union and the
United Nations Rome-based agencies (RBAs): IFAD, FAO and the World Food
Programme (WFP). This partnership builds on each partners’ comparative
advantage in supporting farmers’ graduation from food insecurity to market-
oriented farming.

17. Within the partnership, WFP will provide support to food- and nutrition-insecure
farmers. With this support, households can gradually build productive assets and
acquire agricultural production and risk management skills to meet basic food
needs. IFAD will support subsistence farmers in graduating to market-oriented
farming by addressing constraints on production, post-harvest management,
processing and marketing. Through the ASAP Trust Fund, IFAD will also support
farmers’ investments in improved natural resource management and resilience to
climate change. Throughout this process, FAO will support farmer groups and
county governments in adopting good agricultural practices, including conservation
agriculture, while the European Union will sustain the achievement of programme
objectives by providing additional funding for implementation through IFAD and
FAO.

18. The programme approach encompasses an innovative public/private partnership
with financial institutions that aims to expand access to financial services as
beneficiaries graduate from subsidized support to market-oriented farming. Natural
resource management and climate change adaptation are mainstreamed in each
component to ensure that programme interventions are sustainable and improve
the resilience of targeted smallholders. Finally, while the programme will support
targeted households in meeting their cereal needs and in producing a surplus for
markets, WFP will support the transfer of good nutrition practices to households
through its protracted relief and recovery operation.

B. Organizational framework
19. Implementation framework. The lead agency for programme implementation is

the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries. This agency will be responsible
for coordinating programme implementation, supported by a programme
coordination unit (PCU) for IFAD-funded activities, and liaising with FAO and WFP
focal points for activities carried out by these agencies. A steering committee
chaired by the Principal Secretary of the State Department of Agriculture will be set
up at the national level to provide oversight and strategic guidance of
implementation. To operationalize the RBA partnership, an RBA technical
coordination group will comprise the PCU coordinator and FAO and WFP
representatives. The group will be responsible for annual planning, budgeting,
mobilizing RBA contributions to the programme and identifying opportunities for
collaboration with other donor-funded activities in target counties.

20. Grant to FAO for capacity-building of county structures. At the local level,
programme implementation will be aligned to Kenya’s devolution framework, with
the counties as primary implementers. Given the limited capacity of newly set up
county government structures, IFAD will provide FAO with a grant to build the
capacity of county agricultural offices to plan, execute and monitor agricultural
services and investments within the County Integrated Development Plan:

(i) A dedicated RBA implementation support team in each target county will
plan, execute and monitor agricultural services in the context of the KCEP-
CRAL. Each county’s support team will be composed of a lead technical



EB 2015/114/R.9

5

support officer and a national United Nations volunteer – both with an
agribusiness and programme management background. These experts will
work with FAO and WFP programme officers, and with the National Drought
Management Authority coordinator at the county level.

(ii) Capacity-building of county agricultural offices will strengthen the outreach of
agricultural extension agents in delivering agricultural services to farmers.
This includes training packages and cost provisions for agricultural services to
farmers in the context of programme implementation.

21. A memorandum of understanding will be signed with WFP to define roles and
responsibilities in programme execution. The agreement between the European
Union and IFAD will be revised to reflect the European Union’s increased KCEP
contribution to cover the CRAL window. The Union has also entered into a
contribution agreement with FAO to disseminate good agricultural practices,
including conservation agriculture, in the framework of the programme.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

22. Programme planning. Programme planning will follow a bottom-up and gender-
and-youth sensitive approach at the county level. Throughout the programme’s
seven-year implementation period, the PCU will support counties in sensitizing and
mobilizing stakeholders, and in requesting support. Eligible farmer and county
requests for programme support will be included in the KCEP-CRAL annual
workplan and budget (AWP/B), which will conform to the Government’s planning
cycle. For community-level investments, participatory rural appraisals will be
carried out to facilitate the formation of community-based organizations, which will
oversee implementation. Planning at the county level will be reflected in the County
Integrated Development Plan.

23. Monitoring and evaluation, and knowledge management. The programme’s
development goals will be monitored by a robust system, which will be aligned with
Kenya’s National Integrated Monitoring and Evaluation System and in compliance
with IFAD’s Results and Impact Management System (RIMS). RIMS is capable of
measuring results in terms of climate-change resilience, natural resource
management and the graduation of smallholders.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
24. Financial management. To ensure effective financial oversight, a programme

finance team will be set up at the lead national agency. In addition, there will be an
accountant in each of the three regions covered by the programme. At the county
level, an accountant from the National Treasury will be responsible for programme
financial management.

25. Internal controls. To complement government mechanisms, the following
internal controls will be instituted: (i) the PCU finance/administration manager will
be an agent (non-transacting) on all programme county and regional bank
accounts; (ii) at the county level, the national treasury accountant will be a
signatory to the programme bank account, together with the designated county
programme coordinator; and (iii) budget control will be supported through the
programme accounting software and the use of commitment ledgers (sometimes
called vote books) at the county level.

26. Accounting systems, policies and procedures. An off-the-shelf accounting
package with the ability to generate expenditure trends by component, category,
and activities in United States dollars, euro and Kenyan shillings will be used.
Development of programme uniform coding (chart of accounts) will be a joint effort
by the PCU finance team, those responsible for monitoring and evaluation, and
technical officers.



EB 2015/114/R.9

6

27. Financial reporting and monitoring will be conducted in accordance with
International Public-Sector Accounting Standards on a cash basis. In addition to
annual audited financial statements, IFAD will require semi-annual interim financial
reports.

28. The grant to FAO will be disbursed based on AWP/Bs. In addition, FAO will submit
statements of expenditure with respect to the use of at least 75 per cent of the
immediately preceding advance (and 100 per cent of previous advances). FAO will
provide regular reports to IFAD, including six-month unaudited financial reports,
and will submit a copy of FAO audited financial statements that cover any part of
the grant proceeds within six months following the official publication of FAO’s
audited statements.

29. Procurement. With the enactment of the Public Procurement and Disposal of
Assets Act and the Public Procurement and Disposal Regulations, Kenya has
established a sound legal framework for public procurement with clear hierarchical
distinctions. The legal and regulatory framework of the Public Procurement and
Disposal of Assets Act will be used in programme procurement. KCEP-CRAL
procurement provisions will build on the Ministerial Tender Committee of the
Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries. Items common across more than
one county will be procured nationally in bulk; contract award decisions will be
made by that committee. For activities such as spot road improvements and
construction of storage facilities that cannot be bulked and procured nationally, the
KCEP-CRAL will rely on the County Service Delivery Coordinating Unit Tender
Committee, as the legal authority to approve contract awards, and on the County
Governments Procurement Regulations.

E. Supervision
30. The programme will be jointly supervised by IFAD and the lead agency, with the

participation of FAO, WFP and the European Union. One supervision mission and
one follow-up mission will be conducted each year to review the programme
approach and its effectiveness. Special attention will be given to reviewing the
effectiveness of the RBA partnership in the graduation of farmers.

IV. Programme costs, financing and benefits
A. Programme costs
31. The total investment and incremental recurrent costs of the KCEP-CRAL are

estimated at US$118.0 million, including physical and price contingencies.
Programme investments by component are:

 Component 1. Capacity-building for climate-resilient productivity
enhancement and natural resource management accounts for
US$11.1 million, representing 9.4 per cent of total base costs.

 Component 2. Post-production management and market linkages accounts
for US$8.8 million, representing 7.5 per cent of total base costs;

 Component 3. Financial services, including the e-voucher scheme, accounts
for US$77.7 million, representing 65.8 per cent of total base costs; and

 Programme management accounts for US$11.7 million, representing
9.9 per cent of total base costs.

32. In addition, preparatory activities and implementation support at the county level
accounts for US$8.7 million (7.4 per cent of total base costs).



EB 2015/114/R.9

7

Table 1
Components by Financiers

(US$ '000) GoK
IFAD
Loan

ASAP
Grant

IFAD
Grant EU add-on

Financial
Institutions Beneficiaries Total

Am ount Am ount Am ount Am ount Am ount Am ount Am ount Am ount

462 5 124 - 2 000 1 134 - - 8 719

Adoption of  improved f arming practices including GAP and CA 24 - - - 1 086 - - 1 110
Community-based sustainable NRM and adaptation to Climate
Change - - 10 000 - - - - 10 000

24 - 10 000 - 1 086 - - 11 109

Strengthening of  f armer organizations and post-harvest
management 282 3 360 - - - - 173 3 815
Market Linkages and value addition 37 3 361 - - - - 1 579 4 977

320 6 721 - - - - 1 752 8 793

E-voucher platf orm f or productivity enhancement - 37 237 - - 7 142 1 860 26 212 72 451
Value Chain Financing 246 3 295 - - 543 - 1 172 5 255

246 40 532 - - 7 685 1 860 27 384 77 706
500 9 400 - - 1 781 - - 11 680

Total PROGRAMME COSTS 1 551 61 776 10 000 2 000 11 686 1 860 29 136 118 008

A. Capacity building for clim ate-resilient productivity
enhancem ent and NRM

Preparatory activities/ Implementation Support and Capacity-
building at county-level
Com ponents

E. Programme Management
Subtotal

C. Financial Services
Subtotal

Subtotal
B. Post-Production Managem ent and Market Linkages

Notes: GAP - good agricultural practice CA- conservation agriculture

Table 2
Expenditure Accounts by Financiers Financial
(US$ '000) GoK IFAD Loan ASAP Grant IFAD Grant EU add-on Institutions Beneficiaries Total

Am ount Am ount Am ount Am ount Am ount Am ount Am ount Am ount

I. Investm ent Costs
A. Works 231 4 119 - - - - 983 5 334
B. Vehicles 214 905 - 187 291 - - 1 597
C. Equipments & Materials 274 2 544 521 61 606 - 390 4 395
D. Consultancies 316 3 939 2 754 1 475 - 66 8 550
E. Trainings 516 4 657 3 125 - - 1 030 71 9 399
F. Grants and Subsidies - 36 299 3 600 - 7 111 829 27 626 75 465

Total Investm ent Costs 1 551 52 463 10 000 248 9 482 1 860 29 136 104 739
II. Recurrent Costs

A. Salaries and Allow ances - 6 671 - 1 752 1 427 - - 9 850
B. Operating Costs - 2 642 - - 777 - - 3 419

Total Recurrent Costs - 9 313 - 1 752 2 204 - - 13 269
Total PROGRAMME COSTS 1 551 61 776 10 000 2 000 11 686 1 860 29 136 118 008

B. Programme financing
33. The total costs of the KCEP-CRAL window will be financed by the Government, an

IFAD loan, an ASAP grant, an IFAD grant under the country-specific window to
FAO, a European Union contribution through IFAD, financial institutions and
beneficiaries as follows:

 The Government will finance taxes and duties valued at US$1.5 million
(representing 1.3 per cent of the KCEP-CRAL window).

 The IFAD loan to the Republic of Kenya, estimated at US$61.8 million
(52.3 per cent of the KCEP-CRAL window), will finance start-up activities,
capacity-building of farmer organizations, post-harvest management
activities, market linkage and value chain strengthening, and programme
management costs.

 The ASAP grant, estimated at US$10.0 million (8.5 per cent of the KCEP-
CRAL window), will finance mainstreaming of natural resource management
and climate resilience throughout the programme.

 The IFAD grant to FAO, estimated at US$2.0 million (1.7 per cent of the
KCEP-CRAL window), will be dedicated to capacity-building and the costs



EB 2015/114/R.9

8

incurred by county agriculture offices delivering agricultural services to
farming communities.

 The European Union additional contribution through IFAD is valued at
US$11.7 million, corresponding to EUR 9.5 million (9.9 per cent of the KCEP-
CRAL window).

 Finally, the contribution of financial institutions to the programme’s e-voucher
scheme and related financial services is estimated at US$1.9 million
(1.6 per cent of the KCEP-CRAL window). The beneficiary contribution is
assessed at US$29.1 million (24.7 per cent of the KCEP-CRAL window).

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
34. Overall, the KCEP and its CRAL window will support 140,000 smallholder farmers in

attaining food security and graduating into market-oriented commercial farming.
Through the CRAL window, 100,000 smallholder farmers in Kenya’s ASALs have
been targeted. The KCEP-CRAL will provide opportunities for increased returns on
smallholder agricultural production and marketing, with direct benefits including:

 Increased yields from improved agricultural technologies – including
conservation agriculture and good agricultural practices – and strengthened
extension systems;

 Increased climate resilience through adapted varieties and technologies,
better climate information and community resilience investments;

 Increased quality of marketable produce from post-harvest management,
training and access to equipment;

 Higher prices as a result of aggregation from village storage facilities and
other grain-bulking structures;

 Labour-saving technologies such as the use of herbicides (compared with
conventional weeding) and minimum tillage/direct seeding;

 Value addition through demonstrations of novel processing opportunities and
facilitation of linkages between business owners and financial institutions;

 Efficiency gains as a result of road spot improvements; and

 Incremental tax revenues generated for the central Government and county
governments from increased volumes of taxable production.

35. Economic analysis shows that the programme has the potential to generate an
economic rate of return of 15 per cent over a 20-year period. Benefits will accrue
to a range of stakeholders across many value chains, making the entire investment
even more viable and spreading its impact across the entire nation through
increased employment and tax revenues. Thus the actual economic rate of return
will likely be higher than the 15 per cent reported. Sensitivity analysis concluded
that the programme’s economic rate of return is relatively stable. It is estimated at
8.3 per cent if costs increase by 10 per cent, and at 13.3 per cent if benefits
decrease by 10 per cent.

D. Sustainability
36. The sustainability of programme investments and development results will be

ensured by:

 Mainstreaming natural resource management and climate-change adaptation;

 Promoting conservation agriculture and good agricultural practices;

 Empowering county governments and communities for sustainable natural
resource management and resilience to climate change;



EB 2015/114/R.9

9

 Building the capacity of stakeholders; and

 The e-voucher scheme and inclusive financial services.

37. At the institutional level, financial services, managed by financial institutions, will
be provided to stakeholders through a public/private partnership. This will enable
these institutions to expand their client base while they contribute to the
sustainable financial inclusion of ASAL smallholders. Investments by financial
institutions as programme partners are good indications of financial sustainability.
The relationship established between financial institutions and programme
beneficiaries will endure beyond the programme’s lifespan as these institutions
continue to provide beneficiaries with improved financial services.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
Risks Mitigation measures
Droughts or floods affect expression of
demand among target communities.

 Mainstream resilience packages in
programme activities

Climate-related risks hinder attainment
of programme objectives.

 Strengthen community-based resilience
systemsMainstream climate resilience in
programmes, plans and policies

Weather variability and crop failure
discourage financial providers from
participating in the programme.

 Assess feasibility of crop insurance
schemes. Strengthen climate information
services and climate-based extension
messages for smallholders

Low penetration of financial service
providers and cultural beliefs hinder
participation by target groups.

 Raise awareness
 Link target groups to contract farming and

outgrower schemes

Capacity of devolved structures to
manage implementation of activities is
weak.

 Embed capacity-building and
implementation support to county
structures for the programme’s
implementation organizational framework
and activities

 Empower county-level authorities with
resources for close monitoring,
supervision, timely updates and feedback

RBA coordination for mobilizing technical
and financial contributions to the
programme is weak.

 Embed RBA joint technical coordination
mechanisms at national and county levels
in the programme organizational
framework

Technical capacity for operationalizing
programme strategies and executing
programme activities is weak.

 Provide counties (PCU) with operational
strategies and technical tools for
programme execution under each
component

 Carry out activities requiring specific
technical competences through specialized
partners or service providers in
collaboration with counties. Identify
partners with specialized expertise for
each component

Exchange rate fluctuates  Conduct regular multi-currency monitoring
and reporting of programme costs

Fiduciary risks: Kenya’s Transparency
International 2014 Corruption
Perceptions Index was 2.5, which is an

 Specify external audit terms of reference,
conduct rolling internal audits, utilize off-
the-shelf accounting software and



EB 2015/114/R.9

10

Risks Mitigation measures
indication of high risk. disaggregate reporting by category,

component and financier

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

38. The programme responds directly to the following objectives of the IFAD Strategic
Framework 2011-2015: improved natural resources and the economic asset base;
improved access to services; capacity-building of rural people to manage profitable
and sustainable enterprises; opportunities for women and youth; sustainable
natural resource management; and adaptation to climate change.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
39. Support to developing the economic potential of ASALs is a priority in Kenya’s

Constitution and Vision 2030. The main goal is to fast-track their sustainable
development by increasing investment and ensuring that the use of resources is
reconciled with the realities of people’s lives. The National Policy for the
Development of ASALs recognizes that sorghum and millet are the most suitable
cereals for the environment, while maize continues to be cultivated by most
smallholder farmers as the primary cereal of choice.

40. The KCEP-CRAL is fully aligned with the Government’s priorities for ASALs and
harmonizes the efforts of major development partners – the Government, the
European Union and RBAs – in support of agricultural and rural development. In
line with national policies, the programme approach is adapted to the socio-
economic and biophysical characteristics of ASALs: (i) frequent drought; (ii) low
and unreliable rainfall; (iii) high vulnerability to climate change; (iv) fragile
ecosystems; and (v) high food insecurity and poverty.

41. The programme is also fully integrated into Kenya’s development partner
frameworks for agricultural and rural development. It directly contributes to
advancing the development results agreed by the Government and the United
Nations in Kenya under Kenya’s United Nations Development Assistance
Framework 2014-2018: strategic result 1 – inclusive and sustainable economic
growth; and strategic result 2 – environmental sustainability, land management
and human security. It will also generate knowledge products on food security,
approaches to graduation of smallholders to commercial farming, and climate
resilience in semi-arid areas. These products will be disseminated in development
partner working groups such as the Agricultural and Rural Development Donor
Group and the ASALs Donor Group, in order to inform policies and programming for
ASALs.

42. The programme’s organizational framework for implementation is aligned with
national systems. At the local level, programme implementation and RBA
coordination will be aligned with Kenya’s devolution framework. Counties will be
the primary implementers of the programme using community-based approaches.
Given the capacity gaps faced by the newly established county structures, the
programme’s organizational framework includes dedicated implementation support
to the counties for programme execution, coordination of RBA contributions and
the promotion of synergies with other donor-funded initiatives.



EB 2015/114/R.9

11

Innovations and scaling upC.
43. The programme incorporates innovative features such as:

 A partnership involving the Government, the three RBAs and the European
Union to steer farmers’ graduation from food insecurity to commercial
farming, with a focus on good agricultural practices, natural resource
management and resilience;

 A partnership with Equity Bank to set up an electronic platform combining
debit cards with e-vouchers to support smallholder access to new
technologies and financial services;

 Weather-based crop insurance, which will be piloted in the programme areas;

 Technical packages that introduce farmers to innovative combinations of
adapted inputs and practices for managing natural resources, which have
been tested by the Kenya Agricultural and Livestock Research Organization.

44. Moreover, the KCEP-CRAL will promote business models, including new business
partnerships between smallholders and buyers, governance structures and financial
mechanisms for storage and processing facilities. The innovative features described
above, if successfully implemented, will generate significant knowledge and the
potential for replication and scaling up in Kenya and the region. Monitoring and
knowledge management will thus be important in assessing and comparing
performance, learning from experience and documenting achievements and good
practices.

Policy engagementD.
45. The programme will generate lessons learned, good practices and innovations that

inform policy dialogue on agricultural development in semi-arid areas. Specific
areas of interest include: (i) adapted technical packages; (ii) inclusive business
models for farmers’ access to services and markets; (iii) innovative financial
instruments; (iv) approaches for graduating smallholder farmers from food
insecurity to commercial agriculture; and (v) increasing resilience to climate
change and natural resource management. Special attention will be given to
documenting the impact of synergies among the Government, RBAs, the European
Union and the private sector – each of which brings comparative advantages to
addressing complex agricultural and rural development challenges in ASALs.

46. Capitalizing on these synergies, as mentioned previously, the programme will
generate knowledge products on food security, graduation approaches, commercial
farming and resilience in semi-arid areas that will inform policy and programming
in ASALs.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
47. A financing agreement between the Republic of Kenya and IFAD will constitute the

legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower/recipient. A
copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as an annex.

48. A grant agreement between the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations and IFAD will constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed
grant under the country-specific window to FAO.

49. The Republic of Kenya is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD
and from IFAD’s Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme Trust Fund,
acting through IFAD in its capacity as trustee of the trust fund.

50. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.



EB 2015/114/R.9

12

VII. Recommendation
51. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Republic of Kenya in an amount equivalent to forty-three million eight
hundred and fifty thousand special drawing rights (SDR 43,850,000), and
upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with
the terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide an Adaptation for
Smallholder Agriculture Programme Trust Fund grant to the Republic of Kenya
in an amount equivalent to seven million one hundred thousand special
drawing rights (SDR 7,100,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall
be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant not exceeding two
million United States dollars (US$2,000,000) to the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, and upon such terms and conditions as
shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President



