



































President’s report

Proposed loan to the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic for the Northern Smallholder
Livestock Commercialization Project: Rural
Financial Services Programme


Lao People’s Democratic Republic

Northern Smallholder Livestock Commercialization
Project: Rural Financial Services Programme

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Lao People's Democratic Republic

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry

Total programme cost: US$19.7 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 7.3 million (equivalent to approximately
US$10.0 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional: 40 years, including a grace period
of 10 years, with a service charge of three fourths of
one per cent (0.75 per cent) per annum

Cofinancier(s): Asian Development Bank (ADB)

Bilateral development partner(s) to be identified

Amount of cofinancing: ADB: US$2.9 million

Bilateral development partner(s) US$1.9 million

Terms of cofinancing: ADB: 1 per cent interest charge for grace period and
thereafter 1.5 per cent

Bilateral development partner(s): Grant

Contribution of borrower: US$4.34 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$0.6 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/LOT/P.20/Rev.1

1

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
loan to the Lao People’s Democratic Republic for the Northern Smallholder Livestock
Commercialization Project: Rural Financial Services Programme, as contained in
paragraph 40.

Proposed loan to the Lao People’s Democratic Republic
for the Northern Smallholder Livestock
Commercialization Project: Rural Financial Services
Programme

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Over the past decade, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic has experienced rapid

economic growth and poverty reduction. Although the national poverty rate declined
steadily by 40 per cent over the last 15 years, 26 per cent of the population still lives
below the poverty line. Poverty is predominantly rural, with high concentrations in
remote and mountainous areas adjacent to the north-eastern and eastern borders
with Viet Nam.

2. Agriculture and natural resources accounted for 24.8 per cent of gross domestic
product (GDP) and over 70 per cent of employment in 2014. More than 80 per cent
of the population depends on agriculture for their livelihood, while more than
50 per cent of households are subsistence farmers with annual incomes below
US$300. While GDP grew at 7.6 per cent in 2013, the agricultural sector grew by
just 2.7 per cent due to low productivity and inadequate links to opportunities arising
from rapid growth elsewhere in the economy. The livestock subsector is an
important source of income and store of wealth for rural smallholders, with
89 per cent of smallholders owning one or more types of livestock – buffaloes,
cattle, pigs, goats, poultry or other small livestock.

3. The expanding demand for livestock products in the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic and neighbouring countries is generating new income opportunities for
households in rural areas. The capacity of rural households to benefit from such
demand, however, remains limited. The productivity of traditional livestock
production systems is low and livestock is still primarily kept as a means of storing
wealth. There is a need to improve production methods to reduce costs and improve
off-take if rural livestock production systems are to provide expanded and
sustainable sources of income for smallholders.

4. The Government’s overarching long-term development goal is to graduate from the
status of least-developed country by 2020. The National Socio-Economic
Development Plan (NSEDP) and the National Growth and Poverty Eradication
Strategy are the main policy documents outlining the country’s strategy to eradicate
poverty. Poverty reduction efforts are focused on the 72 poorest districts, which will
benefit from community-driven access-oriented rural development. Ten of the 12
districts selected to benefit under the Northern Smallholder Livestock
Commercialization Project (NSLCP) are high-priority poor districts. IFAD supports the
Government in implementing its eighth NSEDP and, under the country strategic
opportunities programme (COSOP) 2011-2016, pursued the objectives of promoting
economic growth, sustainable livelihoods and food and nutrition security of poor
rural people.



EB 2016/LOT/P.20/Rev.1

2

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

5. The demand for meat in the Lao People’s Democratic Republic is forecast to increase
significantly over the next decade, as is demand for exports to neighbouring China
and Viet Nam. The Government has set the target of increasing livestock production
from the current 210,000 tons per year to 365,000 tons per year by 2020. The
information available suggests current exports meet less than 10 per cent of
potential demand, while domestic demand is rising at 4.5 per cent per year.

6. Against this backdrop, the Government requested IFAD and the Asian Development
Bank (ADB) to finance a programme supporting the commercialization of livestock
smallholders through the lateral scaling up of the recently completed Northern
Region Sustainable Livelihoods through Livestock Development Project (LDP),
cofinanced by ADB, IFAD and the Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation
from June 2007 to March 2014. LDP reached approximately 13,000 smallholders
with the potential advantages of more intensive, commercially oriented livestock
practices. Overall, the LDP initiated a long-term process of modernizing and
commercializing smallholder livestock production. Given the respective organizations’
comparative advantages, IFAD will support improving smallholder livelihoods
through access to rural financial services and strengthened farmers’ groups, while
ADB will invest in critical infrastructure and technical support. The ADB investment
became operational in the first quarter of 2015.

7. The Northern Smallholder Livestock Commercialization Project: Rural Financial
Services Programme (NSLCP-RFSP) supports the Government’s policy of expanding
domestic livestock production through improved productivity and value addition,
including through sanitary measures, to enable commercial smallholder farmers to
compete more effectively in regional markets and in import substitution.
Furthermore, the rural financial services component of LDP showed a high unmet
demand for rural financial services in the programme districts. Microfinance
institutions (MFIs) registered with the Bank of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic
(BoL) are expanding in the country, both lending to agriculture and providing
financial management and brokerage services to the rapidly expanding
savings-financed village funds (VFs). Private banks, however, are not yet significant
agriculture-sector financiers. In this environment, the NSLCP-RFSP will adopt a
two-pronged approach: to deliver NSLCP livestock credit at market terms on the
short term; and, on the longer term, to develop a strategy to: (i) build VFs into
sustainable financial institutions able to meet local immediate-term needs for rural
financial service; and (ii) improve the incentive structure for private banks and MFIs
to provide medium-to-long term agricultural rural financial services.

8. The financing for NSLCP-RFSP is in line with the COSOP 2011–2016, which
comprises three strategic objectives: (i) community-based access to and
management of land and natural resources; (ii) access to advisory services and
inputs for sustainable, adaptive and integrated farming systems; and (iii) access to
markets.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
9. Programme area. Programme implementation will focus on approximately 200

villages located in 12 districts in the northern Houapanh, Luang Namtha, Luang
Prabang and Xiengkhouang provinces, where poverty rates range from 28 per cent
to 43 per cent, with rural areas worst off. In each district, priority animal types will
be selected for support with due attention to potential production capacity for
support of market-oriented livestock value chains.

10. Target group. In each district, the programme will work with rural
livestock-farming households that are members of smallholder livestock production



EB 2016/LOT/P.20/Rev.1

3

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

and marketing groups (SLPMGs) to be formed under the programme. The
programme aims to work with a total of 300 SLPMGs in the 12 districts, extending
livestock-production and -marketing support to approximately 5,400 households and
their 32,000 members. Related community-based livestock infrastructure
investments will target an estimated additional 10,000 livestock-owning households
in the programme area. Access to rural financial services through village-based
saving and credit schemes will benefit approximately 20,000 households, including
non-livestock farming households. The programme will tailor its overall technical and
rural financial service support to ensure the inclusion of marginalized and poor
villagers in the programme activities through VFs.

11. The NSLCP will strengthen support for women and ethnic groups through intensive
training programmes. In collaboration with Lao Women’s Union (LWU), the
programme will promote gender equality and women’s participation in
village-development planning, SLPMGs and market-linkage programmes, assisting
women to gain equal access to agricultural support and investment opportunities.
Women’s empowerment and gender mainstreaming will be implemented and
monitored through a gender action plan. Farmer-to-farmer extension programmes to
improve livestock husbandry will specifically target ethnic groups.

B. Programme development objective
12. The goal of the NSLCP-RFSP is to establish a sustainable and scalable rural financial

and technical services model that supports the reduction of rural poverty and
increased livestock productivity. The development objective is to increase livestock
production through expanded financial and technical services.

C. Components/outcomes
13. Within the larger framework of the NSLCP, the IFAD-supported part of the

programme will have two main components:

14. Component 1. Increased productivity of smallholder livestock producers.
This component comprises two subcomponents:

(i) Smallholder livestock production and marketing groups. The
programme will work with 300 existing livestock production groups formed
under LDP that have made good progress along the commercialization
trajectory, to further build their capacities and expand their membership base
to form SLPMGs. SLPMGs will progress beyond the basic production
improvements achieved under LDP to: (i) access input supplies and services
needed for commercial production; (ii) produce higher-quality livestock for
sale at provincial markets; and (iii) market as a producer group. The provision
of services and technical assistance will assist SLPMGs in building their
capacities in livestock production and farm financial management so as to
profitably boost livestock production and income. Working with the Lao
Farmers’ Network, the programme will promote farmer-to-farmer extension.
The programme will identify lead farmers at the village cluster level for further
training in animal husbandry, who will subsequently mentor livestock
production programmes through interested SLPMGs.

(ii) Technology development. Under this subcomponent, four primary activities
will be implemented:

(a) Livestock market studies will evaluate livestock marketing in target
provinces and assess opportunities at the national level for value chain
development and livestock product export.

(b) Forage production will develop selected leguminous forages as profitable
farmer-produced seed crops for free distribution in small amounts to
new households, while also promoting the purchase and distribution of



EB 2016/LOT/P.20/Rev.1

4

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

grass splits to support the vegetative development of productive forage
grasses.

(c) As animal husbandry skills improve, various combinations of technical
and financial services will enable interested SLPMG members to become
livestock-breeding households and procure improved sires to sell
breeding services to villagers.

(d) Land use planning and allocation activities will enable villages to prepare
or update their land management plans to designate resources such as
water sources and suitable land for communal livestock production,
including planting forage and animal housing; where land use titles have
not yet been allocated, the programme will support participatory and
systematic individual and community land use titling.

15. Component 2. Sustainable and scalable rural finance services. This
component comprises three subcomponents to articulate a sequential three-pronged
approach to develop rural financial services.

(i) Financial services to NSLCP beneficiaries. The programme will provide
additional financing to former LDP village livelihood funds for one round of
lending to SLPMG members for viable livestock investments through
amortized loans at market rates. This project-driven credit scheme will be
phased out midterm and replaced by a longer-term sustainable financial
services system established under the programme (see points (ii) and (iii)
below). To support livestock credit delivery, technical assistance will be
provided to establish new guidelines for credit schemes and to empower
district LWUs to responsibly manage livestock development credit to SLPMG
members.

(ii) Networked village funds. The programme, in partnership with the BoL and
a bilateral development partner, will support the development of at least 200
community-based, savings-driven VFs. Such BoL-based schemes have
functioned successfully for more than five years in other provinces. The
programme will develop a systematic approach to expanding and
strengthening VFs, based on the establishment of VF-owned, second-tier
support organizations – Network Support Organizations (NSOs) – at the
provincial level. NSOs operate as management agents for their member VFs,
who also own the NSOs.

(iii) National agriculture-refinancing facility. At the request of the
Government, the programme will provide medium-term assistance to
establish a national agriculture refinancing facility (NARF), to be located within
the BoL. The NARF will receive funding from existing grants held by the
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry (MAF) as well as from the programme,
which it will apply to refinance a portion of the lending made by commercial
banks and MFIs to targeted agricultural sectors, in line with the national
agriculture development strategy, at rates that would significantly increase
margins for lending institutions. The NARF will thereby provide a powerful
incentive for the expansion of financial services in rural areas. Reflows from
the one-off project credit operations (described under (i) above) will be
channelled into the NARF. In the medium term, the NARF will also capitalize
NSOs (described under (ii)) once they reach a certain level of maturity.

III. Programme implementation
A. Approach
16. Programme implementation will span five years and support the Government’s policy

of expanding domestic livestock through improved productivity and value addition.
The approach also supports the Government’s sam sang (decentralization) policy,



EB 2016/LOT/P.20/Rev.1

5

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

whereby the province serves as the strategic unit, the district as the planning and
budgetary unit, and the village as the implementing unit. The programme
exemplifies such an approach through bottom-up planning, support to farmer-led
technical service delivery, the establishment of private and communal land use
rights, and the catalysis of private investments in rural and agricultural sectors. The
management structure will build on lessons learned through previous IFAD projects
in the country and the region, avoid parallel management systems and implement
transparent mechanisms for financial management and fund transfers.

B. Organizational framework
17. MAF, through its Department of Livestock and Fisheries, will be the lead agency with

overall responsibility for programme implementation, which it will delegate to district
administrations and to the National Programme Management Office (NPMO), based
in Vientiane. The heads of the Provincial Agriculture and Forestry Office and the
District Agriculture and Forestry Office will serve as programme focal points at the
provincial and district levels, respectively. The National Project Steering Committee
(NPSC), chaired by the MAF Vice-Minister, will be responsible for the overall direction
of the programme. It will provide guidance and oversight to participating provinces
and districts. The NPSC will include representatives of MAF, the Ministry of Finance,
the Ministry of Planning and Investment, the Chamber of Commerce and Industry
and the four provincial Governors/Vice-Governors. Provincial Project Steering
Committees, headed by provincial governors, will be responsible for their respective
annual work plans and budgets (AWPBs) and the financial and physical progress of
the programme.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

18. Planning, monitoring and evaluation. The AWPB will be the key management
tool for planning, monitoring and reporting on the implementation of activities. The
programme will follow a participatory planning approach in the target areas. The
monitoring and evaluation system will: (i) guide implementation through the
assessment and analysis of outputs, outcomes and impacts on poor households’
nutrition and livelihoods; and (ii) provide the Government information to measure
programme contributions to the implementation of MAF national strategies, and data
and analysis for evidence-based policymaking. A management information system
will be established to monitor operational and financial progress alike. Furthermore,
special studies will be undertaken at midterm and upon programme completion to
evaluate: (i) improvements in production and productivity; (ii) the use and benefits
of VFs and NSOs; and (iii) the implementation methodology/approaches adopted by
the programme. Other studies will be undertaken as deemed necessary by the
NPMO.

19. Learning and knowledge management. The programme’s knowledge
management and learning processes will: identify, analyse, document and share
knowledge; support the dissemination of innovations; and identify issues for
advocacy with policymakers, the broader donor community and other relevant
stakeholders. The programme’s learning systems will include: (i) study tours,
discussions and workshops for project and ministry staff at the national and district
levels to promote agricultural and financial services initiatives; and (ii) various
formats for the dissemination of results, including farmer-to-farmer extension.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
20. Financial management. As custodian of the funds in the programme account, the

NPMO will be responsible for programme financial management. The NPMO will also
be accountable to the Government and to IFAD for the proper use of funds in line
with applicable legal agreements and with contractual arrangements with service
providers. It will provide detailed financial statements of programme operations,
resources and expenditures for each fiscal year in accordance with standards and



EB 2016/LOT/P.20/Rev.1

6

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

procedures acceptable to IFAD. The financial management assessment of the
programme rated the fiduciary risk as high. Mitigation measures will include close
supervision, support and oversight from IFAD through: (i) the installation of
professional accounting software; (ii) the development of a financial manual
integrating controls linked to operations; (iii) biannual supervision and
implementation support missions; and (iv) a control framework integrating periodic
internal audits and independent external audits.

21. Flow of funds. The Government will open a designated account, denominated in
United States dollars, in the BoL to receive and hold the proceeds of the IFAD loan.
The NPMO will open and maintain an operational programme account, denominated
in Laotian kip, which will be funded and replenished as necessary from the
designated account upon NPMO request and in accordance with expenditures
incurred under approved AWPBs. The Ministry of Finance will ensure the timely
transfer of funds required by the NPMO. The NPMO will ensure the compliance of
replenishment requests from implementing agencies and that timely withdrawal
applications are submitted to IFAD with appropriate supporting documentation.

22. Procurement. The procurement of goods, works and consulting services financed by
IFAD will be carried out in compliance with the IFAD’s Project Procurement
Guidelines. National procurement procedures, processes and regulations will be
applied to the extent that they are consistent with those Guidelines.

23. Internal control and external audit. Internal control systems will be established
at the NPMO level. An external audit will be carried out in compliance with the
International Standards on Auditing and the IFAD Guidelines on Project Audits.
Independent external auditors will be appointed on a timely basis. The audited
financial statements and audit reports will be submitted to IFAD within six months
following the close of each fiscal year.

24. Governance. The NPMO will prepare a programme framework for investment
transparency and publicity. This framework will include provisions to ensure that
procurement is carried out, whether by the districts or by the NPMO, in accordance
with IFAD rules and specifications. Measures will include: (i) the publication of all
procurements, calls for proposals, contract awards and business partnership details
in local newspapers and at district and provincial offices; (ii) the participation of
end-user representatives in bid assessments; and (iii) prompt communication with
bidders. The framework will also include an internal code of conduct to be signed by
all staff involved in programme implementation.

E. Supervision
25. IFAD and ADB will jointly supervise the programme. Annual supervision missions will

be organized jointly with the Government and include the main implementing
agencies and stakeholders. Implementation support missions will be dispatched on
the basis of specific needs from the Hanoi subregional office. Supervision and
implementation support missions will jointly assess achievements and lessons,
review innovations and advise on corrective actions as required. A midterm review
will be organized by the Government and IFAD after 30 months, in mid-2019, in
close collaboration with relevant stakeholders, including the cofinanciers.

IV. Programme costs, financing, and benefits
A. Programme costs
26. The total cost of the IFAD-supported part of NSLCP-RFSP is estimated at

US$19.7 million, including contingencies, as indicated in table 1. The NSLCP-RFSP is
part of the larger IFAD-ADB financed NSLCP, which has a total value of
US$38.3 million, including US$21 million of ADB financing.



EB 2016/LOT/P.20/Rev.1

7

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

B. Programme financing
27. The IFAD-supported part of the NSLCP will be financed by a highly concessional loan

in the amount of US$10.0 million (50.9 per cent), while ADB will provide
US$2.9 million (14.7 per cent) and the bilateral development partner
US$1.85 million (9.4 per cent). The LDP carry-over in terms of reflows from rural
finance schemes is expected to provide US$2.4 million (12.2 per cent), while the
Government will directly contribute an estimated US$1.91 million (9.7 per cent) and
beneficiaries US$0.6 million (3.1 per cent). While the LDP carry-over is, in principle,
part of the government contribution, this amount is shown separately in table 1 and
table 2 for the convenience of monitoring.

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
28. It is estimated that the programme will benefit a minimum of 200 villages,

comprising 20,000 poor smallholder households, through access to livestock
production technology, support for livestock management infrastructure and
improved rural financial services. The direct beneficiaries include households
receiving programme-managed SLPMG livestock credit; borrowers from
NARF-refinanced NSOs/VFs investing in agricultural production; and households and
small agribusinesses borrowing from approved MFIs and commercial banks
refinanced through the NARF. In programme districts, villages and households not
directly targeted by the NSLCP-RFSP will benefit indirectly through the improved
capacities, services, systems and technologies adopted in their communities,
kum bans (village clusters) and districts.



/R
ev.1

8

Table 1
Programme costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component

IFAD loan

Bilateral
development

partner ADB loan
LDP

Carry-over Beneficiaries
Borrower/

counterpart Total

Amount %t Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Smallholder Livestock producers adopt productive technology 1 787 30.8 2 796 48.2 600 10.3 619 10.7 5 803
(i) Smallholder livestock production and marketing groups 897 22.9 2 400 61.2 600 15.3 22 0.6 3 919
(ii) Technology development 890 47.3 396 21.0 597 31.7 1 883

2. Farmers access sustainable and scalable rural financial
services 7 756 58.6 1 850 14.0 2 400 18.1 1 238 9.3 13 244
(i). Financial services to SLPMG 3 154 56.6 2 400 43.0 23 0.4 5 577
(ii) Networked village funds in NSLCP districts 3 265 62.1 1 850 35.2 145 2.8 5 260
(ii) Agriculture refinancing facility 1 337 55.5 1070 44.5 2 407

3. Effective project management 456 89.2 55 10.8 512
Interest during implementation 98 100 98

Total 10 000 50.9 1 850 9.4 2 895 14.7 2 400 12.2 600 3.1 1 912 9.7 19 657

Table 2
Programme costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD loan

Bilateral
development

partner ADB loan
LDP

Carry-over Beneficiaries
Borrower/

counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

A. Vehicles 32 100 32
B. Credit 3 750 52.4 2 400 33.6 1 000 14.0 7 150
1. Agriculture refinancing facility 1 000 50.0 1 000 50.0 2 000
2. NSLCP financial services 2 750 53.4 2 400 46.6 5 150

C. Operating costs 395 97.7 9 2.3 404
D. Training 1 081 100 1 081
E. Good, Services and Inputs 2 111 63.0 396 11.8 845 25.2 3 352
F. Consultancies 1 679 46.9 1 850 51.7 47 1.3 3 576
G. Equipment and Materials 561 98.0 12 2.0 573
H. Grants and subsidies 343 10.3 2 400 71.8 600 17.9 3 343
I. Salaries 49 100 49
Interest during implementation 98 100 98

Total 10 000 50.9 1 850 9.4 2 895 14.7 2 400 12.2 600 3.1 1 912 9.7 19 657

E
B
 2

0
1
6
/LO

T
/P.2

0
/R

ev.1



EB 2016/LOT/P.20/Rev.1

9

E
B

2
0
1
6
/1

1
9
/LO

T
[C

lick h
ere an

d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

29. The overall economic internal rate of return is 11.9 per cent, against a social
discount rate in the Lao People’s Democratic Republic currently estimated at 6 per
cent. The cost-benefit ratio of 2.16 indicates a return of approximately US$2.16 for
every dollar invested. The sensitivity analysis indicates the internal rate of return to
be robust.

D. Sustainability
30. The NSLCP-RFSP design approach placed central importance on sustainability. In

terms of rural financial services, the programme-implemented livestock credit
scheme will be phased out and reflows channelled into the NARF. In addition, a
significant number or rural finance operations are expected to be conducted through
the strengthened VFs, which, due to their operational mode, tend to reach full
sustainability at very low operational volumes. If successfully implemented under the
NSLCP-RFSP, it will be possible to expand and scale up the VF-support approach,
based on the services of the NSOs, in other parts of the country. As for the NARF,
the refinancing activities would be conducted only with banks and registered MFIs
that have passed due diligence tests and reached full institutional sustainability. The
programme also places emphasis on activities related to land use allocation and
titling, which are imperative for ensuring the sustainability of any investments in
technology and knowledge transfer, and their adoption by livestock farmers. Finally,
the programme will promote the capacity-building of public institutions from the
district to the national levels. Such investments in public capacity will enable the
establishment of a sustainable technical advisory services system.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
31. The main risks identified relate to institutional issues, including: (i) a lack of

technical coordination at the grassroots level; (ii) ineffective inter-institutional
cooperation and dialogue and consequent delays in disbursement for field
implementation; and (iii) a lack of interest in rural expansion among formal banks
and registered MFIs. To mitigate these risks, the programme will: (i) develop a
thorough coordination mechanism in the implementation guidelines; (ii) ensure the
involvement of affected kum bans and farmers’ groups at all steps in the
preparation, implementation and supervision of programme activities; and (iii) raise
awareness regarding value chain financing possibilities.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
32. The programme design is guided by IFAD’s Strategic Framework 2016-2025 and the

COSOP 2011-2016 for the Lao People’s Democratic Republic. The programme
complies with IFAD’s policies and strategies on gender equality and women’s
empowerment, indigenous peoples, environment and natural resource management,
access to land and security of land tenure, and knowledge management. While the
programme’s design and implementation activities may have some environmental
and social impacts on human populations or environmentally significant areas, these
will be small in scale, dispersed, largely site-specific and reversible. In terms of
environmental impact, the programme is classified as Category B.

B. Alignment and harmonization
33. The Programme is consistent with the Government’s development objectives, which

promote the expansion of market-oriented agricultural production. The programme
objectives are consistent with IFAD’s COSOP, with their focus on agriculture and
pro-poor trade, sustainable growth through private sector development, regional
integration and transforming agriculture from subsistence farming into a diversified
commercialized sector.

34. The programme will complement other IFAD, ADB and bilateral initiatives to improve
food security and income in the Greater Mekong subregion, including: (i) the



EB 2016/LOT/P.20/Rev.1

10

E
B

2
0
1
6
/1

1
9
/LO

T
[C

lick h
ere an

d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Strategic Support for Food Security and Nutrition Project; (ii) the Microfinance in
Rural Areas – Access to Finance Programme; (iii) the Land Management and
Decentralized Planning Project; (iv) the planned New Zealand Aid
Programme-financed Lao People’s Democratic Republic Beef Industry and
Veterinary Training Project; and (v) the Core Agricultural Support Project Phase II
(for food safety, linkages to cross-border value chains and livestock management).

C. Innovations and scaling up
35. The establishment of an innovative rural financial services model, at the explicit

request of the Government, is at the core of programme design. The most significant
innovation is the expansion of VFs and NSOs. Establishing new VFs and improving
the functioning of existing community-based operators are important steps forward
for financial inclusion and the provision of financial services in rural areas. The
proposed VF- and NSO-based approach provides an opportunity to test options for
further developing such community-based approaches and to link them more closely
to formal financial sector operations. The programme will support the Government in
developing innovative methods to promote rural and agricultural finance throughout
the country.

D. Policy engagement
36. The Programme will contribute to the analysis of policy issues related to

implementation experiences, in particular in rural finance. It will also foster
stakeholder alliances to generate policy proposals, build capacity for policy
development and promote policy advocacy within national processes. In addition, the
Programme is expected to provide evidence-based inputs to policy discussions on
issues such as the regulatory framework of the livestock subsector, and land use
planning. The Programme will use platforms such as the Agricultural and Rural
Development Sector Working Group to identify policy gaps and raise policy issues
related to implementation experiences.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
37. A financing agreement between Lao People’s Democratic Republic and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower.
A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as appendix I.

38. The Lao People’s Democratic Republic is empowered under its laws to receive
financing from IFAD.

39. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
40. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Lao People’s Democratic Republic in in the amount of seven million three
hundred thousand special drawing rights (SDR 7,300,000) (equivalent to
approximately US$10.0 million), and upon such terms and conditions as shall
be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President



