








































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of
Liberia for the Tree Crops Extension Project
(TCEP)

Republic of Liberia

Tree Crops Extension Project (TCEP)

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of Liberia

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture

Total project cost: US$30.73 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 9.48 million (equivalent to approximately
US$13 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional: Maturity period of 40 years,
including a grace period of 10 years, with a service
charge of 0.75 per cent per annum

Amount of Adaptation for Smallholder
Agriculture Programme (ASAP) grant:

SDR 3.28 million (equivalent to approximately
US$4.5 million)

Contribution of borrower: US$1.86 million

Contribution of beneficiaries/private
sector:

US$2.31 million

Cofinancier/financing gap: US$9.06 million

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/LOT/P.38/Rev.1

1

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of Liberia for the Tree Crops Extension Project, as
contained in paragraph 47.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Liberia for
the Tree Crops Extension Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Despite significant improvements since the end of the civil war, Liberia remains a

fragile state with weak institutions, policies and governance. The outbreak of the
Ebola virus disease has further constrained Liberia’s limited institutional capacity
and impacted its economy, threatening post-war gains. Liberia is classified as a
Least Developed Country and a Low-Income Food-Deficit Country,1 and relies
heavily on foreign assistance. The gross national income per capita was US$400 in
20142 and, according to the 2014 Human Development Index (HDI), increased by
68.2 per cent from 2000 to 2013. With a 2013 HDI value of 0.412, Liberia ranked
175 out of 187 countries in human development.

2. According to United Nations statistics, the population is estimated at 4.4 million,
with an annual growth rate of 2.6 per cent. Liberia has a large youth population: in
2013, 42.9 per cent of the population was estimated to be under 14 years of age.
The agriculture sector is the primary source of livelihoods for 48.9 per cent of the
active population – mainly in smallholder and subsistence farming. Liberia signed
the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme (CAADP) compact
and has thus committed to the Maputo Declaration on Agriculture and Food Security
and of a 10 per cent budget expenditure on agriculture, though it currently commits
only 3 per cent.

3. The tree crop sector was traditionally one of Liberia’s biggest employment sectors
and an integral part of its social fabric and economy. Primary cash crops included
cocoa, coffee, oil palm and rubber. During the Liberian civil war, the tree crop
sector was devastated and many farmers displaced from their land. The abandoned
farms and plantations degenerated into forest and their associated support
structures were damaged or destroyed. Market linkages vanished, while exports
dropped to near-zero levels. Rehabilitation and growth in the tree crop sector can
do much to increase farmers’ incomes, revive the rural economy and contribute to
consolidating peace. This section focuses on the rationale and underlying
development hypothesis for IFAD involvement. It briefly explains how the project’s
development objective contributes to specific objectives of the Government of
Liberia’s Poverty Reduction Strategy (PRS) and the CAADP and to the relevant
objectives of the results-based country strategic opportunities programme
(RB-COSOP). Moreover, it shows how the project links with ongoing IFAD
projects/grants (e.g. synergies/complementarities) and with the activities and
policies of other international agencies (harmonization) and major stakeholders.
Similarly, the country's forest, soil and water resources require effective and
sustainable management practices to improve agricultural productivity and
increased resilience in the face of climate change.

1 Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, list of Low-Income Food-Deficit Countries for 2014.
2 World Bank, World Development Indicators: gross national income per capita, Atlas method (current US$).



EB 2015/LOT/P.38/Rev.1

2

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

4. The Government is prioritizing both structural investments for long-term economic
growth and the post-Ebola recovery process. The Liberia RB-COSOP reached its
midterm in 2013, and was reviewed to identify the way forward for IFAD support
under the 2013-2015 performance-based allocation system (PBAS) cycle and
beyond. Overall, the midterm review revealed that strategic objectives under the
RB-COSOP were still relevant, but the transition from emergency to development
approach should be acknowledged more, which justifies a stronger focus on support
to the cocoa subsector.

5. The proposed Tree Crops Extension Project (TCEP) is part of the Government’s
strategy to promote export-oriented growth, with deep engagement by private
stakeholders in the cocoa value chain. Liberia became a member of the International
Cocoa Organization (ICCO), and IFAD contributed to its first membership fees. The
TCEP is aligned with government policies, in particular: (a) the Agenda for
Transformation (AfT), which was launched in 2012; (b) the Cocoa Export Strategy
2014-2018, 3 which is a blueprint for increased competitiveness of Liberian cocoa in
the global market; (c) the Economic Stabilization and Recovery Plan (2015-2017);
(d) the new Land Rights Act, to be enacted in 2015; (e) the restructuring process of
the Liberia Agricultural Commodities Regulatory Authority (LACRA) Act, which will
regulate the cocoa subsector; and (f) the National Adaptation Programme of Action
for climate change resilience.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
6. The TCEP will intervene in approximately eight statutory districts in Nimba County.

This geographical expansion will complement the ongoing Smallholder Tree Crop
Revitalization Support Project (STCRSP) in Lofa County.

7. The TCEP will benefit 11,000 stakeholders of the cocoa value chain, including:
(i) 8,000 cocoa smallholder members of kuu groups4 and farmer field schools
(FFS); (ii) approximately 2,400 additional farmers, who will benefit from the
rehabilitation of roads, input supply and market linkages; and (iii) 600 people
through job creation along the value chain. To select the 8,000 cocoa smallholders,
the TCEP will combine a self-targeting approach with tools to ensure inclusiveness.
Priority will be given to women, youth (18-35) and survivors of the Ebola outbreak.

B. Project development objective
8. The overall development goal of the TCEP is “to improve the livelihoods and climate

change resilience of rural households in Nimba County". The development objective
is to improve the incomes and climate change resilience of smallholder cocoa
producers in the county.

9. Some key impact and outcome indicators are: (i) 8,000 smallholder farmers have
increased the quantity of cocoa sold; (ii) 4,000 smallholder farmers have increased
their resilience to climate change; (iii) gross sales of cocoa per farm have increased
from US$178 in year 1 (Y1) to US$1,718 in Y6; (iv) at least 90 per cent of cocoa is
paid as grade 1 and receives 75 per cent of the ICCO reference price in Y6;
(v) 200 kilometres (km) of roads made passable all year round by end-Y3; and
(vi) 9,800 tonnes of cocoa sold through cooperatives and private-sector partners
(PSPs).

3 Developed with the support of the International Trade Centre.
4 Kuu is a traditional community-based cooperative work group that carries out brushing and cleaning of agricultural plots.



EB 2015/LOT/P.38/Rev.1

3

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

C. Components/outcomes
10. Component A: Revitalization of cocoa plantations. Basic revitalization and

replanting will take place in Y1-Y4 and will follow these phases: 1,000 hectares (ha)
in Y1, 2,500 in Y2, 3,000 in Y3 and 3,500 in Y4. Starting in Y2, 2,000 ha will be
targeted for replanting. Value chain linkage development, and greater focus on crop
husbandry and post-harvest handling, will be undertaken in Y1-Y6. Establishment
and operation of a seed station in Nimba County will also be supported to
guarantee the availability of improved planting material for farmers, village
nurseries and privately owned nurseries. Diversification of cocoa farms with banana
and plantain will be pursued for food security, climate resilience and smoothing of
cash flow, while simultaneously increasing the role of women in the farm economy.

11. Component B: Rehabilitation and maintenance of roads. Approximately
200 km of farm-to-market roads will be rehabilitated in Nimba County, using the
implementation methodology developed under the STCRSP. Regarding
maintenance, the TCEP will have a three-pronged approach: (i) capacity-building in
road maintenance; (ii) improvement of the road maintenance strategy, including
development of a financing mechanism; and (iii) transition financing of
maintenance on a cash-for-work basis.

12. Component C: Service provision for value chain development. This
component aims to: (i) strengthen the capacity of farmers’ cooperatives at the
district level; (ii) strengthen the capacity of the Ministry of Agriculture (MOA) and
Cooperative Development Agency (CDA) at decentralized levels; (iii) ensure that
climate change adaptation is mainstreamed in the technical support systems for
value chain development; and (iv) monitor deforestation in the tree crop sector.
The main innovation under the TCEP is the use of a long-term growth path for
institutional capacity-building of cooperatives.

13. Component D: Project coordination, monitoring and evaluation. The
objective of this component is to ensure effective, efficient operational planning,
implementation, monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and knowledge management.

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

14. Approaches and manuals developed under the STCRSP will be updated, and
STCRSP implementation arrangements harmonized with those of the TCEP. The
TCEP will build on the existing expertise and human resources of the STCRSP.
Moreover, the project will adopt a value chain approach to link cocoa farmers,
organized at the grass-roots level in kuu groups and FFS, with cooperatives and
PSPs.

15. Cocoa revitalization of farms will take place in Y1-Y4. Rehabilitation of roads will
take place in Y2 and Y3 and preparatory works will start in Y1. Finally, with regard
to the provision of services for value chain development, the approach to enhancing
the institutional capacity of cooperatives will be less supply-driven and more
bottom-up, while also clearly defining the responsibilities of the cooperatives in
their partnerships with the project and with grass-roots groups. Previous mapping
and capacity assessments of farmers’ cooperatives in Liberia have lacked sufficient
discrimination on which to base the selection for project inclusion.

Organizational frameworkB.
16. MOA is designated as lead project agency for the TCEP. It will have overall

responsibility for implementation and will ensure linkages to other relevant
ministries and agencies. MOA will also work closely with the CDA and LACRA.

17. The national steering committee (NSC) of the STCRSP will also serve the TCEP. The
NSC will orient the project strategy, oversee planning, review progress and impact,



EB 2015/LOT/P.38/Rev.1

4

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

and ensure linkages with related projects, government services and relevant value
chain stakeholders. The programme management unit (PMU) will be the secretariat
of the NSC.

18. The PMU, which is anchored in the Planning and Development Department of MOA,
is in charge of implementing all donor-funded projects in agriculture. Within the
PMU, coordination, management and M&E of the TCEP will be the responsibility of
the project implementation unit (PIU) in Monrovia, which has responsibility for all
IFAD-funded projects in Liberia. The IFAD-PIU will ensure day-to-day management
of the TCEP. In addition, the TCEP will establish a county PIU in Sanniquellie, Nimba
County.

19. The main implementing partners of the TCEP will be: (a) selected cooperatives
engaging in business agreements with the kuu groups and FFS; (b) at least two
PSPs, who will engage in procurement plans with the project and the cooperatives;
(c) the Central Agricultural Research Institute (CARI); and (d) other specialized
service providers, including national and international consulting firms,
non-governmental organizations (NGOs), commercial financial institutions and
others.

20. At the county level, the TCEP will liaise with the decentralized functions of MOA and
CDA. The county agricultural coordinator (CAC) and district agricultural officers
(DAOs) will monitor implementation of components A and C. The county resident
engineer (CRE) will liaise with the project on implementation and monitoring of
component B. A memorandum of understanding will be signed with the project to
define roles and responsibilities.

Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning andC.
knowledge management

21. Planning. The Monrovia PIU will consolidate an annual workplan and budget
(AWP/B) for each project year, on the basis of proposals from the county PIU. The
AWP/B will include: (i) a detailed description of planned project activities for the
coming project year, and the sources and uses of the related funds; (ii) an
18-month procurement plan for items to be procured with IFAD financing; and
(iii) indicators and associated targets extracted from the logical framework. The
draft AWP/B will be submitted to the NSC for clearance and then to IFAD for
comments and final non-objection.

22. Monitoring and evaluation. The logical framework of the TCEP will form the basis
for measuring outputs, outcomes and impacts of the project. The results of the
TCEP will then feed into the MOA subsector contribution to the national AfT M&E
system. The TCEP M&E system will take targeting of women and youth into account
– as a minimum, disaggregating data by gender and age. Moreover, indicators will
be developed to measure the results of specific activities targeting the most
vulnerable segments of the target population.

23. Baseline data will be collected prior to project implementation to ensure that results
are closely monitored to continuously improve the outreach, relevance and
effectiveness of interventions. To this end, in June 2015 SCOPEinsight5 carried out
an assessment of 15 cocoa cooperatives in Nimba and Bong counties in order to
diagnose capacity to enable the project to better tailor training curricula to the
specific needs identified. This exercise will be repeated in TCEP Y3 and Y6. In
addition, the PMU has contacted CARI to conduct a mapping exercise of
cocoa/coffee farms in Nimba County with which the project will potentially work.6

5 SCOPEinsight is an independent rating agency based in the Netherlands that assesses the business potential of
farmer organizations in agriculture, dairy, forestry and aquaculture in developing countries.

6 MOA/PMU is exploring other partnerships that could support the implementation of M&E activities under TCEP
(i.e. young professionals, the Liberia Institute of Statistics and Geo-Information Services (LISGIS), and county
community colleges).



EB 2015/LOT/P.38/Rev.1

5

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Finally, the TCEP will apply IFAD standard reporting procedures during
implementation.

24. M&E will be undertaken at multiple levels and by multiple stakeholders to support
effective implementation. Indicators have been developed during project design and
will be further refined as project activities become more detailed.

25. Forest cover and deforestation risks will be monitored in TCEP target areas through
a geo-information service (under the Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture
Programme [ASAP] grant).

26. Knowledge management plays a central role in IFAD’s scaling up agenda, and
the knowledge management strategy of IFAD-supported projects in Liberia will be
strengthened beginning with the TCEP. An action plan will be developed at start up.
This plan will outline activities to be undertaken, as well as roles and responsibilities
of project staff and implementing partners, to ensure the collection of high-quality
data, in-depth analysis, and creation of knowledge products for evidence-based
decision-making and to contribute to policy dialogue on the cocoa subsector.

Financial management, procurement and governanceD.
27. Country context and risk rating. The inherent risk in Liberia is assessed as

medium. The Corruption Perceptions Index score for Liberia has slightly
deteriorated from 41 in 2012 to 38 in 2013 and 37 in 2014. According to the latest
Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability assessment, conducted in 2012, the
Government has made significant improvements since the last assessment (2007),
but the overall state of public financial management remains moderately weak.

28. Responsibility for financial management of the project will rest with the PIU that is
responsible for implementing other ongoing IFAD projects. As part of the project
design process, a financial management assessment was undertaken. Financial
management arrangements and the capacity of the PIU were assessed as mostly
adequate to meet IFAD requirements; thus initial risk is considered medium. The
PIU will prepare periodic interim financial reports and annual project financial
statements in accordance with accounting standards acceptable to IFAD. All
financial management arrangements will be detailed by the PIU in a financial
procedures manual to be approved by the Fund.

29. Flow of funds. There will be two designated bank accounts (in United States
dollars) opened in the Central Bank of Liberia, one for the IFAD loan and one for
the ASAP grant. IFAD financing shall be disbursed against duly certified withdrawal
applications in accordance with IFAD disbursement procedures to be specified
further in the letter to the borrower.

30. Audit arrangements. The borrower, through the PIU, will appoint independent
auditors acceptable to IFAD, under terms of reference cleared by IFAD, and in line
with the IFAD Guidelines on Project Audits. An audited annual consolidated financial
statement for the entire project, together with a management letter on audit
observations on internal controls, shall be submitted to the Fund within six months
of the end of the fiscal year.

SupervisionE.
31. The project will be directly supervised by IFAD. Annual supervision missions,

including follow-up missions when needed, will be organized with the participation
of MOA, the Ministry of Finance and Development Planning, CDA, LACRA,
cooperatives and beneficiaries. Supervision will not be conducted as general
inspections, but as opportunities to assess achievements and lessons learned, and
to reflect on how to improve implementation and impact. Missions will be an
integral part of the knowledge management cycle.



EB 2015/LOT/P.38/Rev.1

6

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

IV. Project costs, financing and benefits
A. Project costs
32. Total project costs over six years, including contingencies, taxes and duties, are

estimated at US$30.73 million. The TCEP will absorb the entire 2013-2015 PBAS
allocation of US$13 million for Liberia under highly concessional lending terms, as
well as US$4.5 million in ASAP grant funding for climate change resilience activities.
The Government will finance taxes and duties on imported goods and the value
added tax (VAT) for a total of US$1.86 million. PSPs are expected to provide credit
of at least US$0.96 million. This amount includes PSP investments in the marketing
chain, as well as working capital that could be provided to cooperatives to buy
cocoa. The contribution of farmers totals US$1.35 million and consists of a
40 per cent contribution of own labour to the revitalization and replanting of cocoa
plantations and management of village nurseries, as well as to solar dryers. A
financing gap of US$9.06 million remains.

33. The ASAP grant will be used to finance: (a) in-country production of high-quality,
climate-adapted and disease-free planting material (seeds and grafting), including
through international partnerships; (b) promotion of farming practices that serve as
a buffer against increased climate pressures (higher shade, more-intensive plant
management including grafting and pruning, and income diversification through
various tree crops); (c) corresponding training of technicians and farmers;
(d) provision of solar dryers and training in their use; (e) participatory land-use
planning and monitoring based on satellite imagery, to ensure that increased
profitability of the tree crop sector and improved road access to remote areas do
not lead to deforestation; and (f) institutional capacity-building, policy dialogue and
knowledge management in the field of climate change resilience.

Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Millions of United States dollars)

IFAD
2013-2015

PBAS
Financing

gap
IFAD grant

(ASAP) Government

Private-
sector

partners Beneficiaries Total
Component Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %
A. Revitalization of

cocoa plantations 3.49 34.8 0.16 1.6 3.43 34.2 0.64 6.4 0.96 9.6 1.35 13.5 10.03 32.6
B. Rehabilitation and

maintenance of
roads 0.64 6.3 8.9 87.1 - - 0.68 6.6 - - - - 10.22 33.3

C. Service provision for
value chain
development 4.62 76.0 - - 1.07 17.6 0.39 6.3 - - - - 6.08 19.8

D. Project coordination,
monitoring and
evaluation 4.25 96.5 - - - - 0.15 3.5 - - - - 4.4 14.3

Total 13 42.3 9.06 29.5 4.5 14.6 1.86 6.0 0.96 3.1 1.35 4.4 30.73 100.0

B. Project financing
34. The TCEP will absorb the entire 2013-2015 PBAS allocation of US$13 million for

Liberia under highly concessional lending terms, as well as US$4.5 million in ASAP
grant funding for climate change resilience activities. The financing gap of
US$9.06 million – mainly to finance rehabilitation of roads (component B) – could
be financed by IFAD’s PBAS 2016-2018 allocation (modalities to be confirmed). The
Government and IFAD will explore further cofinancing opportunities.



E
B
 2

0
1
5
/LO

T
/P.3

8
/R

ev.1

7

Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD
2013-2015 PBAS Financing gap

IFAD grant
(ASAP) Government

Private-sector
partners Beneficiaries Total

Expenditure category Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

I. Investment cost 9.3 35.1 9.0 34.1 4.1 15.4 1.78 6.6 0.96 3.7 1.35 5.1 26.49 85.8
A. Works 99 1.1 8.5 90.9 99 1.1 0.7 7.0 - - - - 9.4 30.5
B. Goods, services

and inputs 2.1 49.7 0.1 2.5 0.6 13.8 0.3 7.0 - - 1.15 27.0 4.3 14.0
C. Vehicles 0.8 84.9 - - 0.07 8.1 0.07 7.0 - - - - 0.9 3.1
D. Equipment and

materials 1.1 24.6 0.04 0.9 1.9 42.0 0.3 7.0 0.96 21.2 0.2 4.3 4.5 14.8
E. Consultancies 1.9 67.8 - - 0.7 25.7 0.2 6.5 - - - - 2.8 9.3
F. Training 2.6 82.3 0.04 1.1 0.3 10.2 0.2 6.4 - - - - 3.1 10.1
G. Workshops 0.1 81.8 0.02 11.2 - - 0.009 7.0 - - - - 0.1 0.4
H. Services 0.5 45.4 0.3 24.5 0.3 30.2 - - - - - - 1.1 3.7

II. Recurrent costs 3.7 86.0 0.06 1.2 0.4 9.9 0. 08 2.8 - - - - 4.24 14.2
A. Salaries and

allowances * 2.5 95.2 - - 0.1 4.8 - - - - - - 2.6 8.5
B. Operational

costs 1.2 72.2 0.06 3.1 0.3 17.7 0. 08 7.0 - - - - 1.64 5.6

Total 13.0 42.3 9.06 29.5 4.5 14.6 1.86 6.0 0.96 3.1 1.35 4.4 30.73 100
*

Institutional capacity in Liberia is very weak and few service providers are available. Hence the required expertise needs to be internalized in the project. About 44 per cent of recurrent costs are
for staff salaries at the centralized level; 16 per cent for allowances to conduct field visits; 10 per cent for support to decentralized functions of MOA, CDA and young professionals; 9 per cent for
staff salaries at the local level; 8 per cent for salaries of staff tree crop experts; and the remainder for equipment and vehicles.



EB 2015/LOT/P 38/Rev.1

8

E
B
 2

0
1
5
/LO

T
/P.

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
35. Project benefits. The TCEP will have 11,000 beneficiaries: 8,000 cocoa

smallholder farmers, 2,400 additional farmers (who will benefit from spillover
effects) and approximately 600 people through job creation along the value chain.
Considering an average household size of 5.9 in the project area, this adds up to
64,900 household members. The project is expected to lead to increases in cocoa
production, marketing and exports as a result of: (a) revitalization of abandoned
plantations; (b) replanting of new trees on existing plantations; (c) higher yields at
the smallholder level, owing to improved production practices promoted through
dedicated extension systems; and (d) higher quality of cocoa as a result of
improved post-harvest handling and marketing. As a result of component B, the
rehabilitation of farm-to-market roads will procure access to markets, reduce time
and costs to reach local markets and limit the post-harvest losses caused by bad
transportation conditions. Regarding component C, the strengthening of
cooperatives will contribute to increasing their bargaining power in price-setting
when negotiating with buyers. It will also contribute to delivery of quality services
to cocoa farmers and guarantee sustainability of the approach, in particular,
dissemination of improved planting material, extension services, and access to
inputs and to output markets.

36. Financial analysis. The four financial models developed to simulate interventions
of the TCEP are based on information collected by the ongoing STCRSP and the
TCEP design team in April and July 2015. The financial crop models capture:
(i) increases in cocoa yield; (ii) increases in quality; and (iii) increases in prices for
higher quality, as well as better bargaining power for farmers. The yield
assumptions are based on information from other projects in Liberia and the region.
Cocoa price assumptions are based on World Bank price information and
projections (constant 2015 prices). Assumptions regarding grades are based on the
experiences of ongoing projects.

37. Economic analysis. The economic rate of return (ERR) of 37.2 per cent over
20 years is profitable from an economic standpoint and generates a total of
US$108.8 million in the same period (social discount factor: 4.3 per cent). The
sensitivity analysis indicates a solid resilience to: (i) increases in costs due to a
combination of risks affecting output prices, yields and adoption rates; (ii) lower
adoption rates due to a limited outreach of extension services; and (iii) increases in
project costs due to higher prices of service providers, road construction and
inputs.

D. Sustainability
38. It is proposed to classify the project as posing moderate socio-environmental risks

– category B – in view of: targeting of existing plantations and rehabilitation of
existing roads; safeguards against indirect deforestation; measures against
environmental risks of the application of agrochemicals; and careful monitoring of
negative social impacts. A Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment
Procedures (SECAP) note has been prepared. In terms of climate risks, a
preliminary classification of moderate climate risk is proposed at this stage.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
39. The main risks and mitigation measures to be adopted are: (i) weak governance

and institutional capacities – the TCEP will adopt direct contracting procedures,
follow IFAD procurement guidelines, and strengthen training and control systems
related to financial management; (ii) weak cooperatives and market linkages – kuu
groups and FFS will enhance the capacity and bargaining power of farmers. Market
linkages will be established through PSPs and cooperatives. The TCEP will also
provide institutional support to cooperatives; (iii) increased disease pressure will be
mitigated through the setting up and training of pesticide application teams in



EB 2015/LOT/P 38/Rev.1

9

E
B
 2

0
1
5
/LO

T
/P.

cooperatives and FFS, as well as through promoting the use of shade from trees
and diversification of farming systems; (iv) deforestation – interventions will be
restricted to existing farms; forest conservation agreements and participatory land-
use monitoring will contribute to controlling deforestation risk; (v) increased use of
pesticides and fertilizer – the fertilizer application promoted will be in doses too low
to cause environmental harm; biopesticides will be applied through specially set up,
trained and equipped spraying teams, thereby reducing the risk of inappropriate
use; (vi) insufficient planting material and/or not adapted to specific needs – a
collection station will be set up for screening and multiplication of seed and bud
woods for grafting; (vii) low quality of cocoa – solar dryers will be introduced for
individual farmers and at the cooperative level. LACRA will be involved in quality
control.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

40. The design of the TCEP is compliant with the relevant IFAD policies, including the
IFAD Strategic Framework 2011-2015, Rural Enterprise Policy, Private Sector
Development and Partnership Strategy, Rural Finance Policy, Gender Equality and
Women’s Empowerment, Youth Policy Brief, Targeting – Reaching the Rural Poor,
and Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
41. The Cocoa Export Strategy 2014-2018 is a blueprint for the increased

competiveness of Liberian cocoa in the global market. On the basis of an in-depth
diagnostic, the strategy proposes 15 structural interventions in the cocoa value
chain, of which at least eight will be addressed by the TCEP. These structural
interventions aim to: (i) speed up efforts to rehabilitate cocoa farms abandoned
during the civil war and better organize farm operations; (ii) improve land
management practices, aligned with Global Good Agricultural Practice
(GLOBALG.A.P.) and good management practice standards, especially at the
smallholder and cooperative level; (iii) increase availability of inputs by developing
a locally manufactured input supply chain, and by improving access to imported
inputs; (iv) use high-quality saplings/seedlings through collaboration with research
institutes in Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana and the United Kingdom, among other countries;
(v) increase levels of mechanization, leading to increased capabilities of sector
stakeholders for transformation and processing; (vi) better train local buying
agents engaging in best practices and ensure that they are maintained at the
farmgate level; (vii) increase support to women cross-border traders and other
women’s groups and actors active in the sector through mentoring, training in
improved negotiation skills, technical support and access to efficient grievance
mechanisms; and (viii) develop in-market support/national promotion branding.

Innovations and scaling upC.
42. Several approaches adopted by the TCEP are innovative: (a) organization of

farmers at the grass-roots level to enhance their bargaining power; (b) integration
of climate change resilience and related institutional capacity-building; (c) greater
focus on the supply chain for new genetic cocoa material; (d) added attention to
the post-harvest aspects and quality of cocoa; (e) extra emphasis on service
delivery by cooperatives to their members; (f) the combination of basic
revitalization of plantations with enhanced revitalization and replanting;
(g) additional focus on measures to include women and promote their access to
benefits; and (h) use of a long-term growth path for institutional capacity-building
of cooperatives, combined with a more-systematic approach and institutional
auditing.



EB 2015/LOT/P 38/Rev.1

10

E
B
 2

0
1
5
/LO

T
/P.

Policy engagementD.
43. ASAP grant. Within the ambit of the new LACRA Act (once enacted) and the United

Nations Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation Programme
(UN-REDD) policy development in Liberia – and in collaboration with other
development partners – the TCEP will support a national round-table on climate-
friendly cocoa and the potential expansion of cocoa production towards wetter
counties as part of a countrywide climate change adaptation strategy. Other items
that could be discussed are: (a) switching to farmgate pricing with a prescribed
minimum; (b) stimulating the cocoa sector through quality premiums and enforced
minimum standards; and (c) bilateral agreements with Ghana and Côte d’Ivoire on
technical exchanges, exchange of germplasm, multiplication strategies, control of
diseases and child labour issues.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
44. A project financing agreement between the Republic of Liberia and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as appendix I.

45. The Republic of Liberia is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

46. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
47. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Republic of Liberia in an amount equivalent to nine million four hundred
and eighty thousand special drawing rights (SDR 9,480,000), and upon such
terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms
and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant under the
Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme to the Republic of Liberia
in an amount equivalent to three million two hundred and eighty thousand
special drawing rights (SDR 3,280,000), and upon such terms and conditions
as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions
presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President


