







































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the
United Mexican States for the
Rural Productive Inclusion Project


United Mexican States

Rural Productive Inclusion Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: United Mexican States

Executing agency: Ministry of Social Development (SEDESOL)

Total project cost: US$19.5 million

Amount of IFAD loan: EUR 5.87 million
(equivalent to approximately US$6.6 million)

Amount of IFAD grant: US$0.5 million

Terms of IFAD loan: Ordinary terms: Maturity period of 15 years, including agrace period of 3 years, with an interest rate per annum
equal to 100 per cent of the IFAD reference interest rate

Contribution of borrower: US$11.4 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$1.1 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/LOT/P.31/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the United Mexican States for the Rural Productive Inclusion Project, as
contained in paragraph 52.

Proposed loan and grant to the United Mexican States for
the Rural Productive Inclusion Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Mexico is a country with a surface area of 1.96 million km2. The National Council on

Population estimated a total population of 121 million people in 2015 (112.3 million
according to the 2010 census), posting average demographic growth of 1.4 per
cent per annum. Rural people account for 23.1 per cent of the total population.

2. The Mexican economy is the second largest in Latin America and fourteenth in the
world. Mexico is a middle-to-high-income country at US$9,740 per capita. Although
total GDP grew at an annual average rate of 2.5 per cent from 1994 to 2013, this
was insufficient to improve living conditions for the population. Two key constraints
on economic performance are stagnant productivity and unequal income
distribution. Productivity over the past 30 years has declined at a rate of 0.7 per
cent per annum, while the Gini coefficient was 0.509 in 2010.

3. Within the agriculture sector, a highly heterogeneous productive structure prevails.
Family farms – subsistence farming with no market linkages and located mainly in
the central and southern regions of the country – represent 51 per cent of all rural
production units. Labour productivity in Mexican agriculture is notoriously low, at
just 26 per cent of the national average. Another critical problem in sector
performance is lack of access by rural smallholders to financing.

4. In recent decades the Government of Mexico has deployed significant efforts to
combat poverty, involving a broad range of public programmes with steadily
increasing budgetary allocations. The 2015 federal budget includes a package of
financing equivalent to US$22 billion for the Special Concurrent Programme for
Sustainable Rural Development.

5. Despite the scale of this institutional and financial effort, broad portions of the
population continue to live in poverty. In 2012 the National Council on Policy
Evaluation produced data indicating that 53.3 million people were living in
situations of poverty, 31 per cent of them in rural areas. Accordingly, the
administration that took office on 1 December 2012 designed a new social policy
that explicitly seeks to create synergy between income support (mainly conditional
cash transfers) and productive development programmes. Combining these
instruments was assigned as a mandate to Prospera, the social inclusion
programme created at the end of 2014, based on earlier experiences of the
Oportunidades and Progresa programmes. This new social policy seeks to give
families benefiting from income support the opportunity to develop their own
productive initiatives in order to autonomously and sustainably generate income
that enables them to improve their living conditions.



EB 2015/LOT/P.31/Rev.1

2

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

6. In this context, the Government is looking for ways to implement the new social
policy and is thus simultaneously testing different approaches to productive
inclusion. The present Rural Productive Inclusion Project (RPIP) should be seen as a
pilot in that regard, as should the Productive Territories Pilot Programme (PPTP).
IFAD provided support to the PPTP for design and initial implementation, in the
form of a grant to the Government for technical cooperation from the Latin
American Centre for Rural Development. The PPTP is now in operation and will
provide valuable lessons for implementation of the proposed project.

7. The RPIP is aligned with the National Development Plan 2013-2018, and especially
the Special Program to Democratize Productivity and the Social Development Sector
Program, which shape the context in which a new generation of social policy has
been designed. High priority is now given to the strategy of productive inclusion,
whereby the Ministry of Social Development (SEDESOL) and Prospera have
undertaken a number of actions such as design of the RPIP.

8. The project is fully aligned with IFAD’s country strategy, which sets forth two main
objectives: (i) help smallholders and campesinos significantly increase their
productivity by strengthening their assets, capacities, organization and access to
public services and to goods and service markets; and (ii) contribute to making
public spending for the economic development of smallholders and campesinos
more efficient and equitable.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
9. This project will be implemented in 26 municipalities in three federal states:

Guerrero, Hidalgo and Zacatecas. The municipalities have been selected on the
basis of: eligibility for the National Crusade against Hunger; incidence of poverty;
presence of indigenous peoples; a significant number of families served by
Prospera, especially those with land; and the location of strategic population
centres with market potential for carrying out the productive projects of Prospera
families.

10. The target population will comprise Prospera heads of household and their families
that: (i) live in rural areas in the selected states and municipalities; (ii) live in
situations of poverty; (iii) have the potential to engage in income-generating
agricultural and non-agricultural productive activities; and (iv) show interest in
participating in the project. Priority will be given to indigenous populations.

11. The project is expected to reach 12,800 Prospera beneficiary families, of whom
65 per cent are expected to submit applications to access productive projects, with
promotion provided by the project (8,400 families), and 65 per cent of these will
successfully access investments under ongoing productive development
programmes (5,400 families).

B. Project development objective
12. The goal of the project is to contribute to effective implementation of the

Government’s national strategy for productive inclusion and the reduction of rural
poverty.

13. The development objective is that beneficiary families increase their income by
implementing profitable and sustainable productive activities.



EB 2015/LOT/P.31/Rev.1

3

C. Components/outcomes
14. The project will seek to achieve its development objective through two

components: productive inclusion and institutional strengthening. In addition,
financial inclusion will be incorporated as a cross-cutting axis.

15. Component 1: Productive inclusion. This component will support Prospera
beneficiaries and their families participating in the project in accessing programmes
for productive development. It will help them use the investments efficiently to
increase the quantity and improve the quality of their products, access markets,
and thus raise their incomes. To this end, the project will strengthen the
organizational, technical and productive skills of the beneficiaries and improve their
capacities to access other government programmes.

16. In coordinating project activities in the communities, project promoters of
productive and financial inclusion (PIPFs) will play a key role, being responsible for
assisting beneficiaries in identifying potential productive activities and facilitating
access to technical assistance in designing projects for financing by the
programmes. PIPFs will also facilitate access to technical assistance for
implementation of beneficiary productive projects, and build capacities in
beneficiary organizations for obtaining additional aspects needed by some groups,
such as additional financing, legal constitution of small enterprises, etc. On the
other hand, technical assistance for the design and implementation of productive
projects will be provided by external technical assistants.

17. Component 2: Institutional strengthening. This component is designed to
strengthen the ability of Prospera to successfully take on a new role as the key
actor implementing the national strategy for productive inclusion. Its current solid
capacities are focused mainly on implementing social programmes and, above all,
on efficiently providing conditional cash transfers to more than six million
beneficiary families. Capacity-building will thus be provided both to implement the
project in the three states selected and to implement the productive inclusion
strategy nationwide.

18. The component will contribute to the development of new institutional skills through
capacity-building and training of Prospera staff in the project area and at
headquarters. In addition, research and analysis will be conducted and proposals
for innovation developed throughout implementation of the national strategy for
productive inclusion, i.e. in planning and design, operation, monitoring and
evaluation (M&E). Finally, organizational learning and discussion of public policies
will be promoted through targeted knowledge management activities.

19. Cross-cutting axis: Financial inclusion. As an integral part of the process of
developing capacity for effective productive inclusion and of facilitating technical
assistance provided to Prospera families, financial inclusion constitutes a cross-
cutting axis with three concrete activities: (i) financial literacy will be promoted
through provision of financial education among beneficiaries. This training will be
provided mainly by existing institutional programmes, and will be complemented by
PIPFs; (ii) the project management unit, with PIPF support, will strive to link
productive projects with the existing supply of rural financial services, including
existing guarantee funds, and will coordinate actions with government programmes
operating in the project area, thereby leveraging additional financing, mainly
working capital, for beneficiary productive activities; and (iii) each year, as part of
the annual project seminar, a forum promoted by Prospera will take place to raise
awareness among other actors in the financial sector. This will facilitate the
effective provision of finance to productive activities of family units within the most
vulnerable segments of the population, thus supporting them in their development
and income generation.



EB 2015/LOT/P.31/Rev.1

4

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

20. The project is being formulated in the framework of the new social policies, which
focus on promoting productive activities among beneficiaries. Thus the project
facilitates identification and creation of productive opportunities for people living in
poverty. It does this through access to resources from programmes for productive
development that enable beneficiaries to develop sustainable income-generating
activities, with the objective of structurally breaking the cycle of poverty.

21. Prospera’s mandate seeks to create synergy between the social and productive
policies, including the numerous programmes for productive development. In that
context, it should be stressed that the project will mainly facilitate access to
investments and services – such as productive investments, technical assistance for
implementation, and rural financial services – that are currently being offered by
the other government agencies or private actors.

22. The project will promote links with productive development programmes, based on
lessons learned from other pilot programmes, such as the PPTP. In that regard, it
will benefit from the institutional linkages and attention generated by the PPTP with
several federal productive programmes. It will also take advantage of valuable
lessons learned on the strengthening of producer groups and targeting
mechanisms, among other aspects.

B. Organizational framework
23. Strategic project direction will be provided by the Prospera Technical Subcommittee

on Employment, Income and Savings (STEIA), currently chaired by the Ministry of
Finance and Public Credit (SHCP), with representatives of Prospera’s national
coordination and heads of various productive development programmes. The
executing agency is SEDESOL, through Prospera’s national coordination. To this
end, a technical team will be appointed within the existing Prospera structure,
specifically within the Office of Coordination and Linkages (DGCV), to direct project
implementation in coordination with the various Prospera operating divisions
involved, as well as with state-level branches. This team and its location within
DGCV, with functions to be specified in the project implementation manual, is
strategically important in ensuring project management in accordance with the
objectives and timelines set, as well as close coordination with other productive
inclusion actions operating within Prospera. The Office of General Administration
and Finance (DGAF) will be responsible for the project’s administrative and financial
management within Prospera.

24. The project calls for two types of key actors for technical assistance and capacity-
building: (i) national-level institutions to provide training of national coordination
project staff and technicians supporting Prospera families benefiting from the
project; and (ii) technical assistance and training service providers supporting the
design, processing, start-up and consolidation of productive projects of Prospera
family organizations.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

25. The project will set up a system for planning and M&E that is compatible with
Prospera’s M&E framework. Prospera is known for its strong capacity in this area,
which so far, however, has focused mainly on evaluation of conditional cash
transfers and their impact on the beneficiary group. This project will complement
the current system with a strong focus on M&E of productive inclusion and
institutionalization of these new capacities in Prospera.



EB 2015/LOT/P.31/Rev.1

5

26. Prospera has not yet defined a single operating modality for implementation of the
productive inclusion strategy, but is rather testing different methods, such as the
previously mentioned PPTP, to then evaluate which modality is the most efficient
and effective. The present project should also be seen as a pilot providing a
learning opportunity for the institution. The lessons learned from project evaluation
and systematization will be invaluable to the Government in refining the productive
inclusion strategy. Accordingly, knowledge management is a central activity for the
project and, indeed, one of its reasons for being.

27. Ensuring the kind of learning that enables continuing improvement – based on
results and experiences in implementation of the project and other pilots – is
critical. To this end, beginning in year one, a total of three seminars will be held on
public policy and productive inclusion, as well as to share experiences, analyse
project results and promote discussion and dialogue on comprehensive policies for
productive inclusion.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
28. Financial management. The project's financial management, including budgeting,

procurement, flow of funds, disbursements, internal controls, accounting, financial
reporting and audit, will be the responsibility of Prospera’s DGAF, under the
supervision of a federal financial entity, to be nominated by SHCP. Project
execution will be carried out according to Prospera’s operational rules and
procedures and the implementation manual. The project will use Prospera's
accounting software, ensuring compliance with IFAD's financial reporting
requirements.

29. Flow of funds. Loan funds will be disbursed using the reimbursement method of
disbursement, whereas a designated account denominated in euro, and
administered by the designated federal financial entity, will be opened for advance
receipt of grant funds. The financial entity will open and administer a project
account, which will receive both IFAD and counterpart funds.

30. Procurement. Procurement of goods and services will follow national procurement
procedures and regulations to the extent that they are consistent with IFAD’s
procurement guidelines.

31. Audit. Consolidated project financial statements will be audited annually by an
independent auditor in accordance with current procedures and terms agreed by
the Ministry of Public Administration and international financial institutions, to the
extent that they are consistent with IFAD guidelines on project audits. All project
accounts will be audited, including those relating to IFAD funds and those relating
to national counterpart funding. Audit reports will be delivered to IFAD within six
months of the end of each fiscal year.

E. Supervision
32. The project will be directly supervised by IFAD, in accordance with its Policy on

Supervision and Implementation Support. This arrangement will facilitate two
supervision missions per year. Moreover, continuous implementation support and
problem-solving is envisaged, including initial support for the implementation
manual and annual workplan and budget.

IV. Project costs, financing and benefits
A. Project costs
33. Total project costs amount to US$19.5 million, of which component 1: productive

inclusion, costs approximately US$17.2 million, and component 2: institutional
strengthening, costs approximately US$2.3 million.



EB 2015/LOT/P.31/Rev.1

6

Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant
Counterpart
(Prospera) Beneficiaries

Productive
programmes Total

Component Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount

1. Productive Inclusion 5 516 - - 1 060 10 595 17 171
2. Institutional
strengthening 1 067 500 788 - - 2 355

Total 6 583 500 788 1 060 10 595 19 526

B. Project financing
34. The total cost of the project will be financed by five sources. IFAD is financing

approximately US$7.1 million through its loan and grant, while Prospera is financing
roughly US$0.8 million in counterpart funds. Given that one of the project
objectives is to promote access by the Prospera population to current productive
development programmes, an estimated US$10.6 million will be made available to
beneficiaries under such programmes over and above the IFAD and Prospera
contributions, and a beneficiary contribution is estimated in the amount of
US$1.1 million to cofinance the productive investments.

35. The IFAD loan will be made available to the Government on ordinary terms and will
have a maturity period of 15 years, including a grace period of 3 years, with an
interest rate equal to the reference interest rate determined semi-annually by the
Fund.

36. IFAD financing for this project will also cover taxes, as requested by the
Government, given the impracticability of exempting the project from taxes from a
budgetary, operational and accounting viewpoint – and given that the World Bank
currently applies this practice in the country.

37. Retroactive financing will apply for eligible expenses incurred previous to loan entry
into force but after the date of Executive Board approval, of up to EUR 587,000 for
expense category 2 "Consultancies".

Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD loan IFAD grant
Counterpart
(Prospera) Beneficiaries

Productive
programmes Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Equipment, material
and communication 138 2 - - - - - - - - 138
2. Consultancies 6 445 98 500 100 788 100 - - - - 7 733
3. Productive
investments - - - - - - 1 060 100 10 595 100 11 655

Total 6 583 500 788 1 060 10 595 19 526

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
38. This section describes the benefits expected from project interventions. The main

indicators of the analysis are as follows: (i) 12,800 Prospera families benefit from
the project in the form of basic advisory assistance on production issues and
information on access to financial services; (ii) about 8,400 families benefiting from
the project prepare and submit some 1,400 projects (averaging six families per
project) to productive development programmes, of which approximately two thirds
(approximately 900 projects) are approved, benefiting some 5,400 families;
(iii) 5,400 families access technical assistance for successful implementation of



EB 2015/LOT/P.31/Rev.1

7

their productive projects, as well as financial education; (iv) 75 per cent of the
productive projects approved are still operating after two years; (v) 400 young
people (Prospera beneficiaries and their children) are trained in project
management and leadership; and (vi) approximately 3,400 Prospera officers and
project operators have strengthened their capacity to implement the national
strategy of productive inclusion.

39. The economic analysis shows that the project represents a profitable investment,
with an economic internal rate of return of 29.5 per cent and a net present value of
US$164.6 million.

D. Sustainability
40. The project design points to the economic and social sustainability of productive

investments of the target group. The project strategy promotes development of
their technical, organizational and administrative skills, which will enhance the
sustainability of their activities.

41. On the institutional level, component 2 has the objective of strengthening
Prospera’s capacity to successfully carry out its mandate to promote the national
agenda for productive inclusion. In that regard, the project seeks to institutionalize
skills for and knowledge of productive inclusion, which will effectively ensure the
sustainability of the institutional approach to the subject.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
42. The main project risks are as follows:

Risk Mitigation strategy

Lack of normative provisions and
agreements with some productive
development programmes to ensure
priority and effective access for
Prospera beneficiaries to these
programmes.

Resistance by operators of productive
development programmes – which
have traditionally not worked with poor
populations – to facilitating access by
the Prospera population to such
programmes.

Through STEIA, which includes SHCP,
Prospera and representatives of these
programmes, an ongoing dialogue will be
maintained to strengthen their
commitment to the Government’s
objective of productive inclusion.

Awareness-raising will be provided for
programme operators in the field to
ensure their inclusion of the Prospera
population.

The isolated conditions of many
localities prevent families from learning
about opportunities to undertake
productive projects and access to
productive development programme
resources.

The project will incorporate promoters of
productive and financial inclusion within
its geographical coverage area to
disseminate information about these
programmes and facilitate liaison of
families with technical service providers.

Beneficiaries do not wish to formalize
new economic activities supported by
the project for fear of losing their
Prospera transfers and having to pay
taxes.

The project will emphasize the provision
of accurate information on the rights and
responsibilities of beneficiaries in two
areas: (i) receipt of conditional cash
transfers; and (ii) tax treatment of their
productive initiatives.

Insufficient quality of technical
assistance services are available in the
project area to support families in
developing and implementing their
productive projects, as well as
insufficient incentives to attract service
providers.

Lessons learned in Mexico and other
countries show the importance of having
technicians that are familiar with, and
ideally live in, the project area. A
preliminary assessment carried out
during project design shows that quality
services are available in the project area,



EB 2015/LOT/P.31/Rev.1

8

having work experience within the area,
and with populations with a similar profile
to that of Prospera.

Project management is hampered by:
(i) delays and/or deficiencies in budget
availability and changes in
programming structure that place
constraints on access by the Prospera
population; and (ii) unsafe conditions in
some parts of the project area.

Project management risks will be
mitigated by ongoing dialogue between
government authorities and IFAD, and
full ownership by Prospera during
execution. The security risk will require
constant monitoring of conditions in the
field.

Degradation of natural resources
caused by the implemented production
projects, particularly sheep breeding.

This risk will be mitigated by the
inclusion of criteria of environmental
impact on the design of productive
projects. In the case of sheep breeding,
mitigation actions will be included, and
compliance with an adequate ratio of
animals per designated grazing area will
be ensured.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

43. The project is aligned with the IFAD Strategic Framework 2011–2015 in promoting
an economic asset base that is resilient to market and climate change, and in
improving access to technical assistance services in support of smallholders. The
project is also compliant with IFAD’s policies on: (i) targeting, by applying a
geographical, direct and self-targeting strategy; (ii) gender and age equality,
through the strategy to target women; (iii) rural finance, through greater access by
smallholder farmers to the rural financial services they need to meet their
production requirements; (iv) engagement with indigenous peoples, respecting the
principle of free, prior and informed consent; and (v) environment and natural
resource management, through the promotion of good environmental practices in
production.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
44. This project is intended to contribute to effective implementation of the

Government’s national strategy for productive inclusion and to reducing rural
poverty and food insecurity. The project has been formulated in the framework of
the country’s National Development Plan 2013-2018, more specifically the Special
Program to Democratize Productivity, which coordinates government actions aimed
at carrying out public policies that remove barriers limiting the productive potential
of citizens and enterprises. Moreover, the project area falls within the areas of the
National Crusade against Hunger, which comprise the Government’s priority areas
for poverty reduction.

45. The project will be implemented in close coordination with other initiatives in
Prospera, such as the PTPP, among others.

Innovations and scaling upC.
46. The approach of this project is innovative in that it seeks to bridge the gap between

social transfer programmes and productive development programmes, allowing the
beneficiaries of the first to access the latter and implement sustainable productive
projects. In that way, the project will not directly finance productive investments,
but will facilitate access to already-existing funds in the country.

47. This project is being designed as a pilot project to contribute to the government
strategy for productive inclusion. If proven successful, it can be scaled up in



EB 2015/LOT/P.31/Rev.1

9

accordance with government priorities. As mentioned above, Prospera has not yet
defined a single operating modality for implementation of the productive inclusion
strategy, but is testing different approaches of which this project is one. The idea is
to evaluate the diverse modalities and scale up the option that has proven the most
efficient and effective.

Policy engagementD.
48. Being a pilot, the project will have a strong focus on learning. At strategic points in

time, and at least once per year, during the annual seminar on public policy and
productive inclusion organized by the project, policymakers will be updated on
progress and lessons learned and on concrete, evidence-based policy
recommendations.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
49. A financing agreement between the United Mexican States and IFAD will constitute

the legal instrument for extending the proposed loan to the borrower. A grant
agreement between the United Mexican States and IFAD will constitute the legal
instrument for extending the proposed IFAD grant to the recipient. Copies of both
negotiated agreements are attached as appendix I.

50. The United Mexican States is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD.

51. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
52. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the United
Mexican States in an amount equivalent to five million eight hundred and
seventy thousand euros (EUR 5,870,000), and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the United
Mexican States in an amount equivalent to five hundred thousand United
States dollars (US$500,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President



