










































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of
Rwanda for the Rwanda Dairy Development
Project

Republic of Rwanda

Rwanda Dairy Development Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning/ Republic of
Rwanda

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Resources

Total project cost: US$65.1 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 31.35 million
(equivalent to approximately US$43.6 million)

Amount of IFAD grant: SDR 0.79 million
(equivalent to approximately US$1.1 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional loan

Cofinancier: Heifer Project International (HPI)

Amount of cofinancing: Heifer Project International: US$4 million
Private sector: US$6.6 million

Terms of cofinancing: Grant

Contribution of borrower: US$3.9 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$5.9 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of Rwanda for the Rwanda Dairy Development Project, as
contained in paragraph 46.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Rwanda for
the Rwanda Dairy Development Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country, rural development and poverty context
1. Rwanda is a small, landlocked country in east-central Africa with a land area of

26,338 km2. Its estimated population in 2016 is 11.55 million with an annual
growth rate of 2.36 per cent. Population density has increased from 321 persons
per km2 in 2002 to 445 persons per km2 in 2015 – the highest in Africa.

2. While Rwanda has had an impressive record translating its sustained growth into
poverty reduction across the country, poverty remains a major challenge with
slightly over 4.4 million people estimated to be living in poverty. The country is
ranked 163rd out of 188 countries in the 2014 Human Development Index,
classifying Rwanda as a low human development country. The latest national
poverty survey identified 39.1 per cent of the population as poor and 16.3 per cent
as extremely poor (unable to afford the basic basket of goods and services
estimated at RwF 159,375 per household per year in 2014).1

3. Poverty is mostly a rural phenomenon: the incidence of poverty in rural areas is
estimated at 43 per cent compared to 22 per cent in urban areas. The country’s
land distribution is skewed – 36 per cent of households own 6 per cent of all farm
land, with an average of 0.1 hectare (ha) per household (compared to the national
average of 0.33 ha per household). The HIV prevalence rate has fallen below 3 per
cent as a result of concerted efforts to promote awareness and behaviour change,
coupled with ensuring that pregnant women living with HIV have access to
antiretroviral medicines.

4. Official estimates show that 19 per cent of Rwandan households are food insecure.
Food insecurity follows a similar distribution across districts as poverty and is
highest in the northern (46.2 per cent) and western (45.3 per cent) provinces. Food
insecurity is often related to the stability of rural incomes, access to land, animal
ownership and events such as crop failures and seasonal scarcities, which reduce
access to food. While there has been a marked reduction in the prevalence of
chronic malnutrition over the last decade, stunting continues to be above the World
Health Organization severity threshold and is a major public health concern. Almost
38 per cent of children under 5 are chronically malnourished, with stunting levels
above 40 per cent reported in over 30 per cent of districts in the country.

5. Dairy is a strategic commodity and the dairy subsector is crucial for rural
development, poverty reduction and food and nutrition security in Rwanda. It offers
a pathway out of poverty for the large number of households keeping livestock and
those who provide services and add value throughout the supply chain. The current
"farm gate" value of annual milk production is approximately US$153.90 million.
The dairy subsector is the largest segment of the livestock sector in Rwanda, which
accounts for 10.5 per cent of agricultural gross domestic product and is the fastest
growing subsector within agriculture.

1 National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda (NISR), Rwanda Poverty Profile Reports 2013/2014, 2015.



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

2

6. In recognition of the importance of dairy, the Government has made significant
investments in the industry over the past decade aimed at transforming it from
subsistence to a business-oriented, modern sector capable of meeting the country’s
demand for dairy products and producing surpluses for the regional market. The
results of these investments are clearly visible today and include the transformation
of the national cattle herd from 600,000 cattle dominated by local breeds with low
milk production potential in the 1990s to today’s national herd of 1.35 million,
which includes 54 per cent improved dairy breeds. In tandem with this
transformation of the sector, annual milk production increased from 50,000 metric
tons in 2000 to 731,000 metric tons in 2015. Per capita milk consumption has also
steadily increased from below 20 litres per year in the 1990s to 64 litres per year in
2015.

7. While the impressive growth of the dairy sector in Rwanda has enabled the country
to become a significant player in the regional dairy industry, the sector’s
performance still lags behind that of competing countries in the region, and there
are still many challenges to be tackled. The Government’s National Dairy Strategy
seeks to build on the gains made so far to address the remaining factors
constraining the dairy sector from achieving its potential. A key thrust of the
strategy is to formalize the dairy value chain and – considering the health benefits
– increase national consumption of processed milk instead of the raw milk currently
being consumed. The strategy also seeks to improve value addition and product
diversification based on the anticipated milk surplus. The National Dairy Strategy
aims to not only increase the number of improved breed cows but enhance their
productivity through improved feeding across seasons. The latter is important to
ensure consistent milk supply, particularly during the dry season when milk supply
has consistently been far below demand. The Government is also seeking to expand
the milk-collection infrastructure, including the establishment of more milk
collection centres (MCCs) and increased commercialization of their operations.
Improved productivity and efficiency along the dairy value chain are expected to
reduce costs, making Rwanda’s dairy products less expensive and more competitive
in regional markets.

8. The National Dairy Strategy emphasizes the importance of public-private-producer
partnerships in achieving its objectives. The Government has spearheaded the
development of the dairy industry through projects such as the African
Development Bank-funded Livestock Infrastructure Support Project and the Rwanda
Dairy Competiveness Programme I and II funded by the United States Agency for
International Development. In addition, the Netherlands Development Organisation,
Heifer Project International (HPI), Send-a-Cow and the recently completed East
Africa Dairy Development Programme funded by the Bill & Melinda Gates
Foundation have supported dairy development in Rwanda. The projects are being
implemented in prescribed districts, with the Rwanda Dairy Competitiveness
Programme II active in 17 districts across the country’s five milksheds.

9. Despite remarkable progress in developing the country’s dairy sector, significant
challenges remain. Key among them are: (i) low milk productivity, attributed to the
low number of improved dairy cattle and compounded by inadequate forage, animal
feeding practices and seasonal fluctuations in water availability; (ii) limited support
services (such as artificial insemination, veterinary services, extension and inputs),
and inadequate knowledge of dairy cattle management; (iii) limited organization of
farmers for collective action in marketing of milk and accessing inputs and services;
(iv) inadequate development and management of milk collection, processing and
marketing infrastructure for the supply of quality milk to domestic and regional
markets; (v) limited access to financing for dairy value chain actors, especially
women and youth; and (vi) a nascent policy and institutional framework and the
need for specific laws, regulations and institutional capacity development to
encourage the industry’s growth.



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

3

10. The dairy sector is susceptible to climate change on both the production and
marketing sides as water and land become more limited for fodder production and
temperatures increase, requiring changes in forage-feeding systems. This makes
the transport and safe storage of milk to consumers more complex and requires
more energy use. On the other hand, dairy farming contributes to climate change
since increasing dairy production may contribute to anthropogenic greenhouse gas
(GHG) emissions, biophysical degradation and loss of biodiversity if green
strategies are not promoted along with good dairy-management practices. For
these reasons, dairy production needs to be increased through well-managed
intensification rather than an extensification approach, and must incorporate
climate-smart measures and technologies to mitigate against adverse
environmental impacts.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
COSOP

11. The proposed Rwanda Dairy Development Project (RDDP) will address these
challenges and capitalize on the opportunities created by past investments in the
sector. At the current level of productivity, milk-supply projections show that the
country will not be able to meet the rapidly growing domestic demand for milk and
sustain the upward trend in cross-border exports to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Republic of Burundi. RDDP is expected to contribute to closing this
gap. The project design builds upon lessons learned in the dairy sector by
developing the value chain through: improving cattle productivity, milk quality and
the processing capacity of the dairy industry; and strengthening the policy and
institutional framework for the sector. RDDP supports all three strategic objectives
of the results-based country strategic opportunities programme (COSOP) 2013-
2018.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
12. The project area comprises 12 districts throughout Rwanda. Selection of the

targeted districts was based on: (i) the current cattle population and level of milk
production; (ii) current and projected market development potential, including
investments in MCCs, dairy processing plants and animal feed factories; and
(iii) levels of poverty, food insecurity and malnutrition. With an estimated
population of 4.6 million, poverty in the project area is higher than the national
average, with the highest poverty in targeted districts in the north and west.

13. The project’s primary target group comprises slightly over 100,000 resource-poor
rural households, of whom 80,000 will be involved in dairy farming and 20,000 in
off-farm activities along the dairy value chain. The target groups include:

 51,800 smallholder dairy farmers in zero-grazing systems who typically own
up to three cows – this is the predominant livestock system in Rwanda,
accounting for 92 per cent of all livestock keepers, producing mainly for home
consumption and selling a small surplus locally;

 22,200 smallholder dairy farmers in semi-extensive grazing systems with up
to 10 cows – they are principally located in the northern and eastern
provinces, and typically have 5-10 ha, which form a good base for sufficient
supply of forage for their cattle, but face challenges associated with shortages
of water and pastures during dry months;

 6,000 Girinka (one-cow-per-poor-family) beneficiaries, who will receive a cow
in-calf and pass on the first heifer to a qualifying neighbour – these
households meet the criteria set by the government programme, with some
land for forage production and ability to construct a cowshed;



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

4

 15,400 young farm assistants age 15 to 24 working as wage labourers on
dairy farms, especially in women-headed households with no male adults –
they are typically from very poor families, with little or no education, and a
limited skills base;

 5,400 rural women age 15-35, who will benefit from new economic
opportunities and the creation of small off-farm business opportunities; and

 640 livestock farmer field school (L-FFS) facilitators, 450 producers of forage
seeds and vegetative-planting materials, 175 veterinarians, 72 community
animal health workers and artificial insemination technicians, members of
dairy cooperatives, milk-collectors and dairy processors.

14. The gender strategy aims to provide equal opportunities for women and men to
participate in, and benefit from, development of the dairy value chain through
RDDP-supported activities. It is expected that women will account for at least
45 per cent of all project beneficiaries. Women-headed households and women in
men-headed households will be empowered to build small businesses or engage in
activities related to dairy farming. The Gender Action Learning System will ensure
that women fully participate in household decision-making, especially regarding
dairy activities. Women’s participation in L-FFS will encourage their membership
and leadership in dairy farmers’ organizations, apex organizations and policy
engagement. Climate-smart investments will support the use of labour-saving
technologies such as rainwater harvesting, and the intensification of dairy
production will provide opportunities for biogas systems, which can be used for
household energy.

B. Project development objective
15. The overall goal of RDDP is to contribute to pro-poor national economic growth and

improve the livelihoods of resource-poor rural households. This will be achieved by
focusing on food security and nutrition, empowering women and youth, increasing
smallholder dairy farmers’ incomes and developing a climate-resilient dairy value
chain. Specifically, the project seeks to increase the dairy sector’s competitiveness
and profitability through the provision of quality products from small-scale
producers to domestic and regional consumers, thus improving their livelihoods,
food security and nutrition while building overall resilience.

16. There are two specific objectives:

 Sustainably intensify dairy production and increase productivity among
participating smallholder farmers. This shall be achieved through: the
promotion of improved climate-smart dairy-farming practices and access to
quality dairy inputs; extension services including veterinary and artificial
insemination services; green technologies; and business and financial
services, following a hub-model approach.

 Increase incomes among 80 per cent of participating smallholder farmers
from dairy farming through the combined effects of increased milk production
and improved market access. This shall be achieved through the:
development of 30 dairy hubs; establishment and strengthening of dairy
farmers’ organizations; and facilitation of linkages to markets and dairy value
chain actors such as milk collectors, processors, transporters, traders and
investors in milk quality through public-private-producer partnerships.



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

5

C. Components/outcomes
17. To achieve its objectives, RDDP has three technical components:

18. Component 1: Climate-smart dairy production intensification aims at
increasing the capacity of smallholder dairy farmers and farm assistants to
sustainably produce and supply higher volumes of quality milk to the dairy market.
This component focuses on: (i) enhancing the capacity of smallholder dairy farmers
and farm assistants to improve their knowledge, attitudes and behaviours for
increased milk productivity and quality; (ii) providing smallholder dairy farmers with
sustainable access to public and private livestock services and inputs; and
(iii) supporting resource-poor households without cattle to acquire dairy assets so
that they can begin dairy farming through the Girinka programme and increase
their capacity to implement climate-smart investments aimed at sustainably
improving milk productivity and quality, as well as increasing household-level milk
consumption.

19. Component 2: Producer organization and value chain development is
designed to enable farmers to capitalize on productivity gains realized through
investments made under component 1. This component aims to increase their
earnings through: (i) organization and capacity-building of dairy-farmer
cooperatives for improved service delivery to farmers in milk collection and
marketing, input supply, animal-health services and financial services under the
hub model; (ii) investment in climate-resilient milk collection, processing and
marketing infrastructure aimed at reducing post-production losses and enhancing
the supply of quality milk in the domestic and regional markets; and (iii) leveraging
financing for climate-resilient dairy enterprise development aimed at catalysing
growth in all segments of the dairy value chain.

20. Component 3: Institutional and policy development aims to facilitate the
establishment of an evidence-based, inclusive policy framework and institutional
structure for the Rwandan dairy sector. It will achieve this by supporting:
(i) formulation of a national dairy policy and legislation necessary for improving the
regulatory environment of the sector; (ii) policy implementation and institutional
strengthening; and (iii) policy-related analysis and technical assistance.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
21. The starting point of RDDP will be the value chain for milk and milk products; it will

focus on supporting milk production, marketing and processing. In the process, it
will also support public and private production service providers such as
extensionists, input suppliers, artificial insemination and veterinary services,
smallholder dairy farmers and their organizations, informal traders and
transporters, small private dairy and MCC operators, and milk processors. The
project will facilitate the emergence of diverse subsector value chains offering a
range of products to different markets. In all of them, emphasis will be on:
increasing the quantity of milk marketed and processed; promoting efficiency in
value chains; ensuring the quality and safety of the final products; and increasing
household-level milk consumption.

B. Organizational framework
22. The lead agency in project implementation will be the Ministry of Agriculture and

Animal Resources (MINAGRI). Within the Ministry, daily operations will be managed
by the single project implementation unit (SPIU), which currently implements the
IFAD-supported Project for Rural Income through Exports, Post-harvest and
Agribusiness Support Project and the Kirehe Community-based Watershed
Management Project in Rwanda. In line with the sector-wide approach principles
and to mainstream project implementation within government agencies responsible
for dairy development, the main implementing body for the project will be the



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

6

Rwanda Agriculture Board (RAB), which will work closely with HPI in developing the
dairy-hub model. Other implementing partners will be the Rwanda Council of
Veterinary Doctors, the Rwanda Cooperative Agency, Rwanda’s Business
Development Fund and the Rwanda National Dairy Platform. These agencies will
provide facilitation and technical services in line with their mandated roles to
support project implementation. Collaboration will also be forged with the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) for technical support.

23. Performance-based contracts. Project implementation will be structured around
performance-based memoranda of understanding and partnership agreements with
government and non-governmental agencies, and service contracts with recruited
service providers. To ensure uninterrupted service delivery during implementation,
MINAGRI will enter into multi-year agreements with government implementing
partners and HPI, but provide annual reviews to ensure the achievement of results.
All service contracts for multi-year engagement will be issued on an annual basis,
and will be renewable only upon achievement of clearly set performance targets.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

24. Project management will be guided by a results-based management approach,
which aims to ensure that all processes, services and activities of the project and its
implementing partners contribute to achieving the project targets within the
framework of the project’s theory of change. As part of this approach, planning will
be guided by the project’s strategy, logframe and broader results framework, which
will inform the development of annual workplans and budgets.

25. The objectives of the project’s monitoring and evaluation system are to: (i) provide
information on progress towards results as required for results-based management
at all levels; (ii) enable the tracking of physical progress against the targets in the
annual workplan and budget; and (iii) collect and disseminate lessons for learning
purposes, including options for scaling up, replication and risk management. In line
with IFAD's Results and Impact Management System (RIMS), results will be
measured at the output, outcome and impact levels. The project logframe will be
extracted from the results framework and linked to the economic and financial
analysis in line with IFAD guidelines.

26. A knowledge management strategy for the dairy sector will be developed building
on three pillars: people, processes and technology. Quarterly reviews with
implementing partners will be organized by the SPIU to discuss progress towards
planned results in order to prepare quarterly progress reports, which will focus on
lessons learned, challenges and good practices. Study tours, exchange visits and
learning visits will be organized for lateral knowledge transfer.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
27. MINAGRI will have overall responsibility for the project’s financial management

system. It will be administered through the existing SPIU financial management
structure, which is regarded as a best practice in the region. The SPIU uses the
TOMPRO accounting system for both project and government reporting. The
financial reporting and audit standards are acceptable to IFAD.

28. Project audit. The SPIU will recruit an internal auditor to assess compliance of the
project's internal controls and procedures. The external audit will be performed by
the Office of the Auditor General.

29. Funds flow and disbursement arrangements. IFAD will disburse loan and grant
proceeds through a designated account to be opened at the National Bank of
Rwanda. The operational and counterpart funds accounts, denominated in Rwandan
francs, will also be opened at the National Bank of Rwanda, through which daily
payments to suppliers will be made. Funds will be transferred to other
implementing partners from the operational account. Implementing partners may



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

7

be required to open bank accounts specifically for RDDP funds depending on
whether they will receive substantial advances for activities under their
responsibility. Project funds will flow from the SPIU to the RAB and other
implementing partners only once memoranda of understanding are in place.

30. Start-up costs. Withdrawals for start-up costs are encouraged for eligible
expenditures to be incurred between the date of entry into force of the financing
agreement and the satisfaction of the conditions precedent to withdrawal.

31. Procurement. RDDP will adopt national procurement systems in line with the
international competitive-bidding threshold for goods, works and services, provided
that this system is in compliance with IFAD’s guidelines and in accordance with the
financing agreement and the letter to the borrower. The following actions will be
mainstreamed during RDDP implementation to ensure greater transparency and
accountability in financial management and procurement: (i) disclosure of
information to a wider audience, including at the community level;
(ii) beneficiary/civil society oversight for monitoring purposes and to ensure that
project-related information is discussed openly; (iii) a responsive complaints-
handling system; and (iv) sound accounting and audit measures within a context of
rigorous financial management.

E. Supervision
32. Project supervision will be carried out by IFAD jointly with MINAGRI, and with the

participation of HPI. Two implementation support/supervision missions will be
conducted every year and a midterm review will be organized by MINAGRI in the
third year. The IFAD Country Office will play an important role in supervising the
project by continually assessing bottlenecks and risks to successful implementation
and sustainability, and monitoring changes in implementation that require proactive
adjustments to the project design, implementation arrangements and logframe.

IV. Project costs, financing, and benefits
A. Project costs
33. Total project costs over six years, including physical and price contingencies, are

estimated at US$65.1 million, as presented in table 1 below, which summarizes
overall costs by component and financier. Component A represents 42 per cent of
total base costs, component B, 46 per cent and component C, 3 per cent; project
coordination and management costs are 9 per cent.



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

8

Table 1
Project costs by component and financier

(Thousands of United States dollars)
IFAD IFAD Private

loan grant Heifer banks Beneficiaries Government Total

Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount %
A. Climate-smart dairy
production intensification

- - - -

1. Knowledge, attitudes and
behaviour

8 973.6 - 840.4 9 814.1 15.1

2. Sustainable access to
public and private livestock
services

6 485.2 535.7 404.0 115.6 603.6 790.4 8 934.5 13.7

3. Asset building and climate-
smart productivity

6 084.4 - 594.0 1 584.8 - 625.5 8 888.7 13.7

Subtotal: Climate-smart dairy
production intensification

21 543.3 535.7 998.0 1 700.4 603.6 2 256.3 27 637.3 42.5

B. Producer organization and
value chain development

1. Organization and capacity-
building of farmer
cooperatives and other value
chain players

4 236.0 - 2 908.7 - - 283.5 7 428.2 11.4

2. Investment in milk collection
and processing infrastructure

3 146.2 344.7 90.2 - 928.2 1 036.7 5 546.0 8.5

3. Financing for dairy
enterprise development

7 368.1 - - 4 866.7 4 400.0 11.7 16 646.5 25.6

Subtotal: Producer
organization and value chain
development

14 750.2 344.7 2 998.9 4 866.7 5 328.2 1 332.0 29 620.7 45.5

C. Institutional and policy
development

1. Policy formulation 332.3 - - - - 3.9 336.2 0.5
2. Policy implementation and
institutional strengthening

1 073.4 - - - - 141.0 1 214.4 1.9

3. Policy-related knowledge
management

65.8 210.3 - - - 41.3 317.3 0.5

Subtotal: Institutional and
policy development

1 471.5 210.3 - - - 186.1 1 867.8 2.9

D. Project coordination and
management

1. Project management 4 767.4 - - - - 59.1 4 826.5 7.4
2. Monitoring and evaluation 1 086.5 - - - - 30.3 1 116.8 1.7

Subtotal: Project coordination
and management

5 853.8 - - - - 89.4 5 943.3 9.1

Total 43 618.8 1 090.7 3 996.9 6 567.1 5 931.8 3 863.9 65 069.1 100.0

B. Project financing
34. The project will be financed by: (i) IFAD in the amount of US$44.7 million

(69 per cent of the total cost) through a highly concessional loan of US$43.6 million
and a grant of US$1.1 million; (ii) HPI for US$4 million (6 per cent of the total
cost); (iii) the private sector/banks for US$6.6 million (10 per cent of the total
cost); (iv) the Government of Rwanda for US$3.9 million (6 per cent) in the form of
tax exemptions; and (v) beneficiaries for US$5.9 million (9 per cent). Table 2 below
details project costs by expenditure category and financier.



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

9

Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD IFAD Private
loan grant Heifer banks Beneficiaries Government Total

Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount %

I. Investment Costs
Works 510.2 - 112.0 622.2 1.0
Vehicles 145.4 - 36.4 181.8 0.3
Equipment and materials 5 095.1 344.7 248.9 115.6 952.5 1 689.2 8 445.9 13.0
Goods, services, and
inputs 9 796.3 210.3 1 476.2 - 579.3 2 026.4 14 088.4 21.7
Consultancies 5 842.5 535.7 1 133.6 - - 0.0 7 511.8 11.5
Training and workshops 9 505.6 - 1 138.2 - - 0.0 10 643.8 16.4
Grants and subsidies 7 777.2 - - 6 451.5 4 400.0 - 18 628.7 28.6

Total investment costs 38 672.3 1 090.7 3 996.9 6 567.1 5 931.8 3 863.9 60 122.5 92.4
II. Recurrent costs

A. Salaries and
allowances 3 737.9 - - - - 0.0 3 737.9 5.7
B. Operating costs 1 208.6 - - - - 0.0 1 208.6 1.9

Total recurrent costs 4 946.5 - - - - 0.0 4 946.5 7.6

Total 43 618.8 1 090.7 3 996.9 6 567.1 5931.8 3 863.9 65 069.1 100.0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
35. The economic and financial analysis shows that the project would be profitable with

an internal economic rate of return of 26.2 per cent and a net present value of
US$44.1 million at a 12 per cent economic discount rate. Sensitivity analysis shows
that the economic profitability of RDDP remains satisfactory even if the project
costs increase by 50 per cent, the project benefits decrease by 50 per cent or the
benefits lag behind by two years. The project is financially profitable at the
production, processing and marketing segments of the value chain, with the
financial internal rate of return for farmers ranging from 22 per cent to 43 per cent
depending on the production system (for small-scale processors, it is estimated at
43 per cent and for milk collection and marketing enterprises, it ranges from 25
per cent to 36 per cent).

D. Sustainability
36. RDDP will contribute to improving the livelihoods of targeted dairy-farmers and

strengthening the resilience of their production systems through the promotion of
dairy farming as a profitable business. The sustainability of project benefits will be
ensured through:

 Implementation by national bodies and utilization of national procedures to build
country ownership and sustain investment in the dairy value chain;

 A focus on empowerment of dairy groups through L-FFSs, which contributes to a
bottom-up approach for technology transfer, knowledge dissemination and
support service delivery, enabling dairy farmers to access these services at
affordable cost well beyond the project time frame;

 An emphasis on cost-sharing with farmer beneficiaries to ensure their ownership
and project investment support to enhance beneficiaries’ entrepreneurial
capacities so that farmer groups can access services and develop business
enterprises supported by financial institutions, and conclude contracts with
nationwide milk processors;



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

10

 Facilitation of dairy hubs’ access to financial services, which will enable them to
establish long-term business relationships with the financial sector so that
businesses can grow and advance to a commercial scale; and

 Promotion of partnerships with stakeholders such as HPI for dairy-business hub
development, FAO for technical assistance regarding animal-health and feeding,
and operational partnerships with the Business Development Fund and the
Rwanda Veterinary Doctors Council to ensure the continuity of project
interventions beyond IFAD support.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
Main risks Mitigation measures
Medium: Business management
capacity of dairy hubs does not
develop fast enough to cope with their
expansion and ensure that activities
are managed effectively in support of
dairy value chain development.

RDDP is expected to provide inputs appropriate to the needs of the hubs
that will be supported by an extensive training and business coaching
programme. Where appropriate, the project will support a "turnaround"
programme that has proved effective in other projects supporting
cooperative development.

Low: RDDP interventions encourage
non-commercial value chain
investments.

RDDP has been designed in accordance with a value chain approach. The
sustainability of this approach rests on commercial incentives and
private-sector participation. The project will support dairy-farmers, MCCs
and other dairy value chain stakeholders to build financially self-sustaining
commercial linkages based on commercial incentives rather than reliance
on subsidies. Results of the economic analysis show that the project has a
good and resilient economic profitability that should remain satisfactory
even in case of strong adverse developments in project costs, benefits and
implementation delays.

Medium: Under-investment in rural
roads, water and electricity
infrastructure perpetuates the
problems of low-quality milk for
processing, high production costs and
limited opportunities for export.

The Government has committed to provide additional resources through
the Feeder Roads Development project to finance feeder road
improvements under component 2, which are currently estimated at
US$12.8 million.

Low: Disease outbreak (e.g. foot-and-
mouth disease, Rift Valley Fever,
Contagious Bovine Pleuropneumonia)
can cause losses for dairy producers
and the dairy industry if contingency
and mitigation plans are not
implemented by national veterinary
authorities.

The Government has put in place disease-control measures that include
regular vaccination campaigns against these diseases and elaborate
movement control of livestock and livestock products. Lessons learned
from IFAD-funded projects in Zambia and Malawi on disease control have
been considered in formulating project activities to strengthen national
capacity for mitigating the risk of disease outbreaks.

Medium: The effects of climate change
can have significant impacts on
natural resources, especially pasture
and forage/crop production, affecting
seasonal available grazing and
reducing the nutrition and lactation of
cattle.

The project’s climate-smart dairy intensification approach will strengthen
community resilience through the sharing of dairy-farming best practices
and adoption of green innovations in order to cope with extreme climate
events. The project will train dairy farmers in forage conservation and
invest in pasture improvement and conservation at the farm level. The
project will also promote investments in climate-resilient and low-carbon
post-production procedures, cooling, processing and value addition to
reduce product losses and increase the incomes of farmers and rural
labourers.

Medium: Rwanda has been ranked as
maintaining a high level of integrity in
public administration and has made
significant progress in establishing
mechanisms to support integrity and
transparency in public procurement
systems. The 2015 Transparency
International Corruption Perception
Index score of 54 places the country at
medium risk.

Mitigation measures include strengthening the internal audit function,
performing financial management assessments of new implementing
agencies, upgrading accounting software and maintaining a project
implementation manual with all financial procedures.



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

11

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
37. RDDP complies with IFAD’s policies on targeting, gender equality and women’s

empowerment, private sector, climate change, environment and natural resource
management. The project is designed to be consistent with the IFAD’s Private
Sector Development and Partnership Strategy, its Rural Finance Policy and the
associated Decision Tools for Rural Finance. The project is also in line with the
approaches outlined in the Framework for Gender Mainstreaming in Programme
Management Department Operations.

38. The project’s Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP)
category is B considering that RDDP will promote enhanced natural resources
management and integration of livestock and crop production. It will ensure that
climate-resilience technologies (e.g. solar energy and biogas) are widely adopted
along with improved management of natural resources and dairy cattle herds,
which in turn will mitigate environmental risks.

B. Alignment and harmonization
39. RDDP investments will be integrated with ongoing IFAD, government and other

partner-supported initiatives related to livestock, dairy and rural infrastructure
development. The project is aligned with core programme areas of the
Government’s Strategic Plan for the Transformation of Agriculture (PSTA III),
including: (i) agriculture and animal resources intensification; (ii) research and
technology transfer, advisory services and professionalization of farmers; (iii) value
chain development and private sector investment; and (iv) institutional
development. In addition, RDDP will contribute to the goals of the Economic
Development and Poverty Reduction Strategy II and the National Strategy on
Climate Change and Low-Carbon Development.

C. Innovations and scaling up
40. RDDP builds on past and on-going experiences with improving the national dairy

industry through the dairy-hub model. Through the promotion and support of this
successfully-tested model, project interventions will seek to strengthen dairy-
farmers’ cooperatives and set up basic dairy infrastructure under a business
framework that will evolve into sustainable farmer-managed dairy hubs. These
dairy hubs will act as a nexus of private sector-led interventions designed to
increase access to productive services such as feed and other inputs, artificial
insemination and veterinary-extension services, output markets and dairy-related
business development services such as finance, insurance, and market support.

41. Scaling-up of results under the RDDP will be achieved through linking focused
project investment resources to leverage private co-investments and borrowing
from the commercial banking system through public-private-producer partnerships
– and in so doing, developing commercial value chain relationships and services
that are market driven and sustainable. RDDP will strengthen the dairy value chain
and, in particular, the linkages between smallholder dairy producers and their
organizations on one hand, and processors and traders on the other. It will also:
promote the development of a scalable model for integrating financial and non-
financial services into commercial relationships between smallholder dairy farmers
and processors; and support efforts to reduce the cost of doing business in the
dairy-processing industry, thus creating incentives for further investments in the
entire sector.

D. Policy engagement
42. By considering policy engagement as a full-fledged component of the project, IFAD

emphasizes the need for a conducive – and inclusive – institutional framework for
the Rwandan dairy sector in which smallholders are involved from the formulation



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

12

to the implementation of policies. The project will support dairy-farmer
cooperatives, the Rwanda National Dairy Platform and the Rwanda Council of
Veterinary Doctors in strengthening their technical and organizational capacities,
thereby ensuring continuity and sustainability of support after the implementation
period. The project will work across all phases of the national policy cycle –
including policy formulation, implementation and evaluation – and will emphasize:
partnerships and learning from previous experience; integration into national policy
processes and existing governance structures; and the generation and use of
evidence to inform policy decisions

VI. Legal instruments and authority
43. A project financing agreement between the Republic of Rwanda and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as
appendix I.

44. The Republic of Rwanda is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD.

45. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
46. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Republic of Rwanda in an amount equivalent to thirty-one million three
hundred and fifty thousand special drawing rights (SDR 31,350,000)
(approximately US$43.6 million), and upon such terms and conditions as shall
be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
Rwanda in an amount equivalent to seven hundred and ninety thousand
special drawing rights (SDR 790,000) (approximately US$1.1 million) and
upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with
the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President



