







































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of
Zambia for the Enhanced Smallholder
Agribusiness Promotion Programme

Republic of Zambia

Enhanced Smallholder Agribusiness Promotion
Programme

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of Zambia

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture

Total programme cost: US$29.672 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 15.5 million (equivalent to approximately
US$21.25 million)

Amount of IFAD grant: SDR 0.74 million (equivalent to approximately US$1.01
million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional: Maturity period of 40 years,
including a grace period of 10 years, with a service
charge of 0.75 per cent per annum

Cofinancier(s): Private sector, Indaba Agricultural Policy Research
Institute (IAPRI), Platform for Agricultural Risk
Management (PARM)

Amount of cofinancing: Private sector: US$3.46 million
IAPRI: US$0.51 million
PARM: US$0.20 million

Terms of cofinancing: Private sector: partners’ contribution
PARM: grant
IAPRI: In-kind technical assistance.

Contribution of borrower: US$2.01 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$1.23 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/119/R.22/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to Republic of Zambia for the Enhanced Smallholder Agribusiness
Promotion Programme, as contained in paragraph 55.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Zambia for
the Enhanced Smallholder Agribusiness Promotion
Programme

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Zambia is a landlocked country covering 752,618 km2 with a population of

16 million. Over 70 per cent are aged under 30 and the population grows at
3 per cent per year. While Zambia attained lower-middle-income country status in
2011, inequalities remain very high and poverty reduction has been slow.

2. During the 2010-2014 period, gross domestic product (GDP) grew at an average of
7 per cent. However, growth fell to 5 per cent in 2014 and 3 per cent in 2015,
largely due to lower copper prices and power outages. The Zambian kwacha (ZMW)
has undergone depreciation, from around ZMW 5.5/US$ in 2012 to ZMW 10/US$ in
2016.

3. Widespread and extreme rural poverty and high unemployment remain significant
challenges. Over 50 per cent of Zambians live below the poverty line and
41 per cent in extreme poverty. At 77 per cent, poverty in rural areas is three times
higher than in urban areas.

4. Agriculture and agroprocessing account for approximately 40 per cent of GDP and
12 per cent of exports, with agricultural production contributing approximately
21 per cent to GDP. Zambia has abundant arable land that is relatively fertile and
experiences good rainfall. The agriculture sector has a dual structure, comprising: a
small number (approximately 740 households) of large commercial farmers and
approximately 50,000 emerging commercial farming households; and
approximately 1.5 million smallholder farming households. There is a large
productivity gap between the commercial and smallholder subsectors. Bridging this
gap and linking farmers to expanding markets has major potential to drive rural
economic growth and poverty reduction.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

5. Connecting smallholder farmers to the flourishing agribusiness sector will allow
IFAD’s target group to share in the rising prosperity enjoyed in urban areas and the
rapidly growing demand for high quality food.

6. Zambia is plagued with a high level of child malnutrition, with stunting rates at
50 per cent and 46 per cent in rural and urban areas, respectively.1 Further
investment to support smallholder farmers is required to reduce poverty and
increase food and nutrition security. The Government favours the commercialization
of small-scale agriculture as a major driver of rural poverty reduction. Agribusiness
is encouraged to strengthen linkages between smallholder farmers and consumers
through increased private sector participation in service delivery, such as in input

1 Central Statistical Office – 2015 Living Conditions Monitoring Survey Key Findings.



EB 2016/119/R.22/Rev.1

2

supply, output marketing and agroprocessing. This calls for improved quality,
reliability and scale of production, especially from small and medium agricultural
enterprises. The policy framework promotes self-reliance among farming
households and encourages the development of partnerships among farmers,
government and the private sector.

7. The ongoing Smallholder Agribusiness Promotion Programme (SAPP) is making
significant progress towards smallholder commercialization and agribusiness
promotion. According to the SAPP 2015 midterm review (MTR), 26 per cent of
sampled households reported increased sales of agricultural commodities averaging
64 per cent per household. Approximately half of households reported increased
selling prices, while 98 per cent reported increased value of sales, and 69 per cent
increases due to value addition. Approximately a quarter of the sampled households
benefited from improved market linkages, while 69 per cent accessed extension
services in business-related issues. Household ownership of assets increased for
55 per cent of those sampled.

8. The SAPP MTR identified a number of lessons that would improve effectiveness and
inform the design of the proposed Enhanced Smallholder Agribusiness Promotion
Programme (E-SAPP):

(a) The need to forge commercial linkages between smallholders and emerging
commercial farmers and higher level value chain actors rather than rely on
the service provider model, which has proven costly and not very effective.

(b) The need to decentralize operations and rationalize institutional arrangements
within existing structures.

(c) The need to improve the skills of smallholder farmers and small and
medium-sized enterprises to identify business opportunities, develop business
plans and negotiate with private sector value chain actors.

(d) The potential of matching grant facilities (MGFs) to leverage significant
investments from the private sector when large enough to attract interest.

9. Under SAPP, the matching grant uptake was initially slow because: (a) the
development of grant guidelines was a protracted process; (b) the guidelines were
found to be too complex and some potential partners were deterred from
submitting applications; (c) the technical service provider used had no presence
close to the beneficiaries and had to rely on subcontracting; (d) a lack of
involvement of district staff meant there was limited knowledge about the grants at
district level; (e) when SAPP eventually involved district staff, they did not have the
capacity to advise communities in developing fundable proposals; (f) the
beneficiary cash contribution of 10 per cent deterred applications; and (g) potential
applicants for “large” grants found the size of these grants too small to attract their
interest.

10. E-SAPP will focus on building strong and sustainable partnerships aimed at
facilitating the transformation from subsistence farming to farming as a business.
The programme will build on SAPP’s achievements in developing sustainable and
profitable partnerships connecting farmers to commercial opportunities.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
11. E-SAPP has a multiple commodity focus and nationwide coverage. The selection of

the commodities will define the geographic focus of interventions. The programme
will focus on three commodity groups: (a) legumes (groundnuts, soybeans, beans
and cowpeas); (b) small livestock (poultry, goats, sheep and pigs); and (c) rice.
These were selected on the following basis: (a) over 70 per cent of smallholders
produce these commodities as both food and cash crops; (b) the commodities have



EB 2016/119/R.22/Rev.1

3

significant nutritional benefits; (c) they help fill the seasonal hunger period;
(d) they have high potential for commercialization through partnerships with the
private sector, efficiency gains and value addition; (e) there is a high level of
interest among market intermediaries; and (f) there is potential to deliver quick
results. However, the larger grants under the public-private-producer partnerships
(4Ps) facility will not be restricted to the above value chains or regions.

12. Target group: The Government classifies Zambia’s 1.5 million smallholder farming
households in three categories. Category A (subsistence farmers) will form the
majority of the target group. Category B (economically active) and C (commercially
oriented farmers) will also be targeted to help develop the programme’s
agribusiness linkages, considering that they are already producing a surplus for the
market. The programme will work with approximately 40,000 category A,
16,000 category B and 5,000 category C households.

B. Programme development objective
13. The programme development objective (PDO) of E-SAPP is to increase the volume

and value of agribusiness outputs sold by smallholder producers. The programme
goal is to increase the incomes and food and nutrition security of rural households
involved in market-oriented agriculture. This underlines the central importance of
food and nutrition in efforts to improve the lives of the rural population, but also
the ambition to reach beyond basic needs and increase incomes to enable
households to improve dwellings, send children to school and invest in agriculture.

C. Components/outcomes
14. The PDO will be achieved through three technical components.

15. Component 1: Enabling environment for agribusiness development will help to
establish an enabling policy and institutional environment for commercially oriented
agriculture and rural development. It will advance the capacity-building work
initiated by SAPP and help to address risk management issues. In addition,
subsector policies will be reoriented to integrate climate risk management.

16. Component 2: Sustainable agribusiness partnerships will build the capacity of
smallholders and their service providers to compete for, and implement, matching
grants. This is a key success factor to facilitate the integration of smallholder
farmers within value chains, promote their engagement in the MGF process and
improve their productivity, incomes and nutritional outcomes. This will be achieved
through nutritional education and training on farming as a business, as well as
extending and strengthening SAPP’s MGF experience within a 4P framework. There
will be three MGF windows: linkage of graduating subsistence farmers to markets;
enhancing micro, small and medium-sized agroenterprise (MSME) development;
and facilitating pro-smallholder agribusiness partnerships. They will support
interventions on the supply and demand sides alike to increase output, productivity,
quality and resilience.

17. Component 3: Programme implementation will be conducted through a
programme coordination office (PCO). E-SAPP will finance, in addition to the
planned activities, the PCO costs, office equipment, office consumables, and
vehicles and associated maintenance costs. It will provide PCO staff salaries,
training and technical assistance to address specific needs. The PCO will be
responsible for coordinating and monitoring programme activities, including:
financial management and reporting; procurement; the preparation of annual work
plans and budgets (AWPBs); and monitoring and evaluation (M&E)/knowledge
management. The PCO will conduct annual AWPB review meetings, annual outcome
surveys, biannual implementation reviews and annual knowledge-sharing
workshops. Results and learning-oriented reporting will be based on inputs from
beneficiaries and implementing partners.



EB 2016/119/R.22/Rev.1

4

III. Programme implementation
ApproachA.

18. Based on lessons learned from SAPP, the entry point for target clients will be the
market intermediaries. The focus will be on a “market pull” approach rather than
“supply push” approach. Market intermediaries include output off-takers, input
marketing, service provision and commodity associations. The 4P clients will be
larger agribusinesses, with the exclusion of commodities such as maize that are
heavily supported by the Government and other development partners. MSMEs will
also be targeted, especially in developing linkages with category B and C
households. The market intermediaries are the primary partners of E-SAPP, with
the smallholders as the beneficiaries. This approach offers opportunities for
sustainable scaling up and replication on the basis of commercial incentives.

19. E-SAPP will adopt a whole value chain approach to improve the economic surplus
by identifying areas where efficiency, productivity and quality can be improved. It
will use government institutions and private-sector partnerships as the entry point
through which to reach smallholder farmers and MSMEs. Implementation will span a
seven-year period, fully embedded in the Government’s decentralized system. The
programme will be harmonized with the IFAD country programme and initiatives of
the Government and other development partners. Potential collaboration is being
explored with the World Bank, the African Development Bank, the United States
Agency for International Development, the European Union, the United Kingdom’s
Department for International Development and the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations.

Operational frameworkB.
20. The Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) will be the executing agency and delivery systems

will be fully integrated into decentralized government structures. Implementation
arrangements will build on the mechanisms employed by SAPP, enabling a
seamless transition from SAPP to E-SAPP. The MoA Policy and Planning Department
will be responsible for administration and coordination, and supported by a
programme steering committee chaired by the Permanent Secretary of MoA or
his/her nominee.

Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning andC.
knowledge management

21. The logical framework will be used as a tool for planning and M&E, to ensure that
necessary information is available for management decision-making, and to
facilitate reporting to the Government, IFAD and stakeholders. Planning will be a
decentralized process, starting at the district level with the preparation of
commodity-specific plans, which will be aggregated into a programme-wide AWPB.
To ensure a truly aligned portfolio, AWPBs for all IFAD programmes will be
harmonized to capitalize on comparative advantages, minimize duplication,
encourage linkages between them and ensure the optimal use of resources.

22. The M&E system will build on the experience of SAPP and provide information that
informs management decision-making and reporting, including data for IFAD’s
Results and Impact Management System. Monitoring will focus on the activities
defined in the AWPB, and on creating a cumulative overview of results/outputs. The
M&E system will be decentralized under the oversight of a planning/M&E officer and
a knowledge management officer. Knowledge management will ensure a continuous
learning process in which data are compiled, analysed and disseminated as lessons
learned, along with thematic studies and stories from the field. Information-sharing
within the aligned portfolio will receive particular attention.



EB 2016/119/R.22/Rev.1

5

Financial management, procurement and governanceD.
23. Financial management. Transparency International’s Corruption Perceptions

Index rates inherent risk in Zambia as “medium”, characterized by improved
governance, increasing opportunities for the private sector, and some weaknesses
in public sector management. The fiduciary risk was assessed by IFAD as “high”
mainly due to persistent delays in justification from districts, with consequent
liquidity problems, accounting software not optimally functioning and internal audit
in need of strengthening; improved safeguard measures will therefore be put in
place to reduce risk to “medium”. E-SAPP will employ similar financial management
systems to those used under SAPP, including the accounting software. However,
E-SAPP procurement will be started in advance by another ongoing IFAD project.
Strong training and technical assistance will be provided from the outset. Coverage
of biannual internal programme audits will be included in the audit plan of the MoA
Internal Audit Unit, which will be included in E-SAPP start-up trainings. Internal
audit reports and action plans to implement audit recommendations will be shared
with IFAD as a reporting requirement. Financial reporting will be based on IPSAS2
standards.

24. A designated account denominated in United States dollars will be held at the Bank
of Zambia. Two operating accounts, one denominated in Zambian kwacha and the
other in United States dollars, will be held a commercial bank – the latter is
intended to mitigate foreign exchange risk and will be used for paying foreign
suppliers for contracts denominated in United States dollars and for foreign travel
costs.

25. To address the risk of delayed justification of expenditures by districts: transfers to
districts will be made on the basis of activity-tagged advances that must be retired
before subsequent releases; a system for monitoring advances to districts will be
included in the accounting software; and agents/assistants will be recruited at the
provincial level to follow up and facilitate the justification process and to ensure
expenditure reports and supporting documentation from the districts are collated
and submitted to the PCO on a timely basis.

26. The MGF will be managed by a service provider selected on the basis of relevant
experience, working under the supervision of the PCO. Community mobilization and
training will also be outsourced. The matching grants will be replenished upon each
disbursement to grantees, not once grantees have fully utilized the grants. A
performance-based payment schedule will be included in contracts, and grants will
be regularly monitored. Procedures will be included in the grant manual to
guarantee transparency and minimize the risk of malpractice. After allocation of the
grants under their respective windows, the borrower shall ensure that audits of the
grant allocation process, approval and use of grant funds are carried out by an
independent service provider acceptable to IFAD. Withdrawals from the grants
category may only be made on condition that IFAD has determined that such audits
are satisfactory.

27. Audit. The Office of the Auditor General of Zambia will conduct an external audit of
E-SAPP annually or will have the discretion to appoint an independent private audit
firm acceptable to IFAD. Internal control systems at the PCO level will be
established and MoA will maintain oversight through its Internal Audit Unit.
Supervision missions will review internal audit reports and assess management
responses to recommendations. Internal controls will also be verified during the
annual external audit by the Auditor General, and reported to IFAD in management
letters. The audit reports will be submitted to IFAD no later than six months after
the end of each fiscal year.

2 International Public Sector Accounting Standards – Cash Basis.



EB 2016/119/R.22/Rev.1

6

28. Procurement. National procurement procedures will be applied to the extent that
they are consistent with IFAD’s guidelines and provided they are assessed as
satisfactory or better. This applies to all procurement except international
competitive bidding for contracts above an agreed threshold. Procurement planning
will follow the templates in the IFAD Procurement Handbook as already adapted for
SAPP and the other IFAD-supported programmes in compliance with the Zambia
Public Procurement Authority (ZPPA). A procurement assessment of SAPP
operations resulted in a medium risk score, largely as a result of staffing challenges
facing the MAL’s Procurement and Supplies Unit (PSU), which tend to cause delays
in the procurement cycle, exacerbated by lengthy processes, including for the
approval of contracts by the Ministry of Justice. Measures to improve procurement
performance will include: the recruitment of a procurement specialist to support the
PSU; capacity-building for the PSU, ZPPA and the Ministry of Justice to address the
procurement delays; and the incorporation of procurement modules into the
financial management software.

SupervisionE.
29. IFAD and the Government will conduct supervision missions, normally every six

months, to assess achievements and lessons learned and reflect on ways to
improve performance. Implementation support will focus on planning, procurement,
financial management, M&E and the provision of technical assistance. The most
important skills to be provided include: value chain analysis; financial management
and procurement; M&E; poverty and gender analysis and targeting; and
programme management. Key issues likely to require the attention of the missions
will include: M&E, learning and knowledge management; implementation and
reporting delays; procurement; partnerships, beneficiaries and the private sector;
and capacity-building interventions.

IV. Programme costs, financing, and benefits
A. Programme costs
30. Total costs, including price contingencies, duties and taxes, are estimated at

equivalent to US$29.7 million, of which approximately US$1 million (3 per cent)
represents the foreign exchange content and US$1.2 million (4 per cent) duties and
taxes. Total base costs amount to approximately US$28.1 million, while price
contingencies account for an estimated US$1.5 million (5 per cent of base costs).
Investment costs account for 80 per cent of the base costs, and recurrent costs
20 per cent. Funds allocated to management and coordination amount to
approximately US$5.0 million (17 of total costs).



EB 2016/119/R.22/Rev.1

7

Table 1
Programme costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Borrower IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries Private sector Other financiers Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %
1. Enabling environment
for agribusiness
development growth
A. Agribusiness policy
development 99 4.4 1 251 56.0 65 2.9 - - 108 4.8 712.3 31.8 2 235 7.5
B. Institutional
strengthening for
agribusiness 277 17.1 1 119 69.0 227 14.0 - - - - - - 1 623 5.5

Subtotal 375 9.7 2 371 61.4 291 7.6 - - 108 2.8 712.3 18.5 3 858 13.0
2. Sustainable
agribusiness
partnerships
A. Strategic linkage of
graduating subsistence
farmers to markets 374 3.4 8 200 73.9 719 6.5 1 232 11.1 572 5.2 - - 11 098 37.4
B. Enhancing agro
MSME Development 369 5.7 4 255 65.3 - - - - 1,890 29.0 - - 6 515 22.0
C. Facilitating pro-
smallholder market pull
agribusiness
partnerships 150 5.1 1 895 64.6 - - - - 887 30.2 - - 2 932 9.9

Subtotal 894 4.4 14 350 69.9 719 3.5 1 232 6.0 3 349 16.3 - - 20 544 69.2
3. Programme
Implementation 737 14.0 4 533 86.0 - - - - - - - - 5 270 17.8

Total programme
costs 2 006 6.8 21 254 71.6 1 011 3.4 1 232 4.2 3 457 11.7 712.3 2.4 29 672 100.0

B. Programme financing
31. IFAD will fund the programme through a grant equivalent to approximately

US$1.01 million and a loan on highly concessionary terms in an amount equivalent
to approximately US$21.25 million. Grant-funded activities relate mostly to
capacity-building and facilitating the transition of households from category A to
category B, and eventually to category C. The Government will provide
US$ 2 million in cofinancing, in the form of taxes and duties, and beneficiaries
US$1.23 million, mainly in-kind. The private sector will contribute US$3.46 million
through share of the matching grants; the Indaba Agricultural Policy Research
Institute (IAPRI) approximately US$0.51 million through technical assistance for
policy development; and the Platform for Agricultural Risk Management (PARM)
US$0.2 million for agriculture risk management activities.



EB 2016/119/R.22/Rev.1

8

Table 2
Programme costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Borrower IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries Private sector IAPRI PARM Total
Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Investment Costs
A. Consultancies - - 1 587 68.9 585 25.4 132 5.7 - - - - - - 2 304 7.8
B. Equipment and
materials 21 16.0 108 84.0 - - - - - - - - - - 129 0.4
C. Works - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
D. Vehicles 355 41.3 505 58.7 - - - - - - - - - - 860 2.9
E. Workshops - - 335 47.1 104 14.6 103 14.4 108 15.2 62 8.7 - - 712 2.4
F. Training 749 20.7 1 120 31.0 321 8.9 283 7.8 1 145 31.6 - - - - 3 617 12.2
G. Goods, services
and inputs - - 3 252 100.0 - - - - - - - - - - 3 252 11.0
H. Grants and
subsidies - - 9 610 75.5 - - 715 5.6 2 204 17.3 - - 200 1.6 12 729 42.9
I. Unallocated - - 250 100.0 - - - - - - - - - - 250 0.8
Total investment costs 1 125 4.7 16 768 70.3 1 011 4.2 1 232 5.2 3 457 14.5 62 0.3 200 0.8 23 854 80.4
2. Recurrent costs
A. Operating costs 143 16.0 572 63.9 - - - - - - 180 20.1 - - 896 3.0
B. Salaries and
allowances 738 15.0 3 913 79.5 - - - - - - 270 5.5 - - 4 922 16.6
Total recurrent costs 882 15.2 4 485 77.1 - - - - - - 451 7.7 - - 5 817 19.6

Total
programme
costs

2 006 6.8 21 254 71.6 1 011 3.4 1 232 4.2 3 457 11.7 512 1.7 200 0.7 29 672 100.0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
32. The programme will promote the transformation of smallholder farmers from mainly

subsistence level to commercially oriented production by building sustainable and
profitable partnerships with agribusinesses. The economic rationale hinges on
improving smallholders’ integration within value chains through partnerships with
agribusinesses (the 4P approach) that provide improved access to technologies and
inputs, knowledge about improved technologies, better services and enhanced
marketing opportunities. The beneficiaries will be assisted in developing their
entrepreneurial and business capacity through access to technical support and
training.

33. The result will be: (a) increased productivity and product quality; (b) better and
more stable prices through participation in contract farming and/or outgrower
arrangements offering improved market access; (c) expanded farm size and wider
adoption of improved farming practices; (d) sustainable partnerships with the
private sector and enhanced access to services; and (e) added value through
aggregation, sorting, grading, drying and storage.

34. Direct programme beneficiaries. The primary beneficiaries will be approximately
61,000 smallholder households, in particular young people and households headed
by women. This includes 40,000 category A subsistence farmers; 16,000
economically active category B farmers; and 5,000 commercially oriented category
C farmers. Assuming an average household size of five, the total number of
beneficiaries will be approximately 305,000.

35. Indirect programme beneficiaries. A large number of smallholders will benefit
indirectly through the diffusion of knowledge about improved technologies, and
improved access to marketing services and business information. Consumers will
also benefit from more better quality products and better prices, with positive
effects on nutrition and food security. In addition, all those living in the areas where



EB 2016/119/R.22/Rev.1

9

E-SAPP is active will benefit from strengthened local economies, increased job
opportunities and the development of complementary economic activities
(e.g. input dealers).

D. Sustainability
36. Economic/income sustainability. The value chain/market-led approach will

foster entrepreneurship among smallholder farmers and their integration within
value chains. This will result in the orientation of smallholder groups and individuals
towards market opportunities and a lasting commitment among value chain
partners to enhance value creation. Linkages to markets will ensure that mainly
subsistence farmers have an outlet for their surplus production to assist them make
the transition to farming as a business. As long as the established linkages prove to
be profitable and mutually beneficial, the long-term outcomes will be sustainable.

37. Environmental sustainability will be enhanced through the application of
environmental standards by the MGF recipients, and the implementation of
environmental and social management plans as part of grant-funded activities. This
will be achieved through capacity-building in environmental and social procedures
and risk management. While beneficiaries will acquire tangible benefits from these
standards and plans, those results may not materialize in the short term. The
management team will oversee the Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF) to reinforce the benefits of integrating environmental
management practices and counteract trade-offs for short-term benefits that may
adversely affect the natural resource base. The ESMF will define the responsibilities
and benchmarks for monitoring environmental impacts and include feedback
mechanisms to incorporate any positive externalities.

38. Institutional sustainability. To ensure relevance, ownership and sustainability,
E-SAPP will mainstream planning, implementation and M&E into the Government’s
decentralized institutional frameworks and align them with national goals and
policies. Participating institutions will be supported and strengthened to build
institutional capacity (as per subcomponent 1.B) and sustainability. Communities
and grass-roots institutions will be mobilized and strengthened to build their
capacity for sustainability and to take ownership of programme interventions.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
39. The logical framework identifies the main risk areas, and risk monitoring forms part

of the M&E approach. The main risks and mitigation measures are detailed below.

40. There is a possibility that the pipeline of large-scale 4P grantees will not materialize
into grants uptake, due to lack of awareness or the existence of more attractive
grant facilities under other programmes. This risk will be mitigated through:
(a) promoting the existence and terms and conditions of the 4P grants;
(b) identifying potential grantees and inviting them to make applications; and
(c) collaborating with other development partners to ensure that the various
matching grant funds have harmonized terms and conditions. Discussions have
already been held with other development partners concerning this issue.

41. Extension teams at the district level and lower may not be adequately prepared to
identify and support potential MSME grant recipients. Among the lessons learned
from SAPP was that training on business and grant procedures focused on too
narrow a range of government staff. E-SAPP will ensure that marketing, general
and commodity specialist extension staff receive training in farming as a business,
engaging with the private sector and managing/overseeing the MSME grants.

42. The limited capacity of some institutions may delay implementation. To mitigate
this risk, the programme includes capacity-building for institutions facing identified
capacity challenges (subcomponent 1.B).



EB 2016/119/R.22/Rev.1

10

43. Private sector stakeholders may be reluctant to fully engage in the programme,
resulting in reliance by farmers on government institutions for services that could
be provided by the private sector. To mitigate this risk, the programme provides for
private sector representation on the programme steering committee. In addition,
the MGF service provider will play a catalytic role in private sector participation.

44. A delay in programme start-up would lead to the possibility of implementation
delays and a disbursement lag. To minimize this risk, IFAD and the Government are
taking steps to ensure a seamless transition between SAPP and E-SAPP.

45. A lack of good quality matching grant applications would result in the slow
disbursement of grant resources. The programme will provide training for
applicants, promote the MGF widely and identify potential grantees based on value
chain scoping studies.

46. Climate change and variability will potentially have a negative impact on
productivity, in particular of rainfed agriculture and where farmers have limited
resources to manage risks such as pests and diseases. Measures to reduce impacts
include capacity-building in climate risk management, and vulnerability analysis
that will inform the selection of value chains.

47. Fiduciary risk, as mitigated by the controls detailed in section III.D above, results in
medium assessment.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

48. E-SAPP will be implemented in compliance with IFAD’s Strategic Framework
2016-2025, as well as IFAD’s policies on natural resource management and climate
change. The programme recognizes the economic and social value of natural assets
through capacity-building for farmers in environmental management, and the
criteria used in the selection of MGF partners. It will support climate-smart
approaches and defines minimum standards for grantees in relation to climate
resilience and capacity-building on environmental, social and climate risk
management. It will also adhere to the principle of livelihood diversification to
reduce vulnerability and build resilience. E-SAPP is also compliant with IFAD’s
Targeting Policy (2006) and Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment Policy
(2012). Of the 10,000 market-ready poor households to be targeted, at least
30 per cent will be headed by women and 25 per cent by young people. Moreover,
the nutrition focus is aligned with IFAD’s commitment to nutrition-sensitive
interventions and mainstreaming nutrition.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
49. The programme supports the Government’s policy on reducing poverty through

smallholder commercialization in conjunction with private sector partners. Within
this framework, MoA is expected to focus on its core functions, which include policy
formulation, legislation and regulation. The programme has been developed in
consultation with partners engaged in improving agricultural productivity and
market linkages. Relevant partners will be invited to participate in the screening
and selection of commodities, the mapping of selected value chains, and the
development and implementation of intervention plans.

Innovations and scaling upC.
50. E-SAPP builds on IFAD experience as a 4P endeavour aiming to reduce rural

poverty by stimulating rural economic development through the transformation of
smallholder producers (including subsistence farmers) into profitable small-scale
commercial farmers. It seeks to improve the effectiveness of policies and practices
to accelerate the growth of farming as a business among Zambia’s 1.5 million
smallholder households. The programme will enhance the focus on women and



EB 2016/119/R.22/Rev.1

11

young people as priority target groups and support the mainstreaming of
nutrition-sensitive agriculture/agribusiness.

Policy engagementD.
51. Policy engagement is an integral part of the programme in recognition of the need

for a conducive and inclusive institutional framework for the agribusiness sector
that involves smallholders in policy from design to implementation. The programme
will support the Government in establishing an enabling policy and institutional
environment for commercially driven agriculture and rural development, and help
put structures in place to address agricultural risk management-related issues.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
52. A programme financing agreement between the Republic of Zambia and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as
appendix I.

53. Republic of Zambia is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

54. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
55. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Republic of Zambia in an amount equivalent to fifteen million five hundred
thousand special drawing rights (SDR 15,500,000), and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
Zambia in an amount equivalent to seven hundred and forty thousand special
drawing rights (SDR 740,000) and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President



