

President’s report

Proposed grant to the Republic of Zimbabwe
for the Smallholder Irrigation Revitalization
Programme


Republic of Zimbabwe

Smallholder Irrigation Revitalization Programme

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Recipient: Republic of Zimbabwe

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture, Mechanisation and Irrigation
Development

Total programme cost: US$51.5 million

Amount of IFAD grant: SDR 18.3 million
(equivalent to approximately US$25.5 million)

Cofinancier(s): OPEC Fund for International Development

Amount of cofinancing: US$15.0 million

Terms of cofinancing: To be confirmed

Contribution of recipient: US$7.7 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$3.3 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/118/R.20/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
grant to the Republic of Zimbabwe for the Smallholder Irrigation Revitalization
Programme, as contained in paragraph 53.

Proposed grant to the Republic of Zimbabwe for the
Smallholder Irrigation Revitalization Programme

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Zimbabwe is a landlocked country with a total area of approximately

390,757 square kilometres. The country’s population is estimated at 14.6 million
people (2014) and projected to grow to 20.3 million people in 2020. With a Human
Development Index of 0.509, Zimbabwe ranks 155th of 188 countries. Life
expectancy stands at 57.8 years, and stunting prevalence in children is an
estimated 27.6 per cent (2014). While still among the highest globally, the
prevalence of HIV has declined from 25 per cent in 1997 to 15 per cent in 2014.

2. Economic growth slowed from 4.5 per cent in 2013 to an estimated 1 per cent in
2015 as a result of weak domestic demand, high public debt, tight liquidity
conditions, drought, poor infrastructure and institutional weaknesses. Agriculture
provides direct and indirect livelihoods for over 70 per cent of Zimbabwe’s
population and supports one third of the formal labour force. Agriculture generates
between 15 and 18 per cent of gross domestic product, and contributes over
40 per cent of national export earnings.

3. The proportion of the population living below the national poverty line is estimated
at 72 per cent (84 per cent in rural areas). Zimbabwe’s recurrent droughts and food
security issues have remained dire over the past decade, exposing millions of
people to food insecurity and poverty. An estimated 1.5 million people – 16 per
cent of the rural population – will be unable to meet their minimum food needs and
will require humanitarian assistance in 2015/16. This is a 164 per cent increase
over the 2013/14 season.

4. Zimbabwe’s relations with the international community have been difficult for
years, mainly due to land reforms and political conflicts. There are now positive
signs of the international community re-engaging with the Government of
Zimbabwe. The Government has made progress on negotiations with international
financial institutions, notably the International Monetary Fund and the African
Development Bank, to settle the country’s arrears. In December 2015, IFAD’s
Executive Board approved Zimbabwe’s debt rescheduling proposal in the amount of
US$23.1 million.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

5. Zimbabwe has one of the highest levels of water development for irrigation in the
region. Evidence suggests that households in smallholder irrigation schemes are
better off in terms of food production, income, nutrition and general well-being than
households relying on rainfed agriculture. In addition to achieving higher yields,
irrigators are able to increase crop production and incomes during the dry winter
season, when rainfed production is impossible.



EB 2016/118/R.20/Rev.1

2

6. More than 50 per cent of smallholder irrigation schemes in Zimbabwe are either not
functional or only partly functional. These schemes have been caught in a vicious
cycle of build/operate/rehabilitate, and are heavily dependent on government and
donor funding.

7. A common feature is that rehabilitation has primarily focused on infrastructure
development and repairs, often without the corresponding investments in farmers’
organization and empowerment, water management, agricultural production
activities and market linkages. Some schemes have been operating for many years,
even decades, many of them at sub-optimal levels. There is a general lack of
community ownership and participation in the management of irrigation assets.
While irrigation management committees (IMCs) exist in all schemes, and are seen
as a standard requirement, they do not have the formal status to enforce by-laws.

8. Decades of experience in irrigation development, both in Zimbabwe and elsewhere,
have evidenced the need for an integrated approach to ensure commercial and
environmental sustainability. This is the rationale behind the design of the
Smallholder Irrigation Revitalization Programme (SIRP). Without an increased
market orientation, improved access to inputs, and the adoption of good
agricultural practices to boost productivity, farmers cannot create the revenue
needed to increase their income and defray the operation and maintenance (O&M)
of irrigation schemes. Similarly, unless wider socioeconomic and biophysical
considerations are taken into account, equity issues will limit impact to a small
number of people, and environmental issues will undermine the overall success of
the programme.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
9. Programme area: SIRP will revitalize 6,100 hectares (ha) in about 152 existing

smallholder irrigation schemes, located mainly in communal and old resettlement
areas in the semi-arid sections of natural regions III, IV and V in the provinces of
Manicaland, Masvingo, Matabeleland South, and Midlands. The programme’s target
area contains about 47 per cent of the country’s estimated total irrigation-equipped
area of about 13,000 ha.

10. Target group: SIRP will target 29,750 smallholder poor rural households,
equivalent to about 148,750 people. Women (heads of household, wives and young
women) will account for at least 50 per cent of the target group, in line with their
participation in irrigated agriculture and off-farm activities. SIRP beneficiaries will
include: (i) 15,250 households (76,250 people) holding an average of 0.4 ha in
irrigation schemes; (ii) 12,500 households (62,500 people) with no access to
irrigation in the greater-scheme and subcatchment areas relying on rainfed
agriculture and livestock; (iii) 2,000 youth, who will be involved in production,
aggregation, marketing and service provision and will build small- and
medium-scale businesses along value chains; and (iv) 500 extension service
providers that will improve their capacity for more responsive and efficient service
delivery.

B. Programme development objective
11. The overall goal of SIRP is that rural households achieve food and nutrition security

and are resilient to climate change effects and economic shocks in the programme
districts. The programme development objective is that rural households
sustainably increase their income in schemes and adjacent rainfed areas supported
by the programme.

12. The programme goal will be achieved by revitalizing existing high potential
irrigation schemes and their adjacent rainfed areas (subcatchment areas), which
will result in: (i) an increase in production and productivity of selected



EB 2016/118/R.20/Rev.1

3

commodities; (ii) an increase in annual household incomes; (iii) increased market
integration; and (iv) a smallholder agricultural production system that is better
adapted to climate change.

C. Components/outcomes
13. SIRP’s structure is articulated around two complementary components, the first

focusing on sustainable development of smallholder irrigation, and the second on
climate-smart agriculture and market access.

14. Component 1: Sustainable smallholder irrigation development will focus on
revitalizing existing irrigation schemes and rendering them fully operational,
thereby contributing to improving the incomes of targeted households. This will be
achieved by rehabilitating 6,100 ha of existing irrigation schemes in the four target
provinces, while financing further scheme feasibility and design studies nationwide.
It will entail expanding the area of existing smallholder irrigation schemes under
effective O&M by irrigators and their water users organizations (WUOs), by
preparing and implementing revitalization plans at scheme level. This will be
complemented by capacity-building for government departments to provide quality
service to smallholder irrigators, and engaging in policy dialogue on issues affecting
small-scale irrigators.

15. Component 2: Climate-smart agriculture and market access aims to improve
productivity and sustainable crop production under both rainfed and irrigated
conditions, through improved cropping intensity on selected schemes and increased
adoption of improved varieties, fertilizers, good agricultural practices and
climate-smart agriculture practices and technologies. This component will seek to
improve village natural resources management planning, including soil and water
conservation in adjacent rainfed areas, by preparing and implementing greater
scheme agricultural plans. A natural resources management facility will be
established to provide matching grants to farmers in rainfed areas to undertake
income-generating projects that utilize natural resources in a sustainable manner
and complement soil and water conservation technologies. This component will
focus on improving farm profitability and household incomes by increasing market
access and linkages between the different value chain actors for both irrigation and
rainfed farmers. Moreover, this component will improve access to and use of
financial services through enhanced financial literacy of farmers and their
organizations and strengthening of community-based financial institutions. This
component will promote good nutritional practices and gender mainstreaming as
part of agricultural and market support. This will be complemented by
capacity-building for government departments to enable them to provide quality
services to smallholder farmers, and engage in policy dialogue on issues affecting
smallholder farmers.

III. Programme implementation
A. Approach
16. The proposed principles of engagement for programme design are as follows:

(a) In line with IFAD’s mandate, SIRP will target productive poor smallholders
who are currently engaging in irrigation as well as poor and vulnerable
smallholders engaged in rainfed farming in the adjacent rainfed areas;

(b) Without compromising on food security, the programme will support the move
towards smallholder irrigated farming as a business in order to enable
sufficient financial returns to targeted smallholders, long-term sustainability of
investment and replicability/scalability of the smallholder irrigation
development approach;

(c) SIRP will adopt a participatory approach. The programme will support farmers’
own development efforts, based on the preparation of a revitalization plan and



EB 2016/118/R.20/Rev.1

4

a greater scheme agricultural plan by farmers/irrigators through their
organizations;

(d) Investment will be made on a cost-sharing basis, with capital expenditure
financed mainly by the programme, and farmers fully covering the O&M of
their scheme, including the cost of water and depreciation of movable
equipment;

(e) The programme will prioritize the rehabilitation of existing schemes while
verifying adequate water availability at pre-feasibility stage, market proximity
to sell produce at competitive prices and interest on the part of the private
sector and financial institutions to work with the scheme or cluster, and
institutional arrangements;

(f) SIRP will engage with the private sector, such as off-takers, input suppliers
and financial institutions, early on in the process of prioritizing schemes to be
rehabilitated, in order to ensure viable linkages with input and output markets
and support services during implementation; and

(g) The Government’s capacity to provide services to smallholders will be
strengthened, while supporting the implementation of different business
models and business relations between farmers and the private sector.

B. Organizational framework
17. The lead implementing agency will be the Ministry of Agriculture, Mechanisation and

Irrigation Development (MAMID). The Ministry will execute the programme and
ensure that it is aligned with sector priorities and complements the
programmes/projects and initiatives of other development partners supporting the
sector. Implementation responsibilities rest with the Department of Irrigation (DoI)
for component 1, while the Department of Agriculture Technical and Extension
Services (AGRITEX) will lead component 2. At the provincial and district levels,
programme coordination will be provided by provincial and district agricultural
coordination committees, respectively.

18. A multi-sector stakeholder programme steering committee, chaired by the
Permanent Secretary of MAMID, will be established to provide overall programme
oversight, direction and advice. A dedicated and competitively recruited programme
coordination unit (PCU) will report to the Permanent Secretary, MAMID. The PCU
will be responsible for day-to-day management and ensure effective coordination of
DoI and AGRITEX activities under the programme. The PCU will be responsible for
consolidating annual workplans and budgets (AWP/Bs), procurement plans, and
progress and financial reports received from the districts and implementing entities,
and will coordinate the procurement of goods, works and services. The PCU will also
take charge of monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and provide support to
implementation and supervision missions. The PCU will serve as programme
steering committee secretariat.

19. A programme technical committee, comprising of staff drawn from government
technical departments, will provide technical support and advice to the PCU on
planning and progress issues.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

20. The main planning tools for SIRP will comprise the updated logical framework/M&E
framework, including indicators and targets, and the results-based AWP/B. The
logical framework provides indicators and targets for the programme as a whole,
whereas the RB-AWP/B will be used as the primary planning tool to set annual
targets and allocate financial resources. The financial and physical execution of the
RB-AWPB will be regularly monitored and reported on.

21. The M&E system will be the key source of comprehensive and reliable data to
inform improved planning and decision-making during implementation. It will be



EB 2016/118/R.20/Rev.1

5

relied upon to inform stakeholders on SIRP performance. Results generated by the
results and impact management system indicators will be reported back to IFAD on
an annual basis. The PCU will be responsible for ensuring a well-functioning M&E
system.

22. A baseline study will be designed and carried out at programme start-up in
pre-identified schemes. Baselines will be scheme specific as per outcome of the
selection process. The baseline studies will form the basis for assessing programme
effectiveness and results achievement. The household survey will be repeated at
mid-term and upon programme completion.

23. SIRP learning systems will involve monthly, quarterly, bi-annual and annual review
meetings/workshops, capturing information on progress, lessons and best practices
and finding solutions to implementation constraints at different levels. These review
platforms will serve as a learning event, as well as to monitor and influence the
process through which results are supposed to be achieved.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
24. Financial management. A financial management assessment carried out at

design assessed the overall fiduciary control risk as high. Consequently, the
proposed financial management arrangements for SIRP include appropriate risk
mitigation measures, inter alia: (i) competitive recruitment of a dedicated
programme accountant, and assignment of qualified accounting staff at the
provincial level; (ii) mobilization of additional technical assistance during start-up to
assist with the establishment of systems and financial procedures to be included in
the programme implementation manual; (iii) use of accounting software; and
(iv) the use of programme-specific designated accounts, to ensure that the residual
programme implementation rating will be medium risk.

25. MAMID’s Director of Finance and Administration will be responsible for ensuring
adequate financial management arrangements throughout SIRP implementation.
The operational day-to-day financial management functions, including budgeting,
accounting, funds flow management, internal control, financial reporting and
ensuring timely external audits, will be the responsibility of the PCU’s programme
accountant overseen by the Chief Accountant, DoI.

26. Programme audits. To provide assurances of strong internal controls, MAMID will
include regular internal auditing of the programme in its audit plans. During the
initial years an independent audit firm acceptable to the Fund will perform the
external audit, until such time as the Office of the Auditor General has been
appropriately assessed.

27. Funds flow and disbursement arrangements. Two separate designated
accounts operated and maintained by the Ministry of Finance and Economic
Development will be opened to receive programme funds from IFAD and the OPEC
Fund for International Development (OFID), respectively. Only one operational
account will be opened for settlements of advances to implementing agencies and
programme expenditures incurred. The PCU will manage and operate the
operational account.

28. Start-up costs. An advance may be requested to cover start-up costs for eligible
expenditure to be incurred between the date of entry into force of the financing
agreement and fulfilment of the conditions precedent to withdrawal.

29. Procurement. All procurement under SIRP will be carried out in accordance with
national procurement procedures, to the extent that they are consistent with IFAD’s
project procurement guidelines. A procurement assessment of MAMID undertaken
during SIRP design showed several inconsistencies between national and IFAD
regulations, concerning bid registers, bidding documents, contract administration,
procurement planning and selection of procurement methods. To address
procurement risks, a procurement specialist in the PCU will be responsible for



EB 2016/118/R.20/Rev.1

6

ensuring full compliance with IFAD requirements. The latter will be duly spelled out
in the financing agreement, letter to the recipient and programme implementation
manual.

E. Supervision
30. The SIRP will be directly supervised by IFAD. Direct supervision will encompass loan

and grant administration, procurement reviews, audit reviews, and supervision and
implementation support missions. Joint supervision missions with the Government
will be carried out bi-annually and will focus primarily on fiduciary aspects, physical
progress and the quality of programme implementation. In conjunction with
supervision, implementation support will be provided by IFAD to help ensure the
efficient achievement of programme objectives. Additional implementation support
and backstopping will be provided during the programme start-up phase to enhance
technical capacities, assist with the establishment of implementation arrangements
and assist in the setting up of required systems (e.g. M&E and financial
management). The proposed OFID cofinancing will be administered by IFAD.

IV. Programme costs, financing and benefits
A. Programme costs
31. Total programme costs to be incurred during the seven-year implementation

period, including price and physical contingencies, duties and taxes, are estimated
at US$51.5 million. This includes base costs amounting to US$47.6 million and
estimated physical and price contingencies in the amount of US$3.9 million
(8 per cent of the base costs). Estimated foreign exchange expenditure is about
US$15.2 million (30 per cent of total programme costs), whereas duties and taxes
amount to US$8.1 million (16 per cent). Investment costs represent 89 per cent of
the base costs, with recurrent costs accounting for the remaining 11 per cent.
Programme management costs are 4 per cent of total programme costs.

32. Local inflation rates were estimated at 1.3 per cent per annum in 2017 and
2 per cent per annum thereafter until 2023. Foreign inflation has been set at
2 per cent for seven years, based on the World Bank Manufactures Unit Value
Index. Taxes and duties were estimated using information provided by the
Zimbabwe Revenue Authority. The Government of Zimbabwe will either waive
duties, excises and taxes or directly finance their cost.
Table 1
Programme costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component

IFAD grant OFID Beneficiaries Government Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Sustainable smallholder irrigation
development 11 511 35 13 767 42 2 238 7 4 961 15 32 477

2. Climate-smart agriculture and
market access 12 253 73 1 233 7 1 045 6 2 333 14 16 864

3. Programme coordination 1 736 80 - - - - 441 20 2 176

Total 25 500 50 15 000 29 3 283 6 7 735 15 51 518

B. Programme financing
33. SIRP will be financed by the Government of Zimbabwe, programme beneficiaries,

IFAD and, pending official confirmation, OFID. IFAD will finance 50 per cent
(US$25.5 million) of overall programme costs on grant terms, under the Debt
Sustainability Framework. The Government will finance taxes and duties



EB 2016/118/R.20/Rev.1

7

(US$7.9 million), representing 15 per cent of total costs.1 Beneficiaries will
contribute 6 per cent of total programme costs, US$3.3 million, in the form of
financial contributions to O&M for rehabilitated infrastructure, cost sharing of
post-harvest technologies, and in-kind contribution to soil and water conservation
activities. It is anticipated that OFID will finance 29 per cent2 (US$15.0 million) of
programme costs, covering civil works related to irrigation rehabilitation and road
improvement.
Table 2
Programme costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD OFID Beneficiaries Government Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1.Consultancies 4 911 90 - - - - 546 10 5 457
2. Equipment and materials 2 475 98 - - - - 56 2 2 531
3. Goods, equipment and inputs 2 009 71 - - 697 25 108 4 2 814
4. Workshops 545 85 - - - - 96 15 641
5. Training 4 315 85 - - - - 762 15 5 077
6. Vehicles 1 091 45 - - - - 1 336 55 2 427
7. Works 7 621 28 15 000 56 348 1 3 931 15 26 899
8. Salaries and allowances 387 75 - - - - 129 25 515
9. Operating costs 2 145 42 - - 2 238 43 774 15 5 157

Total 25 500 50 15 000 29 3 283 6 7 735 15 51 518

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
34. SIRP will generate substantial economic and social benefits. The main quantifiable

benefit is the increase in production and productivity to be achieved with higher
yields following investments in the revitalization of irrigation schemes and in
farm-level training on both irrigated and rainfed plots. Cropping patterns on
irrigated plots will favour market-led production of higher value crops, leading to
increased farm incomes. The introduction of post-harvest technology and
infrastructure, as well as training in post-harvest handling, is expected to result in
reduced post-harvest losses. Investments in the rehabilitation of approximately
150 kilometres of access roads will reduce transport costs and enhance market
access for targeted smallholders.

35. Moreover, the programme is likely to generate a range of indirect benefits, such as
the creation of off-farm jobs in the service and marketing sectors, increased market
participation and food availability, institutional strengthening and policy changes.

36. The proposed investment shows robust financial results at both crop and farm level,
demonstrating clear incentives for farmers to participate and financial sustainability
for the irrigation scheme. The base case economic internal rate of return (EIRR) is
estimated at 25.9 per cent. The benefit/cost ratio is estimated at 2.29, and the
payback period at 7.3 years. The economic net present value is estimated at
US$41.7 million. The EIRR is robust to changes in the expected benefits or costs.
Switching values were calculated for incremental benefits and incremental costs.
Benefits would have to be reduced by 60 per cent or costs increased by
152 per cent for SIRP to become economically unviable. Such variations in costs
and benefits are unlikely to occur. Adoption rates ranging from 65 per cent to
85 per cent have been assumed in the cost benefit analysis.

1 The estimate of taxes and duties was based on the rates in effect at the time of the design. In conformity with the principle that
no taxes or duties would be financed out of the proceeds of the IFAD and OFID financing, any future changes in the rates and/or
structures of taxes and duties would apply to the programme.
2 If OFID funding does not materialize, alternative sources of funding will be sought by the Government of Zimbabwe.



EB 2016/118/R.20/Rev.1

8

D. Sustainability
37. The long-term sustainability of investments in irrigated infrastructure will be

ensured as follows: first, prior to investment a diagnostic study of the key issues
affecting scheme performance needs to be carried out with a high degree of
participation by the targeted farmers. This study will identify the root causes of
system failure and allow SIRP to adequately target investments. Second,
interventions will take into account larger natural resource management issues to
ensure environmental sustainability. By investing in community-based natural
resources management in adjacent rainfed areas and linking them with income
generating activities, SIRP proactively deals with potential environmental issues
whilst also ensuring a longer life time for the scheme itself. Third, the programme
will invest in building adequate capacity at all levels as required to sustainably
operate and maintain schemes, manage finances and effectively prevent or resolve
any social conflicts related to access to land or water.

38. Zimbabwe’s rural population is exposed to the effects of climate change, as the
recent drought showed. The proposed programme interventions are designed to
minimize those impacts. Revitalized irrigated agriculture becomes a key adaptation
pathway to respond to increasing intra-seasonal variability in the water supply.
Water-use efficiency will be improved by reducing conveyance losses and by
training farmers on irrigation water management. When designing extensions to
existing schemes, the increased crop water requirements due to increased
evapotranspiration will be assessed to determine potential irrigable area. The
selection of new schemes to be studied will be informed by the National Adaptation
Plan, currently under development, in order to select those areas most crucially
affected by climate change. Interventions in the adjacent rainfed lands aim to
restore the natural resource base and use it in a more sustainable way, thereby
increasing resilience to shocks. These interventions will help protect the irrigation
schemes from silting up and restore water bodies.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
39. The programme design prioritized risk identification and management to ensure a

successful re-engagement of IFAD in Zimbabwe and the sustainability of the
proposed interventions. The main approach has been simplified design and
implementation arrangements to limit the programme’s exposure. Measures in
financial management and procurement are proposed to manage remaining risks
deemed acceptable or inevitable.

40. Macro-economic and political instabilities, however, remain beyond programme
control. Other key risks to programme success have been identified as follows:
(i) non-fulfilment of IFAD arrears settlement; (ii) non-availability of cofinancing
from OFID; (iii) programme implementation delays; (iv) limited responsiveness of
service providers; (v) inability of farmers to contribute to initial commitment and
operational costs; (vi) effects of climate change; and (vii) market constraints.

41. The respective mitigation measures for the above risks include: (i) commitment by
the Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe and the Ministry of Finance and Economic
Development to ensure liquidity to settle arrears as they fall due; (ii) close
follow-up by the Government of Zimbabwe with OFID; (iii) engagement of technical
assistance during programme start-up to help set up financial management
systems and address pre-disbursement conditions; (iv) capacity-building for public
sector service providers, and engagement of private-sector service providers under
performance-based contracts; (v) targeting schemes where farmers have
demonstrated willingness and ability to commit to operational costs; (vi) integration
of climate change effects into the planning and design of irrigation investments;
and (vii) improving farmers’ access to information and promoting value addition at
scheme level while establishing linkages to markets.



EB 2016/118/R.20/Rev.1

9

42. Based on the 2015 Transparency International Global Corruption Perceptions Index
score of 21, the country has been rated as high risk. A 2015 follow-on World Bank
financial management assessment indicated that improvements have taken place in
recent years but recommended a number of reforms. As provided in paragraph
24 above, the programme’s design arrangements include key financial management
safeguards to be adopted during implementation.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
43. SIRP design is fully aligned with all IFAD strategic objectives set for the

2016-2025 period.3 Strategies for gender mainstreaming and targeting have been
incorporated in programme design in accordance with the IFAD Policy on Targeting
and the Policy on Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment. All activities under
SIRP will comply with the IFAD Policy on Improving Access to Land and Tenure
Security. Proposed activities in rural finance are consistent with IFAD’s Rural
Finance Policy.

44. For environmental and social purposes, SIRP is classified as a category B operation,
as the focus of the investment is primarily on rehabilitating existing irrigation
schemes. The programme is expected to have limited adverse social impacts on
human populations or environmentally significant areas. These risks will be
minimized through a solid scheme selection and design process complemented by
investments in the greater scheme area. In line with IFAD’s Social, Environmental
and Climate Assessment Procedures, residual risks will be identified in the
environmental and social impact assessment and managed via scheme-specific
mitigation measures agreed upon in the environmental and social management
plan to be prepared for each SIRP-supported scheme.

B. Alignment and harmonization
45. The smallholder irrigation subsector is identified among priority areas for

investment in all relevant country strategy and policy documents.4 The Zimbabwe
Agenda for Sustainable Socio-Economic Transformation, the country’s poverty
eradication strategy, targets a 50 per cent increase in the country’s area equipped
with irrigation by 2018. Both the Comprehensive Agricultural Policy Framework and
Zimbabwe Agriculture Investment Plan share SIRP’s value chain approach to
increasing farm productivity, improving extension services and promoting the
commercialization of smallholder agriculture. All relevant country strategies
emphasize the importance of building the resilience of communities to food and
nutrition insecurity and the effects of climate change.

46. Furthermore, SIRP implementation responsibilities will be largely mainstreamed
within the Government’s existing systems and decentralized structures. This will
facilitate the creation of synergies with other development partners and ensure
complementarities between SIRP and other interventions in the sector.

C. Innovations and scaling up
47. The programme will adopt a holistic approach to smallholder irrigation revitalization

in Zimbabwe that encompasses infrastructure development, farmers’ organization
capacity-building and empowerment, natural resource management, agricultural
production, market linkages and access to finance. This is an innovative approach,
as it constitutes a departure from the usual focus on “hardware” investments. The
selection of irrigation schemes for revitalization will occur during programme

3 IFAD Strategic Framework 2016-2025.
4 Government priorities for the development of the agricultural sector are outlined in the: (i) Zimbabwe Agenda for Sustainable
Socio-Economic Transformation 2013-2018; (iii) Zimbabwe Agriculture Investment Plan 2013-17; (iv) draft Comprehensive
Agricultural Policy Framework 2012-2032; and (v) Zimbabwe 10-Point Plan for Economic Growth.



EB 2016/118/R.20/Rev.1

10

implementation, and will be based on predefined criteria that prioritize areas that
optimize a combination of biophysical, socioeconomic and institutional aspects, in
order to achieve economies of scale and scope, and maximize efficiency,
effectiveness and large-scale impacts. The participatory planning approach and the
requirement of having farmers contribute to O&M costs are innovative features,
intended to promote sustainability.

48. The programme will pilot and promote low cost technologies for storage and
processing of perishable products at irrigation scheme level and cluster level.
Innovative approaches to include youth in programme activities call for providing
vocational training and starter kits to promote off-farm employment along the value
chain.

D. Policy engagement
49. The programme will enhance national capacity through evidence-based policy

dialogue among stakeholders such as the Government, farmer representations,
WUOs and the private sector to engage in policy dialogue on issues related to
smallholder irrigation, natural resources management and market access. Several
priority issues have been identified during programme design, including:
(i) formalization of the status of IMCs to become legally recognized WUOs with
certified rights to water and lands; (ii) revision of water pricing for smallholder
irrigation; (iii) effective and cost-efficient implementation of environmental and
social management plans; and (iv) incentives for private companies to engage with
smallholder farmers.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
50. A programme financing agreement between the Republic of Zimbabwe and IFAD

will constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as appendix I.

51. The Republic of Zimbabwe is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD.

52. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
53. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a Debt Sustainability Framework grant
to the Republic of Zimbabwe in an amount equivalent to eighteen million
three hundred thousand special drawing rights (SDR 18,300,000)
(approximately US$25.5 million) and upon such terms and conditions as shall
be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President



