









































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to Nepal for
Samriddhi – Rural Enterprises and
Remittances Project

Republic of Nepal

Samriddhi – Rural Enterprises and Remittances Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of Nepal

Executing agency: Ministry of Industry

Total project cost: US$68.2 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 15.50 million (equivalent to approximately
US$21.8 million)

Amount of IFAD Debt Sustainability
Framework grant:

SDR 11.95 million (equivalent to approximately
US$16.8 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: 40 years, including a grace period of 10 years, with a
service charge of three fourths of one per cent
(0.75 per cent) per annum

Amount of cofinancing: US$13.7 million

Terms of cofinancing: The private-sector contribution will mostly consist of
cost-sharing of capacity-building and outreach
promotion by financial institutions

Contribution of borrower: US$9 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$6.6 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/114/R.13

1

Recommendation for approval
The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of Nepal for Samriddhi – Rural Enterprises and
Remittances Project, as contained in paragraph 42.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Nepal for
Samriddhi – Rural Enterprises and Remittances Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Nepal has a population of 26.6 million people, of whom 56 per cent are 20-40

years of age. It is a low-income country with a per capita GDP of US$642, which is
the second lowest in South Asia. Since the end of the decade-long internal conflict
in 2006, insecurity and political instability have contributed to relatively slow GDP
growth. The majority of the population still lives on low-input/low-output
agriculture that provides limited income. Thus wage labour and widespread
migration have obligated 3 million Nepalese, mostly from rural areas, to be
employed abroad. The development of the service sector is partly due to a boom in
migration remittances, which have multiplied by a factor of six since 2003-2004,
now reaching 25 per cent of GDP, to about 55 per cent of rural households and still
increasing. Additionally, the poverty incidence decreased from 42 per cent in 1996
to 25 per cent in 2010, primarily due to the impact of remittances.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

2. Samriddhi1 – Rural Enterprises and Remittances Project has been developed in line
with the 2013-2018 results-based COSOP (RB-COSOP) and the Government of
Nepal’s request to harness remittances in support of entrepreneurship.

3. In line with Nepal’s National Development Plan, Industry Policy and Agriculture
Development Strategy, the project will diversify the range of economic activities
accessible to poor rural households and unemployed young men and women
through two main avenues. First, it will promote self-employment and small
businesses and microenterprises that can generate better incomes and jobs –
through both on farm and off-farm activities. Second, it will promote vocational
training and apprenticeship in direct connection with gainful job placement. In
addition, the approach to rural enterprises and remittances (RER) will develop
mechanisms specifically targeting migrant households and returnees, so they can
make the best possible use of their remittances.

4. Samriddhi will contribute to all three RB-COSOP strategic objectives. It will be the
first IFAD project to scale up Financing Facility for Remittances good practices into
an investment project, as well as the first to promote a comprehensive set of
mechanisms fostering remittance investment in livelihood development in Nepal.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
5. The project will be implemented in 16 districts of the Eastern and Central

Development Regions. It will use a corridor approach that links districts along the
main roads running south to north to facilitate the connection of hill districts to
larger markets in the terai (plains). Samriddhi will target a total of some 179,000

1 ‘Samriddhi’ is a Nepali word meaning prosperous or economically well-off.



EB 2015/114/R.13

2

primary beneficiaries, which will include existing rural micro/cottage and small
enterprises (RMSEs), poor households, returnee migrants and small enterprises.
The secondary target group will include medium and large enterprises as well as
service providers, who will be harnessed to provide support to the primary target
group through the development of business partnerships, vocational training,
apprenticeship packages and job placement. The project will also provide financial
education to 244,800 people to support financial inclusion.

6. Samriddhi will adopt an inclusive approach in which all existing micro-cottage and
small enterprises and all potential entrepreneurs – involved in both farming and
non-farming activities – will be eligible to access project-sponsored services in the
target districts. However, project support will vary according to the size of
enterprises, with a higher proportion of project grant funding provided to family-
based enterprises and the poorest groups, and a lesser proportion extended to
small enterprises. In addition, the project will ensure that poorer households,
women and other disadvantaged groups have access to project services and that
these are adapted to their needs.

B. Project development objective
7. The project goal is to contribute to reducing poverty and achieving sustainable

peace through employment-focused, equitable and inclusive economic
development. The development objective is that viable RMSEs, in both farm and
off-farm sectors, provide sustainable sources of income to poor households,
migrant families and returnees. Main indicators are: (i) 57,500 rural entrepreneurs
expand their existing business or create a new one; (ii) 30,000 rural youth access
job placement services; (iii) 34,500 enterprises are supported by Samriddhi
(22,500 new and 12,000 existing); and (iv) 21,000 vocational trainees and
apprentices are supported by Samriddhi, of which no less than 33 per cent are
women.

C. Components/outcomes
8. The project has three components: Component 1 – Promotion of RMSEs aims to

(i) provide micro and small entrepreneurs with sustainable access to adapted
business development services, so they can expand existing businesses or create
new ones; and (ii) assist members of poor households in building their skills and
securing gainful wage employment in RMSEs. Activities will be driven by an
assessment of markets, business opportunities and available services and by an
inventory and classification of existing RMSEs through a validation process.
Enterprise Service Centres (ESCs)2 will facilitate RMSE linkages with financial and
non-financial service providers, provide counselling services and information,
promote business partnerships and manage a system for the qualification,
capacity-building and quality monitoring of service providers.

9. Component 2 – Productive investment aims to (i) support the access of
RMSEs, migrants and remittance recipient households to responsive and suitable
financial services; and (ii) facilitate the financial inclusion of migrants and their
families, support their access to reintegration and peer-counselling services and
harness remittances for productive investment in rural enterprises. It will develop
innovative financial instruments designed to offset major constraints faced by
RMSEs in affordably accessing investment loans and to stimulate migrants’ savings
and investment in small business development. This will include: a risk-sharing
scheme to address RMSEs lack of collateral; a performance-based matching grant
scheme for family and microenterprises with insufficient cash flow to borrow money
in the initial stages of microenterprise development; and a departure loan buy-
back scheme targeting migrants. Capacity-building will be provided to financial
institutions in target districts, and in particular to savings and credit cooperatives

2 In Nepali: ‘samriddhi ko dhoka’ – the door to well-being.



EB 2015/114/R.13

3

(SCCs) and to Small Farmers Cooperatives Limited, to deliver responsive services
to the target population.

10. Component 3 – Institutional support and project management aims to
promote a favourable policy and institutional environment supporting the
development of RMSEs and the contribution of migration to sustainable
development. To this effect, Samriddhi will finance policy studies and research, as
well as activities enabling selected stakeholders representing the interests of
RMSEs or of migration stakeholders to participate in policy dialogue with the
Government. Additionally, Samriddhi will support capacity-building of institutions
that play a key role in creating a conducive environment for small businesses and
microenterprises and for migrants’ reintegration. Finally, it will assist in setting up
a multi-stakeholder platform on migration and development (MPMD), which will
provide a venue for policy dialogue on the integration of migration into the
development agenda and for developing policy measures to facilitate migrant
reintegration and to promote their economic initiatives in the country.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
11. The project strategy is driven by a primary concern that existing RMSEs need

support at national and local levels to develop, increase family income, generate
economic activities and improve employment. In addition, the promotion of RMSEs
must rest on sustainable structures and on mechanisms allowing continued access
of entrepreneurs to commercially-oriented services even beyond project
completion. Thus the project is designed as a temporary intervention aiming to
prepare public and private stakeholders to take over the responsibilities and costs
of securing continued RMSEs access to financial and non-financial services.

B. Organizational framework
12. The set-up of Samriddhi is based on public/private partnerships geared to support

inclusive and sustainable rural economic growth. While the Government retains
overall implementation and facilitation responsibility, non-governmental players will
have a key role in providing business development and financial services to target
groups for the creation and expansion of RMSEs and for maximizing the
development impact of migrant remittances through business investment.
Implementation arrangements also take stock of the long-lasting and strong
partnership between the Government and the Federation of Nepal Chambers of
Commerce and Industry, which is already implementing several initiatives
supporting RMSEs and rural producers.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

13. The integrated monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and knowledge management (KM)
system will be developed in accordance with government frameworks and with
IFAD guidelines. It will have three main objectives: steer project implementation;
support economic decisions and policymaking; and share knowledge and scale up
good practices.

14. The M&E/KM cycle will start with the preparation of the annual workplan and
budget (AWP/B). All Samriddhi stakeholders will have an active and important role
in identifying and reporting data. M&E officers at all levels will ensure that women
are adequately represented in this process and that they are supported in voicing
their specific concerns. To guarantee an inclusive M&E/KM system, Samriddhi will
provide capacity-building to the project management team (PMT), corridor teams
and ESC staff.

15. The purpose of knowledge management is to ensure that knowledge generated
within the project is systematically identified, analysed, documented and shared.



EB 2015/114/R.13

4

Particular attention will be given to documenting: innovative models; information
to be shared with and discussed by the MPMD with a view to assessing progress
and discussing measures to improve performance; and Learning Routes, which will
be organized to support the exchange of knowledge and good practices among
ESCs.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
16. Financial management will be governed by Ministry of Finance regulations and

will be in line with IFAD guidelines on financial management. The financial
management system will be under the overall responsibility of the Samriddhi
project manager and the accounts officer. A finance and administrative officer will
also be competitively hired from the open market. The draft project
implementation manual (PIM) – established at final design and to be approved by
IFAD – includes a financial management section describing IFAD procedures for the
withdrawal application process, flow of funds, accounting and financial reporting
and audit requirements. A complete financial management assessment was
undertaken and the residual risk was found to be ‘medium’, to be mitigated
efficiently through the following measures: professional software-based
accounting; stringent reporting requirements; accountability; internal audit
provision; and a detailed finance manual. Two designated accounts in United States
dollars will be opened at the Nepal Rastra Bank (central bank), through which
advance resources from the loan and grant will be channelled respectively. The
Government’s Financial Administration Regulations will be used as the basis for
accounting and appropriate controls over financial transactions, and will be
supplemented by separate ledgers, registers and reporting formats to record and
report IFAD expenditures by categories, components, subcomponents and
activities. Consolidated project financial statements will be prepared in accordance
with internationally recognized accounting standards.

17. Internal control and audit. The PMT accounts officer will be responsible for
tracking project expenditure, managing assets and procurement and monitoring
fiduciary aspects of district- and corridor-level project activities. The project will
continue the existing practice of internal audit by the District Treasury Control
Office, in line with government financial rules and regulations. With regard to
external audit, the Office of the Auditor General is considered an independent body
under the respective government offices and is responsible for final project audit.
Audits shall be carried out in accordance with International Standards on Auditing
and IFAD’s Guidelines on Project Audits.

18. Procurement. The procurement of goods, works and services financed from
resources provided or administered by IFAD will be undertaken in accordance with
the provision of the Public Procurement Act and associated regulations, Public
Procurement Rules and the provisions of IFAD’s Procurement Guidelines and
Handbook. Goods and services (non-consulting) procured using national
competitive bidding, national shopping and direct contracting will follow the
procedures and processes defined in the PIM to be approved by the project
steering committee (PSC) and IFAD. The selection of individual consultants and
individual service providers will also be defined in the PIM, which will provide
details of the selection method to be applied.

E. Supervision
19. Annual supervision missions will be organized by IFAD jointly with the Government,

in close collaboration with field-level implementers and project stakeholders.
Supervision will not be conducted as an inspection, but will rather offer an
opportunity to assess achievements and lessons jointly, to review innovations and
to reflect on improvement measures.



EB 2015/114/R.13

5

IV. Project costs, financing, benefits
A. Project costs
20. Total project investment and recurrent costs are estimated at US$68.2 million over

seven years, including physical and price contingencies. Total baseline costs are
US$57.60 million.

Table 1
Indicative project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries

Private
sector -

financing
institutions

The
Government Total

Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount

A. Promotion of rural micro-cottage and small
enterprises

Mapping and setting up capacities at district and
regional levels

2 266 4 257 - 364 1 124 8 012

Services for RMSE promotion and development 10 314 758 1 836 - 1 929 14 837

Vocational training and apprenticeships 3 931 1 342 - 209 3 489 8 972

Subtotal promotion of rural micro-cottage and
small enterprises

16 511 6 357 1 836 573 6 542 31 821

B. Productive investment

Rural finance 1 534 5 258 4 800 13 175 219 24 987

Mobilizing migrant resources and skills 367 514 - - 1 476 2 356

Subtotal productive investment 1 901 5 772 4 800 13 175 1 695 27 343

C. Institutional support and project management

Policy and institutional development 404 1 942 - 1 410 2 757

Project management 2 979 2 744 - - 501 6 224

Subtotal institutional support and project
management

3 383 4 686 - 1 911 8 981

Total costs 21 795 16 815 6 636 13 749 9 148 68 145

Table 2
Indicative project costs by expenditure category and financier*
(Thousands of United States dollars)

* Final disbursement categories will be decided during negotiations based on IFAD’s procedures, which will include a
maximum of five cost categories for reasons of efficiency.



EB 2015/114/R.13

6

B. Project financing
21. The Government of Nepal, IFAD, the private sector and beneficiaries will finance

the project. IFAD total financing amounts to US$38.61 million, equivalent to
56.7 per cent of total project financing (24.7 per cent under the form of a Debt
Sustainability Framework grant and 32 per cent through a highly concessional
loan). The Government would finance taxes, duties and salaries, and is further
expected to contribute to the cost of the salary of one staff member for each ESC
and to vocational training, for a total of US$9.1 million. The private sector
contribution is estimated at US$13.7 million. Overall beneficiaries’ contributions are
estimated at US$6.6 million.

22. Taxes and duties will not be financed by IFAD.

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
23. Samriddhi will target a total of some 179,660 primary beneficiaries:

60,000 entrepreneurs; 89,660 people who will access jobs generated by the newly
created and expanded RMSEs; and about 30,000 people, mostly youth, who will
benefit from vocational training and apprenticeship.

24. Additionally, the project will provide financial education in-country and abroad to
213,100 people, mostly migrants and migrants’ households. An estimated
10 per cent of these will access other project services.

25. The secondary target group will include: (i) medium and large enterprises and
service providers, who will extend support to the primary target group; and
(ii) 22,500 enterprises (from category B to medium and large), who will benefit
from capacity-building to make the best use of apprenticeships.

26. Furthermore, project investments will lead to indirect benefits for RMSEs and poor
households beyond the target area.

27. The base-case scenario for a 20-year period of analysis shows an economic rate of
return of 26 per cent and a net present value of US$37.7 million.

D. Sustainability
28. Samriddhi strategy and activities are driven by the primary concern that, by the

end of project implementation, sustainable mechanisms will ensure continued
RMSE access to financial and non-financial services. This will be attained through:
(i) public/private partnerships that provide target groups with sufficient returns and
include capacity-building and expansion opportunities; (ii) financial sustainability of
RMSEs and ESCs through sound business plans, with incentives to support start-
up, cost-recovery mechanisms, capacity-building of key players, linkages to
performing financial service providers (SPs) and resource mobilization; (iii) use of
local resources to develop entrepreneurship, expand the range of business
development services SPs and generate jobs; and (iv) promotion of business
partnerships between the smallest enterprises and value chain aggregators, which
will facilitate continued RMSEs access to services and markets and promote their
growth beyond initial project-financed support.

29. The second interim review, planned for the end of the fifth year, will make
recommendations with regard to key measures required to secure the sustainability
of project achievements, based on which the PMT will prepare a detailed exit
strategy.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
30. Most risks associated with this project remain medium or low, and mitigation

measures have been identified for all risks. The three risks remaining high are
given below.



EB 2015/114/R.13

7

31. Risks associated with the project related to the Government or other development
organizations paying protracted subsidies and in-kind support to entrepreneurs to
establish their businesses, which will be mitigated by sharing implementation
modalities and successful achievements with the MPMD and government partners
to foster harmonization. In addition, Samriddhi and ESCs will negotiate
coordination agreements at the district level to ensure that subsidies do not
undermine the Samriddhi approach to sustainability.

32. The risk that the volume of service business will not be sufficient to generate an
adequate income for full-time SPs will be mitigated by project support to several
mechanisms facilitating sustainable SP access.

33. The risk that public/private migration stakeholders fail to take responsibility for the
operation and financing of the MPMD will be mitigated by project interventions to:
(i) set up the platform and develop plans and tools; (ii) finance the MPMD
secretariat and operations; (iii) draft a law to institutionalize the platform; and
(iv) support migrant organizations in developing advocacy skills.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

34. The design of Samriddhi was guided by IFAD’s policies and strategies on: targeting,
gender and private-sector engagement. The project is in line with IFAD’s specific
objectives on remittances, which aim to: enhance market development and
financial access through the identification, replication and scaling up of innovative
remittance transfer systems; promote financial inclusion among migrants and
remittance-recipient families in rural areas through better use of remittances; and
create an enabling environment that promotes public/private partnerships for
effective remittance development strategies.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
35. A PSC will be set up at the national level to: provide overall guidance and

oversight; ensure that Samriddhi programming is aligned with national-sector
priorities; and offer a venue for sharing Samriddhi good practices and for
channelling policy issues to the appropriate policymaking bodies. The PSC will also
approve annual AWP/Bs and annual progress and financial reports.

36. Samriddhi will rely on existing district industry promotion committees to: develop a
dialogue among stakeholders involved in RMSE development; discuss RMSE
constraints and value chain bottlenecks; agree on measures required to free them;
and identify policy gaps and provide guidance to ESCs. It will ensure that ESC
activities are inclusive of women and poor people, and that gender equality and
social inclusion issues are addressed as part of their regular agenda.

Innovations and scaling upC.
37. The PMT and business development services technical assistance will assist ESCs in

developing innovative modalities for service delivery, such as: (i) developing
systems alternative to price (commissions or mark-ups) that link payment to actual
results/impact on business; (ii) promoting SPs that have an existing business and
do not rely solely on service provision to make a living, including cooperatives or
producers’ associations; and (iii) assisting SPs in developing businesses in
conjunction with RMSEs promotion (for example, large farmers buying agricultural
products from serviced farmers). Innovative models will be thoroughly documented
with support from corridor teams and will be shared across target regions and
through multistakeholder platforms at the district industry promotion committee
level, regional (Eastern Business Forum) and national levels (National Business
Forum, the project steering committee).



EB 2015/114/R.13

8

Policy engagementD.
38. The project will support selected stakeholders representing the interests of RMSEs

or of migrants to participate in policy dialogue with the Government. Samriddhi will
finance studies and research enabling such stakeholders to: (i) develop policy
positions; (ii) organize policy consultations of members at regional and national
levels; and (iii) acquire advocacy skills.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
39. A financing agreement between the Republic of Nepal and IFAD will constitute the

legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower/recipient. A
copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as an annex.

40. The Republic of Nepal is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

41. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
42. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Republic of Nepal in an amount equivalent to fifteen million five hundred
thousand special drawing rights (SDR 15,500,000), and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
Nepal in an amount equivalent to eleven million nine hundred and fifty
thousand special drawing rights (SDR 11,950,000) and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President




