











































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the
Argentine Republic for the
Goat Value Chain Development Programme


Argentine Republic

Goat Value Chain Development Programme

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Argentine Republic

Executing agency: Unit for Rural Change

Total programme cost: US$25.45 million

Amount of IFAD loan: US$12.30 million

Amount of IFAD grant: US$1.02 million

Terms of IFAD loan: Ordinary: Maturity period of 18 years, including a grace
period of three years, with an interest rate per annum
equal to 100 per cent of the IFAD reference interest rate

Contribution of borrower: US$7.00 million

Contribution of provincial governments: US$2.97 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$2.16 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/LOT/P.18/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval
The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed loan
and grant to the Argentine Republic for the Goat Value Chain Development
Programme, as contained in paragraph 33.

Proposed loan and grant to the Argentine Republic for
the Goat Value Chain Development Programme

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country, rural development and poverty context
1. Argentina is one of the largest economies in Latin America and one of the world's

major producers of agricultural commodities, especially soybeans, maize and beef.
In addition, there are some 251,000 family farms in the country. Many of these are
run by poor families, the majority of whom live in the greater north region. In
addition, Argentina is home to about 950,000 indigenous peoples. In 2010, 18 per
cent of the rural population and 22 per cent of rural dispersed households had
unmet basic needs. About 46,000 farms are raising goats, principally smallholders.

2. Poverty is especially severe in farming families, indigenous communities, rural
working families and large families without fixed incomes. Youth unemployment is a
serious problem in rural areas, and outmigration of young rural women is common.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

3. The Government of Argentina aims to reduce rural poverty through income
generation based on sustainable agricultural production. The Unit for Rural Change
(UCAR), of the Ministry of Agroindustry (MAI), has demonstrated the capacity to
improve the performance of IFAD's portfolio, which is implemented within its
country programme as an instrumental part of public policy to support family
farming. Specialized technical institutions cooperate with UCAR in this task.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
4. The programme leverages public policy priorities, lessons learned in the IFAD

country programme and opportunities within the country to reduce rural poverty by
integrating family farming into value chains. Its design is based on the insertion of
smallholder goat breeders into value chains, following participatory planning by
producers’ organizations within goat production basins. Value chains include:
(i) meat; (ii) fibre, especially mohair and cashmere; and (iii) milk products. The
chains are not very developed, with limitations faced by family farmers and
processing companies.

5. The programme area includes the five provinces of Chaco, Formosa, Neuquén,
Mendoza and Santiago del Estero, which include some 60 per cent of the total
number of goats in the country.

6. Beneficiaries will include men and women producers (including indigenous
communities) engaged in goat breeding and organized in producers’ organizations.
The programme will prioritize existing organizations and promote incorporation of
vulnerable groups, especially indigenous peoples, women and youth.



EB 2016/LOT/P.18/Rev.1

2

B. Programme development objective
7. The programme’s development objective is to raise the incomes of goat-breeding

families through their sustainable integration into value chains. The six-year
programme aims to reach 8,000 families.

C. Components and outcomes
8. The programme has three components:

 Component 1: Development of markets and sectoral policies. This
component will strengthen development of emerging value chains by creating
a conducive commercial environment, including marketing, policy and
normative aspects. To develop markets for goat products, it will support
market analysis and promotion, exploration of foreign markets and technical
assistance to processing companies. It will also promote product
standardization conforming to official normative rules, and creation of a
natural-resource monitoring framework for sustainable goat management.
Moreover, it will develop human resources by supporting technical exchange
visits and basic financial education.

 Component 2: Productive, organizational and commercial
development. To improve the functioning of value chains, the programme
will provide the following territorial support to participating organizations:

(a) Goat basin identification, the creation of goat basin forums and
participatory planning and monitoring of market-based sectoral
development.

(b) In the pre-investment phase, it will support preparation of participatory
rapid appraisals of producers’ organizations, institutional strengthening
and eventually the formulation of business plans in the framework of
business alliances in accordance with goat basin plans.

(c) In the investment phase, it will finance implementation of approved
business plans – including physical assets, training, technical assistance
and working capital – through revolving funds for credit administered by
producers’ organizations. Additionally, the programme will finance
guarantee funds to facilitate operating capital loans from financial
institutions to the associated lead companies in the value chains.

 Component 3: Programme management. This component includes
programme management by UCAR and provincial management units. It will
include the adaptation of systems for planning, monitoring and evaluation,
and also for knowledge management, with a special focus on South-South and
triangular cooperation (SSTC).

III. Programme implementation
ApproachA.

9. The programme’s operational strategy will be based on: (i) sector-wide investments
in goat product markets and policies; (ii) participatory goat basin plans; and
(iii) business plans as the principal instruments of producers’ organizations’ for
training, investment, technical assistance and operating capital.

Organizational frameworkB.
10. MAI, through the UCAR, will be responsible for programme implementation and will

directly execute the activities in components 1 and 3. Provincial governments will
be responsible for implementing component 2 through provincial management
units, based on provincial financing agreements with MAI. Beneficiary organizations
will be responsible for developing and executing business plans through
participatory processes.



EB 2016/LOT/P.18/Rev.1

3

11. Beneficiary participation is central to the programme. Producers’ organizations will
participate in goat basin forums to prepare and monitor basin plans. They will be
responsible for planning and implementing business plans, including procurement.
Finally, they will monitor and evaluate implementation of their business plans,
which will provide the programme’s system with data.

Planning, monitoring and evaluation, learning and knowledgeC.
management

12. Planning will be based on defined goals and objectives. The programme’s annual
planning exercise will provide the flexibility needed for implementation, in
coordination with provincial authorities. Goat basin plans will be prepared with the
participation of provincial authorities, producers’ organizations, private enterprises
and public institutions.

13. For the programme’s data and knowledge system, UCAR will apply results-based
management methods using an organizational matrix to manage the development
of goat basin and business plans. The system will be integrated into UCAR’s existing
management system, allowing monitoring of physical progress based on data
entered at the provincial level. A tracking sheet will facilitate analysis of information
critical to measuring results. For impact evaluation, implementers will collect
information from beneficiary households using a family questionnaire that includes
IFAD’s Results and Impact Management System (RIMS) survey. Institutional
advancement will be tracked by monitoring the participating producers’
organizations. Thematic studies will be carried out to analyse experiences in
programme implementation.

Financial management, procurement and governanceD.
14. Financial management. MAI, through UCAR, will be responsible for financial

management of all programme resources, including flow of funds, disbursement,
internal controls, accounting, financial reporting and audit. UCAR has been the
implementing agency of IFAD programmes since its creation in 2009. It has
extensive experience and adequate systems and procedures. For programme
implementation, UCAR will use its existing accounting system, which is satisfactory
to IFAD. Funding for start-up costs may be used for early programme expenditures.

15. Flow of funds. IFAD loan and grant resources will be disbursed to a receiving
account in United States dollars in the Central Bank of Argentina. Funds will then be
transferred to the two designated accounts in United States dollars in the Banco de
la Nación Argentina, to two designated accounts in United States dollars in the
central bank of Argentina. The accounts will be used exclusively for the proceeds of
the loan and grant, respectively. From each designated account, funds will flow to
the respective operational account denominated in Argentine pesos, which will be
managed by UCAR. Provincial-level implementation units will open provincial
operational accounts in Argentine pesos.

16. Procurement. The programme will follow national procurement regulations to the
extent these are compatible with IFAD’s procurement guidelines. UCAR, the
provincial management units and producers’ organizations will carry out
procurement on the basis of agreed procurement plans. Procurement of works,
goods and services in the framework of business plans, and accounting for these
expenditures, will be the responsibility of producers’ organizations, in line with
IFAD’s community-based procurement directives, with support from provincial
units.

17. Audit. The programme’s consolidated financial statements will be audited annually
by the national auditor general in accordance with IFAD’s Guidelines on Project
Audits. All programme accounts will be audited, including all sources of funding.
The scope of the audit will include visits to producers’ organizations. Annual audit
reports will be submitted to IFAD within six months of the end of each fiscal year.



EB 2016/LOT/P.18/Rev.1

4

SupervisionE.
18. The programme will be supervised directly by IFAD in accordance with the

methodology agreed by IFAD and UCAR. Initial supervision tasks include support for
rapid programme start-up and set-up of the accounting, planning, and monitoring
and evaluation systems.

Exception to IFAD’s General Conditions for AgriculturalF.
Development Financing and operational policies

19. With respect to retroactive financing, expenses related to goat basin forums and to
SSTC for activities begun as of the date of negotiations will be considered eligible
up to US$500,000 under the expense categories “Goods, services and inputs for
beneficiaries” and “Consultancies (technical assistance)” from both the loan and
grant accounts. Activities to be financed by retroactive financing and their source of
funding will require prior “no objection” from IFAD to be considered eligible. For
expenses for reimbursement to be recognized, the borrower/recipient must submit
them to IFAD once disbursement conditions have been met.

IV. Programme costs, financing, benefits
A. Programme costs
20. The total cost for six years of implementation will be US$25.5 million, including

contingencies, of which: US$2.7 million relates to component 1; US$19.0 million to
component 2; and US$3.8 million to component 3. Management costs make up
15 per cent of programme costs. Costs include 6 per cent for contingencies with
respect to price escalation for goods, services and operating expenses, and
0.001 per cent for physical contingencies with respect to goods and services.

B. Programme financing
21. The programme will be financed by: (i) the central government, with a contribution

of US$7.0 million to cofinance business plans of producers’ organizations and
management costs; (ii) provincial governments, with a contribution of
US$3.0 million to cofinance business plans and provincial management costs;
(iii) IFAD, through a loan of US$12.3 million and a grant of US$1.0 million for
SSTC; and (iv) beneficiaries, with in-kind contributions of US$2.2 million to
cofinance business plans. Programme costs by component and expenditure
category are presented in tables 1 and 2.

Table 1
Programme costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant
Central

government
Provincial

government Beneficiaries Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Development of markets and
sectoral policies 1 796 67 882 33 - - - - - - 2 678 11

2. Productive, organizational
and commercial development 10 377 55 - - 5 807 31 643 3 2 160 11 18 987 75

3. Programme management 127 3 135 4 1 192 32 2 329 62 - - 3 783 15

Total programme costs 12 300 48 1 017 4 7 000 28 2 972 12 2 160 9 25 448 100



EB 2016/LOT/P.18/Rev.1

5

Table 2
Programme costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant
Central

government
Provincial

government Beneficiaries Total
Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Grants (capitalization of
producers’ organizations) 9 390 52 - - 5 807 32 643 4 2 160 12 18 000 71

2. Goods, services and inputs 123 100 - - 10 3 338 97 - - 472 2
3. Consultancies (technical

assistance) 1 725 81 402 19 - - - - - - 2 126 8
4. Training 662 52 615 48 - - - - - - 1 277 5
5. Credit and guarantee funds 400 100 - - - - - - - - 400 2
6. Salaries and allowances - - - - 989 39 1 523 61 - - 2 512 10
7. Operating costs 0 - 0 - 193 29 467 71 - - 660 3

Total programme costs 12 300 48 1 017 4 7 000 28 2 972 12 2 160 9 25 448 100

C. Benefit summary and economic analysis
22. The programme will serve some 8,000 rural families (approximately 40,000

people), including 5,600 smallholder families and 2,400 indigenous families. Small-
scale producers, organized in approximately 160 producers’ organizations, including
48 indigenous communities, will generate the programme’s expected benefits.

23. The financial and economic evaluation indicates the activities’ viability at farm and
programme levels. The internal rate of return is 23.3 per cent, and the net present
value US$19.6 million.

D. Sustainability
24. The programme’s sustainability will be ensured by: (i) collaboration of producers’

organizations with processing companies in the goat basin forums; (ii) support to
beneficiary organizations that will continue operating after programme completion;
(iii) sector-wide support provided in component 1, including the vegetation
monitoring system and SSTC activities; (iv) environmental, climate change
adaptation and commercial support measures to be integrated into business plans;
and (v) linkage of participating companies to commercial financial institutions.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
25. The programme’s potential adverse impacts and risks of failing to achieve its

objectives are limited. The main risks include: (i) political and institutional risks,
which are low in view of the country’s stable poverty-reduction policy framework
and UCAR’s track record in implementing poverty reduction programmes;
(ii) possible delay in incorporating participating provinces into the programme,
which has been mitigated by their identification and participation in programme
design; (iii) companies’ difficulties in joining the programme, which will be reduced
by inviting them to participate in the goat basin forums, and by technical assistance
and loan guarantees; (iv) market risks, which are already low by virtue of observed
demand for goat products, will be further reduced by addressing supply and
marketing constraints; (v) technological and climatic risks, which will be mitigated
through local technical assistance and support to integration of climate-proofing
measures into business plans and participating companies’ operations; and
(vi) fiduciary risk: based on a 2015 Transparency International Corruption
Perceptions Index score of 32, and IFAD experience in the country, the
programme’s fiduciary risk has been rated as medium. However, the solid
experience and systems of UCAR, along with close implementation support from
IFAD, are considered sufficient to mitigate fiduciary risk.



EB 2016/LOT/P.18/Rev.1

6

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

26. The programme approach and implementation modalities are consistent with IFAD
strategies and policies. They specifically support IFAD’s fiduciary compliance and
are aligned with the IFAD Strategic Framework 2016-2025 and the policies on rural
finance, indigenous peoples, environment and natural resource management,
gender equality and women’s empowerment, and targeting.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
27. The programme is in line with government objectives and the Federal and

Participative Agri-food and Agribusiness Strategic Plan, 2010/2016 (PEA2). It is also
consistent with the recommendations of IFAD’s 2010 country programme
evaluation in seeking a programme approach, expanding the range of financial
services and introducing the use of grants to boost knowledge management.

Innovations and scaling upC.
28. The programme’s innovations include: (i) focusing on specific value chains with a

high incidence of poverty and sound commercial potential; (ii) bringing together
smallholder producers, companies and public administration in forums to plan the
development of goat value chains; (iii) integrating sector-support activities such as
market analysis and promotion and policy support; (iv) introducing systematic
natural resource monitoring; (v) widening the spectrum of rural financial services,
including financial education and loan guarantees for participating companies; and
(vi) SSTC to support market and policy development activities.

Policy engagementD.
29. The programme will support development of public policies to promote sustainable

smallholder goat breeding in Argentina and beyond by generating and
communicating evidence of the value chain development approach it applies. Best
practices will be learned and disseminated in the framework of the SSTC
programme.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
30. A financing agreement between the Argentine Republic and IFAD will constitute the

legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower/recipient. A
copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as appendix I.

31. The Argentine Republic is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

32. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
33. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Argentine Republic in the amount of twelve million three hundred thousand
dollars (US$12,300,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Argentine
Republic in the amount of one million seventeen thousand dollars
(US$1,017,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially
in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President



