














































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
North Cameroon Agriculture and Water Smart Landscapes Project (P166072) 

 
 

  
Jan 28, 2018 Page 1 of 25  

     

 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 25-Jan-2019 | Report No: PIDISDSC24140 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Cameroon P166072  Valorization of 
Investments in the 
Valley of the Benue 
(P166072) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA Sep 16, 2019 Dec 20, 2019 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing MINEPAT MEADEN  

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
To contribute to the Regional Climate Resilience Investment Plan by improving irrigation services and sustaining climate 
resilient agricultural productivity in the Benue River Valley. 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 200.00 

Total Financing 200.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 200.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 200.00 

          IDA Credit 200.00 

   
 

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 


A - Full Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 
 
 

B. Introduction and Context 

 
Regional Context  

The Niger Basin, located in West and Central Africa, is one of the major transboundary basins in Africa. Its 
1.5 million km2 active hydrographic basin spans over the territory of nine countries: Benin, Burkina Faso, 
Cameroon, Chad, Guinea, Ivory Coast, Mali, Niger, and Nigeria. Its population of 130 million inhabitants is 
growing rapidly, expected to reach 180 million people by 2025. Except for Nigeria, most of the population in 
the basin is rural and depends on agriculture, animal husbandry or fishing for its livelihood. 
 
The value of the Niger River System resides in its contribution to water, food, energy, and job security, to 
transport and to biodiversity. For thousands of years, the river, its tributaries and connected lakes and 
wetlands have supported local populations with diverse water-dependent livelihoods such as flood-recession 
agriculture, cattle grazing and drinking, fishing and hunting. In the Niger Basin Countries, agriculture (including 
farming, livestock husbandry and fisheries) contributes 20 to 50 per cent of GDP and roughly two-third of the 
population depends on it for its livelihood. Moreover, those mostly family fishing and agro-pastoral systems 
are labor intensive and generate significant indirect employments (processing, trade and crafts). In a region 
with a structural deficit in food production and increasing temperature and rainfall variability and uncertainty, 
the river, its tributaries and connected groundwater resources are key to increase agricultural productivity and 
resilience to climate change. In addition, the river system is important for the energy security of the region, 
with an installed, partially integrated, hydro-power capacity of 2,000MW1. Finally, the Niger hydro-system 
sustains some of the most significant biodiversity areas in the World, notably the Inner2 and Maritime Deltas 
in Mali and Nigeria respectively, both Ramsar sites. 
 
Yet the Niger hydro-system and the population, economies and biodiversity relying on it are vulnerable to 
several climate and water-related shocks and stresses, many of them transboundary in nature. Managing 
competing water demands, notably between upstream and downstream users and between different sectoral 
will be one of the basin’s main development challenges in the coming decades as intensifying water use, while 
necessary, will not be without impacts. Notably, it will be important to strike a balance between the regulation 
of river flows (i.e. reservoirs) and increased water withdrawals for irrigation, hydropower and navigation, as is 
the case of the Upper Niger, Medium Niger and the Benue (i.e. Chad, Cameroon and Nigeria) and the 
preservation of the Maritime Delta ecosystem (i.e. biodiversity and ecological services: fishing) in Nigeria. 

                                            
1 World Bank, 2006: Water Resources Management & Development Opportunities in the Niger River Basin. Policy Note. Economic 
and Sector Work. Washington, DC: World Bank. Nigeria is exporting electricity to Niger and Benin in the Niger Basin. 
2 During the rainy season, the Inner Delta forms a large flood plain of 20,000 to 30,000 km2, facilitating the cultivation of rive, cotton 
and wheat as well as cattle herding and fishing. The size of the flooded area is subject to strong annual variations, depending on the 
discharge in the Upper Basin.  

Priority should therefore be given to increasing the performance of existing infrastructure; 
reducing/postponing the need to build new dams; as well as strengthening the Niger Basin authority (NBA)’s 
capacity in its water allocation, planning and coordination of transboundary projects function.  
 
In this context, the Government of Cameroon has made a request to the Niger Basin Authority to incorporate 
the Lagdo dam into the Niger Basin Master Plan. The WB is currently supporting the master plan through a 
Niger Basin regional program using the Series of Project (SOP) instrument. Phase 1 (Building Climate Resilience 
in the Niger Basin, P161262) objective is to strengthen the Niger Basin Authority’s capacity for integrated, 
transboundary water resources management, while subsequent phases/projects, including the proposed 
operation, would be for country-level investments. Within the master plan integration, the development of 
irrigation from the Lagdo dam is indicated for Cameroun.  

Summary of regional potential water issues, per section of the Niger basin and country 

Section of the Niger Basin / countries Main transboundary issues 

Cameroon, Lower Niger and Benue (Chad, 
Nigeria)  

- Flood risk in Cameroon and Nigeria 
- Land degradation in Cameroon and Chad, 

contributing to sedimentation in 
Cameroon and Nigeria 

- Sub-optimal power generation from 
existing dams in Nigeria (i.e. Kainji and 
Jebba) and Cameroon (i.e. Lagdo) 

-  

Inner Delta (Mali): Wetland of international 
significance (RAMSAR), providing fish, 
pasture land and flood-recession agriculture 
for more than 2 million people 
 

- Vulnerable to a reduction of annual flood 
and overall yearly inflows, that could result 
from an increase in water withdrawals 
from irrigation (i.e. “offices”); river flow 
regulation from future dams (i.e. Fomi) 
or/and climate change 

Middle Niger (Mali, Niger, Benin, Burkina 
Faso) 

- Flooding particularly in Niger and Benin 
- Erosion and Sedimentation in all countries 
- Invasive Species (Water Jacinth) 

Upper Niger (Guinea, Ivory Coast, Mali) - Moderate degradation of land and forest 
cover (Guinea and Ivory Coast) 

- Contamination from informal mining 
(Guinea, Mali and Ivory Coast) 

- Low water productivity in the “Offices” of 
Mali, largest water user in the basin 

- Sub-optimal power generation from 
existing dams in Mali 

Maritime Delta (Nigeria): wetland of 
international significance, source of livelihood 
to about 1 million fishermen 

- Vulnerability to increase water 
withdrawals and regulation from upstream 
countries 

- Invasive Species (Typha, Water Jacinth) 


The proposed project is therefore proposed as the second of a Series of Projects under the Regional 
Program. Through in country investments it will contribute to the implementation of targeted, interventions 
for transboundary, integrated water resource management. 
Country Context 

 

A lower middle income country of about 24 million people, Cameroon is strategically located on the gulf of 
Guinea. It is naturally well placed to play the role of a regional hub. With its 600 kilometer coastline, Cameroon 
borders with six Central Africa countries3 which, with the exception of Nigeria, are members of the Economic 
and Monetary Community of Central Africa (CEMAC by its French acronym). Its regional port of Douala serves 
as an entry point to two strategic road corridors to Bangui and Ndjamena. Cameroon’s Far North region shares 
with Chad, Niger and Nigeria access to Lake Chad, a basin traditionally important for livelihood in the region, 
but also an area of competition for scarce resources including between farmers and pastoralists. Cameroon is 
endowed with ample arable land, water, energy, and oil and mineral resources.  
 
With a per capita Gross Domestic Product of US$1,374 (current prices) in 2017, the economy is largely driven 
by its primary sector, agriculture and mineral resources, and benefits from its location in the Congo Basin, the 
world’s second largest tropical forest zone, which provides an exceptional ecological diversity. The country’s 
mineral wealth includes deposits of oil, natural gas, gold, iron, manganese and uranium. Crude petroleum is an 
important resource accounting for 10 percent of GDP and being the main export product by value. Timber is the 
second largest export product. Imports are dominated by manufactured goods and come mainly from Europe. 
 
Despite having one of the most diversified economies in the CEMAC region, Cameroon’s economic activity 
slowed in 2016. Growth has dipped to 3.7 percent by the end of 2017, compared to 4.4 percent in 2016. This 
outcome is due to slower growth in oil production (+3 percent in 2016 against 37 percent in 2015) resulting from 
the maturity of the main oil fields, and to the avian flu epidemic that has damaged the local poultry industry, 
particularly in the West, which accounts for 80 percent of production. However, continued implementation of 
the Government’s ambitious infrastructure plan and interventions to boost the agriculture and forestry sectors 
have significantly contributed to sustained strong growth in public works and construction and services. Inflation 
rose to 1.6 percent at the end of June 2016, largely based on the increased tax rate on alcohol (7.4 percent) and 
tobacco in the 2015 budget law, and the 4.9 percent increase in prices for services, restaurants, and hotels. 
 
Cameroon’s ruling party, the Cameroon People’s Democratic Movement (CPDM), has long dominated the 
country’s political landscape and currently occupies 148 of the 180 seats in the National Assembly and 81 of 
the 100 seats in the Senate, which was created in 2013.  Presidential elections are scheduled for 2018.  While 
Cameroon has enjoyed peace for many decades in spite of its highly diverse population, it now faces an 
increasingly challenging situation in its northern regions, where Boko Haram is waging a low intensity war.  This 
has resulted in high levels of insecurity and violence, involving 2,276 fatalities in 2014-2015 alone, loss of 
livestock, and risks associated with normal economic activities such as farming. Cameroon’s northern regions 
are facing a humanitarian and economic challenge: The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs 
(OCHA) estimated the number of food insecure people in the northern regions to have increased from one 

million in 2014 to 2.4 million in August 2016, including 253,000 children suffering from severe or moderate acute 
malnutrition. The year 2017 has also been marked by high tensions in the northwest and southwest Anglophone 
regions, which feel marginalized by the rest of the country. 
 
The Government of Cameroon (GoC) long-term vision, Cameroon Vision 2035, is of an emerging, democratic 
and united country in diversity. To operationalize this Vision, the Government adopted a Growth and 
Employment Strategy (DSCE –Document de Stratégie pour la Croissance et l’Emploi) in 2009 and defined specific 
objectives to be achieved by 2020, like to reduce poverty by less than 29 percent and by 10 percent in 2035. 
The GoC has further adopted the United Nations 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. It also endorsed 
the Paris Agreement under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and published 
Cameroon’s Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC) setting out its contribution to climate change mitigation 
and priorities for adaptation.  
 
The DSCE identifies inadequate infrastructure and an unfavorable business environment as the main factors 
impeding economic growth and employment creation. The agriculture sector, which currently employs about 
70 percent of the active population in Cameroon (primarily in the informal sector), is regarded as the engine for 
economic growth and job creation if it can be transformed from traditional farming to diversified and 
commercially viable farming (see below). The DSCE recognizes the need for agricultural diversification, increased 
productivity, and large-scale public investment projects in the sector. In fact, notwithstanding Cameroon’s 
abundance of natural assets and tremendous climatic and land potential, the primary sector’s contribution to 
growth is very limited, about one percentage point of GDP p.a., and is dominated by food crops grown by 
smallholder farmers.  
 
As population growth outpaces poverty reduction, the number of poor increased between 2007 and 2014 by 
12 percent to 8.1 million people, with important regional disparities. The northern regions exhibit by far the 
highest poverty rates in Cameroon, with an estimated 56 percent of the poor living in the North and Far North 
regions alone. In these two northern regions poverty and inequality levels have steadily increased over time 
relative to the rest of the country where poverty and inequality have declined. They are subject to multiple 
poverty traps, which are documented extensively in the World Bank Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD, Report 
103098-CM)4, including low agriculture productivity, increasing vulnerability to climate change, poor 
infrastructure, and limited access to health and education services.  
 
Poverty incidence is correlated with agro-ecological zones. The northern regions of Cameroon, i.e., the four 
poorest regions (the Far-North, the North, the North-West and the Adamawa), belong to three agro-ecological 
zones – the Sudano-Sahelian, the Western Highlands, and the Guinea Savannah zones which together account 
for 80 percent of all poor (see figure below). In the largely arid Sudano-Sahelian zone, comprising the Far North 
and North regions, agricultural output (millet, maize, peanuts, and cotton) depends heavily on rainfall. Animal 
production is also vulnerable to drought. In this zone 72 percent of the population or 56 percent of all poor live 
below the poverty threshold. In the Western Highlands, comprising the North-West and West regions, there is 
a cattle and coffee based system with corn, (coco) yams, potatoes, and peanuts as the main food crops. Thirty-
nine percent of the population in this agro-ecological zone (but as much as 55 percent in the North-West region) 



live below the poverty threshold representing 18 percent of all poor. Twenty percent of the poor live in the 
remaining two agro-ecological zones. 
 
 
Figure 1: Cameroon: incidence of poverty by agro-ecological zone  

Social and economic gaps between 
regions are likely to worsen as a result of 
climate change. The Sudano-Sahelian area 
(North and Extreme North) is the most 
environmentally fragile zone in Cameroon. 
It is particularly exposed to drought and 
increased temperatures with serious 
implications for the majority of inhabitants 
who depend on agriculture and livestock 
for their livelihoods. Regional climate 
change projections suggest that an overall 
decrease in the quantity of the water 
available could exacerbate water 
shortages in many rural areas of northern 
Cameroon. The quality of water will also be 
affected. An increase in temperatures and 
greater dryness are likely to result in net 

capillary movement and the salinization of both water and soils. Rice, one of Cameroon's main food imports, 
grown in the north by both traditional and modern methods, will particularly be affected, but also other food 
crops such as millet, sorghum and maize.  
 
 

Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 

Agriculture remains the backbone of Cameroon's economy, employing 70 percent of its workforce, while 
providing 42 percent of its GDP and 30 percent of its export revenue. Blessed with fertile land and regularly 
abundant rainfall in most regions, Cameroon produces a variety of agricultural commodities both for export and 
for domestic consumption. Coffee and cocoa are grown in central and southern regions, bananas in 
southwestern areas, and cotton in several northern provinces. In addition to export commodities, Cameroonian 
farmers produce numerous subsistence crops for family consumption. Principal food crops include millet, 
sorghum, peanuts, plantains, sweet potatoes, and manioc. Animal husbandry is practiced throughout the 
country and is particularly important in northern provinces. The great majority of Cameroonian farmers are 
small-holders, generally obtaining low yields from small plots of land using traditional methods: handheld hoes 
and animals for draught power. Cash crop production is also done by small holders. Food crops contribute 64 
percent to agricultural GDP, followed by livestock (13 percent), forestry (9 percent), industrial and export crops 
(8 percent), and fisheries (6 percent). About 54 percent of all households have at least one member who owns 
a crop field of about 2.4 hectares (ha) as documented in the DSCE.  
 

Yet, a series of constraints have led Cameroon’s agriculture sector to be characterized by low productivity 
and low-production subsistence farming. Declining soil fertility, limited use of fertilizer, low adoption of high 
yielding varieties and improved farming techniques are among the core reasons for constrained yields. 
Techniques and approaches to address these constraints exist, and Cameroon is blessed with a multitude of 
high quality agricultural research institutions. Nevertheless, the adoption of improved practices remains limited, 
as no functional extension system is in place, as evidenced by the size of the yield gaps. The main constraints 
are: (i) Limited access to inputs (less than 7 kg/ha of fertilizers are used; the use of improved seeds is lower than 
30 percent); (ii) Very limited mechanization: Cameroon has a ratio of 0.1 tractor/1,000 ha and a mechanization 
ratio of only 0.1; (iii) Weak institutional capacity of Producer Organizatons (POs) associated with limited 
storage/processing capacity and marketing infrastructure; (iv) Lack of storage and marketing infrastructure, 
aggravated by the isolation of agricultural production areas because of the poor quality of rural roads, which 
comprise 80 percent of the national network (only 5.2 percent or 4,200 out of 81,000 km are in good condition); 
(vi) Limited access to credit/rural finance: POs and SMAEs have limited access to credit/ rural finance because 
of their inability to present viable projects for financing, the (perceived) high cost of financing, and the absence 
of specific financial services/instruments for their segment; and (vii) The size of traditional family farm 
enterprises, of which 63 percent are too small (less than 2 ha) to profit from non intensive agriculture.  
 
Meanwhile costly and poorly targeted subsidies do not benefit the poorest, distort the market and increase 
food dependency. In an effort to mitigate the negative effects of the 2008 rise in food and fuel prices, the 
Government launched a universal subsidy program (food and fuel), which by 2011 was costing the Government 
around 2.7 percent of GDP. In 2013 more than US$100 million was spent to subsidize fish, wheat and rice alone. 
These subsidies benefit the urban middle and upper class and only very small amounts (between 2 percent and 
27 percent depending on the food item) benefit the poorest 40 percent. These persistent subsidies and the 
attempts to stabilize the market through interventions act as a disincentive for local food production and not 
only aggravate rural poverty, they also sustain the country’s dependency on food imports. In addition, as 
Cameroon is well placed to serve a sub-region that has high purchasing power and is structurally deficient in 
food, distortionary policies impact negatively on trade competitiveness. 
 
Agriculture, livestock management and agro-forestry are not only sectors in which the majority of the poor 
are engaged, they are also sectors of competitive advantage. This is based on three observations. The first is 
that Cameroon has factor endowments rich in unskilled and semi-skilled labor and natural resources. Cameroon 
has a unique bio-diversity and is the custodian of global public goods such as the rainforest in the Congo Basin. 
Only 29 percent of arable land is cultivated, and below 3 percent of irrigable land is irrigated. It thus has a 
comparative advantage in primary products, agriculture, environment and mining. The second is that high 
indirect costs on doing business are less limiting on agriculture, pastoralism and agro-industry than they are on 
more sophisticated manufacturing or high-tech, tradeable services. The third is that Cameroon does not meet 
the internal nor regional demand for cereals, meat and animal products and the agricultural trade balance is 
negative. 
 
Improving the functioning of value chains for staple food crops is particularly important for poverty reduction. 
Poor households spend a larger share of their budget on food than non-poor households do. Moreover 
households in the two poorest wealth quintiles ‘specialize’ in the cultivation of food crops like maize, millet, 


     

sorghum, yams, banana, cassava, and beans. These crops are also the staple foods for the poorest households, 
implying that improvements in production and commercialization for these crops would have the double benefit 
of increasing farm incomes and reducing food prices for the urban poor who rely on food purchases. Many rural 
poor will benefit from lower food prices as many are net food purchasers. Good results are already being 
achieved by linking farmer cooperatives producing millet and sorghum with large industrial enterprises like 
Guiness. The value chain for milk similarly offers great opportunities, as does the value chain for poultry, meat, 
eggs or chickenfeed. 
 
The presence of significant yield gaps for the most popular crops suggests scope for productivity increases. 
Assessing actual crop yields against maximum attainable levels offers important insights into the performance 
of agriculture and the potential for yield growth and expected productivity gains from agricultural investments 
and policies, including land and water resources management. The yield gap for Cameroon is substantial. The 
largest differences are for sweet potato, rice and cassava, with yield gaps of 78, 75 and 73 percent. Sorghum, 
maize and potatoes also have sizeable yield gaps of respectively 63, 67 and 64 percent.5 
 
In a context of improved yields, there is significant potential for the (domestic and regional) markets to absorb 
increased food production. Already the demand for food in Cameroon exceeds supply as evidenced by the large 
amount of food that is imported. Also the high levels of chronic malnutrition –particularly in the north of the 
country, point in the direction of an unmet demand for food. Moreover, there is a large demand for food in the 
region. Nigeria is a huge market and rice, maize and onions already find their way to markets in Nigeria, but also 
in Gabon and the Democratic Republic of Congo. But even domestically the demand for food will rise rapidly 
due to an annual population growth rate of 2.8 percent and increased urbanization. However, the formation of 
a middle class will be accompanied by the demand for food products with a high income elasticity such as rice, 
milk and milk products, eggs and meat. 
 

On land issues, a main principle is lands belong to the State. The Government of Cameroon (GoC) has initiated 
a land reform process over 10 years ago and a draft land law is currently being reviewed at the presidency 
level. While the proposed law is not yet being shared outside the Government, preliminary analyses suggest 
that it does not contain any major innovations likely to address the dysfunctions of the land sector. It does not 
seem to be based on the definition of a fundamental land policy addressing issues across the various sectors 
(agricultural, pastoral, forestry, environmental, industrial, urban). Moreover, the proposed law barely seems to 
address the issue of recognition of customary land rights but rather there seems to be a desire to strengthen 
the role of the State in land ownership and the constitution of public land reserves. It is, however, questionable 
when the new land law would be adopted given the political sensitivity of land issues in a context of upcoming 
presidential elections in 2018 and increasing tensions and fragile situations in several regions of the country. 
 
Despite the many challenges it faces, the GoC is committed to increase investment in the agriculture sector 
for poverty reduction and economic growth. A growth strategy that focuses on products cultivated by the 
poorest has a greater likelihood of successful poverty reduction, and as the majority of the poor can be found 
in the rural areas of northern Cameroon, a poverty reducing growth strategy would focus on the value chain 
development of coarse grains (rice, maize, millet, and sorghum) but also livestock, beans and cotton, which is 

     

the main cash crop grown in the Northern regions. In this context, the GOC’s agriculture strategy is expressed 
in three key national strategy and planning documents: (i) «Vision 2035» envisages agricultural growth beyond 
5 percent by 20209; the DSCE foresees significant productivity increases in agriculture and livestock farming; (ii) 
the 2005 - 2009 Rural Development Strategy and its 2013 update (“Document de Stratégie de Développement 
du Secteur Rural,” - DSDSR) commit to a modernization of rural infrastructure and agricultural production and 
sustainable management of natural resources; and (iii) Cameroon has engaged in the African Union’s 
Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Program (CAADP), and with CAADP support, Cameroon is 
currently finalizing its 2014-2020 National Agriculture Investment Program (“Plan National d’Investissement 
Agricole,” - PNIA11).  
 

Cameroon aims to articulate and implement a more robust public expenditure program to improve sector 
performance. This would necessitate an examination of the national budget level benefiting the sector, which 
currently remains below 5 percent of the total budget (compared with the CAADP target of 10 percent), as well 
as a review of the quality of expenditure planning, allocation, and implementation. To this effect, the agriculture 
sector ministries (MINADER and the Ministry of Livestock, Fisheries, and Animal Production) with support from 
the Bank are currently finalizing an agriculture sector public expenditure review to identify bottlenecks, 
inefficiencies, and deviations from the policy goals. The review, which is expected to be completed by the 
effectiveness of the proposed project, will analyze growth of agriculture on a macroeconomic scale within the 
framework of a computable general equilibrium model. This model will analyze the role of relative prices, public 
expenditure, and exchange rates on the growth in the sector. This tool will also development partners to help 
decide how to increase the financial resources dedicated to agricultural development. 
 
Within this framework, the Government of Cameroon asked support from the World Bank to improve 
irrigation services and sustain climate resilient agricultural productivity in the Benue River Valley, in the North 
of Cameroon. One of the poorest regions in the country, highly populated, and with a history of immigration 
pressure from the extreme North, the North region is within the Sudano-Sahelian Savanah agroecological zone. 
Of the five agroecological zones of Cameroon, the Sudano-Sahelian (North and Extreme North) is the one with 
the shortest rain-fed season (March to September, Figure 2 below).  
 

     

In this zone, the potential Evapotranspiration (ETP) is never fully satisfied by the amount of monthly rainfall, 
inducing a permanent deficit (figure 3 below). This translates into water stress and reduced photosynthesis and 
therefore yields. In this zone improved water storage, water harvesting, and irrigation are critical to improving 
farm production. Improved water management also enhances the ability to withstand climatic shocks and is 
commensurate with a strategy whereby the production of staples is promoted in rain-fed systems and 
production of high value cereals (e.g.  rice), horticultural cops, and industrial crops in irrigated systems. With an 
enormous untapped potential for irrigation (a 5,900 million m3 Lagdo reservoir) the Benué Valley if correctly 
developed will have a significant impact in improving the life of hundreds of thousands of people through 
economic growth, poverty reduction, social stabilization, and reduced vulnerability. 
 

Figure 3 Thornthwaite water budget: annual data at Maroua-Salack, (1970-1985) 

 
 

 

Different groups of poor people can be expected to benefit from increases in agricultural productivity in the 
Benué Valley. Poor farmers will benefit from higher incomes brought about by productivity gains while non-
farmers in rural areas benefit from spill-over gains. When increased agricultural productivity leads to increases 
in food production, lower food prices will benefit the urban poor and net food buyers in rural areas, often the 
poorest. This is not inconsequential. High transportation costs make food an imperfectly tradeable commodity. 
An important transmission mechanism from agricultural productivity to aggregate growth is through the price 
of food, as it allows sustaining lower labor costs in the rest of the economy. 
 
The proposed project may qualify for a high adaptation and mitigation co-benefits in the form of adoption of 
Climate Smart practices, reduction in irrigation energy use, reducing emissions from deforestation and forest 
degradation and agricultural management activities that improve carbon pools. Project activities proposed 
under components 1, 2 and 3 are included on the “List of activities eligible for classification as climate mitigation 
finance” in the 2016 Joint Report on Multilateral Development Banks’ Climate Finance under category 4, sub-
     

category 4.1 and 4.2. In compliance to the corporate mandate included in the Environment Strategy endorsed 
by the board in 2012, a preliminary GHG assessment using conservative boundary values has been performed 
for this project using the Ex-Ante Carbon Balance Tool (EX-ACT).  Preliminary results show that the project 
creates a total net carbon sequestration of 337,558 tCO2-eq. Watershed management provided the largest 
potential for mitigation co-benefits. An updated GHG assessment will be performed during the appraisal stage. 
 
 

Relationship to CPF 
 

The project objective is fully consistent with the Cameroon Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for 2017-2021 
to support poverty reduction and shared prosperity in Cameroon. The FY17-FY21 CPF succeeded the Cameroon 
Country Partnership Strategy (FY10-FY13, report number - 52997), which was extended until FY14 by the 
Progress and Learning Report considered by the Executive Directors in October 2012. The CPF draws on a 
comprehensive Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD, report 103098-CM), completed during FY16, which 
identified constraints to achieving the World Bank’s Twin Goals of eliminating poverty and fostering shared 
prosperity in a socially and environmentally sustainable way. Despite more than a decade of economic growth, 
national poverty incidence has remained almost unchanged.  Poverty decreased slowly as a percentage of 
population, from 40.2 percent in 2001 to 37.5 percent in 2014, and its incidence declined in urban areas from 
17.9 percent to an estimated 8.9 percent during the same period.  In rural areas, on the other hand, the 
percentage of poor increased from 52.1 percent to 56.8 percent.  Even though urban poverty declined 
significantly in relative terms, the absolute number of urban poor declined only slightly, by 300,000, because 
the urban population increased by approximately 4.1 million since 2001. In rural areas, higher poverty incidence 
resulted in 1.1 million additional poor people. Overall, the absolute number of poor in Cameroon increased by 
approximately 800,000 since 2001. 

 
The CPF has concluded that in the short-term, the largest opportunity for increasing shared prosperity and 
reducing acute poverty in Cameroon is an improvement in rural livelihoods, largely based on agriculture.  Eighty-
five percent of all poor people live in the countryside. Of these a majority live in the Sudano-Sahelian areas of 
the North and the Far North regions. Cameroon has a strong potential to increase agriculture productivity. It 
has a comparative advantage in primary products based on a relative abundance of natural resources and 
unskilled and semi-skilled labor. There is also significant unmet internal demand for cereals, meat and animal 
products. The development of labor-intensive agro-industry could offer a path towards more diversified, 
complex and higher value forms of manufacturing. Key issues include low agricultural yields, limited 
infrastructure for transportation, delivery, and storage, as well as the need for improved irrigation and water 
harvesting to improve farm production in some areas.  
 
The proposed project addresses the key issues identified in the CPF and promotes natural resources and water 
management, irrigation, and agriculture under a participatory landscapes approach, with a specific focus on 
land tenure rights security.  Irrigation (as major investment component) will be expanded from reservoirs 
already developed on the Benue River which would provide safeguard against climate change impacts and 
increased occurrence of droughts. The supporting project components are aligned to development and 
dissemination of new agricultural technologies, climate-resilient rainfed agriculture, enhanced market linkages 
for small and marginal farmers, and improved natural resource management in the upper catchment areas of 

the Benue River. Further the project will have positive impact in terms of environmental protection, and reduced 
greenhouse emissions by disseminating high efficiency irrigation systems, particularly for high value crops, 
which significantly reduce water consumption. The proposed project would also improve the sustainability and 
reliability of rainfed agriculture and small-scale irrigated agriculture in the Benue River Valley downstream of 
the Lagdo dam with better flood protection features. Thus the proposed project will be closely aligned to the 
findings and recommendations contained in the CPF. 
 
Link with other existing projects. The proposed Project builds on previous work and results of the Flood 
Emergency Project (PULCI - P143940) for component 2 and 4, and will closely coordinate with the Agriculture 
Investment and Market Development Project (PIDMA - P143417) for component 3. PULCI, following previous 
work from PACA (P112635), is working to improve irrigation and flood protection in a sustainable manner for 
the riverine population of the Far-North. Furthermore, the Bank is currently undertaking a AAA for increasing 
climate smart agriculture in Northern Cameroon. In addition, the project will collaborate with the regional 
initiative Building Climate Resilience in the Niger Basin (P161262) whose objective is to strengthen the Niger 
Basin Authority’s capacity for integrated, transboundary water resources management, being the Benue valley 
part of the Niger basin.” 
 
 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
I. The Overall Series of Project Program  

  

The Program Development Objective is to strengthen NBA’s capacity for integrated, transboundary water 
resources management and support the implementation of the Regional Climate Resilience Investment Plan 
(CRIP).   
  
The program activities focus on two broad areas:   
  
Strengthening of ABN’s capacity for transboundary, integrated water resource management (WRM) investing 
in Planning and feasibility studies, Environmental Information System and associated decision making tools, 
Operationalization of the Water Charter, and Strengthening NBA’s operational capacity, dissemination of good 
practices and project implementation support; and  
  
Support of the implementation of the CRIP focusing on transboundary activities. Among the numerous activities 
planned in the CRIP two types of activities have been selected: activities aimed at improving the performance 
and safety of large, existing transboundary infrastructure (mostly for hydropower and irrigation) in order to 
postpone the need to develop further large dams and their potential damages on riparian countries and 
measures to manage transboundary contributions to flood and sedimentation.   
Among the potential activities are the following: (i) Improving the performance and safety of key existing 
hydropower dams, such as, for example, the Kainji and Jebba dams in Nigeria, the Sotuba and Selinge dam in 
Mali, and the Lagdo hydropower dam in Cameroon, with its interconnection to Chad; (ii) Improving water-use 
efficiency of the “Office du Niger” in Mali; and (iii) Addressing Niger River sedimentation and recurrent flooding 
in the “Moyen Niger” and “Benoué tributary” through water conservation measures in Burkina Faso, Cameroun 


and Benin among others.  
 
 

 
II.  Proposed Development Objective(s)  

  

The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve irrigation services and sustain climate resilient 
agricultural productivity in the Benue River Valley located within the administrative region of North, in 
Cameroon.   
  
This would be achieved through sustainable management of the water resources generated in the Benué River 
catchment area and flowing to the reservoir impounded behind the Lagdo dam, as well as of the regulated river 
flows downstream of the dam for irrigated agriculture. In addition, flood mitigation and protection measures 
on the Benue River system downstream of the Lagdo dam will enable sustainable rain-fed agriculture in the river 
valley. Support to livelihoods in the Lagdo reservoir and improved feed availability for livestock due to increased 
production of crops would improve off farm rural incomes resulting in shared prosperity.   
  
 
Key Results (From PCN) 

 

The Key Project Indicators (KPI) will be:  

a) Area provided with new/improved irrigation and drainage services (in Has, Core Indicator); 
b) Increase in irrigated  area (hectares) under vegetables as well as cereal crops; 
c) Increase in climate resilient agricultural productivity (yield/ha) of various crops grown in the project 

areas; 
d) Number of farmers reached with agricultural assets or services.   

 
 
 
D. Concept Description 

 

1. Description 
 
Introduction/Background: The project area covers the Benue river valley located in North Cameroon 
Administrative Region, one of the poorest regions of the country. The Lagdo multipurpose dam was 
constructed on the Benue River over the years 1978-1982. At completion, the storage volume in the reservoir 
impounded behind the dam was about 7,700 million cubic meters. A hydropower plant was established with 
72 MW installed capacity and allowance was made for provision of water for irrigation of about 11,000 ha 
(about 6,000 ha along the right bank of the river and about 5,000 ha along the left bank of the river). The 
hydropower station has been operating since 1982 but the irrigation development did not take place as 
originally envisaged. About 800 ha were developed on the right bank in 1992. The reservoir storage volume 
has been impacted over the last 30 years by sedimentation and currently the storage volume available is 



 
The World Bank  
North Cameroon Agriculture and Water Smart Landscapes Project (P166072) 

 
 

  
Jan 28, 2018 Page 15 of 25  

     

estimated to be about 5900 million cubic meters based on bathymetric surveys completed in 2005. The project 
would support the sustainable management of the Benue watershed, the development of irrigated agriculture 
on both banks of the river immediately downstream of the river as well as in the river valley below, and the 
improvement of agriculture practices in the valley, including land tenure right management. In accordance with 
World Bank OP 4.37, project financing would include aspects related to safe operation of the dam and 
appurtenances. The total project cost is expected to be about US$ 200 million for a duration of seven years. 
The project will have the following components. 
 

Component 1: Watershed Management (US$ 5M IDA, US$ 10M regional IDA, US$ 15M Total) 
 

The primary goal of this component is to reverse the process of degradation of the natural resource base and 
improve the productive potential of natural resources and incomes of the rural households in the watershed 
sustaining the Lagdo reservoir while improving the operation and safety of the dam. The secondary goal is to 
maintain the quality and quantity of water of the reservoir through sustainable operation and maintenance. It 
will finance watershed interventions, consulting services, technical assistance and equipment along the 
following.  
 

Watershed management: Prior to the construction of the dam and impoundment of the reservoir at Lagdo, the 
population farmed the reservoir area after the recession of flood flows each year. After the impoundment some 
of these farmers have moved to the periphery of the reservoir and have been cultivating there. Tillage of lands 
and cultivation induces soil erosion in these areas resulting in sediment deposition in the reservoir. In addition, 
the reservoir is an important source for fisheries development. Cutting of firewood to smoke the fish, a common 
practice in Cameroon, resulted in deforestation further contributing to erosion and sedimentation in the 
reservoir. This subcomponent will introduce sustainable practices to manage the watershed. It will mobilize 
community participation in watershed development and management aimed at integrating land-water use to 
reduce soil erosion, retain moisture and produce biomass, while enhancing incomes and livelihood options. 
Non-arable land development: interventions will be aimed at (i) ecological rehabilitation of the catchment by 
carrying out soil and water conservation measures through site specific treatment plans, and (ii) narrowing the 
gap between biomass production and consumption in degraded areas. Arable land development: This 
subcomponent will improve cropping systems through promoting adoption of new agronomic practices, and 
fisheries, crop diversification, water harvesting technologies and optimal use of natural sources. Effort for 
improving land tenure security as an incentive to use these new agronomic practices and technology will be 
included in this subcomponent. Funds would be provided to secure appropriate expertise in this regard and to 
implement the measures described above as appropriate. Funds would be provided to secure appropriate 
expertise in this regard and to implement the measures described above as appropriate. This subcomponent 
can be assigned Mitigation co-benefits as financed activities will lead to net reduction in GHG emissions. 
 
Component 2: Water Infrastructure rehabilitation, development and maintenance (US$ 45M IDA, US$ 90M 
regional IDA, US$ 135M Total) 
 
The goal of this component is to rehabilitate and develop water infrastructure that will ensure dam operation 
and safety downstream of Lagdo and allow irrigated agriculture in 11,000 ha, a potentially game changer for the 
rural economy of the North of Cameroon. It will finance studies, consulting services, works and equipment along 


     

the following three subcomponents. This component may qualify for both climate change adaptation and 
mitigation co-benefits . 
 
Subcomponent 2a:  Sustainable operation and maintenance of Lagdo Dam and Reservoir Complex: The Lagdo 
Reservoir impounded behind the Lagdo Dam provides water for power generation and irrigation of lands located 
immediately below the dam on both banks of the river, and is designed to provide flood modulation as well. The 
lake is also a resource for fisheries. Funds would be provided to improve the water inflow forecasts through 
provision of updated electronic meteorological equipment in the catchment and to improve the modeling 
capabilities of Eneo, the operator of the dam. (Eneo, the Energy Company of Cameroon, is responsible for power 
generation and distribution in the country but has also been given the overall responsibility of Lagdo dam 
operation – power generation, irrigation releases, flood releases, and safety of the dam).  The dam is owned by 
the Government of Cameroon (MEADEN) with Eneo operating under an umbrella contract for energy generation 
and distribution throughout the country with other assets as well.  Currently the dam is being inspected 
periodically by a national expert panel. Funds would be provided to set up an independent dam safety panel 
with specific Terms of Reference in accordance with Dam Safety Guidelines of the World Bank. The Dam was 
built in early eighties. The international standards for design floods and flood evacuating mechanisms have 
changed substantially during the last four decades. The Hydrologic computations for the dam/reservoir complex 
would be revisited and if required the design floods would be revised on the basis of today’s standards. Hydraulic 
computations would also be revised to ensure flood handling mechanisms are adequate to meet current 
standards. Funds would be provided to carry out the required studies and analysis using reputed firms. Funds 
would be provided to make any structural modifications required to the dam and spillway arising out of these 
studies. Improved emergency preparedness plans would be prepared using up to date maps and technology for 
a flooding early warning system. This sub-component may qualify for climate change adaptation co-benefits. 
 
Subcomponent 2b: Irrigation infrastructure to utilize direct water releases available from the Reservoir 
(11,000ha) – Provision was made in the original design of the Lagdo Dam Complex to provide irrigation water 
to irrigate lands situated on both banks of the river immediately downstream of the river. Original designs 
allowed for gravity irrigation of about 6,000 ha on the right bank and about 5,000 ha on the left bank. However, 
only limited irrigation infrastructure was built along the right bank covering about 1,000 ha and no infrastructure 
including release offtake was built on the left bank. In order to utilize the water resource asset already provided 
for in the reservoir for agriculture development, funds would be provided to update the feasibility studies 
carried out earlier covering the irrigation areas on both banks and to prepare detailed designs, cost estimates 
and bid documents for the left bank infrastructure in its entirety. Notional cropping patterns will be developed 
during project preparation on the basis of soil suitability, climate factors and irrigability. Funds would be 
provided for the construction of all requisite infrastructure for the development of the 5,000 ha on the left bank 
including the offtake at the dam.  
 
On the right bank, infrastructure developed for the 1,000 ha requires rehabilitation and modernization.  Funds 
would be provided to update the feasibility studies carried out earlier for the right bank as well as detailed 
designs and cost estimates covering the total gravity command of 6,000 ha. Funds would be provided for 
rehabilitation/modernization of irrigation infrastructure covering 1,000 ha. On the left bank the GoC intends to 
have private-sector led commercial investors. Options of IFC supporting this investment are being considered 


and will be further developed at preparation. The project will propose some legal mechanism to improve land 
tenure right security for all the stakeholders involved in the irrigation schemes. Funds would be provided for 
the construction of primary irrigation infrastructure covering the remaining 5,000 ha on the right bank.  
 
Subcomponent 2c: Technical Assistance for Irrigation Management. This Subcomponent will address the 
daunting challenge of ensuring the long-term viability of the irrigation and drainage services delivered on the 
irrigation schemes.  The approach will be to implement a progressive management transfer to users’ regulated 
bodies in the form of WUAs and to autonomous professional operators, either public or private.  The approach 
will be first piloted in the right bank, which is the ‘first mover’, starting with the areas to be rehabilitated.  The 
investments under this Subcomponent would support the development of a detailed training strategy with 
associated learning materials to re-align existing WUAs and establish new ones to achieve a transformed 
institutional structure for effective water management.  
 
Component 3: Agriculture Production (US$ 40M, IDA) 
 
The fundamental needs of Cameroon to increase production and enhance productivity in the North (especially 
with irrigation and particularly of smallholders), reduce vulnerability, boost rural employment, and provide 
environmental services come in a context where agriculture is challenged by extreme weather, increased 
market risk, too-slow progress in raising rural incomes in some regions, and too-slow progress in improving 
nutrition, especially for women and infants. Agriculture is the main activity of the households (88%) of the area. 
Globally it is extensive agriculture with low production dominated by cereals (maize and sorgho), groundnut 
and cowpea as food-crops and cotton as cash-crop. Within the riverbanks, small plots of onions, tomatoes and 
other vegetables can be found. Social studies show an abundance of labor force. The markets are in Lagdo and 
Ngong, being also intermediaries that re-sell the primary products in Garoua and Ngaoundere. This component 
will focus on production, linking farmers to markets, and support services. It will finance grants, training, works, 
equipment, workshops and studies along the following sub-components. 
 
Subcomponent 3a: Climate Smart Agriculture – Climate-Smart Agriculture (CSA) is an approach for reorienting 
agricultural systems under the new realities of climate change: (i) sustainably increasing agricultural productivity 
to support equitable increases in incomes, food security and development; (ii) adapting and building resilience 
to climate change; and (iii) developing opportunities to reduce GHG emissions from agriculture compared with 
past trends. Activities will focus essentially on enhancing climate proofing while improving water and agriculture 
productivity. Examples of these activities are the dissemination of Systems of Rice Intensification (SRI) 
techniques, water saving technologies such as low pressure irrigation, mechanization services, improved soil 
management, urea-deep placement, drought-resistant and hybrid seed varieties, Integrated Nutrient 
Management (INM), Integrated Pest Management (IPM), organic farming techniques, and diversification into 
high value crops such as pulses and millets, vegetables and other horticulture crops. The project will provide 
farmers with training and technical assistance. A grant facility will finance small equipment, inputs, services 
and/or activities to: (i) promote the adoption of priority technologies, (ii) strengthen producer-based 
organizations, transfer knowledge and technologies; (iii) improve food safety and quality standards, and (iv) 
improve handling, packaging and post-harvest management at the farm level. This sub-component may qualify 
for climate change adaptation co-benefits. 

Subcomponent 3b: Agribusiness and linking farmers to market – This subcomponent will focus on value 
addition and forward linking farmers to markets under a productive alliance approach. Productive alliances are 
collaborative arrangement between groups or producer organizations (POs) and an agribusiness within 
particular value-chains for provision in a specified quantity, quality and time.  Four elements define the nature 
of a Productive Alliance (PA), namely: a group of organized producers, a buyer, an investment in production and 
marketing, and technical assistance. The project will finance outreach and promotional activities to identify POs, 
commercial partners and private financing entities to form alliances, and formulate business proposals and 
business plans. In order to become eligible for financing under the project, a business plan will have to be 
financially feasible, and support one or more productive alliances. Grants would be that portion of the alliance’s 
business plan that would be: (i) financed with proceeds from the proposed project; (ii) implemented by POs; (iii) 
governed by agreements signed between the PO and the project; and (iv) include fixed capital (e.g., plant and 
equipment, minor infrastructure), working capital and technical assistance expenditures. Examples of business 
plans to be financed could be the following: the establishment of PO managed collection, dehusking and 
processing center for rice or cereals, a sorting, grading and packaging facility for fresh vegetables, a grading and 
processing center for cashew nuts. 
 
Subcomponent 3c: Farm Service Centers – The project will finance a TA to promote a local network of private, 
retail supply and farm service businesses Farm Service Centers (FSCs) throughout the project area. An 
enterprise-based delivery of farm supplies and services, FSCs will be one-stop-shops that provide smallholder 
farmers with agricultural and veterinary inputs, services and technologies that will help production and linkages 
to markets. This highly adaptable model, has already been proven successful in several countries worldwide and 
in the region, notably in Senegal and Ethiopia. Grants will be provided and applications reviewed and ranked on 
a competitive basis to evaluate technical capacity, proposed business plan, and potential impacts.  FSCs can be 
privately owned or owned by cooperatives or other types of producers associations. In addition, this 
subcomponent will promote mechanization providing on-demand tractor services for smallholder farmers who 
are relying on expensive and often unavailable manual labor through low-cost “Smart Tractor owners” that pairs 
better off local tractors owners with labor-constrained farmers willing to pay for tractor services (tractor 
“Uberization”). A booking system will allow farmers to request, schedule and prepay for tractor services, from 
nearby Smart Tractor owners, through SMS messaging and mobile money. The subcomponent will provide 
grants, studies and consultant services. Technical inputs and knowledge sharing for this component will be 
provided (tentatively) by the Syngenta Foundation.  
 
Component 4. Implementation (US$ 10M IDA) 
 
Subcomponent 4a: Institutional Strengthening – The primary institution responsible for water resources 
development and management in the North of Cameroon is MEADEN reporting to MINEPAT. The Government 
has constituted a multi-disciplinary team to formulate this project. In order to formulate this project well and 
implement it, MEADEN staff structure has to be modified and modernized. The current organogram of MEADEN 
is being studied in detail to identify gaps and areas for strengthening in order to develop over the coming years 
a modern up to international standards MEADEN, similar to the SAED (Société Nationale d’Aménagement et 
d’Exploitation des Terres) approach in Senegal. MEADEN presently is a state-owned entreprise in charge of 

irrigation service delivery as well as land allocation to farmers and land preparation  TORs are being prepared 
and positions will be filled based on Job Descriptions acceptable to the Bank after the approval of the PCN. 
Funds would be provided to support the training required to strengthen the skills of MEADEN staff both in the 
country, and abroad.  
The operation and maintenance of the new and rehabilitated/modernized irrigation systems would be carried 
out jointly by MEADEN and the Water Users Associations to be set up under the project. MEADEN would be 
responsible for the operation and maintenance of the primary canals and drains while the WUAs would be 
responsible for the secondary and tertiary systems. For irrigation services to be effectively delivered, WUAs will 
have to rely on a participatory design and the cooperation of all member farms, which entails paying irrigation 
and WUA membership fees, signing water contracts with WUAs and attending WUA planning meetings.  
 As several farms are headed by women, a study will be carried out during preparation to find the social 
implications for female irrigators to honor their farm’s financial obligations to WUAs, attend WUA planning 
meetings, and sign an annual contract for water delivery with the WUAs. The study will provide analyses and 
recommendations to improve land tenure rights as well for both female and male irrigators. In addition, the 
concept of WUAs is new to Cameroon. Funds would be provided to train the WUAs as well as to develop 
appropriate legislation for the creation of the WUAs (this is already on-going with the PULCI project).  
Government of Cameroon authorities undertook a study visit in January 2018 to visit the SAED  operations in 
the Senegal river’s delta, where such WUAs are operating efficiently. Following the same model, funds would 
be provided to develop similar arrangements between MEADEN and the WUAs. Irrigation infrastructure would 
be provided with required instrumentation to enable MEADEN to monitor the performance of the WUAs on a 
regular basis to ensure irrigation water is supplied to the farmers on a timely basis and agreed quantities are 
delivered. 
Subcomponent 4b: Project Implementation and M&E support – This subcomponent will set up a Project 

Management Unit (PMU) to assist MEADEN in the day-to-day implementation of the project. Proposed structure 

of the PMU with job descriptions will be developed and agreed with MEADEN before appraisal.  The core PMU 

will be set up in MEADEN soon after the PCN approval. Funds would be provided to meet salaries and allowances 

of PMU staff and to cover operation expenses. The GoC expressed interest in requesting a Project Advance. 

These funds will be used among other things to make progress in setting up and strengthen the PMU 

accordingly. In addition, baseline information will be collected before the start of the management of the 

watershed and before the starting of the production activities in the area to allow an impact evaluation at the 

end of the project life. 

 
 
    

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
The project is located in the Sudano-sahelian zone of Cameroon, it is presumably the driest zone of the country. Rainfall 

in this zone is highly variable with its onset very erratic and last for about 5 months (May-September). This zone is mostly 
affected by land degradation. Land disputes and agropastoral conflicts are of a major concern because there are no 


defined routes for cattle migration, and thus animals. Land degradation is due to pressures such as deforestation due to 
expanding agriculture, fuel wood harvesting, bush fires, semi-intensive and extensive cattle rearing and farming. National 
Park belongs to this zone and it is home to elephants, black rhinos, cheetahs, hyenas, population of hippos and other 
wildlife. Porous borders and poor park protection make Faro extremely vulnerable to poachers, livestock, and habitat 
destruction. 
 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
Cameroon has a comprehensive Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) law and regulations as well as 

occupational safety regulations. The framework law No 96/12 of 5 August 1996 on environmental management highlights 
in its article 17 the principle of environmental impact assessment. Two forms of public participation-stakeholder 
engagement are required for ESIA by law: public consultations during the assessment stage and public hearings during the 
review stage. Legal and administrative appeals are possible at all stages and for all decisions relating to ESIA. A relatively 
mature central (Ministry of environment, interministerial Committee on the Environment, CIE decentralized 
(municipalities, Divisional Committees for technical and administrative supervision of ESMP and ministry of environment 
decentralized units) ESIA authorities are in place but they are understaffed. The CIE gives an opinion on the quality of 
reports prior to their approval by the Minister. The decentralized units don’t have adequate financial provision. They lack 
adequate equipment for fieldwork, and Senior staff lack personal vehicles. In 2017, the ESIA sub-directorate and 
Environmental & Social Management Plan (ESMP) sub-directorate in the Ministry of Environment consist of six full-time 
staff and 2-4-part time staff, of whom many are knowledgeable about the national ESIA system and the World Bank 
Safeguards for which they received a substantial training. MAEDEN is not familiar with the World Bank operational 
policies as this is its first Bank financed projects. It has an institutionalized GIS unit but does not have the necessary 
technical knowledge and expertise in environmental and social issues in the region and as such has the technical capacity 
to identify and flag any safeguards related concerns to the implementation of the safeguards instruments for national-
level investments, should any arise during project implementation. To bridge this gap, the project will set up a Project 
Management Unit (PMU) to assist MEADEN in the day-to-day implementation of the project. At the early stage of 
preparation, two safeguards specialists (Social and Environmental) will be hired for the PMU. They will oversee the 
preparation of the safeguard documents, liaise with local consultants, and coordinate the organization of the necessary 
consultations with key concerned stakeholders and the in-country disclosure of the safeguards instruments. 
 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 
FNU Owono Owono, Social Specialist 
Cyrille Valence Ngouana Kengne, Environmental Specialist 

 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The Project is proposed to be classified as Category 
OP/BP 4.01 “A” due to potential downstream impacts 
and negative potential environmental and social 
impacts associated with development and/or 
rehabilitation of irrigation infrastructure. A basin level 
ESIA report that will include Cumulative Impact 
Assessment (CIA) will be prepared during 
implementation. However, a specific ESIA for the 


n irrigation scheme (11,000 ha) will  be prepared 
and disclosed before the decision meeting. The 
specific ESIA will include a Gender Based Violence 
assessment and occupational safety. These ESIAs will 
inform the notification to Nigeria Government by the 
GoC; ToRs of these studies are consulted upon in-
country and cleared by the Bank. For the subprojects 
to be implemented under the small grants of 
component 3, which are not identified before 
appraisal, an ESMF will be prepared and it shall 
describe the roadmap for preparing sites specific. 
Finally, a GRM will be prepared, consulted upon and 
disclosed before project effectiveness.  
  

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No  

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

Although the project is not expected to intervene in 
any critically important natural habitats, downstream 
impacts, development of irrigation infrastructure may 
affect areas requiring specific management 
considerations such wildlife migration corridors. In 
addition, this policy is triggered due to the presence of 
three cynegetic zones (Campement des éléphants, 97 
920 ha; ZIC 8 : Mayo Boulel, 35 040 ha ; ZIC 8 bis: 
Louga, 8 320 ha) in the project area of influence. 
Specific guidance will be provided to avoid significant 
conversion or degradation of rivers and the EA will 
identify and delineate areas of critical habitat and 
ensured application of the mitigation hierarchy in 
accordance with this policy for all project works. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes 

The project does not support commercial forest 
exploitation. However, the Massif Forest of Ouro-
Doukoudje may be affected due to the presence in the 
project area of influence. Mitigation measures are 
thus proposed as part of the ESMP. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

Major interventions are planned to enhance 
agricultural productivity and this may lead to an 
increased use of pesticides and other agrochemicals. 
An Integrated Pest Management Plan (IPMP) will be 
prepared, consulted upon and disclosed before 
appraisal. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 

Previous studies in the Region revealed local 
significant heritage places such as graveyards. 
Mitigation measures will be incorporated into the 
disclosed ESMP including provisions for a detailed 
Cultural Heritage Management Plan. A comprehensive 

chance find procedure will be prepared as part of the 
ESIA reports, embedded in the overall ESMPs, to that 
end. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 

There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project areas, 
as defined by OP/BP 4.10. 
 
  

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

The client will prepare a Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF) for all the entire project. The project 
through its component 2 is likely to involve land 
acquisition / involuntary resettlement and/or possible 
restrictions of access to resources and livelihoods.  
There are 3 clear distinct irrigation areas: (i) right bank 
rehabilitation (1,000 ha), (ii) right bank new area 
(5,000 ha) and (iii) left bank new area (5,000 ha). 
Therefore:  
(i)           a RAP will be prepared for the rehabilitation 
area prior to appraisal.  
(ii)          for the rest eventual new irrigation areas, the 
resettlement process is at an advanced stage. The list 
of people affected by the project (PAPs) already exists, 
PAPs have received pecuniary compensation, a PAP 
resettlement site is being developed and a Declaration 
of Public Utility (DUP) exists for the eventual new 
perimeters. The Government of Cameroon elaborated 
the list of PAPs in 2010, a total of 1442 household 
affected were recorded for 3093 properties (fields and 
boxes) as provided in the decree n°2010/3445/PM of 
December 15, 2010 relating to the compensation of 
the victims by incorporating to the private domain of 
the state lands downstream from the Lagdo 
perimeters. All this documentation is being reviewed 
and updated by a social audit that the client will 
present to the World Bank team for review and 
clearance prior to appraisal. In case, there will be new 
households settled after 2010 (after the DUP), PAPs 
will be compensated for those new assets (except 
land) prior to resettlement. In case there will be new 
constructions (houses, community infrastructures, 
etc.) different from those already compensated in 
2010 in the DUP area, PAPs will also be compensated 
for these assets prior to resettlement. It is highly 
expected social audit’s recommendations will propose 
specific measures related to assistance for 
resettlement (transportation costs coverage and 
livelihoods assistance) to all PAPs to be resettled. 



Upon approval, the final RAPs of these two new zones 
(right bank new area (5,000 ha) and (iii) left bank new 
area (5,000 ha)) in Lagdo will be prepared during 
project implementation and cleared by the WB prior 
to any works commence. 
In addition, a GRM document for the project will be 
prepared and disclosed before project effectiveness. 
Finally, all subprojects under component 3 will be 
submitted to an environmental and social screening 
during the implementation stage and based on results 
this would lead to Environmental and Social Impacts 
assessments (ESIAs) or Environmental and Social 
Impacts Notice (ESIN). 
  

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 Yes 

 
This policy is triggered because funds would be 
provided to make any structural modifications 
required to the dam and spillway arising out of these 
studies. In addition, the project infrastructure 
investments, including irrigation, will rely on the 
performance of this existing dam. An independent 
Panel of Experts with Dam Safety and Environmental 
and Social expertise will be hired by MEADEN in 
accordance with Dam Safety Guidelines of the World 
Bank. The panel will comprise five specialists 
(geotechnical, Hydrological, hydro-electro-mechanics, 
environmental and social). Improved Emergency 
Response Preparedness plans (ERP) would be 
prepared using up to date maps and technology.  (i) 
The draft TORs for the ERP will be ready before 
appraisal; (ii) GoC will notify Nigeria and (iii) the Bank 
will review existing dam auscultation reports, and any 
other dam safety documents including the accessible 
sections of the OM before the decision meeting. ENEO 
established in 2010 a structured CSR including 
Hygiene, safety and Environment Central Unit. It aslo 
has an environmental and social policy (ESP #42 Rev 2 
09/14) and has developed Safety and Environmental 
and social performances for its operations. However, 
the ERP and ESIA processes will assess the technical 
capacity of ENEO at Lagdo Dam and Regional levels to 
identify, flag and manage any safety, environmental 
and social related concerns to the Lagdo dam 
operation – power generation, irrigation releases, 
flood releases, and safety of the dam. 


Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

Yes 

This policy is triggered because the Benue river  flows 
over the Nigeria–Cameroon border, and the 
Government of Cameroon (GoC) will notify Nigeria 
before negotiations. There is a memorandum of 
understanding on the need to maintain water in the 
Benue Basin was signed between Cameroon and 
Nigeria in 2016. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No There are no disputed areas in the project areas. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Mar 28, 2018 
 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
In the previous stages PID/ISDS, the documents to be presented will be: 1) Resettlement Policy Framework for the whole 

project and 2) Resettlement Action Plan and list of PAPs of the area  to be rehabilitated(1000ha). The other RAPs will be 
prepared under project implementation.   
GRM document for the project need to be prepared and disclosed before project approval.  
 Consultants in charge of safeguard should be on board prior project appraisal, for insuring consultation and validation of 

safeguards instruments. 
 
 
