














































World Bank Document


 

Combined Project Information Documents /  
Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (PID/ISDS) 

 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 23-Feb-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSA24200 
 
 
 
 
 
 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

India P166745 National Rural Economic 
Transformation Project 
(Additional Financing to 
the National Rural 
Livelihoods Project ) 

P104164 

Parent Project Name Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date 

National Rural Livelihoods Project SOUTH ASIA 23-Feb-2018 20-Apr-2018 

Practice Area (Lead) Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency 

Agriculture Investment Project 
Financing 

DEA National Rural Livelihood 
Mission 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) Parent 
 
The project development objective is to establish efficient and effective institutional platforms of theruralpoor that 
enable them to increase household income through sustainable livelihood enhancements and improved access to 
financial andselected public services. 
 

 
Components 

Component 1. Institutional and Human Capacity Development 
Component 2.  State Livelihood Support 
Component 3.  Innovation and Partnership Support 
Component 4.  Project Implementation Support: 

 

Financing (in US$, millions) 
 
FIN_SUMM_PUB_TBL 
SUMMARY 
 

Total Project Cost 500.00 

Total Financing 500.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 

 
 
DETAILS-NewFin3 

Total World Bank Group Financing 250.00 

     World Bank Lending 250.00 
 



Total Government Contribution 250.00 

 

Environmental Assessment Category 

Partial Assessment (B) 
  
OPS_TABLE_SAFEGUARDS_DEFERRED 
 

  
Decision 

 

B. Introduction and Context 
 

Country Context 
 
1. India continues to be one of the world’s fastest growing large economies and has experienced a 

substantial decline in poverty. The Indian economy registered gradually rising growth from 5.5 
percent in 2012-13 to 8 percent in 2015-16. This was supported by robust private consumption, a 
resilient services sector, and some revival in industrial activity. Since the 2000s, India has made 
remarkable progress in reducing absolute poverty. Between 2004 and 2011, poverty declined sharply 
from 38.9 to 21.6 percent at the international poverty line ($1.90 PPP/day). With over a 100 million 
people escaping poverty, the pace of poverty reduction in India exceeded that of the developing world 
as well as that of Middle Income Countries (MICs) in this period. High economic growth, rapid rise in 
rural wages, greater rural-urban integration and increase in non-farm activity, especially construction, 
were the key drivers of poverty reduction. Since 2011, robust economic growth may have aided 
further reduction in poverty. However, trends in the construction sector and rural wages suggest that 
the pace of poverty reduction may have moderated. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 

 
2. Agriculture continues to be important for rural Indians and there are 68 percent of the rural 

population dependent on it for livelihoods and about 49 percent of the labor force works in the 
agricultural sector but paradoxically it contributes only around 10 to 11 % to National gross domestic 
product (GDP). The Government of India’s new agenda of “Doubling Farmer’s Income”, which not only 
emphasizes upon productivity enhancement, intensification and diversification but also on agri-
processing, Agri-logistics, resource use efficiency, agriculture marketing and sustainability could 
possibly transform the Indian Agriculture. The opportunities in the agribusiness sector and local level 
primary value addition are growing with the changing consumer basket and increasing urbanization 
and demand for diversified and nutritious foods. Small producers have the opportunity to directly 
participate in this value chain if they are organized and provided with appropriate infrastructure, 
technology and information support. 



3. Non-farm economy, in recent times, has emerged as an important livelihoods source in rural 
India. A shift away from agriculture toward nonagricultural wage employment and reduced reliance 
on agricultural income has become evident. Non- farm activities contributed 65% rural income in 
2016-17 (Chand, 2017). Diversification into non-farm interventions (both self-employment and 
wage employment) marks the shift from low-productivity jobs to high productivity and it is an 
important pathway for poverty reduction and employment generation. Non-farm rural jobs are 
predominantly in manufacturing, services (including public administration, education, health, 
community, other personal or household services) and trade and transport (including wholesale 
and retail trade, hotels, restaurants, transport, storage and warehousing and communication).  
 

4. The Ministry of Rural Development, Government of India launched the National Rural Livelihood 
Mission in 2011 as its flagship program to enhance rural livelihoods and reduce rural poverty in the 
country. The world bank supported National Rural Livelihoods Project provided intensive support 
to the launch and scale up of the NRLM over the last 7 years. The National Rural Livelihood Mission 
(NRLM) has now been scaled up to o all 29 states of the country.  The intensive approach 
successfully demonstrated by NRLP in around 500 blocks is now being implemented across nearly 
2500 blocks across 29 states through the NRLM program. A total of 45 million rural women are 
currently part of Self-Help Groups and they have cumulatively leveraged nearly 25 billion USD of 
financing from commercial banks since the launch of the NRLM program in 2011.  

 
5. Ministry of Rural Development has subsequently launched two critical programs that aim to 

leverage the National Rural Livelihood Mission and scale up efforts to enhance agriculture incomes 
and on-farm incomes for the rural poor namely the Mahila Kisan Sashiktikaran Program (MKSP ) 
and the Startup Village Entrepreneurship program . The Mahila Kisan Sashaktikaran Pariyojana 
(MKSP) is launched as a sub-component of the Deendayal Antodaya Yojana-NRLM to improve the 
status of women in agriculture, who constitute 33% of the total agricultural labour force, and 
enhance economic opportunities available to them. The program exclusively focus upon small and 
marginal farmers, sustainable agriculture practices and vulnerability reduction. Community 
Resource Persons (CRP) are identified as best practitioners (locally named as Pashu Sakhi, Krishi 
Sakhi etc.) and are instrumental in promoting farm sector livelihoods (agriculture, animal 
husbandry and NTFP), through community to community sharing and learning – as a “proof of 
concept”. The ‘Start-up Village Entrepreneurship Programme’ (SVEP) launched by Government of 
India in 2014-15 aims to promote and support existing rural entrepreneurs by providing bouquet 
of business development services including entrepreneur capacity building, seed & growth capital 
along with handholding support for business development. Currently, the programme is being 
implemented in 47 Blocks across 14 states with support of 5 technical support agencies. Results 
from SVEP and other world bank supported programs to promote SMEs will inform the scaling up 
of enterprise development initiatives to be taken up under NRETP ( NRLP-AF) 

 
6. The Government of India has recently launched Mission Antyodaya to improve the well-being of 10 

million households from 5000 economic clusters (covering around 50,000 Gram Panchayats) by 
addressing multiple dimensions of poverty through convergent actions under wide range of existing 
development schemes and following a saturation approach. The movement of Panchayats away 
from poverty will be tracked through a mobile based application i.e. “Panchayat Darpan” using a 
set of indicators having differential weightage scheme. In a list of 24 indicators, 30% weightage has 
been provided on GP level Infrastructure development; another 30% on Human Development 
outcomes and rest 40% weightage has been given to livelihoods promotion. Mission Antyodaya 
further accelerates economic transformation process building on the NRLP outcomes 



 
7. One of the central lessons learned during the last seven years of implementation of NRLM has been 

that while investments in building institutional platforms of rural poor households is a critical 
foundation for sustainable poverty reduction, it is not sufficient unless these institutions are 
engaged in higher level production systems and have better market interface. Integration of core 
social mobilization and leveraging of financial resources have been adequately demonstrated. The 
next level challenge is to leverage social capital into economic opportunities and crowd in private 
investments; and engage with more commercial partnerships to integrate rural households into 
higher-level income opportunities. Therefore, one of the main thrusts of the NRETP (NRLP- AF) will 
be to develop value chains using end-to-end investments in selected commodities and facilitating 
access to finance to support enterprises in agriculture and allied sectors, thus contributing to 
productivity and profitability. The proposed project will build on existing investments and 
institutional capital to bring further income increase and inclusive growth in rural areas.   

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
Original PDO  
 

1. To establish efficient and effective institutional platforms of the rural poor that enable them to increase 
household income through sustainable livelihood enhancements and improved access to financial 
andselected public services. 

 
Current PDO  
 

2. To establish efficient and effective institutional platforms of the rural poor that enable them to increase 
household income through sustainable livelihood enhancements and improved access to financial 
andselected public services. 

 
Key Results:  

3. The PDO indicators for the additional financing are:  

• 60% of SHGs# federated into Village Organizations.  

• 40% of SHG members* report reduction in high cost debt 

• 50% of SHG members report 30% increase in asset. 

• 20 % increase in income of households that have accessed technical and financial services1 
 
D. Project Description  
        
Project Beneficiary:  

1. The proposed NRETP (NRLP AF) intends to support 100 districts from the existing 13 NRLP States 
towards high end technical assistance and investment support towards deepening and scaling up of 
the economic transformative initiatives that were introduced as part of dedicated funds under NRLP. 

 
1 Define technical and financial services that will be provided/considered  



Additionally, it would support to the Mission Antyodaya program that intends to further accelerate 
economic transformation in selected areas, building on the NRLP outcomes.  

 
2. While MoRD through their own increased budget allocation would continue to saturate and bring 

remaining rural poor into the fold of women SHGs,  the specific investments under additional financing  
will work with targeted households that are already part of SHGs and would focus on strengthening 
of existing network (higher level federations i.e. VO and above) of community organizations of women 
having potential to be mobilized into producer groups and producer organizations and transit to next 
generation economic initiatives like high value agriculture including market access, enterprise and 
skills development etc. MoRD will directly reach out to over a million households through these 
initiatives. The project will support around 50000 individual enterprises; and around 100,000 youth 
will be trained and placed with in formal job markets using the resources available under DDUJKY and 
other skilling & entrepreneurship program of the Government of India. 

Project Component 

3. Component 1: Institutional and Human Capacity Development 
This component will continue to finance technical assistance consultancies, human resources, 
training and development of training material/approaches. Financing under this component will 
endeavor to place skilled professionals to work with NRLM at the national, state and district levels. 
As mentioned in the section on rationale, the TA will be focused on helping the National and State 
teams transition to a new phase of the NRLM that involves greater focus on economic initiatives such 
as high value agriculture and value chain development, enterprise and skills development. Given that 
experiences from these initiatives are relatively nascent, the additional financing support will 
emphasize sourcing of technical support from agencies (Public, Private and NGOs) with the requisite 
technical expertise in rural enterprise development.  National, regional and international experiences 
and skills may be sourced for this objective.   

 
4. In addition, a new sub component focused on providing technical assistance for Mission Antyodaya 

will be introduced. Specifically, as part of this sub component:  
 

a. TA will be provided for Mission Antyodaya at the national, state and district level.    
b. Support under this sub-component will be for 13 NRLP states and nearly 100 districts in those 13 

states. The 100 districts with the highest intensity of the NRLM implementation will be selected 
for the project. These districts will be the districts with the highest amount of mobilization and 
capitalization (both the catalytic capital from NRLM and the finance from commercial banks) and 
the possibilities of having transformative economic potential. Additionally, and as far as possible, 
the project will strive for coordinated technical or investment support with the blocks and 
panchayats selected under Mission Antyodaya and those under NRLP.   
  

5. Component 2. State Livelihood Support  
The activities to be financed under this Component will remain essentially the same but with further 
refinements to focus on the next generation institutional and investment support as described above 
in the rationale. Sub component 2.1 (State Rural Livelihoods Support) will remain the same but 
district level support will be focused on 100 districts that will be selected for project coverage under 
this NRETP (NRLP AF). Under sub component 2.2 (Institution Building and Capacity Building) financing 
will be oriented towards the mobilization of the producer groups and producer organizations. Under 
sub component 2.3 (Community Investment Support) the focus would be on financing community 



organizations mainly towards enterprise and skill development initiatives. The quantum of financing 
under sub component 2.4 (Special Programs) will be significantly scaled up and most of this financing 
will be focused on scaling up initiatives like high value agriculture including market access, enterprise 
and skills development etc.  that were introduced under the dedicated funds under this sub-
component during the project restructuring undertaken in January 2016. 

 
6. Component 3. Innovation and Partnership Support: There is no change in the activities to be financed 

under this component. The component will continue to finance pilot initiatives and technical 
assistance consultancies that support innovative livelihoods activities in agriculture, livestock, youth 
employment, among others, for rural poor households.  Learning and documentation of experiences 
from these initiatives will be emphasized. 

 
7. Component 4. Project Implementation Support: There is no change in the activities to be financed under this 

component. This component will continue to strengthen the National Mission Management Unit for effective 
project management at the national level, finance the Monitoring and Evaluation activities and ICT initiatives.  
Learning and documentation of experiences under the economic transformative investments and institutional 
strengthening programs will be emphasized. 

 
E. Implementation 

 
1. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements:  The MoRD through National Rural Livelihoods Promotion 

Society (NRLPS)/National Mission Management Unit (NMMU) will be responsible for overall technical 
assistance, guideline formulations, National level partnerships, coordination, monitoring, supervision and 
release of funds to thirteen participating States. At the State level, the project will be implemented by the 
State Rural Livelihoods Missions (SRLMs) set up under NRLM as per the agreed framework detailed out in 
Project Implementation Plan (PIP). Each participating States will carry out a diagnostic study of pro-poor 
agriculture value chain and potential of cluster based enterprise development based on which they will 
prepare their Annual Action Plan (AAP) or multi-year State Perspective and Implementation Plan (SPIP). 

 
 
 
 . 

   
F. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 

The additional finance would cover about 100 districts in the current 13 states. The states are spread across 
different agro climatic zones with varied natural and geographical features ranging from wet and humid to 
dry and deciduous as well as include some coastal areas. All the states have previous experience in 
implementing NRETP (NRLP AF) supported livelihood activities in varied agro climatic zones. There is also 
prior experience of working in different geographies and with environmental and social setting of the rural 
areas, which are primarily agrarian. The expected locations influenced by additional financing are likely to 
be similar to those covered under the ongoing NRETP (NRLP AF), and therefore, poses no significant risks of 
potential cumulative and localized significant adverse environmental impacts. Livelihood activities would 
continue to centre around the sustainable use of natural resources, where these are available at project 
locations. NRETP (NRLP AF) NRETP (NRLP AF) The additional financing will be spread across 100 Districts in 
13 high poverty states. The states and project areas were identified based on their high incidence of rural 
poverty and socioeconomic backwardness as well as higher concentration of marginalized population 
groups such as scheduled tribes (indigenous peoples) and scheduled castes. States like Bihar and UP have 
substantial population of Scheduled Castes (SC) and Other Backward Castes (OBC) who are more vulnerable 
and marginalized compared to general population. On the other hand, states like Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh, 
Odisha and parts of Rajasthan, MP, and Maharashtra are dominated by tribals. Within these geographies, 
the NRETP (NRLP AF) will prioritize districts/blocks with higher levels of social mobilsation and financial 
capitalization, which will overlap with pockets of higher tribal and marginalized populations.  

 

 
 

SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 
SAFEGUARD_TBL 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes  

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes  

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes  

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes  

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No  



Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 Yes  

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 No  

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No  

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No  

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No  

 
 

KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 OPS_SAFEGUARD_SUMMARY_TBL 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project proposes to scale-up the existing livelihoods promoted through dedicated special funds. The livelihoods 
include varies use of natural resources and linked processes, such as, Agriculture, Dairy, Small ruminants, Fisheries, 
Non-Timber Forest Produce (lac culture, hill broom, tamarind etc.). The project will also support Non-farm enterprises 
including small processing units and value addition. The project has been consciously promoting special initiatives for 
environmental sustainability of livelihoods such as community managed sustainable agriculture, fodder cultivation and 
stall feeding of milch animals and goats etc. However as the project proposes to scale-up the same interventions 
through additional financing, improper management of any of these livelihood activities and unawareness among the 
SHG members may result in negative impacts, such as: (i) indiscriminate use of chemical inputs in agriculture leading 
to contamination of soil, water and surroundings; (ii) degradation of common grazing lands due to increased pressure 
of grazing and improper pasture management practices; (iii) decreased regeneration capacity of NTFP species in forest 
areas; and (iv) over use of water resources, particularly ground water etc. Most of these activities are small-scale 
interventions, spread over wide areas in several villages. Further, any potential adverse environmental impact and risk 
from these activities can be mitigated, contained and even reversed. Therefore, no potential large scale, significant 
and/or irreversible impacts are envisaged. In addition to Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01), the safeguard policies 
on Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), Forests (OP/BP 4.36) and Pest Management (OP/BP 4.09) have been triggered 
recognizing the importance of integrating sustainable management practices in forest-dependent and agriculture-
based livelihoods. The safeguard policy on Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) has not been triggered as the project funds are 
unlikely to be used for community-level civil works such as small dams, embankments, etc. (Project funds would not 
support activities involving excavations, etc., that may impact physical cultural resources. Therefore, OP/BP 4.11 is not 
triggered. The key social safeguard issues and impacts associated with the NRETP (NRLP AF) are: ensuring project 
interventions and implementation processes are aligned with the socio-cultural context in tribal areas and respond to 
their development priorities; inclusion of traditionally marginalized social groups such as scheduled castes, migrant 
labor, and other households identified under socioeconomic census survey (SECC); promoting strategies that reduce 
gender gaps and advance women’s economic empowerment; and mitigation of any localized, adverse impacts from 
small scale infrastructure that would be coming up in project areas. No adverse long terms impact on tribals and 
indigenous population are expected from this project. OP 4.10 is triggered as states and districts having substantial 
tribal population are included in Project areas. OP. 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement) is not triggered as involuntary land 
acquisition is not envisaged. Small scale community level, infrastructure such as citizen service centres, training 
centres and custom hiring centres are expected to come up largely in pre-existing facilities. However, some of these 
may require small land parcels that are expected to be leased or donated by Panchayats or local government 


departments or individual donors with proper MoUs and due diligence. Given the size of small scale infrastructure, a 
large portion of which is expected to be rented/leased with no or minimal construction, the risks of labor influx are 
not going to be significant. Project interventions are not expected to cause any adverse livelihood impacts and 
restriction of access to land and resources as a result to land taking by the project.  
  
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
Describe any potential indirect and/or long-term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: No 
severe or long-term impacts are expected due to proposed livelihood activities, mainly implemented through the 
women Self Help Groups. Agriculture, livestock, fisheries, non-timber forest produce and non-farm sectors are the 
predominant sectors in which rural poor households are involved and individual and household level investments in 
these sectors generally do not result in potential indirect and/or long-term impacts in the project areas. Further, as 
the experience of existing Bank projects has shown, the nature of activities/works taken up by the SHGs and 
federations under the ongoing project is likely to remain so during the additional financing. No adverse long term 
social impacts are envisaged from the AF interventions and investments. The potential long-term positive impacts are 
expected to be: social, economic and financial empowerment of the poorest households, especially of Scheduled 
Castes and Scheduled Tribes, and women. The poorest and most excluded households would have greater access to, 
security and sustainability of livelihood resources, and enhanced household incomes. The project villages would most 
likely see greater cohesion amongst the poorest social groups, greater capacity and assertiveness among the poor in 
claiming their rights and entitlements, and better participation in local government structures and processes. Gender 
relations could improve as collective action gives women self-esteem and confidence to voice their needs and 
priorities in both the public and private spheres. Overall, the social dynamics and rural institutional environment are 
expected to be much more supportive of the livelihood needs of the poorest households.  
 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. 
Since this is an additional financing aiming to scale up successful interventions, no analysis of alternatives was 
undertaken. However, based on implementation experience during the ongoing project, the safeguards strategy will 
continue to mainstream the environmental best practices into the Package of Practices (PoP) of the livelihood 
activities (e.g.: stall feeding in goatary, non-chemical pest control measures in agriculture). In addition, Promotion of 
alternate green solutions like use of renewable energy, Community Managed Sustainable Agriculture are planned 
during the additional financing. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower 
capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The measures taken during the ongoing project for addressing safeguard policies issues will continue throughout the 
implementation of the additional financing. EMF compliance with the mandatory regulatory requirements list would 
apply to all the clusters in the project and appropriate capacity building support for compliance with regulations and 
awareness building on better environmental practices in livelihood activities would be provided. Efforts will be made 
to develop and apply a sustainability index for funding potential activities through the dedicated fund. The index will 
be based on the principles of resource efficiency, minimal adverse impacts and post-investment support continuation 
of the livelihood. An assessment of the EMF in select states was undertaken during the ongoing project .There is mixed 
experience in terms of borrower’s capacity to plan and implement the measures required for addressing safeguards 
issues. Most of the states (Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, Tamil Nadu and Rajasthan) have had previous experience 
in implementing livelihood projects and other states have also implemented EMF and SMF under NRETP (NRLP AF). 
States that have implemented World Bank-supported livelihood projects as well as NRETP (NRLP AF) have a higher 



 

level of readiness and competency to implement the EMF. Some of these states (e.g. Bihar) have implemented the 
green solutions at a considerable scale. The above findings from these assessments are being incorporated into the 
updated EMF To streamline these capacities, it has been agreed with the Ministry of Rural Development that the 
National Mission Management Unit (NMMU) will have the Livelihood Specialists as the anchor person for EMF to 
support and monitor the implementation in the participating states. Further, the State Mission Management Unit 
(SMMU) of the State Rural Livelihoods Missions (SRLM) would have Environmental Focal Points at the state level 
(Livelihood Managers), district levels and among the block level project facilitating teams to streamline the EMF 
requirements at all levels. The Technical Partners on different value chains will be taken on board for integration of 
the best practices and regulatory requirements into the Package of Practices and Capacity Building programs. The 
NRETP (NRLP AF) social management framework (SMF), including OP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples (Scheduled Tribes), 
will continue to apply to the AF. The SMF comprises strategies for targeting and inclusion of scheduled castes and 
schedule tribe groups/areas, consultation and participation, gender & women’s economic empowerment, citizen’s 
engagement, grievance redress and safeguard screening/mitigation planning for community projects involving 
land/infrastructure. The SMF addresses the issues and needs of tribal people and incorporates the key requirements 
of O.P. 4.10 especially with respect to free, prior and informed consultations and broad community support. The SMF 
includes specific provisions for informed consultations, participation and inclusion of the SC/ST and other excluded 
households, with a special focus on tribal people. The SMF also provides for institutional arrangements and capacity 
building activities of project staff, community institutions and partner agencies. Community projects involving 
productive infrastructure and land donation would follow consultative, transparent and voluntary procedures. MORD 
and the 13 SRLMs have implemented the SMF and its constituent strategies with varying levels of intensity and quality 
in the ongoing NRLP satisfactorily. Under the NRETP (NRLP AF), the capacities and performance of the social 
development staff and partners would be strengthened through a range of measures. NRETP (NRLP AF) aims to 
intensify interventions, financing & technical support for high value agriculture, rural value chains, skills and 
enterprises, producer organizations, innovative livelihood approaches, digital financial inclusion as well as productive 
infrastructure for post-production processes and value addition. Technical Assistance will also be provided to 
convergence (Mission Antoyodaya). Partnerships with technical resource agencies from private and non-profit and 
public sector will be strengthened. Increased investments in high value agriculture, enterprises, productive 
infrastructure and financing of producer organizations would need more explicit criteria for inclusive beneficiary 
targeting and benefit sharing as well as social safeguard screening to minimize elite capture and social exclusion. 
Dedicated HR and Capacity building program on socially inclusive and gendered value chains/enterprises, social 
safeguard screening and risk mitigation and social sustainability will be supported to ensure satisfactory social 
performance of project counterparts. To respond to these focus areas in the AF, MORD has updated the existing SMF 
especially with respect to social inclusion protocols, social safeguard screening mechanisms and inclusive beneficiary 
targeting and benefit sharing criteria for financing of producer organizations and productive infrastructure. Additional 
measures on staffing, capacity building, technical assistance, knowledge programs as well as citizen engagement and 
grievance redressal would be implemented. The results framework will continue to track and report on gender, 
inclusion, citizen’s engagement and women’s economic empowerment. NRETP (NRLP AF) will significantly advance the 
gender mainstreaming and women’s economic empowerment agenda through strategies/specific interventions on 
women led producer organizations and enterprises, Start-up Village Entrepreneurship Program (SVEP) and upgrading 
of skills in selected self-employment occupations for women SHG members and youth. Interventions on digital 
payments, financial inclusion/literacy, Business Correspondents (BC) and enterprise financing will lead to significant 
financial empowerment of rural women. Support to Mission Antoyodaya will strengthen women’s advocacy and 
agency in delivery of social safety net and entitlement services for the rural poor. Nutrition sensitive agriculture and 
interventions on food handling and hygiene will benefit the women disproportionately. The results framework will 
continue to track and report on gender, inclusion, citizen’s engagement and women’s economic empowerment. Client 
has also been organizing regular reviews and lesson learning events on the gender, social inclusion and vulnerability 



reduction dimensions of the SMF. A discrete stocktaking review was undertaken at Midterm stage of the project. 
Overall the project has been performing satisfactorily on mobilsation, inclusion and financial and economic 
empowerment of women and marginalization communities particularly tribals and SC households. SMF 
implementation and reporting would need to improve further on safeguards, GRM and benefit sharing dimensions of 
productive infrastructure and economic clusters. As described above, these are the aspects that are being updated in 
the SMF  
 
 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, 
with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders in the proposed project include the SHG members, groups and federations of rural poor in the 
project districts, technical partners, relevant government departments etc. The existing safeguards arrangements will 
continue to apply. If required, the existing EMF document will be updated based on a short field assessment and 
would be disclosed in English and the local language (Hindi) on the websites of the NMMU, State Departments of Rural 
Development and on the Bank’s InfoShop. The most important stakeholders of the project are the rural poor and their 
organizations, including SHGs, federations, producer organizations and government and non-governmental 
organizations working on rural poverty reduction and livelihoods advancement. The MoRD has held stakeholder 
consultations to inform the design and implementation of the project and address the limitations of existing rural 
development programs that target the poorest and most excluded groups. The following field consultations were also 
held.  
 
 
 