













































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Myanmar National Food and Agriculture Systems Project (P164448) 

 
 

  
June 20, 2018 Page 1 of 16  

 

 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 14-Jun-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSC23462 

 
The World Bank  
Myanmar National Food and Agriculture Systems Project (P164448) 

 
 

  
June 20, 2018 Page 2 of 16  

 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Myanmar P164448  Myanmar National 
Food and Agriculture 
Systems Project 
(P164448) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC Oct 01, 2019 Apr 22, 2019 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing The Republic of the Union of 
Myanmar 

Ministry of Agriuclture, 
Livestock, and Irrigation 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to, “increase productivity of select high value commodities, enhance 
agricultural diversification and competitiveness, and diet diversity in selected agro-ecological zones of Myanmar”.  This 
will be achieved through the provision of key public goods and services that will facilitate and further enhance the 
engagement of (and with) the private sector. 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 100.00 

Total Financing 100.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 100.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 100.00 

          IDA Credit 100.00 

   
 
Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B - Partial Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
 

1. The political reforms of 2011-2015 in Myanmar and economic liberalization coincided with strong economic 
growth and macroeconomic stability, followed by a slowing of economic activity since 2015.  After reaching 8.5% annual 
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth in 2014/2015, economic activity began to slow down with growth reaching 7% and 
5.9% in 2015/2016 and 2016/2017, respectively, due to (i) a challenging macroeconomic environment characterized by 
high inflation, and a reduction in government spending; (ii) a decline in commodity exports (gas and agriculture); (iii) 
constrained private and public investments; (iv) contraction of the agriculture sector due to the extreme weather shocks 
of the 2015/2016 El Niño–Southern Oscillation (ENSO) event; and (v) a decline in industrial output.  Expectations of strong 
exports, industry and services activities contributed to a positive growth forecast for 2017/2018 at 6.4%, counterweighing 
a slow agricultural recovery1. The agriculture sector continues to be vulnerable to supply shocks and demand fluctuations 
from major trading partners (e.g., China and India) affecting the sector’s potential to significantly and sustainably 
contribute to growth and poverty reduction of Myanmar. 
 
2. Despite a decline in poverty in Myanmar over the last decade, poverty remains high and inequality is increasing.  
Nearly 70% of Myanmar’s population lives in rural areas where poverty is prevalent.  The poverty incidence fell from 48.2% 
in 2004/2005 to 42.4% in 2009/2010 to 32% in 2015, making it today one of the poorest countries in Southeast Asia 2.  The 
decline in poverty was rapid in urban than rural areas with the urban-rural gap being substantial in 2015, i.e., 38.8% of the 
rural population are found to be poor relative to 14.5% of the urban population.  In addition, one in ten households fail to 
meet their basic food needs.  In addition to the 32% of the population identified as poor, 14% are categorized as near-
poor making them vulnerable to shocks from crop failures, natural disasters, and health setbacks.  A sizable proportion of 
Myanmar’s poor rely on agricultural activities as smallholder farmers or casual employment with low income 
diversification and high reliance on paddy production.  Female headed households are not identified as being poorer than 
male headed households irrespective of level of profit making, the poor have limited dietary diversity, and have weaker 
productive and financial asset base.  Although living standards of the poorest in Myanmar improved, greater 
improvements were noted among richer households contributing to inequality increase.  There were no significant 
changes in the welfare of the poorest 10% of the population relative to the obvious welfare changes of the average 
household.  
 

        e variations in poverty incidence across the agro-ecological zones (AEZ)3 of Myanmar.  The poverty 
headcount rate in the Hills & Mountains AEZ is 40%, in the Dry AEZ the rate is 32.1%, in the Delta AEZ, the rate is 26.2%, 
and in the Coastal AEZ, the poverty headcount rate is 43.9%.  The Hills and Mountains and the Coastal AEZs have a lower 
share of the population living in them, yet they comprise 47% of the food poor, and 38% are in the bottom quintile of the 
expenditure distribution.  These two AEZs combined have 40% poverty rate and one in six will struggle to meet their basic 
food needs.  Nearly 65% of the poor reside in the densely populated Dry AEZ and Delta AEZ.  Even though the Delta AEZ 
has the lowest poverty head count rate, the number of poor in this area is significant due to its high population density 
(5.5 million poor which also includes Yangon) relative to the 2 million poor in the Coastal AEZ4. 

 
4. Myanmar’s human development faces numerous challenges.  While net primary education enrollment is high 
(93%), there is substantial student drop-out in enrollment at the secondary level resulting in net total enrollment of 55% 
in 2015.  Gender enrollment gaps have been narrowing over time.  On health outcomes, 41% of children under the age of 
five are stunted, 30% are underweight, and 11% are wasted.  In addition, 40% of the population between ages 5 and above 
are overweight or obese, and close to 1 in 7 infants are born with a low birth weight.  It was estimated that on an annual 
basis, Myanmar loses nearly US$400 million in GDP to Vitamin and mineral deficiencies.5  Overall, Myanmar’s Human 
Development Index (HDI) is 0.556, well below the average for East Asia and Pacific (0.720), ranking it 145 out of 188 
countries.  As a result, Myanmar is on a slow path towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) health 
outcomes. 
 

Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
5. Despite Myanmar experiencing rapid structural change over the last decade, it is still an “agri-based” economy.  
Agriculture’s share of GDP declined from 52% to 32% during 2000-2015, while manufacturing share increased from 11% 
to 28%.  Nevertheless, the sector shares of employment remained constant over the last decade.  Agriculture continues 
to be the largest employer with agriculture’s share of jobs registering nearly 52%.  More than one-third of workers (nearly 
8.5 million jobs) identified farming as their primary source of employment through work in own family farms, and 16% 
(equivalent to 2.6 million people) are agricultural laborers.  The employment share in services and industry were 36% and 
12%, respectively.  The formal modern sector in Myanmar contributes to only 11% of the jobs.  
 
6. Agricultural growth relative to other sectors is low and volatile in Myanmar.  In 2011/12, agriculture growth was 
-0.7%, 1.7% in 2012/13, 3.6% in 2013/14, 2.8% in 2014/15, 3.4% in 2015/2016, and 4.3% in 2016/17 respectively.  The 
average sector growth during the period 2011/2012-2016/2017 was 15%, which is substantially lower than the 55% and 
59% growth seen in the industry and services sectors, respectively6.  Hence, contribution of the agriculture sector to the 
growth of Myanmar’s economy over time has been small.   

 
7. Low agricultural growth in Myanmar is attributed to low productivity7 with varying degrees across the agro-
ecological zones.  Paddy land and labor productivities in Myanmar are among the lowest in Asia.  In 2013/2014, the 
average land productivity for paddy was 2.7 tons/ha in Myanmar, 3.9 tons/ha in the Philippines, 2.8 tons/ha in Thailand, 
6.7 tons/ha in China, and 5.8 tons/ha in Vietnam.  Within Myanmar, paddy productivity and profitability are the lowest in 
Ayeyarwady and Sagaing States, and highest in Shan State.  Average paddy yield was 2.7 tons/ha (dry paddy equivalent) 

                                            
3 There are four agro-ecological AEZs in Myanmar: (i) Hills and Mountainous AEZ (covers Chin, Kachin, Kayah, Kayin, and Shan States); (ii) Coastal AEZ 
(covering Rakhine and Taninthayi); (iii) Delta AEZ (covering Ayeyarwady, Bago, Mon, and Yangon); and (iv) Dry AEZ (covering Mandalay, Magwe, Nay 
Pyi Taw, and Sagaing).  
4 “An Analysis of Poverty in Myanmar: Part 02-Poverty Profile”. December 2017. World Bank. 
5 “Nutrition at a Glance”. World Bank. 
6 “Myanmar Agriculture Public Expenditure Review”. 2017. World Bank. 
7 Productivity estimates are derived from the “Myanmar: Analysis of Farm Production Economics”.  

or 3.5 tons/ha (wet paddy equivalent).  This puts Myanmar on the lower end of rice production relative to rice producing 
Asian countries.  Labor productivity for paddy is also low.  For example, in monsoon season, the labor return from one 
day’s work yields 23Kgs of paddy, relative to 62Kgs in Cambodia, 429Kgs in Vietnam, and 547Kgs in Thailand.  Although 
Myanmar’s labor productivity is higher during the dry season, it is still considered very low in comparison with other 
countries.  Paddy production in Myanmar is still labor intensive (farmers in Ayeyarwady spend more than 100 days/ha of 
monsoon paddy relative to 52 says in Cambodia, 22 days in Vietnam, and 11 days in Vietnam).  
 
8. Productivity of non-paddy crops are also low but generally higher than paddy productivity also with varying 
degrees across the agro-ecological areas.  Myanmar’s farming systems are diversified and produce a range of non-paddy 
crops with higher productivity than paddy.  The labor productivity (value of crop per day of labor) of black gram, green 
gram, chickpeas, groundnuts, sesame, and sunflower seeds ranged from $9.29/day to $15.92/day, while for both monsoon 
and dry season paddy labor productivity was $4.75/day and $9.20/day, respectively.  The productivity of non-rice crops 
also varied across the agro-ecological zones depending on the production potential of each area.  For example, the 
productivity of green gram in Ayeyarwady (Delta AEZ) was $13.39/day while in Sagaing (Dry AEZ) productivity was at 
$17.69/day.  
 
9. Low earnings for both paddy and non-paddy production, although earnings from the latter are higher, reflects 
on the low agricultural competitiveness of Myanmar relative to its regional neighbors.  In 2013/2014, the net margin 
($/ha) from producing monsoon paddy averaged $114/ha (ranging from $88/ha in Ayeyarwady to $337/ha in Shan State 
due to proximity to China, resulting in higher farm-gate prices and lower input prices relative to other areas in Myanmar).  
Although the profitability of the dry season paddy was higher at $246/ha, this is still considered low relative to the earning 
of farmers in neighboring Asian countries.  In addition, male-headed households accrue higher profits than female headed 
households for many crops (for few crops the gender differentials in earning is insignificant).  On the other hand, the 
profitability of non-paddy crops (black gram, green gram, chickpeas, groundnuts, sesame, and sunflower seeds) is higher 
and ranged from $141/ha to $581/ha.  The earning differentials between paddy and non-paddy is due to the higher 
production cost of the former crop.  The low earnings raise alarming concerns about the potential of agriculture at its 
current state and a primary focus on paddy alone to achieve agricultural growth and uplift rural households from poverty.   
 
10. The inferior performance of Myanmar’s agriculture sector is first a legacy of past agricultural policies and 
investments centered on rice to attain primarily food security.  This was conducted through input intensification mainly 
for rice.  Public agricultural investments neglected undertaking “Resilient”, “Inclusive”, Competitive”, and 
“Environmentally” (RICE) sustainable investments that takes advantage of Myanmar’s diverse farming systems.   
 
11. The undersupply of quality agricultural public goods plays a significant role in Myanmar’s low agricultural 
productivity and weak support for diversification.  According to the 2017 World Bank Agricultural Public Expenditure 
Review8, the most underfunded function in the sector is agricultural research while there is compelling evidence of high 
returns to investments in core public goods related to technology generation and diffusion, market linkages and 
infrastructure, especially when augmented by policy and institutional reforms.  Undersupply of public goods: first, 
agricultural extension services are limited in number and have weak capacity to provide outreach to farmers.  The ratio of 
extension staff and farm family is very low (nearly 1 to 585)9.  Given the 3,819,1925 acres covering major crops, this means 
on average 1 extension worker covers 5,081 acres.  In addition, extension outreach was geared mostly towards paddy; 
second, farm management is poor.  Farmers have weak knowledge about the appropriate application of production 
technologies such as fertilizers, seed varieties, and pesticides; and third, agricultural research is underfunded, fragmented, 
and suffers from weak human resource capacity.   

                                            
8 World Bank 2017. Myanmar Agricultural Public Expenditure Review. Increasing the impact of public spending on agricultural growth. WB/LIFT.  
9 “Current Status of Agricultural Extension in Myanmar”. 2017. MOALI 



 
12. Private sector engagement in agricultural value chains is low. In addition to the constraints mentioned above, 
several other factors are adversely affecting the private sector’s full participation in agricultural value chain development.  
Infrastructure challenges such as post-harvest storage and cold chain facilities, and testing laboratories restricts them 
from contributing to the downstream side of the value chain.  Poor accreditation of services geared towards the regional 
and global export markets is also a constraint. 
 
13. Climate variability and extreme weather events have also significantly impacted performance of the agricultural 
sector.  In 2012, Myanmar was ranked the country most at-risk to climate shocks within Asia-Pacific, due to the wide range 
of hazards including, floods, cyclones, earthquakes, landslides, and tsunamis.  In addition, it ranks 2 out of 187 countries 
in the Global Climate Risk Index.  However, there are regions and states that are more vulnerable than others.  In 2015-
2016 ENSO event and the accompanying drought in the Central Dry Area decreased production and export of traditional 
crops such as sesame, beans and pulses.  Overall the drought from El Niño affected more than 15 million people in the 
Delta and Dry areas affecting livelihood, food access, decreased productivity and farmer income. 
 
14. Improving nutritional status of Myanmar’s population remains a significant challenge.  Rice continues to be the 
key staple crop consumed in Myanmar.  However, rice lacks nutritional value in terms of the minerals and vitamins typically 
found in a meal with dietary diversity.  A 195-gram serving of long grain cooked brown rice provides 11% of the 
recommended daily calorie value and provides no vitamin A, C or D intake, has only 5% of recommended daily iron value, 
2% of daily calcium and no vitamin B12 value10.  In addition, sufficient knowledge on dietary intake is lacking, especially 
among the rural population.  One way to tackle this challenge is to promote agricultural diversification and increase the 
knowledge of rural households about dietary diversity and importance for improved health outcomes, and productivity. 
 
15. Despite the significant sector challenges, Myanmar’s agriculture has ample potential for growth and rural 
poverty reduction.  Myanmar has abundant natural resources, youthful workforce, and diverse faming systems.  Myanmar 
is the world’s second largest exporter of beans and pulses (after Canada) and the largest exporter in the ASEAN region.  
For example, in 2014, the export earnings from beans and pulses was $835 million (exported to India, Thailand, 
Bangladesh, China, and UAE) which is higher than the export value of rice valued at $630 million during the same year.  In 
addition, urbanization and income growth amongst segments of the population are translating into changing dietary 
preferences and food spending patterns.  All these developments are expected to accelerate and expose enormous 
opportunities for farmers, and private sector across all segments of the value chain, and overall sectoral growth. 
 
16. Leveraging agriculture for sector growth and rural poverty reduction is a top government priority, and this is 
recognized in the 2017 Agriculture Development Strategy (ADS).  The ADS accept limitations of past approaches to ensure 
food security for promoting agricultural transformation and rural poverty reduction.  The strategy identified three priority 
areas requiring support: (i) Governance; (ii) Productivity; and (iii) Market Linkages and Competitiveness.   
 
17. The 2018 Myanmar Sustainable Development Plan (MSDP) recognized the agriculture sector challenges and 
proposed action plans.  The MSDP recognizes the high dependence of Myanmar’s economy on agriculture and its 
significance for poverty reduction, as noted under “Pillar 2: Prosperity & Partnership”. Under this Pillar, “Strategy 3.1: 
Creating a diverse and productive economy with rural development and agriculture as the foundation” stresses on 
addressing Myanmar’s low productivity to support value chain development, increase private sector participation and 
eventually boost agricultural competitiveness.  
 

                                            
10 “Crop Diversification and Nutrition”. 2014. Partners.  



Relationship to CPF 
 
18. The proposed project is aligned to the 2015-2017 World Bank Country Partnership Framework (CPF) and the 
two years extended partnership framework. Rural poverty reduction is outlined as a focus area with several objectives, 
including increased productivity in farming and agribusiness, and addressing critical infrastructure and service gaps for the 
rural poor.  The extended CPF continues its support for rural poverty reduction through rural growth. 
 
19. Furthermore, the proposed project is aligned with the identified pathways for poverty reduction as outlined in 
the Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD).  The SCD identified improvements in agricultural productivity as necessary for 
poverty reduction and as an opportunity for short term gains.  The SCD recognizes the immense potential for 
improvement in Myanmar by addressing yield gaps, diversification, and value-addition. 

 
20. The proposed project is also aligned with the World Bank’s Twin Goals.  The proposed project activities are 
intended to increase the income of the rural poor and generate shared prosperity by building the capacity and knowledge 
of farmers to undertake enhanced farming practices that increases the resilience of their diversified farming systems as 
well as increase their agricultural competitiveness.   

 
21. This proposed project concept has benefited substantially from ongoing and completed analytical and 
investment activities.  The experience from the ongoing Agriculture Development Support Project (ADSP) in project 
management and implementation (fiduciary aspects), and monitoring and evaluation (M&E) arrangements will be used 
extensively for the proposed NAFSP.  Successful instruments of the ADSP such as Project Working committees (PWCs) 
that meets bi-monthly to improve collaboration and monitoring across participating departments and divisions and 
implementation through existing MOALI decentralized bodies such as Agricultural Consultative Committees (ACCs) at 
district and village track levels will be applied to this project.   

 
22. Insights on the status of Myanmar’s agriculture sector performance were drawn from two recent completely 

analytical activities.  The first study is “Myanmar: Analysis of Farm Production Economics”. This was funded by LIFT 

(Livelihood and Food Security Trust Fund) to address existing agriculture data constraints using a 2013/2014 Myanmar 

Agricultural Survey of 1,728 farm households in four regions/states across three Agro-ecological Zones (AEZs) in 

Myanmar: (i) Ayeyarwady and Bago (Delta AEZ), Sagaing (Dry AEZ), and Shan (Hills and Mountains AEZ).  The study did 

not cover the Coastal AEZ.  The survey covers crops produced during two main seasons i.e., monsoon and dry seasons. A 

follow-up survey is currently ongoing to assess changes in farming practices since the 2013/2014 survey.  The second 

study this concept note benefited from is the “Myanmar Agriculture Public Expenditure Review”.  Several insights on the 

status of Myanmar’s food system were highlighted during the recent “Workshop on Modern Food Systems in Myanmar” 

(February 2018).  The workshop discussions noted the ongoing challenges and opportunities for the development of 

Myanmar’s food systems, and these were captured in this concept note.   

 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
 
23. The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to, “increase productivity of select high value commodities, enhance 
agricultural diversification and competitiveness, and diet diversity in selected agro-ecological zones of Myanmar”.  This 
will be achieved through the provision of key public goods and services that will facilitate and further enhance the 
engagement of (and with) the private sector. 
 


Key Results (From PCN) 
 
24. The key results of the proposed project are: 

 
i. Increase in production volume and yields of selected commodities 

ii. Change in agricultural land productivity of targeted farmers supported by the project (percentage) 
iii. Increase in sales of farm produce as a share of production among targeted farmers supported by the project 

(percentage, disaggregated by gender male- and FHHs) 
iv. Increase in efficiency of processing facilities supported by the project (percentage) 
v. Increase in linkages between producers and buyers 

vi. Increase in dietary composition of targeted households (percentage, disaggregated by gender) 
 

 
25. The key project beneficiaries are: (i) smallholders in four agro-ecological zones (Dry, Delta, Hills and Mountains, 

and Coastal); (ii) extension workers; (iii) agricultural researchers; (iv) buyers for value chain development; (v) MOALI 

departments and units participating in the project. 

 
 
D. Concept Description 

 
1. Once the priority agro-ecological zones and high value / potential commodities and value chains are determined, 
the proposed project will adopt the “Theory of Change” and “Maximizing Finance for Development (MFD) for Agricultural 
Value-Chains” frameworks for the identification and selection of project activities within each component and 
subcomponents.   
 
2. The proposed project areas and interventions will be made with close consideration provided to the following: (i) 
promotion of improved nutritional outcomes; (ii) inclusiveness of minorities and other marginalized groups; and iii) 
implementation in conflict and non-conflict areas.   

 
3. The proposed project is envisaged to have the following three components (with interventions tailored to the 
specific context of the selected commodities / value chains): 

 
4. Component 1: Development of Value Chains (US$ 20 million) – The objective of this component will be to support 
mechanisms by which public sector services are improved in collaboration with the private sector where opportunities 
exist to promote the development of selected agricultural commodity value chains, innovative modalities to better link 
farmers to markets, and improvements in the enabling environment for agro-enterprise.  This component will explore 
opportunities (including pilots) for private sector engagement on capacity strengthening to add value for key commodities, 
provision of equipment and infrastructure using out-grower schemes, and matching funds for farmer organizations and 
commodity specific associations.  This component will also include improvements in the enabling regulatory / legal 
environment for agro-enterprise (support to farm inputs and products) including food quality and food safety.  The 
infrastructure investment needs based on business plans and cost sharing mechanisms may include, (i) product collection 
centers, (ii) drying facilities, (iii) post-harvest storage structures, (iv) micro irrigation; (v) improved information technology 
service facilities, (vi) cold chain facilities, and (vii) facilitating a conducive policy environment, among others. 

 
5. Component 2: On-farm Agricultural Investment Support (US$74 million) – This component has two sub-
components: (i) On-farm Infrastructure Investments (US$54 million) and (ii) Agricultural Support Services (US$20 million).  



The objective of the first sub-component is to improve the production volume of selected commodities and crop 
diversification by providing support for infrastructure investments in priority farming systems.  The activities may include 
upgrading/constructing of critical infrastructure for increased productivity, crop diversification and/or competitiveness 
such as in existing and new research/ experimental stations, seed multiplication farms, laboratory buildings and 
equipment, border post quarantine and testing service centers; irrigation systems on-farm/ downstream; and 
decentralized training centers / information centers.  Capacity building related to optimizing infrastructure investments 
and operation and maintenance will also be included.  This sub-component will prioritize infrastructure investments in 
high-value commodities and areas where the level of engagement of the private sector is low or nonexistent.  The 
objective of the second sub-component is to ensure and enhance the provision of key public agricultural services such as 
agricultural research and innovation, extension services, institutional development and farmer training.  This component 
will provide capacity building and policy support to the national agriculture research and extension system with the aim 
to improve service delivery in the agriculture sector.  This component will also focus on services related to on-farm 
management practices which will include the adoption of climate smart production practices, crop diversification, and 
integration of nutritional and gender-sensitive activities. 
 
6. Component 3: Project Management (US$ 6 million) - The objective of this component is to ensure effective 
project management.  This component will support carrying out of the day-to-day project management activities, including 
project administration and implementation, procurement, financial management and audit, social and environmental 
safeguards (including peace and inclusion filters, marginalized/vulnerable population groups, gender etc.), and monitoring 
and evaluation (M&E). 
 
    

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
At concept stage, location for project interventions have not been determined.  
 
Myanmar is characterized by its central lowlands along the Ayeyarwady river, which flows from north to south through 

the Central Burma Basin and ends in a wide delta. These areas are its well-established agricultural production areas, 
which the current Agricultural Development Support Project (ADSP) (P147626) supports. The Central Valley Region is 
bordered by steep, rugged highlands in the north, the Arakan Mountains in the west and the Shan Hills, Karen Hills and 
Tenasserim Hills to the east. As a result, physical characteristics vary significantly across the country, as well as ethnic, 
social and cultural characteristics. 
 
Once project locations are identified, further information will be provided. 

 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
Under the current ADSP project, the project management has hired one environmental and one social safeguards 

consultant, who have the skills and experience to manage the environmental and social risks of the project. The project 
management unit overall has been gaining knowledge and experience on World Bank safeguards policies and their 
implementation. However, without the consultants, the project management unit does not have dedicated staff who has 
backgrounds and experience in environmental and social risk management. As a part of the project’s environmental and 
social management framework (ESMF) preparation, a capacity need assessment will be conducted to identify areas for 
improvement and measures to increased capacities. 




 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 
Martin Fodor, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 
Vivianti Rambe, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 
Zeynep Durnev Darendeliler, Social Safeguards Specialist 

 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The proposed project will focus on activities that (i) 
improve farm management and value chain 
development which include upgrading testing 
laboratories and upgrading/building post-harvest 
storage and cold chain facilities; (ii) strengthening 
capacities of agricultural extension officers and 
researchers; (iii) improve farm management which 
includes support of seed multiplication and 
procurement and distribution of seeds and seedlings 
as well as supply of biological control; and (iv) ensure 
effective project management. 
 
Under Component 1, the proposed project will fund 
specific investments on infrastructure for improved 
farm management such as (i) research, ((ii) seed farms, 
(iii) national service laboratories, (iv) off-site and on-
site service and testing laboratories and centers, (v) 
border post quarantine and testing centers, and (vi) 
training centers and other high priority infrastructure 
to support improved farm management in selected 
agro-ecological zones.  
 
The project will also fund infrastructure for value chain 
development such as (i) product collection centers, (ii) 
drying facilities, (iii) post-harvest storage structures, 
(iv) improved information technology service facilities 
and (v) cold chain facilities intended to support 
downstream agricultural value chain development. 
 
Main potential environmental impacts are related to 
construction activities, maintenance and operation of 
the post-harvest storage and cold chain facilities (e.g. 
hygiene, reliable and adequate water and power 
supply). In regards to seed farms, waste management 
on the use of polythene plant bags for 
seedlings/nursery will be the main issue.  

Main potential social risks are related to land 
acquisition, contested land ownership and land 
conflict, and potential exclusion of ethnic minorities, 
landless farmers, women-headed households or other 
vulnerable groups. Any social assessment conducted 
during preparation or implementation will cover these 
social risks.  
 
Project target provinces and states are yet to be 
determined; therefore an Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared. The 
Framework will include the following: 
 
1. Guidance for screening of subprojects, 
ensuring that relevant safeguard policies (natural 
habitats, forests, and projects in disputed areas) are 
adequately addressed.  
 
2. Assessment of environmental and social 
impacts of various activities related to Component 1 
and Component 3. Component 2 of the proposed 
project will focus on capacity building. The component 
will incorporate technical inputs from the safeguards 
specialists into TA’s Terms of References to ensure 
safeguards aspects are mainstreamed. 
 
3. Details on the type, level and depth of 
environmental and social impact assessments 
(SAs/EMPs/SOPs/ECoPs) required for each of the 
investments/activities. 
 
4. Environment Health and Safety (EHS) 
Guidelines for reference as a generic environmental 
management plan, particularly for construction 
related activities. 
 
5. Environmental and Social Management Plan 
(ESMP), particularly on the following issues: 
construction related activities, maintenance and 
operation (hygiene, reliable and adequate water and 
power supply) issues related to the post-harvest 
storage and cold chain facilities (Component 1), and 
waste management on the use of polythene plant 
bags for seedlings/nursery as well as implication of the 


supply of biological control as part of the integrated 
pest and disease management (Component 3). 
 
Overall, the proposed project is expected to deliver a 
number of environmental benefits, such as improved 
soil and water management practices considering the 
agro-ecological context of the project intervention 
area. The project will also contribute to an integrated 
pest and disease management through the adoption 
of sustainable practices by supplying biological 
controls; the use of natural enemies to manage 
population of pest organisms.  
 
Considering the type of investments and activities, 
scale of the proposed project, as well as the nature 
and magnitude of its potential impacts, an 
environmental Category B operation is proposed. 
 

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No  

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

The policy is triggered to ensure that any affected 
natural habitats are adequately protected, because 
some of the project sites may take place near parks or 
protected areas. The proposed project’s ESMF will 
screen out and exclude any subprojects that would 
involve clearing of new land for agriculture. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No 
The proposed project’s ESMF will screen out and 
exclude any clearing or effects on forest lands. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The policy is triggered as a precaution, because 
pesticide use is a necessity in agricultural activities in 
the region. The ESMF will promote Integrated Pest 
Management as standard practice. A screening 
mechanism will be included in the ESMF to determine 
if there are any sub-projects or activities with 
significant pest management issues; if so, then a 
separate Pest Management Plan will be required to 
ensure that these materials are well managed for 
those subprojects and/or activities. 
 
Under Component 3, the proposed project will fund an 
integrated pest and disease management which will 
support the adoption of sustainable pest and disease 
management practices by supplying biological 
controls; the use of natural enemies to manage 
population of pest organisms. The ESMF will provide 

more detailed information on the application of this 
method. 
 
 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 

This policy is triggered to ensure that any “chance 
finds” or other physical cultural resources during 
excavation or other earth-moving activities are 
adequately protected. Project’s ESMF will consist of a 
chance find procedure which requires that should any 
areas of potential cultural importance or artefacts be 
identified, works should stop and the government 
related agencies (to be identified at appraisal stage) 
should be contacted. No work should continue until 
approval has been sought from these agencies. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 Yes 

Myanmar is one of the most ethnically diverse 
countries in Asia, and the project will likely fund sub-
projects where ethnic minorities are present. Both 
under Component 1 (rehabilitation and construction 
of infrastructure) and Component 2 (formation of 
farmer groups), there may be risks that ethnic 
minorities do not have equal and culturally 
appropriate access to benefits, and may not be 
adequately consulted in decision making. 
 
Since project sites are not known at this time, MoA 
will prepare an IPPF as part of the ESMF in order to 
ensure that in sub-projects are screened for ethnic 
minorities, and sub-project areas where ethnic 
minorities are present, MoE will conduct a social 
assessment and ensure that free, prior and informed 
consultations are held to reach broad community 
support. If target project locations are identified 
during preparation, a social assessment will be 
prepared by appraisal, and free, prior and informed 
consultations will be held. If locations and location-
specific activities are not identified during preparation 
and this is left to project implementation, the social 
assessments under the current ADSP project will be 
combined and updated as an assessment of social risks 
in the agriculture sector, specific to the new project 
activities. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

Rehabilitation and construction of test laboratories, 
post-harvest storage units and cold chain facilities are 
not expected to result in significant land acquisition 
impacts, especially since siting should be flexible for 

construction of new facilities. The impacts should be 
moderate and manageable. 
 
Since siting of sub-projects is not known at this time, 
MoA will prepare a RPF in order to ensure that sub-
projects are screened for land acquisition, and 
appropriate plans are prepared in cases where land 
acquisition is necessary. The RPF will also include 
protocols for voluntary land donation. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 TBD 

The project will not finance construction of new dams, 
however, it is yet to be determined during project 
preparation whether it will include repairs / 
maintenance / rehabilitation  of existing dams in which 
case the dam safety measures would be applied. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

TBD 

Project target provinces and states are yet to be 
determined. ESMF will cover the provision of OP/BP 
7.50 should project preparation discussions determine 
that the locations or activities subject to the policy are 
within the international waterway. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
The proposed project’s ESMF will screen out and 
exclude any projects in disputed areas. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Oct 10, 2018 
 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
MoALI- Department of Agriculture will prepare an ESMF, including a pest management plan, IPPF and RPF, before 

appraisal. If target project locations are identified during preparation, a social assessment will be prepared by appraisal, 
and free, prior and informed consultations will be held. If locations and location-specific activities are not identified 
during preparation and this is left to project implementation, the social assessments under the current ADSP project will 
be combined and updated as an assessment of social risks in the agriculture sector, specific to the new project activities. 
These will be disclosed and consulted on after being cleared by the Bank. These instruments will be informed by the 
documentation and implementation experience of the on-going Agriculture Development Support Project (ADSP). 
 
 
