







































COMBINED PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENTS / INTEGRATED 
SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET (PID/ISDS)  

CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: PIDISDSC15495

Date Prepared/Updated: 28-Dec-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION

  A.  Basic Project Data

Country: India Project ID: P155617
Parent 
Project ID 
(if any):

Project Name: Assam Agribusiness and Rural Transformation Project (P155617)
Region: SOUTH ASIA
Estimated 
Appraisal Date:

05-Sep-2016 Estimated 
Board Date:

22-Dec-2016

Practice Area
(Lead):

Agriculture Lending 
Instrument:

Investment Project Financing

Sector(s): Agricultural extension and research (20%), Agro-industry, marketing, and trade 
(30%), Crops (20%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (20%), 
Animal production (10%)

Theme(s): Rural markets (40%), Rural services and infrastructure (40%), Trade facilitation 
and market access (20%)

Borrower(s): Republic of India
Implementing 
Agency:

Assam Rural Infrastructure and Agricultural Services (ARIAS) Society

Financing (in USD Million)
Financing Source Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT 50.00
International Development Association (IDA) 200.00
Total Project Cost 250.00

Environmental 
Category:

B - Partial Assessment

Concept 
Review 
Decision:

Track II - The review did authorize the preparation to continue

Is this a 
Repeater 
project?

No

Other Decision 



(as needed):

B. Introduction and Context

Country Context
1.      During the last decade, India’s economy expanded at an average annual rate of 7.6 percent, 
and projections are for the high growth rate to continue.  Despite the headline figures on growth, 
concerns linger about the pattern of growth. India continues to face daunting challenges in 
reducing the number of poor, creating jobs, and achieving shared prosperity. Long term 
agricultural growth remains volatile, fluctuating around 3 percent per year.  With India’s labor 
force predominantly in rural areas, and about 68 percent employed in agriculture, the political, 
social and economic importance of agriculture continues. 
 
2.      The Government of India (GoI) recognizes the important role of agriculture in the ongoing 
rural-urban transformation process and the potential it represents as an important source of growth 
and job creation.  The GoI also recognizes the necessity of strategic shifts for structural 
transformation of Indian agriculture to tap into this potential of growth and job creation.  These 
shifts reflect underlying trends in demand for food and factors affecting the supply of agriculture 
produce, and include:  (i) a shift away from a focus on foodgrain production towards 
diversification into high value agriculture production of fruits, vegetables, dairy, etc.; (ii) a shift 
away from a focus on on-farm production towards value addition in the post-harvest segments of 
agriculture value chains; (iii) a shift away from a focus on productivity towards resilience of 
agriculture production systems for addressing the effects of climate change; and (iv) a shift away 
from a focus on agriculture production towards nutrition sensitive agriculture. 
 
3.       To facilitate these four shifts, GoI has launched a number of policies and initiatives since 
2014. These include, among others, a technology driven second green revolution with a focus on 
higher productivity and diversification; a “National Adaptation Fund” to meet the challenges on 
climate change; a nationwide District Level Incubation and Accelerator Programme” focusing on 
micro, small and medium enterprise (MSME) sector; and a scheme for promotion of a National 
Agricultural Market to accelerate the integrated development of agriculture marketing and trade. 
 
4. Consumer demand for food commodities in India is rapidly changing, fueled by strong 
economic growth.  The structural shift in consumption pattern away from cereals to high value 
agricultural commodities is seen both in rural and urban areas.  This in turn is generating growing 
domestic demand for higher quality/value agricultural commodities (including animal proteins) as 
the share of cereals and staples in food expenditure declines, whilst that of animal proteins, fruits 
and vegetables increases.  This provides opportunities for farmers to obtain higher incomes from 
increasingly smaller holdings. 
 
5. Signaled by changes in consumers’ food baskets, India’s agriculture and agri-food marketing 
system is poised for a profound transformation.  The agri-food marketing system is changing from 
ad hoc transactions towards coordinated systems like cooperatives, producers’ associations and 
contract farming.  Public policy has been proactive in facilitating this transformation.  The central 
and state governments have taken important policy initiatives, such as de-regulation of food 
industry, enactment of an integrated food law, de-monopolization of agricultural markets, 
reduction in excise duties on manufactured food products, and priority sector lending to food 
industry to strengthen agriculture-industry linkages. 

Food processing is a “sunrise sector” and its share in GDP is on a continuous rise, with a 
compound annual growth rate of 8.4 percent. According to the Annual Survey of Industries 
2012-13 the food processing sector ranks first amongst all industry groups, both in terms of total 
number of factories (16%) and  number of factories in operation (16%), and third in terms of total 
output (12%), next only to ‘coke and refined petroleum products’ and ‘basic metals’.  More 
importantly, this sector is the largest employer amongst all industry groups, accounting for 11.59 
per cent of industry employment in India.  Its employment intensity can be seen by the fact that 
for every INR 1 million invested, 18 direct jobs and 64 indirect jobs are created in organized food 
processing industry.  Furthermore, food in India has an economic multiplier of 2-2.5, thus 
implying that not only the food products industry can be the antidote for India’s jobless growth, 
but that such a scenario may come at a relatively low (fixed capital) cost. 
 
7. Transition to high value commodities and opportunities in agro-food processing underscores 
the enormous potential for commercialization and income growth in agriculture (including small 
holder) as production, consumption and trade shift from traditional food crops to horticulture and 
other non-traditional (high value) commodities.  Moreover, relative to other countries, India has 
considerable comparative advantages in having a very large (growing and largely un-tapped) 
domestic market, which reduces reliance on exports as the principal driver for near term 
agriculture growth.  Nonetheless, beyond the domestic market there are also strong comparative 
and competitive advantages in developing high value agricultural trade, which is currently 
negligible.
Sectoral and Institutional Context
8. In Assam, agriculture and related sectors are the principal occupation of the vast majority of 
rural population in terms of employment and livelihood. About 90 percent of state’s population 
lives in rural areas and is mostly dependent on agriculture for their livelihoods.  Agriculture and 
the allied sectors directly or indirectly support more than 75 percent of the population, providing 
employment to about 50 percent of the total workforce.  While the average operational holding in 
India is 1.10 hectare, Assam’s farmer families are predominantly small and marginal (85%) with 
an average land holding of only 0.63 hectare. 
 
9.      The recently concluded the Assam Agricultural Competitiveness Project (AACP) was 
instrumental in increasing cropping intensity, on-farm productivity and diversification of 
agriculture in the state. Supported by AACP and other Government of Assam (GoA) initiatives, 
high value horticulture has seen a significant growth in production - the annual growth rate of 
production of fruits, spices and vegetables was 19.2, 6.4 and 72.2 percent respectively in the last 
decade, with Assam contributing significantly to national production in commodities like ginger, 
banana, pineapple, litchi, etc. As such AACP has laid the foundations for long term agriculture 
transformation in the state by shifting the focus from rice production towards diversification into 
high value agriculture production (vegetables, spices, fish, dairy etc.).  This move towards higher 
value products offers opportunities to increase contribution of agriculture to Assam’s growth. 
 
10. Diversification to higher value commodities and opportunities in specialized commodities 
reflect significant opportunities and challenges for farming communities in Assam:  growing 
specialized commodities would need adoption of rapidly changing technologies and quality 
standards.  Smallholder farmers face significant challenges in learning about and adopting rapidly 
changing agriculture technologies.  The Bank supported AACP has successfully introduced the 
Agricultural Technology Management Agency (ATMA) model, a participatory, decentralized 



planning, funding and implementation of technology dissemination to district, block and village 
levels in partnerships with farmer groups, and different line departments.  While the ATMA 
platform has introduced improvements in technology transfer and demand driven extension, the 
current approach focuses mainly on production related issues.  Its capacity needs to be 
strengthened to enhance the ability of farmers to adopt efficient and market led production and 
post-harvest practices for meeting the volume, timing and quality requirements of different 
markets. 
 
11. The key constraints in structural transformation of agriculture in Assam are limited market 
access, poor post-harvest handling infrastructure and fragmented supply chains:  agriculture 
marketing in Assam is characterized by a multiplicity of regulatory authorities in the state (viz., 
local panchayats, municipalities and state agriculture marketing board).  Reforms would be 
needed not only to harmonize the regulatory regime in the state, but also for the development of 
alternative marketing options for farmers.  The supply chain is characterized by the dominance of 
middlemen at different levels, involving pre-harvest contractors, forwarding agents, commission 
agents, wholesalers, sub-wholesalers and retailers.  The existence of multiple intermediaries 
causes prices to snowball with each transaction.  Despite the comparative production advantage in 
agriculture and allied commodities, and emerging marketing opportunities, conversion of this 
advantage into competitive food processing industries has proved to be a challenge in the state.  
There is low investment in assets and limited technology penetration across the food processing 
sector in the state, even though this sector contributes about 22 percent of the industrial output 
and represents 26 percent of gross value add of the state.  The food processing sector is largely 
unorganized and operates on a small scale.  Facilitating the development of organized Micro, 
Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME) both for value addition and job creation, would require 
handholding, business facilitation services, and facilitation of access to financing, along with 
critical regulatory changes for agro and allied MSMEs to flourish in the state. 
 
12.     GoA recognizes that creating conditions for agriculture based rural transformation in the 
long term would require:  (i) a shift away from a focus on on-farm production towards value 
addition in the post-harvest segments of agriculture value-chains; (ii) a focus on productivity 
towards resilience of agriculture production systems in order to deal with the effects of climate 
change; and (iii) creating the necessary conditions for the emergence of a dynamic agri-business 
and enterprise sector in Assam.  Furthermore, GoA at the highest level is committed to 
transforming the agriculture and allied sector to a more commercial and market oriented 
production; promoting MSMEs and implementing necessary reforms for realizing the project 
goals. GoA has also stated its intention that this project will form the nucleus of a much larger 
government agribusiness and rural transformation program. Fundamentally this will involve 
mainstreaming of project’s initiatives in government programs and policies as well as 
convergence of various public programs to deliver along the objectives enshrined in this project. 
Especially the government will oversee the refocusing and strengthening of training and human 
resources program to support (agriculture) enterprise development activities in Assam.
Relationship to CAS/CPS/CPF
13.   The proposed World Bank support to this project is consistent with the current Country 
Partnership Strategy (CPS) for India (2013-2017). The CPS outlines Bank support to India under 
the three pillars of integration, transformation and inclusion with a cross-cutting focus on 
improving governance, environmental sustainability and gender equality.  The proposed project is 
aligned along at least two of these three pillars – transformation, and integration.  Under 
transformation, the project will directly help achieve one of the intended outcomes of the CPS, 



which is increase investor confidence and inward financial flows into the agriculture sector (CPS 
para 43).  The broader objective would be to instill a collective entrepreneurial spirit where 
producers shift from being “price takers” of primary produce, with no or very little influence over 
the market to being more business and value focused.  A key project thrust will be on enhancing 
agglomeration of producers to improve economies of scale in producing, processing and 
marketing.  In parallel with this, the project will support agriculture and livestock productivity 
(including value and incomes) through essential technology transfer in production and improved 
post-harvest and market operations, and also explore and pilot possible financing modalities to 
support entrepreneurship and agri-business (CPS outcome 2.4 para 86 and 89).  Overall, the 
support of the project to the development of higher value commodities and more efficient supply 
chains will underpin ongoing structural transformation of the economy (CPS para 34).  Under 
integration, the project offers the opportunity to increase gross state domestic product (GSDP) 
growth by stimulating private sector investment and agri-enterprise development in Assam, a 
special category state. (CPS, Outcome 1.4).  
 
14.   The project will also leverage the pent-up demand and natural resource advantages of the 
state as well as improve the investment climate (CPS para 72).  In particular, the focus will be on 
processed food, agribusiness, logistics and infrastructure, and MSME finance and insurance. The 
project will establish a new standard of excellence for entrepreneurship and business skills 
training by improving skills and knowledge transfer from trainers to MSMEs (CPS, Outcome 
1.3). Furthermore, the proposed project is aligned with the WBG’s goal of promoting shared 
prosperity.

C.  Proposed Development Objective(s)

Proposed Development Objective(s) (From PCN)
15. The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to “increase value-added and 
improve resilience in the production and processing of selected agriculture commodities, focusing 
on small farmers and agro-entrepreneurs in targeted districts”.  
 
16. Project beneficiaries will include farmers and entrepreneurs especially in the MSME 
segment.  Others would include farmer producer organizations, sector management companies, 
and other value chain participants.  During preparation, specific attention would be given to 
gender inclusion in project design and implementation arrangements. The methodology followed 
to identify targeted districts is elaborated in the Annex 3, attached to the PCN.

Key Results (From PCN)
17. The Key Project Indicators (KPI) will be:  
 
a) Increase in value addition by agri-enterprises; 
b) New agri-enterprises established in the targeted districts; 
c) Number of jobs created, including for women (percent); 
d) Increase in value of agricultural marketed output per farm (in formal partnership);  
e) Increase in market oriented production – (% of farmer and area under cultivation); and  
f) Direct project beneficiaries (number), of which female (percentage).

D.  Concept Description

18.   The proposed project would support, value addition in the production and post-harvest 
segments of selected agriculture value-chains; facilitate agribusiness investments through 


inclusive business models that provide opportunities to small farmers as well as stimulate the 
establishment of new small and medium agribusiness enterprises; and support resilience of 
agriculture production systems in order to better manage increasing production and commercial 
risks associated with climate change, in the targeted districts . The project would adopt a cluster 
strategy within the targeted districts to generate economies of scale; promote vertical and 
horizontal links between local agricultural enterprises; enable diffusion of innovations; leverage 
network externalities; and channel public support for services and infrastructure. By adopting a 
cluster approach, the project would enable all the value chain participants to develop competitive 
and innovative products that meet market demands rapidly and successfully. 
 
19.    The project would achieve the PDO by:  (i) promoting investments in agri-enterprises, 
reducing the business and transaction costs, facilitating access to finance for agribusiness 
entrepreneurs, and, where appropriate, push for process, regulatory and/or policy change; (ii) 
supporting the development of a modern supply chain; improved information communication 
technologies (ICT) based farm information and intelligence services, and alternative marketing 
channels; and (iii) improving producer’s access to knowledge, technologies and infrastructure so 
that they are able to respond to market opportunities and climate variability. 
 
20.    By simultaneously intervening along multiple dimensions of the growth nexus (business 
environment, key infrastructure, access to basic services, local governance), the proposed project 
aims to remove key constraints to business development and strengthen the platform for growth in 
agriculture and allied sectors within targeted districts.  By doing so, it will contribute to the key 
aspects of the GoI, GoA and the Bank’s CPS strategic objectives related to faster and broader 
agriculture sector growth and inclusive development. In line with the PDO, the project will have 
the following components. 
 
Component A: Support to Agri Enterprise Development 
 
21. The focus of this component to enhance the pace of agricultural enterprise growth and 
employment in the targeted districts.  This would be done by establishing a cohesive institutional 
platform, and securing increased private sector investment in the development of value chains, 
processing and marketing in the targeted districts. 
 
Component B: Farm - Market Infrastructure Development 
 
22. The focus of this component is to establish a modern supply chain from farm to market that 
would enable farmers and other value chain participants to access new markets. This would be 
done by enabling secondary and tertiary processing that creates higher value for the produce; 
improving value realization at the farm level through improved sorting, grading and packing of 
produce that enhances the average price realized; supporting a supply chain infrastructure that 
prevents wastage and value erosion in transportation, and allows access to more distant markets; 
and supporting the development and up-gradation of basic and agriculture-specific infrastructure, 
including transportation linkages, warehousing capacity and wholesale market facilities. 
 
Component C: Market-led Production and Resilience Enhancement 
 
23.  The focus of this component is to enable farmers in the targeted districts to take advantage of 
the rapidly changing consumer demand and ensuring resilience of agriculture production systems 


in order to better manage increasing production and risks associated with climate change.  This 
would be done by diversification of their farm production; and introduction of climate resilient 
solutions. 
 
Component D: Project Management, Monitoring and Learning 
 
24. This component will ensure effective implementation of the project activities and monitor and 
evaluate project implementation progress, outputs and outcomes, building on implementation 
experience of AACP.  The component will support: (i) establishment and operations of a Project 
Coordination Unit (PCU), which will oversee and coordinate activities of the implementing 
agencies of the project; (ii) establishment and operations of Project Implementation Units in the 
respective implementing agencies; and (iii) setting up of a monitoring and evaluation (M&E) 
system for the project, including a project management information system, and contracting an 
external M&E agency to monitor project activities and impact. This component will also finance 
dedicated staffing for the project activities, consultancies, training and related material, office 
equipment, and incremental operational costs. The Project will provide investment and technical 
support for the establishment of a sound management information system and information and 
communication technology (ICT) systems and accompanying capacity strengthening of key 
personnel. 
 
25.      Green House Gas (GHG) Accounting: In accordance with guidelines for IDA 17 projects, 
GHG accounting for the proposed Project will be undertaken during the preparation phase. This 
analysis will help to measure the impact of the project on the GHG footprint and also guide 
investments that contribute to climate mitigation, given that world-over agriculture investments 
account of 25% of the GHG emissions. The conceptual framework of the proposed project 
indicates there could be reduced GHG emissions and carbon sequestration benefits as a result of 
interventions such as adoption of improved cropland management, plant nutrient management and 
conservation farming practices, soil health/fertility enhancement, whereas increased emissions 
and decreased carbon stocks could result from cropland expansion and increased electricity and 
fuel consumption during past harvest management, processing and transportation.  There is a 
paucity of specific carbon accounting data for the agri-horticulture sector.  The implementing 
agency will coordinate with the relevant departments to collect the relevant data for these 
analyses.  Furthermore, the recently concluded AACP and other government and donor-aided 
projects will provide a basis for developing carbon balance estimates for the proposed project.  
This accounting exercise will be undertaken using established methodologies that are consistent 
with the international best practice to measure GHG emissions in the proposed project.  The ex-
ante carbon balance tool developed by FAO has been selected as the primary tool for GHG 
accounting in agriculture. The analysis will be carried out by a World Bank team during the 
project preparation phase in close collaboration with state government counterparts and will be 
finalized by project appraisal.

II. SAFEGUARDS
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis (if known)
Though the project location and boundaries are yet to be established, it is expected to cover most of 
the state, and would comprise of critical landscape features, ranging from hills and mountains on the 
one hand and floodplains and wetlands on the other. Water quality in Assam has often come under 
scrutiny for presence of natural fluorides, iron and arsenic. Assam is also endowed with a good forest 


cover and rich biodiversity that is well protected with several designated Protected Areas. The 
project will support small infrastructure development including rural roads that may require land and 
leading to minimal adverse impact on people including those who belong to Schedule Tribe, 
Schedule Caste and other vulnerable groups. Proposed agri-infrastructure development under the 
project could have adverse impacts on natural features, such as, wetlands, if not sited and built 
appropriately. Disposal of construction waste would require monitoring, as it could block natural 
drainage channels if dumped casually. Such impacts would necessitate an Environmental and Social 
Assessment (ESA) and management plans and/or framework for managing adverse environmental 
and social impacts and risks.

B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The state is well versed with the Bank’s safeguard policies, as it has, over the past several years, 
implemented the World Bank funded projects including the recently concluded Assam Agricultural 
Competitiveness Project (AACP) wherein the safeguards have been rated as Highly Satisfactory in 
the Implementation Completion and Results Report. The ARIAS society, earlier supported under 
AACP would be responsible for implementing the project’s environmental and social safeguards. 
ARIAS Society would be suitably staffed for this purpose. An ESA will be undertaken that would 
identify the potential adverse environmental and social impacts and risks. The ESA would develop 
and include an Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) that would have 
appropriate mitigation guidance for complying with the Bank’s safeguard polices. The proposed 
ESMF would draw from the experience of implementing the existing one for AACP and build upon 
new activities that would be supported under this project, including wider dissemination and use of 
the Integrated Pest Management Plan developed under AACP. A good reporting mechanism on 
safeguards already exists in AACP and will be continued. At present all project locations are not 
known, therefore the use of framework is proposed. The ESA would be undertaken based on a 
sample of locations covering most of the proposed investment activities under the project. Therefore, 
even though the nature and scope of investment activities would be known, it may so happen that 
actual physical locations may not be known until an advanced stage of preparation. Therefore, an 
ESA will be done during preparation but an ESMF would be used during implementation. As far as 
possible and as the project design evolves, the borrower would ensure that some of the sampling 
locations and sites for the ESA are actual locations/sites proposed for project interventions. In 
addition, the proposed ESMF would include a screening mechanism that would allow for preparation 
of specific EMPs to mitigate adverse impacts of infrastructure investments, once exact location and 
design of infrastructure activities are identified. These would be particularly required for rural feeder 
roads, rural markets and supply chain infrastructure. At this stage, neither the scope and nature of 
infrastructure investments nor the locations are known. By appraisal, the borrower will develop site-
specific EMPs for infrastructure whose locations have been determined and detailed technical 
designs completed.

C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Anupam Joshi (GEN06)
Mridula Singh (GSU06)

D. POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment Yes An ESA is required as the project is likely to support 

new activities that were not included in the recently 



OP/BP 4.01 completed AACP.

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes The State has a widespread network of naturally 
occurring wetlands (beels) and would require 
mapping of potential impacts through project 
supported infrastructure and other agricultural 
investments.

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No The project is unlikely to bring any management 
changes to the State’s forest resources that are 
governed under a robust national law.

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes There is likelihood of use of pesticides and other 
agrochemicals once project investments are realized. 
The project would promote the wider use of the Pest 
Management Plan and Integrated Pest Management 
Plan that was developed under AACP.

Physical Cultural Resources 
OP/BP 4.11

No The project will not impact any physical, cultural 
and/or religious sites and will be implemented in 
areas where agriculture is already practiced.

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 
4.10

Yes The policy is triggered, accordingly a Tribal 
Development Framework will be prepared to address 
impact. It will also include an action plan to ensure 
that equal opportunities are provided to access 
benefits.

Involuntary Resettlement OP/
BP 4.12

Yes The policy is triggered as land may be required for 
the small infrastructure and rural roads. Resettlement 
Policy Framework including Social Management 
Framework will be prepared.

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No The project will not support construction, 
refurbishment and replacement of equipment etc. of 
any dams. It also does not support rehabilitation of 
existing or building any new irrigation schemes 
originating from existing dams in the State.

Projects on International 
Waterways OP/BP 7.50

TBD During project preparation applicability of this policy 
would be determined based on a technical analysis.

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/
BP 7.60

No Project activities do not fall in any disputed areas.

E. Safeguard Preparation Plan
1. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS
01-Sep-2016
2. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be 
needed. The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage 
ISDS.
The safeguards documentation would require four to six months for completion from the time it is 
started. We expect it to be ready by September 2016.


