














































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Agriculture Modernization and Competitiveness Project (P158372) 

 
 

  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document (PID) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 05-Feb-2019 | Report No: PIDISDSC20304 


BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Uzbekistan P158372  Agriculture 
Modernization and 
Competitiveness 
Project (P158372) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA Sep 26, 2019 Dec 16, 2019 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Finance State Investment 
Committee, Rural 
Restructuring Agency 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The proposed PDO is to strengthen generation and delivery of selected agricultural public services in Uzbekistan. Such 
services would include generation of new agricultural technologies and innovations, their dissemination through 
extension services, support to productive partnerships, and improvement of sanitary and phytosanitary and food safety 
systems. 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 200.00 

Total Financing 200.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 200.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) 195.00 

     International Development Association (IDA) 5.00 

          IDA Credit 5.00 

 

Environmental and Social Risk Classification Concept Review Decision 

Substantial  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

1 Uzbekistan is currently undergoing a paradigm shift away from its state-managed economy. In 2017 and 2018, the 
Government of Uzbekistan (GoU) launched a wide range of reforms that represent a shift from a state-led economic 
system to a market economy. As noted in the 2018 Performance & Learning Review of the World Bank (WB), these entail 
four fundamental economic and social shifts: (i) from the state to the private sector; (ii) from inward-looking to outward-
looking growth and jobs drivers; (iii) from general government subsidies to targeted social programs; and (iv) from central 
government to regional and local authorities, in particular as regards responsibility and accountability for the 
implementation of the reform agenda on the ground.  

2 Important progress has been made in the reform agenda. In an especially significant move, in September 2017, 
the GoU allowed a 50 percent devaluation of the Uzbek Som and abolished many foreign exchange controls. This almost 
immediately eliminated a thriving parallel foreign exchange market and eliminated about 30 percent of the cotton 
taxation, which was depressing agricultural incentives for decades1. The GoU further boosted market incentives by 
liberalizing many import tariffs and committing to WTO accession, lifting price controls for certain raw materials and 
production inputs, and extending the use of commodity market exchanges. It eliminated the monopoly on exports of fruits 
and vegetables and has taken steps to improve safety nets for vulnerable groups, which is critical for further agricultural 
and broader economic reforms. 

3 Significant progress has also been made in reducing the use of forced labor, which has been hampering sustainable 
development of agriculture and damaging Uzbekistan’s image on the global arena. Systematic use of child labor in cotton 
harvesting has been eradicated, while overall use of forced labor has been declining over time. The use of forced labor in 
2018 was estimated by the International Labor Organization (ILO) to drop to 7 percent compared to 15 percent in 2017. 
There is the highest level political commitment in Uzbekistan to fully eradicate the use of forced labor in all sectors, and 
an increased level of transparency and dialogue on the issue, encompassing all groups of civil society, including critical 
voices. The WB’s partnership with ILO has been instrumental to this achievement. Yet, the issue remains, requiring 
continued serious attention to it in future policy dialogue and investment operations.                    

4 While the above reforms are significant, they need to be deepened to facilitate the transition from a state-led to 
a market-oriented economic system as noted in the WB’s Reform Roadmap 2.02. This requires a fundamental reevaluation 
of the state’s role in the economy, from direct involvement in production and marketing to delivery of core public goods 


and correction of market failures. In other words, the government needs to decide what to “do less” and what to “do 
more” going forward. Yet, the definition of a new role of the state and economic transition itself has only just begun.   

Sectoral and Institutional Context 

5 In the overall reform context, agriculture is a sector of the economy where ambition and investment can be 
rewarded. Reforms in the sector present an opportunity to deliver quick economic and social wins, given the large share 
of employment and other economic gains this sector generates3, on the one hand, and its heavy overregulation and a lack 
of high-quality public services on the other. Recent reforms on cotton pricing, import tariffs for inputs and liberalization 
of horticulture exports need to be complemented by a broader shift in the government’s approach to agricultural 
development. This requires putting competitiveness, farm incomes, jobs, and sustainability at the center of the reform 
agenda.  

6 During the preparation of the Concept/Strategy for Agricultural Development in Uzbekistan by 2030 during 
September-December 2018, the completion date of which was moved to October 2019 by the President’s Decree4, it was 
largely agreed that modernizing agriculture requires delivery of a wide range of quality agricultural public services, with 
many of them have been either underfinanced or even not existed in the past. This should help restore the agricultural 
growth, which dropped sharply in recent years (Figure 1)5. Public services include applied agricultural research and 
development, extension/advisory services, education, soil fertility improvement, food safety, animal disease 
control/veterinary services, phytosanitary services, support for smallholder market inclusion (associations, cooperatives, 
clusters, productive partnerships), market and statistical information, market infrastructure and logistics, and 
environment protection and climate change adaptation, among others. The global experience shows that these public 
services are key to correct some large market failures and eventually accelerate agricultural transformation.   

7 Supporting the above-mentioned agricultural public services would constitute a significant departure from current 
practice, under which only few programs receive adequate attention and funding. In 2017 about 80 percent of the 
agricultural budget was spent on irrigation (for its operation and management, pumping water, building new canals, and 
improving drainage). The largest share of the remaining 20 percent was spent on subsidizing 130,000 cotton and wheat 
farmers, who cultivate about 3 million ha or 70 percent of the irrigated area. The public spending on agricultural research 
and development was just 0.01 percent of agriculture sector’s value added, compared to the average 1.5 percent in 
middle-income countries with successful agricultural transformation and of above 2 percent in the developed countries. 
Agricultural extension services do not even exist from the market-economy’s perspectives. Food safety and sanitary and 
phytosanitary (SPS) standards are outdated, preventing Uzbek agri-food products from entering many foreign markets. As 
a result, most farmers do not receive any information and technical assistance (TA) on new technologies and farming 
practices, which leads to the large market failures. 

8 The most underserved are dehkan smallholders. There are 4.7 million of them, who cultivate 481,000 ha or 13 
percent of irrigated land arears. Even though they generate more than 75 percent of agricultural output, including more 
than 90 percent of horticulture and livestock outputs, they do not receive public services from the Ministry of Agriculture 
and other ministries. As dehkan farms are too small and often unskilled, private sector also do not provide any services to 
them either, except buying surpluses they produce. This leads to the market failure. The government has recently 
recognized the need to support this group of farmers through extension, TA, and investments6. Yet, more focus has been 

                                            
3 In 2017, the primary agriculture generated 19 percent of GDP, 20 percent of export, and 27 percent of employment. It provided inputs for 
development of food and textile industries, which accounted for 5 percent of GDP and 2 percent of employment. 
4 Decree of the President No. 5614 “On Additional Measures to Ensure Further Development of Economy and Increase Efficiency of Economic 
Policy” dated January 8, 2019.   
5 The recent decline in the growth of agricultural value added was a result of the decline in production of wheat and cotton caused by adverse 
weather and the more accurate statistical reporting in recent years.     
6 The President’s Decree No. PP-3680 “On Additional Measures to Improve Functioning of Farmers, Dehkans, and Household Plots” dated April 26, 
2018 assigned the Council of Farmers, Dehkans and Household Plots to lead engagement and delivery of services to small farms.  



so far given to their investment/credit support and less to their capacity building, voluntary cooperation, and their 
integration into modern value chains. This hampers the development of inclusive agri-food value chains as experienced 
under the ongoing WB and other donors-financed projects for horticulture and livestock development where the efforts 
to link dehkan farms to large farms and agribusinesses, who receive loans for their business development, largely fail. 

9 While the horticulture sector gets some boost from the government’s desire to increase and diversify exports, the 
livestock sector, which is oriented to domestic market, suffers from a lack of strategic approach to its development. The 
sustainability of its growth is affected by the limited fodder base,7 neglected pastural development, and the lack of 
veterinary, animal nutrition, and other TA services. The government’s attention in recent years has been more to bringing 
highly-productive cattle and upgrade dairy processing and less to addressing the above constraints. 

10 Uzbekistan’s agriculture is significantly exposed to the climate hazards. It is the most vulnerable to the decreased 
and more variable precipitation, higher temperatures, reduced river runoff, and increased frequency and severity of 
extreme events. The adaptation capacity of Uzbekistan’s agriculture is assessed to be weak8. The proposed options for 
increasing adaptation include: (i) generation of drought-and pest-resilient seeds; (ii) increasing access of farmers to 
technology and information through extension services, both generally and for adapting to climate change; (iii) optimizing 
the use of agronomic inputs, especially fertilizers, and adopting good agricultural and animal husbandry practices; (iv) 
investing in water saving technologies; and (v) encouraging farmers to efficiently adapt to climate change.      

11 Generating and delivering agricultural services in a coordinated manner is challenging due to the fragmentation 
of public institutions responsible for delivery of agricultural services. In 2018, the Ministry of Agriculture and Water 
Resources were split into the Ministry of Agriculture and the Ministry of Water Resources. Moreover, during this split the 
State Plant Quarantine Inspection and the State Veterinary Inspection were both moved to the Cabinet of Ministers. Food 
safety’s responsibility of the Ministry of Agriculture is shared with the Ministry of Health. And finally, the newly created 
Ministry of Innovations is responsible for agricultural research, especially seed development. The proposed project will 
engage selectively and strategically with these institutions during the project preparation and implementation. 

Relationship to CPF 

12 The proposed operation is aligned with the Country Performance Framework (CPF) for FY19-21, which has been 
adapted to meet Uzbekistan’s growing social and economic transformation. It largely falls under the Focus Area 1 
“Sustainable transformation towards market economy,” supporting a more strategic engagement in agriculture outlined 
in the CPF. The proposed project would leverage: (i) the WB Livestock Sector Development Project (US$150 million 
approved in June 2017) and additional financing to the WB Horticulture Development Project (US$500 million approved 
in January 2018), which stimulate private investments in production, processing, storing and marketing; (ii) the WB 
Fergana Region Entrepreneurship Project (US$200 million to be approved in March 2019), which will stimulate job creation 
and regional development; (iii) Climate Adaptation for Aral Sea Project (US$14 million), which provides financing for 
climate-smart adaptation practices; (iv) additional grants from the European Union for technical assistance to the WB 
operations to support value chain organization, institutional capacity building strengthening, regulatory framework 
improvement, and small farmers’ access to higher value markets through value chain inclusion in livestock and horticulture 
subsectors; (v) the IFC’s agribusiness and agrifinance programs; and (vi) projects of other development partners such as 
the Asian Development Bank’s horticulture and livestock projects, the European Union’s agricultural budget support, the 
French Development Agency’s livestock project, and the UN Food and Agriculture Organization’s capacity building for 
agricultural institutions.     

13 The proposed project aims to add value by addressing needs that are currently unmet in the WB and other donors’ 
portfolio. The current WB projects are mainly focused on improving access to finance for larger farmers and agribusinesses 

                                            
7 The ratio of fodder area per a unit of cattle in Uzbekistan is 0.03 ha, against the global standard of 0.5 ha of irrigated area and 1.5 ha of dryland.  
8 World Bank. 2013. Reducing the Vulnerability of Uzbekistan’s Agricultural Systems to Climate Change. A World Bank Study, Washington, D.C.  




and just marginally on strengthening selected public institutions to deliver better services for horticulture and livestock 
subsectors. The situation is similar with the projects financed by other major agricultural donors. The ongoing agricultural 
projects amount US$2.5 billion, while the pipeline for the next two years is US$0.8 billion. There are limited investments 
in strengthening public institutions to deliver services to agriculture in a coherent and integrated manner, especially for 
small farms, to increase the rates of economic return of many credit line’s projects and reduce risks for agricultural credit 
borrowers. The proposed project would work with the ongoing agricultural projects to identify investment gaps and design 
activities to leverage operations of the various donors and ultimately improve the agricultural sector outcomes. 

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

14 The proposed PDO is to strengthen generation and delivery of selected agricultural public services in Uzbekistan. 

15 Selected services would include generation of new agricultural technologies and innovations, their dissemination 
through extension services, support for smallholder market inclusion, and improvement of sanitary and phytosanitary and 
food safety systems. 

Key Results (From PCN) 

16 The proposed project would help: (i) generate more and better innovative farm and agribusiness technologies, 
information, and other public services through applied agricultural research; (ii) make them readily available to farmers 
and agribusiness through extension and advisory services; (iii) integrate smallholders in modern food value chains; and 
(iv) reduce costs of pest invasions and animal diseases and expand export opportunities through SPS and food safety 
services. 

D. Concept Description 

17 The proposed project will be a departure from the standard Uzbekistan’s donor-financed agricultural projects of 
the recent years. The standard project consists of a credit line component, typically accounting for 80-90 percent of the 
project costs, and a component for complementary TA to farmers and public institutions, either associated or not 
associated with the credit line. The latter is usually financed by grants. In two ongoing WB projects, for example, the 
capacity building TA activities are financed by the EU grants.     

18 The proposed project will be centered around strengthening public institutions to deliver more and better services 
to farmers and agribusinesses. The efforts will be made to modernize the public institutions through capacity building and 
investment support, encourage their more strategic engagement with private sector, and pilot delivery models of public 
services through public-private-partnerships (PPPs) and using digital technologies. The geography of the project activities 
will be nationwide.    

19 The key guiding principles for designing the proposed project would be the following: 

a. Supporting agricultural reforms: The proposed project will support reforms in agriculture, helping: (i) pilot 
new approaches for public programs, including through PPP; and (ii) define a new role of the government 
in market-oriented agriculture, including improvement in sustainability of land and water use, boosting 
shared prosperity, and elimination of unsustainable labor practices in the entire agri-food industry. It will 
be aligned with the WB Development Policy Operation(s), and, where relevant, with the EU’s agricultural 
budget support program (under preparation), to complement an improved agricultural policy 
environment by investments and capacity building.  

b. Financing public goods: Agricultural programs such as agricultural R&D, extension, cooperation and 
production partnerships, good agricultural practices (including climate-smart agricultural technologies), 
integrated pest management, and food safety and SPS are globally recognized as critical to induce 
agricultural modernization by correcting market failures and providing public goods. These public 




functions have been chronically underfinanced in Uzbekistan; to make impact, these programs require 
both investment and TA to increase quantity of services and, more importantly, improve their quality and 
outreach.   

c. Selection of public goods: Priority will be given to public programs critical to increase competitiveness of 
agricultural production and trade, both domestically and internationally. Competitiveness can be 
increased through higher productivity (or lower costs), adaptivity to climate change, better quality, higher 
(food) safety, and lower transaction costs.        

d. Maximizing Finance for Development (MFD): The proposed project will seek to crowd in private 
investments by strengthening the quality of public programs, reducing transaction costs for farmers and 
agribusinesses, piloting PPP in service delivery, and encouraging private investments in entire food 
system, including from the IFC. It should seek mobilize expertise and resources of the World Bank Group 
to deliver the best services to clients.       

e. Complementary investments that do not duplicate ongoing and planned programs: Several investments 
and capacity building projects financed by the WB and other development partners already support the 
above-mentioned areas of agricultural development and several more are in the pipeline. The proposed 
project will be complementary, focusing on filling gaps and connect various activities.   

20 The following activities and components will be considered during the project preparation. This list is intentionally 
long to provide the task team with flexibility during preparation and give the authorities more options to select from it 
when defining (and narrowing down) the scope of the proposed project.  

Component 1: Generating new agricultural technologies and innovations       

21 This component would support: (i) investments in constructing and upgrading buildings, equipment, laboratories, 
machinery and irrigation/drainage for agricultural research stations; (ii) competitive research grants; (iii) capacity building 
of researchers and other stakeholders associated with operation and management of their fixed assets, knowledge and 
skills for conducting modern agricultural research; and (iv) institution strengthening. Thematically, the support will focus 
on crop and fodder seeds and good agricultural practices (GAP). Preparation of this component will be carried out in 
collaboration with the Ministry of Innovations and the Ministry of Agriculture.      

22 Seeds: Generating drought and pest-resistant seed varieties, multiplying, and making them available to farmers 
are critical to increase competitiveness of agricultural production, given the limited land and water availability in 
Uzbekistan. Yields are low even for crops, on which local agricultural research has focused in the recent decade. Thus, 
improvements are needed for a wide range of crops, from cotton and wheat to fruits and vegetables, and from seed 
genetics to seed multiplication. Seeds will need to be adjusted for different agro-ecological zones of the country. In 
addition, Uzbekistan can produce seeds for exports, which would require, among other things, to have seed laboratories 
accredited by the International Seed Quality Control Agency (ISTA). Furthermore, the proposed project can support PPPs 
in seed production, encouraged by the recent legislation9, by cofinancing the public aspects of the projects. 

23 Fodder crops and pasture management: Applied research on fodder crops and integrated pasture management 
could be supported to help increase the supply of feed to the growing livestock sector, which faces the rapidly rising feed 
cost. Feed account for 60-70 percent of meat and milk prices, so identifying suitable feed varieties and pasture 
management technologies (due to the limited irrigated areas to produce fodder) through agricultural research and 
extending this knowledge to farmers through extension services will be valuable investments. The current ratio of fodder 
area per unit of cattle in Uzbekistan is at least ten time lower than the international norms10; thus, efforts are needed to 

                                            
9 President’s Resolution No. PP-4020 “On Measures to Create Additional Incentives for Greenhouse’s Development” dated November 20, 2018. 
10 The ratio of fodder land per cattle unit in Uzbekistan is 0.03 ha, while international norms require it to be 0.5 ha for irrigated land and 1.5 ha for 




identify and promote high-productivity fodder crops suitable for production on both irrigated and dry lands to inform 
decision of farmers on selecting appropriate varieties and techniques suitable for various agro-ecological zones.     

24 Good agricultural practices: Uzbekistan does not have a code of Good Agricultural Practices (GAP) for crop and 
livestock production, which is common in other countries to promote climate-smart agricultural practices. In many 
countries the adoption of GAP is a precondition for farming or for receiving subsidies. It is also used as a precondition for 
adopting stricter Global GAPs and other standards such as organic and halal. There are many locally-tested best farming 
practices in Uzbekistan, but they are not put together in one coherent place and they are not widely disseminated and 
adopted. The project could support the preparation of the GAP code and guidelines using the best practice local and global 
knowledge; introduce pilot training courses and adjust draft code and guidelines based on experience/feedback; and 
publish final version of the code and guidelines and promote it widely through training programs for extension staff and 
farmers.  

25 The project could also support investments to update soil fertility maps, which is needed for GAP adoption. Such 
investments include upgrading soil testing laboratory infrastructure, digitalize map information with open-date access, 
developing best practice guidelines on soil monitoring and fertilizer use adjusted to different soil types and agro-ecological 
zones, making this information available to farmers through field-based advisers and extension services, and procuring 
portable field-based soil testing equipment to allow extension services and other advisers to provide immediate feedback 
to farmers on soil quality and proposed adjustments needed to enhance soil fertility.   

26 Institutional strengthening: Engagement will be required with the Ministry of Innovations, Ministry of Agriculture, 
other agencies/institutes and private sector (farmers and agribusinesses) to develop mechanisms to bring research and 
private sector together for better defining applied research priorities that would address constraints faced by farmers and 
agribusinesses in a timely and coordinated manner. The experience of the Netherlands and other countries will be used 
to foster a closer collaboration between researchers, farmers, and agribusiness companies. The proposed project could 
foster this kind of collaboration and generate knowledge and lessons to inform a roadmap for other reforms in the 
agricultural research system in Uzbekistan.                 

Component 2: Disseminating agricultural technologies and innovations and creating markets    

27 This component would support: (i) investments in infrastructure for extension/advisory activities, including 
mobility, learning campuses/facilities, demo plots close to farm fields, and creation of digital platforms for reaching out 
many farmers at low cost; (ii) capacity building of extension/advisory officers and preparation of extension materials for 
farmers and agribusinesses; and (iii) operation costs for delivering services to farmers and other clients. Preparation of 
this component will be carried out in collaboration with the Ministry of Innovations, the Ministry of Agriculture, the Council 
of Farmers, Dehkans and Household Plots (Farmers Council), and other stakeholders such as cotton-textile clusters. 

28 Currently, the work of the public agricultural extension services is limited to delivery of production-oriented advice 
to farmers producing wheat and cotton under the government production quota and to make sure that farmers have 
inputs to meet their quotas. The proposed project would help transform them into market-oriented extension and 
advisory services differentiated to the needs of dehkan smallholders, larger farms, and agribusinesses, building on the 
recent legislation11 and the strategy for agricultural extension being drafted by the Ministry of Innovations. The reformed 
extension service would extend knowledge on new technologies and farming practices generated by research locally and 
globally to farmers; promote GAP adoption; offer diversified agribusiness support services; and use digital platforms to 
design services, deliver training and information, improve responsiveness, and increase farmer outreach.  

29 For dehkan farms, extension services could be delivered as a part of establishing productive partnerships, which 
are proved globally as a potent mechanism to promote farm collective actions and reduce transaction costs for 

                  

agribusinesses to include these farm groups in their value chains.  Productive partnerships as a part of the proposed 
project would help include smallholders in modern value chains and reduce transaction costs for agribusinesses to interact 
with smallholders, through: (i) TA for dehkan smallholders; (ii) promotion of their voluntary cooperation and development 
of joint investment plans; (iii) co-financing of investment plans through grants; and (iv) linking farm groups with 
agribusiness and lead firms. The latter could be selected from the ongoing WB-financed horticulture and livestock projects. 
Preparation of this component will be carried out in collaboration with the Farmers Council and the Ministry of Agriculture.     

30 For larger farms, for example, the PPP arrangements with cotton-textile clusters could be developed to deliver 
advisory services on cotton and wheat production and develop technology and information database using digital 
platforms on GAP, crop protection, integrated pest management, decent work, water usage, soil fertility, as well as good 
manufacturing practices in textile factories, to strengthen technical capacity of clusters’ technical staff to increase 
productivity, profitability, and sustainability of agricultural production. For agribusiness, the project could support 
preparation and delivery of targeted courses on agri-food enterprise business diagnostics, business planning and 
preparation of investment applications, and pilot agro-business schools and start-ups for small and medium scale farmers 
and agri-businesses. This part will be prepared in collaboration with IFC and ILO. 

Component 3: Improving SPS and food safety standards  

31 This component would support: (i) investments in constructing and upgrading buildings, equipment, laboratories, 
and other fixed assets of selected SPS and food safety-relevant public institutions; (ii) capacity building of staff associated 
with operation and management of their fixed assets and knowledge and skills for delivering public services; and (iii) 
institution strengthening. These investments will finance and co-finance public programs and be complementary to those 
already carried out or planned under the donor-financed projects. Preparation of this component will be carried out in 
collaboration with the Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Health, the State Plant Quarantine Inspection, and the State 
Veterinary Committee.     

32 Veterinary services: Efficient and trustworthy veterinary services are critical to reduce risk for farmers to invest 
in livestock, reduce economic losses in case of animal diseases, and protect human health. Currently, the delivery of 
veterinary services and their outreach are unsatisfactory to deal with the growing number of animals in the country. The 
World Animal Health Organization (OIE) has recently completed the assessment of the performance of veterinary services 
and investment gap, with the support of the WB-financed livestock project and the State Veterinary Service, with the 
purpose of identifying, detailing, and costing priority activities. The Gap Analysis identified priority areas of support and 
the associated investment needs (funding requirements) in all areas of veterinary services, including trade, veterinary 
public health, animal health, veterinary laboratories, and veterinary management services for the next five years. The 
identified gaps include investments needs in fixed assets, human capital, and operational resources, which will be used to 
define the activities for the proposed project. Veterinary laboratories alone include the large network of laboratories and 
veterinarians, which could be supported by the project.12 Investments will be based on thorough assessments of the needs 
and the role of specific units in delivering public services vis-à-vis the role of private sector.     

33 Phytosanitary/quarantine services: Uzbekistan incurs significant economic losses from pest invasions and from 
difficulty to meet the SPS requirements of importers. Uzbekistan, for example, is on top of the rejection of its fresh 
horticulture exports by the EU, mainly caused by the high level of mycotoxins in dried fruits, which is very far in excess of 
the EU standards. The proposed project could support the State Plant Quarantine Inspection to improve surveillance 
capacity to prevent pest invasions, promote adoption of integrated pest management as a part of GAP adoption, and 
facilitate trade, both export and import. Among several things, the project could help the Inspection to accelerate signing 

                                            
12 The network of veterinary laboratories in Uzbekistan comprises of the State Center for Animal Diseases and Food Safety, which also manages the 
State Research Center on Quality Control of VMPs and Feed Additives; 13 Regional Veterinary Laboratories; 130 Local Veterinary Laboratories; 
1,411 Field Veterinary Stations; 265 laboratories at food markets; and 27 Border Inspection Posts and Transport Stations. Together these veterinary 
laboratories employ 2,600 veterinarians and veterinary para-professionals.   



the International Plant Protection Convention (IPPC) and develop a Pest Risk Analysis capability that is credible to IPPC 
members; establish minimum residual level standards and protocols per international norms and support an awareness-
raising program for existing and potential agri-food exporters; and establish a system of accreditation of SPS laboratories 
and where needed, reference laboratories connected to a network of public and private laboratories. 

34 Food safety standards: The WB’s CPSD analysis found that the food safety standards called GOST require 
modernization to meet the requirements of importers outside of the former Soviet Union and even to expand on 
traditional markets such as Kazakhstan and Russia, who adjust their food safety standards to internationally accepted 
norms and practices. This is especially urgent for horticulture products, for which foreign buyers are sensitive to meeting 
strict food safety requirements, as the above figure shows. The proposed project could support the process of bringing 
domestic food safety standards to the requirements of the major importing countries and provide TA to agribusinesses 
and exporters to adopt the upgraded food safety standards. 

Component 4: Project management and coordination  

35 This component will finance project management and coordination activities, as well as monitoring and 
evaluation. The scope of work under this component will be further defined as institutional and implementation 
arrangements are refined during preparation. 

    
 
Legal Operational Policies                                  Triggered? 

Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50 No 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60 No 

 
Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts 

Although this project intends to provide institutional strengthening, capacity building, and improved service 
delivery, the project will be working with farmers. The GoU has a history of Child and Forced Labor (CFL) 
which was inherited from Soviet times. The GoU has made tremendous strides towards eliminating the use of 
CFL for harvesting of cotton. Third party monitoring by the ILO has reported that child labor seems to have 
been eliminated, however recent reports state cases of forced labor, although at much lower scale than 
previously, still exists. The project will be working with all farmers, which may include farmers who include 
cotton in their crop rotation. Therefore, the concern of forced labor raises project risk to a moderate level. All 
project initiatives, where relevant, will include addressing CFL, as well as ensuring women and the rural poor 
are included in project initiatives. 

 

 