














































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
LIVELIHOODS RESILIENCE AND COMMERCIALIZATION PROJECT (LRCP) IN PASTORAL AND AGRO-PASTORAL AREAS 
(P164336) 

 

 

  
Jun 07, 2018 Page 1 of 10  

     

 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 07-Jun-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSC23863 


BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Ethiopia P164336  LIVELIHOODS 
RESILIENCE AND 
COMMERCIALIZATION 
PROJECT (LRCP) IN 
PASTORAL AND AGRO-
PASTORAL AREAS 
(P164336) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA Jan 22, 2019 Mar 27, 2019 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Finance and 
Economic Cooperation 

Ministry of Federal and 
Pastoral Development 
Affairs 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
 
To Enhance Livelihood Resilience and Commercialization of the Production Systems among PAP Communities in 
Ethiopia.  
 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 600.00 

Total Financing 500.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 400.00 

Financing Gap 100.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 400.00 



          IDA Credit 400.00 

Non-World Bank Group Financing 

     Other Sources 100.00 

          International Fund for Agriculture Development 100.00 

 
  
 

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B - Partial Assessment   
 

 
SAFEGUARDS_TABLE_OPS Have the Safeguards oversight and clearance functions been transferred to the Practice Manager? (Will not be 
disclosed) 
No    
 
 
 
 
Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
 
B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
 
Ethiopia, with a current estimated population of 102.4 million1 (2016), has seen rapid economic growth over the past 
decade and is one of the fastest growing economies in the World. The IMF predicted the growth rate of Ethiopia to be 
8.5 percent in 20182.  The rapid economic growth over the past decade3 has not been able to generate adequate 
employment opportunities and Ethiopia needs to generate 1.7 million jobs4 every year to provide gainful employment 
to youth who are entering workforce. The arid and semi-arid low-lands, accounting for 60 percent of land area with 12 
to 14 percent of population, comprising of pastoral and agro-pastoral (PAP) communities lag behind in most of the 
social and economic indicators and their livelihoods are highly vulnerable to a multitude of shocks, primarily droughts, 
which is being exacerbated by climate change.  

 
 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
The pastoral and agro-pastoral system are complex systems that need to balance the dynamic interplay between 

                                            
1 World Development Indicator, World Bank  
2 IMF World Economic Outlook, April 2018  
3 Average annual GDP growth was 10.1% between 2010 and 2016, World Development Indicators, World Bank 
4 National Planning Commission, Government of Ethiopia. 


people, livestock and environment resource base. The complexity of these livelihood system is getting exacerbated, 
driven by multiple factors droughts, degradation of rangelands, active conflict and insecurity, constrained livestock 
mobility and access to key resources etc. All these changes are resulting in significant changes in PAP production and 
livelihood systems. The commercialization pull is resulting into a category of commercially oriented large-scale herd 
owners who are successfully managing the transition. The stress-push has resulted into a category of population who 
has moved-out of pastoralism either being forced out by successive droughts or opting out since the pastoral livelihood 
is no longer viable or being pulled-in towards other market opportunities. Despite the complexity and high stress 
environment, there are significant economic opportunities in the pastoral and agro-pastoral areas and a significant 
proportion of population is still engaged in pastoral and agro-pastoral systems while others are pursing alternate 
livelihood opportunities.  

 
 
Relationship to CPF 
 
The operation features in the Bank’s CPF for FY 17-21 under the Building Resilience and Inclusiveness Pillar. In addition, 
it strongly contributes to “Promoting Structural and Economic Transformation through Increased Productivity’ pillar.  
The project will contribute to CPF result framework targets of enhance resilience, increase in agricultural yield, job 
creation, natural resource management, climate co-benefits, improved service delivery, as well as Ethiopia’s targets of 
National Adaptation Plan and Second Growth and Transformation Plan (GTP-2).  

 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
 
To Enhance Livelihood Resilience and Commercialization of the Production Systems among PAP Communities in 
Ethiopia.  
 

 
Key Results (From PCN) 

 
The key PDO level Indicators includes:  

1. Number of direct project beneficiary (disaggregated by gender)  
2. People provided with access to improved Economic and Social services (disaggregated by service type and 

gender)  
3. Proportion (volume and value) of production sold by targeted beneficiaries for selected products  
4. Range and agricultural land area (in HA) under improved natural resource management practices 
5. Percentage increase in yield of selected crop and livestock commodities  
6. Jobs created (disaggregated by gender) 

 
 
D. Concept Description 

 
A comprehensive and integrated approach, rather than discrete interventions, that addresses multiple dimensions of 
livelihood is needed to address the binding constraints described above. By understanding the needs of different 
beneficiary groups, pastoralists, agro-pastoralists, and households pursing or intending to pursue alternate livelihoods, 
and designing intervention packages to meet their specific needs, this project aims to support livelihood resilience and 
commercialization through the following project components. The project would invest in improving the overall 


     

enabling environment of rangeland management, pastoral risk management, and institutional development and 
capacity building which will contribute to increased resilience of the PAP communities and production systems.  To 
improve livelihoods, the project would support improving productivity and commercialization of pastoral and agro-
pastoral production system, small scale irrigation in lowland areas, and promoting livelihood diversification. To project 
would support improving access and utilization of basic social and economic services among the target communities 
through a decentralized Community Driven Development approach, which will be complimented by a strategic inter-
community, and inter woreda investments with the purpose of improving prevention and preparedness against 
disasters.  

 
    

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
The project will be implemented in the Pastoral and agro-pastoral areas of Ethiopia. The geographical coverage of the 

project would include regions of Afar, Ethio-Somali, Oromia and SNNPP. 
 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
The borrower has implemented a number of Bank projects and have moderate institutional capacity for implementing 

safeguard policies.The project implementation arrangements will largely follow the existing mechanisms for the ongoing 
PCDP III with slight modifications to capture recent developments. 
While implementing various World Bank Financed infrastructure projects (PCDP I-PCDP III), the Borrower has gained 

experiences in preparing safeguards instruments (ESMF, RPF, ESS and ESMP documents) to identify and address potential 
environmental and social risks. The Ministry of Federal and Pastoral Development Affairs (MoFPDA) has implemented 
three successive phases of Pastoral Community Development Project (PCDP) under an Adaptable Programme Lending 
(APL) spanning 15 years, which has been jointly supported by the World Bank and IFAD. It is, therefore, proposed that this 
new LRCP will utilize the existing experience that has been built up with the ongoing PCDP III safeguard implementation 
arrangements. MoFPDA has the responsibility for overall coordination, monitoring and evaluation of the LRCP. Currently, 
there are safeguards specialists dedicated for PCDP III at federal and the four regional bureau levels. However, if 
Gambella and Benishagul regions will be benefited from the proposed project they are required to deploy safeguards 
experts before commencement of the project. 
Experiences revealed that proper implementation and documentation of safeguards related matters still remains a 

challenge that needs to be further strengthened, through ensuring adequate personnel and capacity at the ministerial 
and local levels, to ensure environmental and social safeguards compliance. 
 

 
D. Policies that might apply 

 


Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The Livelihoods Resilience and Commercialization 
Project (LRCP) is expected to finance the following 
activities: pasture development, supporting area 
enclosures, Prosopis and other invasive species 
control, water resource development along cattle 
corridors, soil and water conservation measures, 
afforestation activities, small dams, flood control, rain 
water harvesting, breed improvement, feed/forage 
improvement and management, animal health 
services, rain-fed agriculture, build demand-driven 
social and economic infrastructure; which may include 
schools, health posts, veterinary posts, small water 
supply and irrigation, small feeder roads, catchment 
management improvements. Given that most of the 
aforementioned activities result in environmental and 
social risks, an environmental and social assessment is 
necessary; ergo OP/BP 4.01 will be triggered. The 
assessment will be outlined in an Environmental and 
Social Framework to be updated prior to appraisal and 
key resullts and measures will be integrated into the 
project documents (PAD, PIM, ESMF, etc.). Further, 
site specific ESIA, ESMP and PMP will also be prepared, 
as required, during project prepation.  

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No 

The Project is being implemented by the Ministry of 
Agriculture. In case of any linkages to private sector 
via the commercialization component of the Project, 
these will be handled via OP 4.01. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

Pastoral areas cover some natural habitats which are 
protected by law, such as the Awash and Yangudi Rasa 
National Parks (Afar), Yabello Sanctuary (Borena) and 
the Babile Wildlife Sanctuary (Somali). However, LRCP 
is not expected to be operated within such areas or 
other areas that qualify as critical natural habitats 
under OP. 4.04 or include any sub-projects that have a 
bearing on protected areas. However, it will affect 
rangelands and pastures, for which OP/BP 4.04 will 
apply to protect even those non-critical natural 
habitats from any adverse impacts. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes 

OP/BP 4.36 is triggered to avoid any anticipated 
potential impacts that may affect the natural forests 
found in Gambella and Benishangul Gumuze regions. 
Besides, LRCP is expected to finance afforestation and 
other natural resources management (range land 
management, area enclosure, …) related activities for 




which OP/BP 4.36 would apply. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

Promotion of rain fed and/or irrigated farming where 
feasible and profitable is part of promoting sustainable 
livelihoods and may indirectly involve use of 
agrochemicals including fertilizers and pesticides for 
both crop and livestock improvements. The ESMF will 
include guidelines and procedures for the preparation 
of specific PMPs, when is required, during the project 
implementation. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 

There are few areas in the Ethiopian lowlands that 
may constitute physical cultural resources in the sense 
described in BP/OP. 4.11. Although the nature and 
scope of the LRCP sub-projects is not known now, they 
are unlikely to involve any major excavation work or 
inundation of areas with water, and are thus not likely 
to affect any physical cultural resources. Furthermore, 
subprojects will be carried out only in areas selected, 
through a broader consultative process that includes 
prior informed consent, by local citizens who would 
normally give great importance to safeguarding their 
cultural resources. Nonetheless, the policy is triggered, 
predicated on the assumption that there could be 
“chance find”. No sub-project that might have 
negative impacts on cultural property will be funded 
without acceptable mitigation measures prepared 
prior to execution of any such sub-project. There are 
national procedures and guidelines for reporting 
chance finds to be followed, and a national entity for 
coordinating and facilitating the archiving, safekeeping 
and documentation of physical cultural resources. The 
Project would work closely with the national authority, 
should any chance find issues arise. The requirements 
and standard measures of a chance-find procedure 
will also be included in the ESMF.  

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 Yes 

The Project triggers OP 4.10 as the vast majority of 
people in the project area meet the criteria for OP 
4.10, with the project explicitly targeting lowlands in 
emerging regions. While the Project therefore will 
benefit specifically these areas, assessing culturally 
appropriate interventions as well as ensuring equal 
access to project benefits, a related Social Assessment 
shall be conducted and respective results integrated 
into the Project design. The SA will contain an explicit 
Social Development Plan and the Project will integrate 
the required measures into the PAD as well as 



allocating ressources to ensure its implementation. 
Consequently it will also be addressed in the PIM and 
the ESMG. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

LRCP interventions may involve acquisition of land and 
/or restriction of access to communal natural 
resources. Therefore, an RPF has to be prepared to 
ensure that appropriate measures are in place to 
address any issues which might arise from potential 
land acquisition and or restriction of access to 
communal natural resources under the Project. This 
RPF shall include appropriate tools to address 
potential impacts by a large number of sub-projects. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 Yes 

LRCP is not expected to finance any investments 
aimed at rehabilitating or constructing large dams. 
Although there could possibly be construction of small 
dams under LRCP, particularly for small scale 
irrigation, they may not be large (more than 4.5 
meters high) and therefore may not require special 
procedures that are normally applied for large dams to 
follow. This notwithstanding, the Project will trigger 
OP 4.37 (Safety of Dams). In cases of small dams 
construction (less than 4.5 meters), the Project will 
use the FAO ‘Manual on Small Earth Dams, A Guide to 
Siting, Design and Construction’. In addition, the 
guideline for small dam construction prepared by the 
MoA will be used to ensure safety of small dams. 
Generic dam safety measures designed by qualified 
engineers will be included in the design and 
implementation/rehabilitation of small dams; with 
respective requirements outlined in the ESMF. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

Yes 

LRCP could extract very small amounts of water from 
any of the shared rivers or drainage systems. This 
notwithstanding, the Project will, in accordance with 
the requirements of the policy, send renewal 
notification of intended water use to the relevant 
riparian countries. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
The project is not expected to be implemented in any 
disputed areas. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Jan 21, 2019 
 



 

Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Before the project appraisal date 
 
 