













































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Maharashtra Project on Climate Resilient Agriculture (P160408) 

 
 

  
Dec 21, 2016 Page 1 of 19  

     

 

 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal. 
 

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 22-Jan-2017 | Report No: PIDISDSC20715 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

India P160408  Maharashtra Project on 
Climate Resilient 
Agriculture (P160408) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

SOUTH ASIA Jun 05, 2017 Aug 24, 2017 Agriculture 

Lending Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Republic of India Ministry of Agriculture, 
Government of Maharashtra 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
To enhance climate-resilience and profitability of smallholder farming systems in selected districts of Maharashtra. 

 

 Financing (in USD Million) 

 

Financing Source Amount  

Borrower  120.00  

International Bank for Reconstruction and Development  480.00  

Total Project Cost  600.00  

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B-Partial Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 

 
 
Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
 
B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
 
1. India is one of the fastest growing economies in the world, ranked among the top ten highest GDP countries, and is 

the world’s second most populous country. During the past two decades, India’s GDP grew at an average of 7 

percent annually. Poverty incidence declined on average by 1.5 percentage points per year during 2005–10 and 

improvements in key development indicators have been remarkable. However, following years of impressive 

economic growth and poverty alleviation, India is now at a critical juncture in its paths towards becoming an 

economic powerhouse and is facing important development challenges and structural constraints to a more 

inclusive growth and a more sustainable development. India remains home to 263 million poor people (most of 

which reside in rural areas) living on less than US$1.90/day and the economic growth has not generated jobs fast 

enough to absorb labor out of agriculture and low productivity rural jobs. To address these challenges, the 

Government of India (GoI) through its 12th Five-Year Plan (FY2013-17) put forward an ambitious goal for accelerated 

economic growth, poverty reduction, job creation, and environmental management. The plan foresees during this 

period an annual GDP growth of 8.2 percent, a reduction in poverty rate by 10 percentage points, 50 million new 

jobs – and an annual growth in the agriculture and allied rural sectors of 4 percent. 

 
2. Climate change may impede socioeconomic development within India and increasing investment in adaptation 

measures to reduce vulnerability will be essential to maintaining economic growth. India’s rapid growth has 

increased its prominence on the global stage and drawn attention to its climate mitigation and adaptation efforts. 

The country has shown leadership in global efforts to limit climate change and is among the early countries to have 

ratified the Paris Agreement on Climate Change (in October 2016). Analyses of the country’s historic climate data 

support the extent of the change taking place: an increase in mean annual temperature (0.56°C between 1901 and 

2007), as well as a decrease in seasonal mean rainfall with more frequent extreme rainfall events. Looking ahead, 

temperatures are projected to increase further and at a faster rate than before (by 1.7-2.0
o
C by the 2030s), coupled 

with an overall increase in monsoon rainfall (with an increase in geographic variability) and extreme precipitation 

events (with an increase in rainfall intensity). India shows an increasing trend in its per capita emission of GHGs, 

though current per capita levels are still among the lowest in the world (2.44 tCO2 equivalent per capita in 2012, 

against global average of 5.5 tCO2 equivalent). In absolute terms, India remains one of the largest GHG emitters, 

with its agriculture sector the second largest contributor (around 18 percent of the country’s total GHG emissions).  

 
3. Agriculture sector growth is essential in achieving India’s development goals: the sector currently accounts for 14 

percent of national GDP and is a source of livelihood for more than half of the population. More than two thirds of 

the country’s poor live in rural areas, and their chance of getting out of poverty directly depends on the 

performance of agriculture and allied rural sectors. The success of ongoing massive rural-urban transformation will 

also depend on improved connectivity of rural areas to cities, enhanced agriculture productivity and value chains for 

agricultural products and off-farm job creation in rural areas, which would temper down current massive migrations 

to urban areas. The agriculture sector also has a major potential for reducing GHG emissions and improving 

environmental management through enhanced soil and water conservation and climate-resilient farm management 

practices.  

 
4. Over the past two decades, the agriculture sector has performed below its potential and has not yet met the 

envisaged growth targets. In the 1990s and 2000s, the annual agriculture growth rate was around 3-3.5 percent, and 


dropped even below 2 percent per annum during 2013-15, due to low productivity, growing water and land scarcity, 

rising labor costs, and declining international commodity prices, exacerbated by the late onset of monsoon rainfall 

and increase rainfall intensity. While overall rainfall is projected to increase, its distribution over time and space is 

likely to become much more erratic, thereby leading to increasingly frequent droughts and floods. Unless significant 

efforts to capitalize on the projected increase in rainfall are made to improve water conservation and soil moisture 

management, water scarcity at farm level will remain a key impediment to achieving higher levels of crop and water 

productivity. 

 
5. Going forward, five inter-related and strategic shifts are required to achieve the 4 percent annual growth target 

set by GoI for agriculture and transform the sector into a modern food system: (i) a shift away from food grain 

production targets towards diversification into high-value horticulture and livestock products; (ii) a shift away from 

pure focus on physical productivity (yields) towards resilience and stability of agriculture to deal with the effects of 

climate change and short-term weather anomalies; (iii) a shift away  from a focus on on-farm production towards 

value addition in the post-harvest segments of the food value chains; (iv) a shift away from a calorie focused 

production structure towards nutrition sensitive agriculture, and (v) a shift away from increasing irrigation water 

supply towards improved water use efficiency. The proposed project is designed to directly contribute to this 

structural transformation process by supporting several of those strategic shifts with a focus on building climate 

resilience in the agriculture sector in the State of Maharashtra.  

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
6. The State of Maharashtra is one of the economic growth engines of the country:  it is the top-ranked state in terms 

of contribution to the national GDP (14.4 percent, 2014-15) and has witnessed an average economic growth rate of 

over 8 percent per annum over the last decade. With 9.3 percent of country’s population and 9.4 percent of the 

country’s geographic area, Maharashtra is also the second largest state in India. Structurally, Maharashtra is more 

urbanized and industrialized compared to the rest of the country and economic contributions of the industries and 

of the services sectors are much larger than that of agriculture and allied sectors (which account for only 11 

percent). However, the agriculture sector remains central to Maharashtra’s economic and political landscape, and 

growth in the sector is critical for the state as over 50 percent of its population depends on agriculture.  

 
7. In Maharashtra, agriculture has grown at an annual average of 6.4 percent from 2004-05 to 2011-12, but growth in 

the sector fluctuates heavily and is depending on highly erratic rainfall during any particular year and rainfall 

variability over time. The distribution of rainfall is highly uneven within the state and ranges from over 4,000 mm per 

annum in coastal areas to less than 400 mm in some of the most arid districts. Agriculture remains the highest user 

of freshwater, withdrawing more than 80 per cent of the surface and groundwater (“blue water”) available to the 

state. Since the continuation of the State’s strong economic growth performance would have to be supported by 

higher water availability in all three sectors of the economy, there is a need for Maharashtra to better manage its 

water resources and in particular to enhance the efficiency of the water used for agriculture and focus on increasing 

the availability and use by the agriculture sector of “green water” (rainwater stored in the soil as soil moisture). 

Severe consecutive droughts experienced in large parts of Maharashtra over the last two years have considerably 

affected the state’s agricultural performance and social fabric in rural areas, and have prompted the highest-level 

state authorities to declare “drought-proofing” of agriculture a key development priority for Maharashtra. 


8. Maharashtra’s agriculture is dominated by small and marginal farmers with an average farm size of 1.44 ha. Most 

of the agricultural production is rain-fed, with less than 20 percent of the arable land under irrigation. Farmers’ 

annual production covers two seasons: kharif crops planted at the onset of the monsoon rainfall and ravi crops 

planted at the beginning of the winter season. Due to the broad range of agro climatic zones and soil types 

encountered, the state’s agricultural production is fairly diverse. Crop production is dominated by food grains, i.e. 

cereals (mostly rice, sorghum or jowar, maize) and pulses (chickpea or gram, pidgeon pea or tur). For oilseed crops, 

soybean remains by far the most important commodity. Cotton and sugarcane, whose production is relatively 

water-intensive, are the two cash crops most commonly found in Maharashtra’s farming systems (the State is 

among the largest producers of cotton and sugarcane in the country).  

 
9. The area under cultivation for cereals has declined since 2000, with a considerable drop in the production of 

sorghum (though naturally better adapted to dryer conditions than other cereals) and a shift from food grains 

towards cash crops has been observed, with an increase in the area for cotton and sugarcane. Since 2000, an 

upsurge in the production of high-value horticulture crops has been observed, and today, the State of Maharashtra 

has emerged as one of the country largest producers of fruits (mango, citrus, grapes, pomegranate) and vegetables 

(onion, tomato). Overall, crop productivity has increased over time but remains at relatively low levels (2013-14, 

non-drought year:  sorghum 814 kg/ha; soybean 1,214 kg/ha; cotton 361 kg/ha). Yield gaps for several key crops are 

still significant, reflecting the need for a mix of sector policies and investments to promote research on climate-

adapted varieties, irrigation for a more efficient on-farm use of water, and extension services for the adoption of 

climate-resilient agronomic practices and technologies – i.e. for building climate resilience in Maharashtra’s farming 

systems.   

 
10. In 2008, GoI released the National Action Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC), and directed the States to develop 

State Action Plans on Climate Change guided by and consistent with the structure and strategies of the NAPCC. The 

GoM took a pioneering step towards formulating the Maharashtra State Adaptation Action Plan on Climate Change 

(MSAAPCC) by commissioning a comprehensive vulnerability assessment study which included the task of 

generating model-based climate projections specific to the State’s geography. The MSAAPCC seeks to address the 

urgent need to integrate climate change concerns into the State’s overall development strategy, thus assisting in 

building long term climate resilience and enabling adaptation to the likelihood of risks arising from climate change. 

The MSAAPCC climate modelling results for 2030, 2050 and 2070, show that temperature and rainfall are projected 

to increase across the State of Maharashtra, with important regional variations – resulting, on balance, in potentially 

significant adverse impacts on agriculture performance.  

 
11. The annual mean temperature in Maharashtra is projected to increase by around 1.3-1.5

o
C by the 2030s; the 

projected increase in monsoon rainfall by the 2030s ranges from 13-30% across the state. These analytical findings 

from the MSAAPCC are consistent with the findings of the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel 

on Climate Change (IPCC). The effects of these longer term climate trends on sectors like agriculture or water, 

effectively signaling a shift in climatic conditions, will be further aggravated by the projected increase in the 

frequency of extreme climate events (droughts, hailstorms, floods, delays in the onset of monsoons, higher rainfall 

intensity) already experienced in Maharashtra over recent past, as illustrated by the 3 severe droughts that hit the 

state over the past 5 years.  

 


12. The GoI has designed a number of policy initiatives and programs aligned with the recommendations from the 

NAPCC program and the state-level action plans, including the National Initiative on Climate Resilient Agriculture 

(NICRA) to promote the development of climate-resilient villages; the Pardhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana 

(PMKSY) Program to promote efficient irrigation practices and improve water use efficiency; the Jalyukt Shivar 

Abhiyan (JSA) Program on watershed and drought management; the Integrated Watershed Management Program 

(IWMP) on natural resources conservation; as well as India’s Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC) as 

presented to the COP21 in Paris to address the adverse effects of climate change. Against this background, the GoM 

is committed to further support and implement those policies in Maharashtra and sees the proposed project as an 

opportunity to contribute to the implementation of policies in support of the climate agenda. 

 
13. Higher level authorities in the state of Maharashtra have recently embraced a new paradigm for the agricultural 

sector which now needs to be mainstreamed across institutions and stakeholders. It is built around the recognition 

and understanding of climate change and climate variability as the “new normal”; this in turn, requires a structural 

shift in the approach to sustainable agriculture growth based on longer-term adaptive interventions (reforms, 

investments, capacity development) to build climate-resilience in agriculture – in addition to focusing primarily on 

shorter-term emergency responses to recurring natural disasters. The Bank is very well placed to provide value-

added to the GoM in establishing this new paradigm through its experience with climate-resilient agriculture 

elsewhere, its capacity to work multi-sectorally, and to apply cutting-edge knowledge at scale in support of changes 

in policies and strategies to promote climate adaptation and mitigation, and generate climate co-benefits.  

 
Relationship to CPF 
 
14. The proposed project is fully consistent with the India Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for FY2013–17 to 

support poverty reduction and shared prosperity in India. In line with the pillar for Transformation, the project 

promotes inclusive rural growth, development and dissemination of new agricultural technologies, climate-resilient 

agriculture, enhanced market linkages for small and marginal farmers, and improved water and natural resource 

management (Outcome 2.4). Further, the proposed project will have a positive impact in terms of: (i) environmental 

protection by enhancing the management of soil and water resources, (ii) reduced greenhouse gas emissions by 

disseminating high efficiency irrigation systems, and (iii) promoting diversification into high value crops (Outcomes 

2.5 and 2.6). The project will also contribute to the Inclusion pillar of the CPS by enhancing the livelihoods of small 

and marginal farmers through crop diversification, enhanced market access (Outcome 3.6), and by improving local 

communities’ ability to manage droughts and floods through enhanced design and restoration of irrigation 

infrastructure with better flood protection features (Outcome 3.8).  

 
15. The project is fully aligned with the Bank’s Climate Change Action Plan (CCAP) which explicitly highlights climate-

resilient agriculture and water management as key priorities for climate adaptation in the South Asia Region (SAR). 

CCAP also advocates that transformative action on climate change requires partnerships with client countries to 

mobilize additional capital for mitigation and adaptation action, which the project proposes to achieve with 

potential co-financing from the GoM as well as from the Green Climate Fund (GCF) through IFC’s 2030 Water 

Resources Program. The project will directly contribute to WBG’s commitment to increase the climate-related share 

of its portfolio from 21 to 28 percent by 2020 in response to client demand.  

  

16. The project is based on a multi sector approach and will require close collaboration across the Bank’s Global 

Practices and Units (Agriculture, Water, Trade & Competitiveness, Climate Change, and Disaster Risk Management) 

in the design and throughout implementation. Close collaboration during planning and implementation will be 

sought with thematically related on-going/pipeline projects and initiatives (e.g. Maharashtra Agricultural 

Competitiveness Project - MACP, P120836; India Climate Change Mitigation Action Support, P162119; National 

Groundwater Management Improvement Program, P158119). Collaboration with IFC is secured through the 

inclusion on the project team of technical staff from IFC’s 2030 Water Resources Group (2030WRG) and efforts to 

develop co-financing arrangements with possible funding from the Green Climate Fund (GCF).  

 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
17. The PDO is to enhance climate-resilience and profitability of smallholder farming systems in selected districts of 

Maharashtra. 

 
18. Direct project beneficiaries will be small farmers (households with 1.0 to 2.0 ha of farm land) and marginal farmers 

(less than 1.0 ha), who will gain from knowledge and technology transfer, and access to assets to enhance climate 

resilience on their farms, as well as increased revenue from crop diversification and participation in emerging value 

chains. Farmer producer companies (FPCs) and small and medium agro-entrepreneurs (SMEs) will also benefit from 

the project through climate-resilient investments in value chain development, support with the promotion of 

backward and forward linkages, and access to business development and incubation services. The project will also 

directly benefit local institutions and agencies (e.g. agricultural research and extension, technical advisory services) 

through capacity development on climate resilience. State Agriculture Universities (SAU), various line departments, 

government agencies and other institutions at district and sub district level will also benefit through a strategic 

partnership with the project towards mainstreaming climate resilience in agriculture.  

   
B. Key Results 
 

19. The following Key Performance Indicators (KPI) are proposed for measuring the core outcomes of the project:  

a. KPI #1 - Resilience: Farmers adopting climate-resilient agricultural technologies [Corporate Results 

Indicator] 

b. KPI #2 - Resilience: Area provided with micro irrigation systems [Corporate Results Indicator]  

a. KPI #3 - Resilience: Average on-farm soil organic carbon content 

b. KPI #4 - Profitability: Average farm income  

c. KPI #5 - Direct beneficiaries: Farmers reached with agricultural assets or services (by gender) [Corporate 

Results Indicator] 

 
D. Concept Description 

 
20. Project area. The proposed project will be implemented in the 15 districts of the Mrathwada and Vidarbha regions 

that have been most affected by the recurrent monsoon failures of recent years. These districts account for a total 

population of 30.2 million people and a project area of around 3.5 million ha. Out of a total of 18,000 villages in the 

districts selected, the project will cover 5,000 villages characterized by a high climate-vulnerability index and low 

HDI; this includes about 1,000 villages located in the Purna river basin tract and showing very high levels of soil 

salinity and sodicity. Managed spill-over effects are expected for a range project activities and outputs to villages not 

covered by the project. Most of the project area is located in Maharashtra’s semi-arid agro climatic zones. The vast 

majority of rural households in the project districts are small and marginal farmers whose livelihood depends for 

more than 90 percent on rainfed agriculture.  

 
21. Cropping patterns in the selected districts are dominated by cereals (mostly sorghum and millet), pulses and 

oilseeds (soybean). While cotton remains the main cash crop, more and more farmers are growing fruit trees to 

secure their farm income. Unlike in some other parts of Maharashtra where groundwater shortage has become an 

acute problem, in the project area only 55 percent of the total groundwater potential has been harnessed. However, 

poor management of surface water and lack of in situ storage in the project area have aggravated the impact on 

agriculture from the severe consecutive droughts that have hit Maharashtra in the past couple of years. 

 
22. Project rationale and alternatives considered. The proposed project results from a clear understanding at the 

highest level of authority in the state that Maharashtra needs a comprehensive, long-term and systematic approach 

to managing and coping with climate change and variability. In the past, emergency responses to increasingly 

frequent climate events have yielded only limited results: such short-term approach did not significantly boost 

agriculture sector performance, prevent further deterioration of the socio-economic fabric in rural areas (exodus, 

farmer suicides), or lead to an increase in farmer income and prosperity. Thus, given the climate projections that 

indicate severe impact on the agriculture and water sectors in Maharashtra under status quo, the new paradigm to 

addressing climate adaptation and mitigation in the agriculture and food system is essential.  

 
23. In addition to the short-term disaster management approach, a policy-based project approach was considered to 

address the impact of climate change on agriculture. Such approach would aim at reforming policies, including those 

that encourage the rapid expansion of water-intensive crops resulting in the depletion of groundwater resources. 

This approach was not pursued, since the selected project area presents distinct agro-hydrological features (e.g. no 

rice is grown in the project area and the sugarcane grown in the selected districts represents less than 3 percent of 

the state-level production). Importantly, the key policies impacting the selected project area relate to markets, and 

on these, Maharashtra has been among the most progressive states in terms of implementing policy reform. The 

remaining policies are beyond the State mandate, controlled by the central government, and these mostly relate to 

the distorting minimum support prices for selected commodities, which by and large are not growth in the project.  

 
24. Finally, a watershed-based approach was considered for the project, with a stronger focus on natural resources 

management. This approach was eventually discarded since it would not sufficiently focus on farm-level adaptation 

and mitigation issues nor would it provide the support for value chain development, a key part of the 

comprehensive approach needed to provide the market outlets and input supplies required to incentivize farmers to 

adopt resilient crops and agronomic practices. 

 
25. In line with GoM request, the proposed project, as represented in the graph below, is built around a comprehensive, 

multi sector approach that focuses specifically on building resilience in agriculture through the scaling up of tested 

technologies and practices, while generating the following interdependent triple win solutions:  

a. enhanced water security at farm level - through the adoption of technologies for a more efficient use of 

water for agriculture, and the increase in water storage capacity (surface and sub-surface) and 

improvement in water distribution structures to address on-farm water availability and reduce the risks 

associated with intra- and inter seasonal climate variability;  

b. improved soil health - through the adoption of good agricultural practices to improve soil fertility, soil 

nutrient management, and promote soil carbon sequestration; and  

c. increased farm productivity and crop diversification - through the adoption of climate-resilient seed 

varieties (short maturity, drought and heat resistant, salt tolerant) and market-oriented crops with a 

clear potential for income security derived from the integration of farmers in corresponding value-

chains.  

 

Strategic Overview, Thematic Linkages and expected Achievements of the PoCRA  

 

 
26. Sustainable pathways to resilience. Enhancing climate-resilience in agriculture involves the integration of 

adaptation, mitigation, and other practices in agriculture that increase the capacity of the farmer and his/her 

production system to respond to various climate-related disturbances by resisting or tolerating the damage and 

recovering quickly. To ensure the sustainability of the comprehensive on-farm and off-farm interventions required 

to build resilience in agriculture, there is a need to strengthen institutions, in particular at the local level, and 

improve their capacity to plan for adaptation to evolving climatic conditions and induce a change in local practices.  

 
27. In addition, the successful adoption of climate-resilient farming practices will largely depend on the farmer’s 

perception of income gains from the new technologies, as profitability remains the most important incentive for 

change at farm level. To that effect, crop diversification, access to knowledge and farm assets needs to be 


accompanied by more market opportunities, which can be achieved through improved participation of organized 

smallholders in the corresponding value chains and the mobilization of private sector (e.g. agri business SMEs).  

 
28. Finally, generating cutting-edge knowledge on climate change and its impact on key sectors such as agriculture and 

water is key to providing strong analytical underpinnings for policies on climate adaptation and mitigation – which 

still need better implementation in Maharashtra (and the rest of the country), despite the state being a frontrunner 

in India on the reform agenda for climate change.      

 
29. Leveraging financial resources. Implementing climate-resilient practices at a scale to cover the targeted 5,000 

villages in a saturation mode with watershed treatment and on-farm technologies requires an estimated total costs 

of well over US$2 billion. The tentative budget for the proposed project is US$600 million, with US$480 million from 

IBRD and US$120 million from GoI/GoM. This represents an average budget envelope of US$20,000 per village and 

year. A contribution from project beneficiaries towards technologies adopted and assets acquired from the project 

will be subsequently factored in, on the basis of the cost-sharing norms applied in other GoM programs and 

projects. Therefore, a major task during project preparation will consist in strategically prioritizing interventions 

planned in each cluster of around 10 villages, selecting results-based investments to be financed, and phasing in 

activities to be implemented in a given cluster.  

 
30. Against this background, the GoM is seeking to leverage its own resources and the IBRD funding with 

complementary funding from the Green Climate Fund (GCF). IFC’s 2030 Water Resources Group is currently 

supporting the GoM’s efforts to access GCF grant funding in the range of US$250 million to scale up climate 

adaptation in Maharashtra rain-fed agriculture. During project preparation, Bank and 2030WRG staff will work as 

one project team and explore with counterparts possible co-financing arrangements between the IBRD funding and 

the GCF grant.  

  
31. Project overview. The proposed project seeks to introduce transformational changes in the agriculture sector by 

scaling-up proven technologies and good agricultural practices that contribute to building climate resilience and 

enhancing farm income. The project will promote the transfer of technologies for climate adaptation and mitigation 

at farm level and will support targeted interventions and limited physical investments in the catchment area to 

promote the use of surface water over groundwater. To enhance farmer income, the project will support activities 

aimed at linking organized smallholders with agri-food SMEs and accessing new market opportunities enhancing 

their participation in commodity value chains.  

  
32. Finally, for the sustainability of the comprehensive approach proposed to build resilience in agriculture, the project 

will enhance the capacity of institutions and agencies at various levels to mainstream resilience (in particular in 
agricultural services for smallholders), develop strategic partnerships with national and international entities, and 
help generate evidence-based knowledge to advance the policy agenda on climate change and vulnerability.  To 
achieve the PDO and KPI targets, the project is designed around the four components described below.    

 
Component A: Promoting Climate-resilient Agricultural Systems (US$ XXX million) 
  

33. The objective of this component is to build climate-resilience in agricultural production systems through a series of 
activities at farm level, complemented by interventions in catchment areas. Mini watershed plans will be developed 
early to provide a road map for investment priorities and the implementation of related activities. This component 



will focus on: (i) scaling-up the adoption by farmers of climate-resilient agricultural practices aimed at improving soil 
health and water-use efficiency; and (ii) catchment area treatment to promote the use of “green water” for 
agriculture over “blue water”, and improve the availability of water at farm level. This component contributes 
directly to the PDO by promoting the transfer of climate resilient technologies at farm level (KPI #1), supporting the 
development of micro-irrigation systems (KPI #2) and encouraging farmers to adopt practices that enhance soil 
health (KPI #3). 

  
34. Participatory development of mini watershed plans. In line with the Maharashtra Groundwater Development and 

Management Act (2009, effective from 2013) which promotes the watershed as participatory planning unit, this 
component will finance the development of some 500 mini watershed plans, each covering a cluster of 8 to 12 
villages and an area of around 5,000 ha. Mini watershed plans are comprehensive multi-year activity and local 
investment tools for planning and monitoring. They include a comprehensive resource mapping, a rapid appraisal of 
stakeholders taking into account gender specificities, and participatory water budgeting to inform on possible 
investments in irrigation and drainage, and water resources management. Those plans will serve as a road map for 
the implementation of subsequent activities and investments under the proposed project. 

  
35. Technology transfer and climate-resilient agriculture practices for a sustainable soil and water management.  To 

enhance increase water productivity and achieve water security at farm level, the component will scale-up the 
adoption of technologies and practices aimed at maximizing the use of surface water for agriculture, at managing 
groundwater resources in a sustainable manner, and at getting “more crop per drop”. To that effect, the component 
will finance the adoption of in-situ soil moisture conservation practices, and the expansion of micro irrigation 
systems (primarily drip and sprinkler irrigation), including water supply structures and drainage facilities. The 
component will also help improve on-farm water availability through selected investments at catchment level (as 
prioritized in the mini watershed plan) to increase surface and sub-surface water storage capacity. To that effect and 
in close coordination with the Chief Minister’s Program on watershed and drought management (Jalyukt Shivar 
Abhiyan), the project will finance drainage line treatment, the improvement of water courses, the construction of 
new and desilting of existing water harvesting structures (e.g. farm and community ponds), and the construction of 
groundwater recharge structures. Agronomic practices promoted under this component in support of improved soil 
moisture management will include, among other, contour bunding, broad-bed furrow and conservation furrow 
cultivation. The component will also support efforts towards a more rigorous monitoring of the quality of the water 
available for agriculture. 

 
36. To improve on-farm soil fertility and micronutrient management, the component will scale-up the adoption of 

climate-resilient agricultural practices aimed at: (i) increasing the soil organic matter content, and (ii) sustaining a 
viable agriculture on the naturally saline and sodic farm soils prevailing in parts of the project area. Conventional 
methods to address soil salinity and soil sodicity (i.e. land reclamation with widespread application of gypsum or 
lime) will be reviewed for their economic sustainability and financial viability in the local context, and used only 
where significant and long term net benefits can be expected. Good agricultural practices aimed at improving soil 
health have been successfully tested in other programs in Maharashtra and beyond (e.g. NICRA) and include 
biomass mulching, residue recycling, manure management, conservation tillage, in-situ moisture conservation and 
others.  

  
Component B: Climate-resilient Post-harvest Management and Value Chain Promotion (US$ XXX million) 
 

37. The objective of this component is to enhance climate resilience beyond farm gate and provide end-to-end solutions 
in selected commodity value chains. To ensure successful crop diversification, the component will help: (i) develop 

smallholder-inclusive value chains for climate-resilient commodities, and (ii) overcome constraints in the seed supply 
chain. In line with GoM priorities, this component will focus on Farmer Producer Companies (FPCs) as major drivers 
of change in the agri-food system. An increase in farm income remains the key driver of change and a pre-
requirement for the adoption of the climate-resilient technologies and good agricultural practices promoted under 
Component A. Thus, this component will directly contribute to the PDO by creating opportunities for increasing the 
revenue of small and marginal farmers (KP #4) through crop diversification and their participation in selected value 
chains.  

   
38. Promoting Farmer Producer Companies. This component will build on the outcomes of other GoM programs and 

projects that have focused on FPCs as agent of change (e.g. MACP). A rapid appraisal exercise, with mapping, 
profiling and capacity needs assessment of the 420 FPCs in the project area (most of them in early development 
stage), will provide the basis for a series of activities tailored to the growth potential of existing FPCs. The 
component will also support the development of farmer-group based organizations into entrepreneurial, market-
oriented, financially sustainable companies with the capacity to perform selected value-adding activities and deliver 
a range of services (e.g climate-related technical advisory services, training on climate adaptation and mitigation 
practices in post-harvest management). The component will support viable mechanisms to further consolidate and 
set up new business linkages for FPCs with private sector (e.g. exporters, seed companies, farm machinery, agro-
input suppliers, and financial institutions). For the professionalization of FPCs, the project will explore a 
collaboration with IFC’s Agribusiness Leadership Program and/or Business Edge Program. Eligible FPCs will also 
benefit from participating in the incubation program of the proposed Climate Innovation Center (see Component C). 

  
39. Strengthening emerging value-chains for climate-resilient commodities. The selection of agricultural value chains for 

end-to-end solutions (from agricultural research to consumer markets) will be finalized by the PMU during project 
preparation. Pulses and oilseeds are emerging as potential priority commodities for end-to-end solutions. In 
addition, the component will support value-chains emerging in the project area following farmers’ production 
diversification to include higher-value commodities, in particular fruit trees (more climate-resilient than annual 
crops given their deeper root system). The component will also support viable investments in product aggregation, 
handling, transformation and marketing (e.g. collection centers, grading and packaging units, cold storage facilities, 
ICT-based market information systems). Priority will be given to investments that promote the use of green 
technologies (including solar energy). Value-chain financing and specifically access to finance and financial services 
for value chain actors will be explored under this component 

  
40. Improving the performance of the supply chain for climate-resilient seeds. The adequate supply of seeds with short 

duration, drought-, salinity- or heat-tolerant features, is a key priority for the GoM’s in its strategy to build climate 
resilience in the agriculture sector. The seed industry in MH is largely segmented, with private seed companies 
mainly focusing on the high value, low volume seeds (e.g. cotton, sugar cane, GM and hybrid varieties), while public 
sector seed corporations dominate the market for low value, high volume seeds (e.g. cereals, pulses and oilseeds). 
The component will address the need for increasing the availability of seeds, given farmers’ evolving demand 
resulting from the recommendations of the district-level contingency plans triggered by climate events (e.g. delays 
in onset of monsoon rains call for different crop mix). To address the shortage of breeder seeds, the component will 
assess the SAU’s breeder seeds programs and support solutions aimed at enhancing their performance (including 
developing linkages with FPCs for seed multiplication). This component will also seek to support key actors in the 
seed supply chain such as the Maharashtra State Seed Corporation who plays a unique role in the production and 
distribution of climate-resilient certified seeds for small and marginal farmers (e.g. pulses and oilseeds). It will also 
finance the development of a limited number of seed processing and storing hubs in strategic locations of the 
project area. 

 
Component C: Institutional Development, Knowledge and Policies for a Climate-resilient Agriculture (US$ XXX million) 
 

41. The objective of this component is to ensure sustainability in the approach proposed for building climate resilience 
through a longer term adaptive management of agriculture, soil and water resources, by: (i) strengthening the 
capacity of existing institutions to design and deliver agro-technical and climate advisory services, (ii) establishing a 
Climate Innovation Center, and (iii) promoting an evidence-based policy dialogue on climate resilience. Successful 
implementation of the activities in this component will contribute to achieving the PDO by increasing the outreach 
of institutions and agencies promoting climate-resilient agriculture in the project area (KPI #5) and generating 
spillover effects to farming communities from other villages in the project area not covered by project activities.   

 
42. Sustainability and institutional capacity development. To ensure the sustainability of the comprehensive approach 

on climate-resilient agriculture proposed in this project, this component will support the development and 
implementation of a capacity development program for district and local level stakeholders. This component will 
mainstream climate-resilience in the strategic objectives of institutions and agencies involved in the delivery of 
services to small and marginal farmers. At district level, the project will work closely with the Superintendent District 
Agricultural Offices (SDAOs) and build their capacity to coordinate and monitor the implementation of the climate-
resilience agenda on the ground. At state level, the project will develop partnerships with the SAUs and support 
existing programs for the development and field-testing of emerging agricultural technologies and practices for 
climate-adaption of dryland farming systems. The component will also promote knowledge and learning exchanges 
on climate-resilience with national/international entities such as ICRISAT, CRIDA, the Indian Institute of Science, the 
Indian Meteorological Department, the Australian Centre for International Agricultural Research (ACIAR), the 
Australian Water Partnership (AWP), and the Carbon Management and Sequestration Center (CMASC, Ohio State 
University).  

 
43. Maharashtra Climate Innovation Center (CIC). This component will finance the planning, launch and start-up phase 

for a CIC until it operates in a self-sustained manner. The CIC will support local private sector capacity – with focus 
on entrepreneurs and SMEs – to commercialize and deploy emerging technologies and business models in growing 
climate sectors (e.g. climate-resilient agriculture, water, energy) to provide local solutions to climate change. The CIC 
will offer services tailored to local needs and conditions among a suite of tools which includes: access to latest 
technology information and market intelligence, fee-based business advisory and other incubation/coaching support 
services, and tailored proof-of-concept grant and seed investment financing to prove and scale early-stage firms and 
concepts. The CIC will draw on local and international expertise to support the GoM with the review and formulation 
of policies and strategies relevant to climate change and climate resilient, in particular as linked to the agri-food 
sectors. During project preparation, the PMU will commission a feasibility study for the CIC; it will be followed up 
during early project implementation with the development of a detailed CIC business and financial plan to be 
submitted for approval to the relevant authorities.  The CIC will be established with technical guidance from the 
Bank’s Climate Technology Program. 

  
44. Knowledge and policies. This component will finance a range of analytical studies aimed at updating and 

disseminating existing knowledge on a range of issues related to climate resilience and agriculture. Such studies will 
provide the analytical underpinnings to improve the policy and strategy framework required to further enhance 
resilience in the agri-food system in Maharashtra (and beyond). This component will support efforts towards a multi 
stakeholder dialogue on policies promoting climate resilience in agriculture, as well as direct payments to farmers 
for environmental services (e.g. soil carbon sequestration, groundwater conservation). This component will also  
look at reliable ways to quantify potential mitigation benefits from activities promoted by the project and aim at 



providing a pathway to carbon financing. The component will also finance the development of a state-of-the art 
climate and agro-hydrological model that supports policy-makers Maharashtra by: (i) making projections on the level 
of sustainable withdrawal of surface and groundwater in a given watershed under various climate and land use 
scenarios, (ii) generating suitability maps for Managed Aquifer Recharge (MAR), and (iii) assessing the magnitude of 
MAR in the project area.  

  
Component D: Project Management (US$ XXX million) 
 

45. This component will primarily finance the project’s incremental operating costs.  A PMU has been set up by the 
Department of Agriculture (GoM) and tasked with the overall management of the project, while ensuring smooth 
coordination of activity implementation by various agencies and strategic partners. Given the transformative nature 
of the project, institutional coordination within and across the relevant sectors is emerging as a critical task in 
developing an effective project implementation mechanism. The PMU will be responsible for compiling an annual 
Activity Plan and Work Program and develop the corresponding budget proposal to be submitted for approval to the 
Project Steering Committee.  

 
46. The PMU will ensure that all project activities are implemented in line with the provisions in the official project 

documents; in particular, the PMU will be in charge of financial management, project procurement, and safeguards 
compliance. The component will support all activities related to project communication, public awareness and 
outreach, including the development of a comprehensive project web site. It will finance the services of specialized 
consultant firms to develop and implement a comprehensive project impact evaluation (including all surveys). 
Further, the project will promote the intensive use of ICT across components; to that effect, this component will 
finance both ICT goods and specialized consultant services. The project’s M&E system will be ICT-based, enabling the 
PIU to access project information and data from the field in real-time. ICT will also be used to facilitate the feedback 
from project beneficiaries on project activities planned/under implementation (citizen engagement), and will be 
mainstreamed in the project’s grievance and redress mechanism. 
 

 
    

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
Maharashtra is one of India’s most prosperous states, with a population of 114 million. Yet, it has some of India’s poorest 

people, four of its 36 districts are among India’s 106 most backward. Agriculture and industry form the mainstay of the 
state's economy. Most of the cultivable land is still rain-fed, relying heavily on the southwest monsoon rains. Districts in 
eastern Maharashtra on the Deccan plateau are particularly prone to drought. The net irrigated area is only 30.77 million 
Ha or about 16% of cultivable land. In Maharashtra, main crops include rice (although not grown in the project area), 
jowar, bajra, pulses, vegetables and onions. The main cash crops include cotton, sugarcane (though the project area 
accounts for only 3 percent of the state sugar cane production), turmeric, and several oilseeds. Amravati and Yavatmal, 
respectively in Vidharba region are the largest orange and cotton growing districts. 
The Project will be implemented in two main regions:  Vidharbha  and Marathwada comprising some 5,000 villages - 

selected for their high climate vulnerability index and low HDI; in addition, about 1,000 of these villages are characterized 
by high levels of soil salinity and sodicity. The project area is characterized by a substantial spatial and temporal rainfall 
variation and scarcity of water resources . These are increasingly exacerbated by frequent droughts associated with 
climate change and high human pressure on natural resources.  


The proposed project is premised on the fact that climate changes are quite inevitable and that it affects all the 
households  much more on the livelihoods of the poor and vulnerable sections. Further, it is well recognized that the 
households/ communities in the rain fed agriculture are quite diverse and heterogeneous with several sub groups 
identifiable based on several factors – resource endowment, gender, ethnicity ( scheduled tribes), castes (scheduled 
castes), religious minorities and geographical setting ( forests, hills, coastal areas). Each of these subgroups gets affected 
differently and has differential capacity for participation. Lastly, to ensure a village/ community spread resilience, group / 
collective action would be essential which demands substantial outreach efforts. Given this scenario, following issues 
emerge as significant: local participation, institutional linkages and communication outreach. 
 

 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
GoM has established a PMU, with a full time environmental specialist, to guide and coordinate preparation of 

environmental and social management framework (ESMF) of the project. A consultant firm has also been brought on 
board by GoM to prepare the ESMF together with the project implementation plan (PIP). During project implementation, 
there will also be environment specialists at the District PMUs in Akola and Aurangabad. GoM has experience with 
implementing World Bank funded projects, in similar sectors, such as Maharashtra Agriculture Competitiveness Project 
and Maharashtra Water Sector Improvement Project. For these projects, GoM is already implementing various tools for 
managing environmental and social issues, such as ESMF. Therefore, there is good borrower orientation and sensitivity to 
implement Bank’s safeguards. 
The project, through the safeguards instruments, will also put in place a capacity building program for staff, and project 

beneficiaries to ensure successful implementation of ESMF and IPM plan, and compliance with the Bank’s safeguards 
policies. A full understanding of the capacity-building need is expected once the draft ESMF is prepared.  
 

 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 
Suryanarayana Satish, Anupam Joshi, Sharlene Jehanbux Chichgar 

 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

OP 4.01 is triggered because the project involves a 
series of interventions for increasing productivity, 
enhancing resilience, and agriculture value chain 
development.  Investments to be supported under the 
project will not lead to any major irreversible impacts, 
however, if not designed effectively,  may generate 
impacts such as soil degradation, water pollution, 
biodiversity conservation, labor safety issues. (these 
are mostly temporary by nature and site specific).  
 
The project will also have positive impacts on the 
environment and natural resource base of the project 
area such as drought-proofing rain-fed agriculture in 
the semi-arid regions, prevention of soil degradation, 

increase of soil moisture and in biomass and organic 
matter of soil, decrease of run-off and soil losses, 
increased climate resilience and annual water 
availability. All mitigation measures would be carefully 
designed in order to enhance the positive impacts, and 
ensure sustainability of investments. 
 
Overall, the project related impacts are mostly 
positive, hence it has been classified as category B. At 
this very juncture, the scope and location of the 
interventions are not known. Hence, an Environmental 
and Social Management Framework (ESMF) is being 
prepared which outlines the process for future 
subprojects to ensure that they are environmentally 
and socially sound, sustainable, and in line with GoM 
and World Bank operational safeguards policies. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

Project financed investments are not expected to 
intervene in any critical natural habitats. The project 
areas contain some essential ecosystems with rich 
biodiversity, and a number of wildlife sanctuaries such 
as Jayakwadi Bird Sanctuary, in Marathwada, and 
Bhamragarh, Bor, Charpala, Chikhaladara Wildlife 
Sanctuary. There are also a number of tiger habitats 
such as Tadoba Andhari Tiger Project, Melghat Tiger 
Project, Pench Tiger Reserve located in Vidarbha 
region. 
 
As details of the exact sites of the proposed 
investments are yet to be known, and investments 
involving civil works may be located within the 
proximity of these areas OP 4.04 is triggered. The 
ESMF would include all adequate measures for 
avoidance, mitigation of impacts and preventive 
measures for negative effects on natural habitats.  
 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No 

Project financed activities will not support 
afforestation, reforestation or pasture improvement 
activities. The project will not encroach on forest land 
or change the management of forest resources. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The policy is triggered because investments targeted 
at increasing agricultural productivity and climate-
resilient agronomic practices may encourage the use 
of pesticides. There is therefore a need to promote the 
use of integrated pest management techniques, 
including the safe use, storage and disposal of agro-
chemicals. The ESMF will aim at providing as much 



information as possible on biological approaches to 
pest management. The project will prepare and 
promote an Integrated Pest Management Plan. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 TBD 

The project is not expected to have an impact on 
physical cultural resources, as it will be implemented 
in areas where agriculture is already practiced. 
However, the project area comprises of Aurangabad 
district, which contains many historical structures and 
UNESCO world heritage sites.  
The project will ascertain through preparation, if there 
is evidence that the project location sites would 
contain features of archeological, historical or cultural 
significance.  Following which, the ESMF would include 
provisions of chance finds to be followed by 
implementing partners, on the proper management of 
physical cultural resources if discovered during project 
implementation.  
 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 Yes 

There are 2.7 million Scheduled Tribe population in 
the 15 project districts which account to about 8% of 
the total population. Further, 27 Tehsils spread across 
11 districts are covered under the Fifth Schedule of 
the Indian Constitution which provides a variety of 
safeguards for the tribals. Given this, the project 
triggers the Bank’s Operational Policy (OP) 4.10 on 
Indigenous Peoples.  However, the next step on 
deploying the instrument- Tribal Peoples Plan (TPP) or 
Tribal Peoples Planning Framework (TPPF)— needs to 
be decided. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 TBD 

Once the project interventions are firmed up and the 
Social Assessment Study is completed, a decision can 
be made on whether lands are required and the 
methods of scuring thereof. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 

OP 4.37 is not triggered as the project investments will 
not support construction, or rely on performance of an 
existing dam >15m height. The project will not  
support rehabilitation of existing or building any new 
irrigation schemes originating from existing dams in 
the State 
 
The project may include construction of small check 
dams. The potential adverse safety and security 
impacts will be addressed in the ESMF which will 
include adequate measures to ensure that the design, 
construction and the maintenance of the small dams 
will be done by qualified engineers.  

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
OP 7.5 is not triggered as no international waterways 
are involved. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No NA 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
May 05, 2017 
 

Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Project has initiated efforts towards the conducting a comprehensive Environmental and Social Assessment. This is 

expected to result in: (i) Integrated Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF); (ii) Tribal People Plan/ 
Framework, as appropriate; (iii) Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), if need be; (iv) IPM/IPNM plans.  A Terms of 
reference (TOR) for the conduction of assessments and preparation of the ESMF  has been prepared by the PMU.  
 
The ESMF will provide essential baseline data, confirm policies that are triggered, assess likely impacts of the project 

interventions. The ESMF will also propose mitigation measures for any adverse impacts that may be envisaged through 
the design and construction phases of various interventions. Recommendations for strengthening institutional capacity, 
and estimate the budget required for the implementation will also be included. While the assessments will be 
participatory with due and extensive consultations with all the stakeholders, especially, the poor and vulnerable farming 
community. Further, the ESMF will also outline arrangements for consultations with the stakeholders and disclosures 
thereof both during preparation as well as implementation phases.   
 
 All safeguards studies shall be completed and the ESMF publicly disclosed by April 15, 2017. 
 
 