













































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Zambia Integrated Forest Landscape Project (P161490) 

 
 

  
Dec 22, 2016 Page 1 of 18  

     

 

 
 
      

 

Combined Project Information Documents /  
Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (PID/ISDS) 

 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 24-Feb-2017 | Report No: PIDISDSA20573 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Zambia P161490 Zambia Integrated Forest 
Landscape Project 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA 16-Jan-2017 04-May-2017 Agriculture 

Lending Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Finance Interim Climate Change 
Secretariat 

 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
To improve landscape management and increase environmental and economic benefits for targeted rural 
communities in the Eastern Province and to provide an immediate and effective response to an eligible crisis or 
emergency. 
 
Components 

1. Enabling environment 
2. Livelihood investments 
3. Project management 
4. Contingent emergency response 

 
 

Financing (in USD Million) 

 

Financing Source Amount  

BioCarbon Technical Assistance Trust Fund    8.00  

Borrower    0.00  

Global Environment Facility (GEF)    8.05  

International Development Association (IDA)   17.00  

Total Project Cost   33.05  

 

Environmental Assessment Category 

B - Partial Assessment 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the preparation to continue     
 



 
Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
 

1. Zambia is a lower-middle-income country with close to 16 million inhabitants. It had a Gross Domestic 
Product (GDP) of US$27.1 billion in 2015, equating to a per capita income of about US$1,300. Zambia 
has made significant socio-economic progress over the past two decades and achieved average growth 
of 7.4 percent between 2004 and 2014. However, since mid-2015 economic growth has slowed down 
considerably to 2.9% in 2015 and a forecasted 3.0 percent in 2016, as external headwinds and domestic 
pressures have intensified.  

2. In 2015, global economic conditions for growth deteriorated and the price of copper (typically 77 
percent of Zambia’s exports) fell further from its 2011 peak. This has put downward pressure on 
revenues, widening the fiscal deficit and reduced the value of exports, opening up a trade deficit. In 
addition, Zambia experienced domestic pressures in the form of: (i) repeat fiscal deficits (reducing 
confidence in the economy); (ii) reduced and delayed rainfall in 2015 (undermining agricultural incomes 
and lowering the water level in reservoirs); and (iii) increased power outages. Further, the strengthening 
of the US$ in 2015 put pressure on the Zambian Kwacha that combined with lower confidence so that 
the local currency lost 41% of its value against the US$. 

3. Close to the end of 2015 the government acted vigorously to contain the impact of ebbing confidence 
with monetary policy measures. These measures restored stability of the Kwacha, which appreciated by 
11.2 percent in the first 9 months of 2016, and helped curb inflation from its peak of 22.9 percent in 
February 2016 to 8.8 percent in November 2016. However, fiscal policy remained loose in 2016 and 
monetary policy has had to remain very tight, reducing liquidity, putting pressure on the financial sector, 
and causing a drag on growth.  

4. The August 2016 elections went in favor of the incumbent President and political party. After five 
elections in ten years the constitutional changes mean that a full five-year term is expected to be served, 
raising cautious optimism about the political space for reform in 2017 and over the medium-term. The 
Government has presented its economic recovery plan: “Zambia Plus” that provides a framework for 
restoring fiscal sustainability, closing the twin deficits and ensuring that structural reforms are carried 
out to boost the non-copper economy. The Government has requested the support of the World Bank, 
IMF and other partners to make it a success. Accordingly, GDP growth is forecast to rise to 4.0 percent in 
2017 and 4.2 percent in 2018. The forecasts are subject to upside and downside risks, but the return of 
investor confidence in the fourth quarter of 2016 (evidenced by over-subscribed bond auctions), bold 
measures by government (including the removal of fuel subsidies), and a rally in copper prices 
(November 2016), suggest that economic circumstances are improving.  

Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here. 


5. The rapid and sustained growth achieved from the early 2000s to 2014 was insufficiently inclusive and 
despite the economy doubling in size, poverty remains widespread. As based on the 2015 Living 
Conditions Monitoring Survey Report of the Government’s Central Statistical Office, an estimated 54.4 
percent of Zambians live in extreme poverty (below US$1.90 per day, purchasing power parity terms) 
and poverty is higher among women. Rural poverty (at 76.6 percent) is more than three times the 23.4 
percent rate of urban poverty. The benefits of growth have accrued mainly to those already above the 
poverty line, inequality has remained high, and efforts are needed not only to restore the economy to 
faster growth, but ensure planned pro-poor policies are implemented and more inclusive growth 
follows. 

Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 

6. In Zambia’s Eastern Province (EP), the majority of the province’s 1.7 million people live in rural areas 
with livelihoods dependent on natural resources. As in Zambia as a whole, this rural population is 
characterized by high levels of poverty and addressing this challenge is the highest priority of the 
provincial administration. According to the World Bank’s Mapping Subnational Poverty in Zambia report, 
the Eastern Province is one of three poorest provinces in Zambia

1
. In addition, according to the Living 

Conditions and Monitoring Survey (2015), at 70 percent, the Eastern Province had the fourth highest 
proportion of population that was poor. The Zambian diet is mainly composed of cereals, predominantly 
maize, starchy roots and, to a lesser extent, fruit and vegetables. Cereals provide almost two-thirds of 
the dietary energy supply. According to the 2013-14 Zambia Demographic and Health Survey, the 
nutrition indicators for Eastern province stand at 43 percent for children under five who are stunted and 
20 percent of the women are overweight or obese (ZDHS, 2013-14).  Women and children are the most 
vulnerable to the problems related to nutrition because of their socioeconomic characteristics.  

7. Compounding the challenges of rural development in the EP is a changing climate, which models suggest 
will continue to change dramatically over the coming decades. The country is already experiencing 
climate-induced hazards. Droughts and floods have increased in frequency and intensity over the past 
few decades and have adversely impacted food and water security, water quality, energy generation, 
and livelihoods of people, especially in rural communities. Recent climate trends based on records from 
1960 to 2003 indicate that the mean annual temperature increased by 1.3 degrees Celsius, an average 
rate of 0.34 degrees Celsius per decade. Mean rainfall in Zambia has decreased by an average rate of 1.9 
mm/month (2.3 percent) per decade since 1960. The future trends in the country are towards a higher 
average temperature, a possible decrease in total rainfall, and some indication of more intense rainfall 
events. Zambia’s Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) report to the UNFCCC has estimated 
national GDP loss due to climate change over a 10-20 year mid-term planning horizon will be in the 
range of US$4,330-5,440 million with the following sector GDP losses: agriculture (US$2,200 – 3,130), 
energy-related (US$270 – 450), health (US$460), and natural resources (US$1,400).  
 

8. In addition to being subject to the impacts of climate change, Zambia contributes to global carbon 
emissions. According to the Second National Communication (SNC), the latest data available from the 
UNFCCC, annual greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions in Zambia have increased by 6.2 percent from 51.52 
million tons carbon dioxide equivalent (CO2e) in 1994 to 54.72 million tons CO2e in 2000. The largest 
contribution to GHG emissions in 2000 came from land use change and forestry, which accounted for 

                                                           
1
 World Bank Group (2015), Mapping Subnational Poverty in Zambia. 

7 percent followed by agriculture at 18.9 percent. 
 

9. Addressing rural poverty and improving livelihoods, helping rural communities adapt to major impacts 
to be expected from climate change, and reducing national carbon emissions from the forest and land 
sector all require a carefully integrated landscape approach. Major sources of rural livelihoods in the EP 
are in agriculture, forestry, and wildlife, but all of these are inter-dependent and all are intertwined with 
climate change adaptation and mitigation. 

 
10. The Government of the Eastern Province is in the process of preparing a development vision in 

consultation with provincial stakeholders. The vision statement is “to improve rural livelihoods in Eastern 
Province by reducing deforestation and forest degradation using a low emission pathway through local 
community participation by 2030”. In order to address the challenges associated with the drivers of 
deforestation, local communities’ participation and commitments as well as private sector involvement 
will be critical in optimizing natural resources management at both communal and individual farmer 
levels. According to the vision, the targets for reducing drivers of deforestation include reducing the 
total annual area burnt from 16.7 percent to 5.0 percent by 2036 through forest fire management; 
establishment of a minimum of 3,000 hectares of plantations on deforested land by 2037; promoting 
ecotourism with community participation to combat poaching; and promoting soil fertility 
improvement, good agricultural practices, and land use planning among 40 percent of the farmers in the 
province to tackle food security and poverty at local level. The estimated financing investment to 
achieve these goals is US$140 million, part of which will be leveraging private sector investments and a 
significant part of which will be mobilization of additional financing for institutional strengthening and 
implementation of activities. The ZIFLP will contribute towards supporting activities for addressing the 
drivers of deforestation as stated in the vision. 
 

11. Institutionally, responsibilities for coordination of the national climate agenda falls to the Interim 
Climate Change Secretariat (ICCS), under the Ministry of National Development Planning (MNDP). The 
ICCS ensures coordination with the many other ministries and organizations which need to be engaged 
in a landscape-level livelihoods/climate change initiative such as this project. Responsibility for 
implementing projects is often with the line ministries. At the provincial level, the provincial 
administration of the Eastern Province exercises considerable control over activities in its jurisdiction, 
consistent with the recently adopted decentralization law of Zambia. 

 
C. Proposed Development Objective  
 

 
 
Development Objective 
 

12. The PDO is “to improve landscape management and increase environmental and economic benefits 
for targeted rural communities in the Eastern Province and to provide an immediate and effective 
response to an eligible crisis or emergency”.  

 

Note to Task Teams: The PDO has been pre-populated from the datasheet for the first time for your 

convenience. Please keep it up to date whenever it is changed in the datasheet. 


Key Results 
 

13. The achievement of the PDO will be measured using the following indicators i) Forest area brought 
under sustainable management practices as a result of the project (ha); ii) Land area under climate-
smart agricultural practices (ha); iii) Yield change for selected crops (%); and iv) People in targeted 
communities with increased monetary and non-monetary benefits (% share of which women). The 
project outcome and intermediate indicators are presented below in the Results Framework. 

 
D. Project Description  
 

14. The project aims to provide support to rural communities in the EP to allow them to better manage the 
resources of their landscapes so as to reduce deforestation and unsustainable agricultural expansion; 
enhance benefits they receive from forestry, agriculture, and wildlife; and reduce their vulnerability to 
climate change. The project must also invest in ensuring that enabling conditions are in place for these 
changes to happen – conditions such as tenure security, planning at different spatial scales, and capacity 
development. Simultaneously the project will create the enabling environment for emission reduction 
purchases to be made in a subsequent project. 

 
15. ZIFLP will promote the adoption of sustainable landscape management practices and climate-smart 

agriculture (CSA) as an alternative. Community empowerment, strengthening local and traditional 
governance and land use planning are the key to integrating, optimizing multiple land uses within the 
landscape. However, collective action is unlikely in the absence of rights to use, benefit from, and 
protect natural resources. Leverage for transforming the system will include village land use plans, 
improved governance, matching land use with land characteristics, and poverty reduction outcomes 
including emission reduction payments. This will require strong monitoring systems for 
livelihoods/economics, governance, the implementation of land use plans, and resources monitoring 
and protection. 

 
16. ZIFLP would finance activities under four components over a five-year period using funds from the 

BioCFplus-ISFL (US$8.0 million), GEF (US$8.05 million) and IDA (US$17.0 million). The project 
components include 1) Enabling Environment, 2) Livelihood and Low Carbon Investments, and 3) Project 
Management. A fourth component, with a zero budget, is included in the event funds need to be 
reallocated for an emergency response. 
 

17. Component 1: Enabling Environment. This first component is intended to help create conditions that 
will allow the livelihood investment of Component 2 to be successfully implemented. This entails 
supporting plans, partnerships, and regulatory conditions to help rural communities in the project area 
to have the capacity to adopt sustainable and low-carbon land management practices. The component 
would include support for (i) Developing integrated district development and local planning; and (ii) 
Establishing emissions reduction framework leading to an Emission Reduction Payment Agreement 
(ERPA) (for future results-based emissions reduction payments). Enabling environment interventions will 
be financed through grant support from the BioCarbon Fundplus-ISFL. 
 

18. Component 2: Livelihood and Low-Carbon Investments. Component 2 will finance on-the-ground 
activities that improve rural livelihoods, conserve ecosystems and reduce GHG emissions. It has 2 



subcomponents: Agriculture and forestry management and Wildlife management. These activities will 
be financed by IDA, BioCFplus-ISFL and GEF resources. Although the subcomponents are sectoral in 
nature, the cross-sectoral and landscape approach of the planning activities that will underlie the 
activities will ensure a landscape approach is retained.  

 
19. Agriculture and forestry management. The objective of this subcomponent is to provide financing for 

interventions that increase agricultural productivity, enhance agro- and forest ecosystem resilience, 
reduce GHG emissions, and sequester carbon using a landscape approach. This subcomponent will cover 
the following activities: (i) scaling up of climate-smart agricultural practices; (ii) community forestry 
management; and (iii) land tenure and resource rights regularization, a pre-condition for the adoption of 
improved agriculture and forestry management. 

 
20. Climate smart agriculture. Interventions under climate smart agriculture will apply a train the trainers 

approach to introduce (i) conservation agriculture (CA) practices and integrated soil fertility 
management, (ii) agroforestry, and (iii) enhanced market access for smallholders and private sector 
engagement. In addition, the project supports community matching grants which can support livelihood 
interventions including climate-smart agriculture interventions, introducing small ruminants or poultry, 
supporting market access through agro-processing. Interventions will aim at enhancing the income and 
livelihood of the communities and farmer families through income generating and value added activities 
in the Eastern Province.  

 
21. Community forestry management. The objective of forestry management is to assist local communities 

and their organizations to improve the management and conservation of their natural resources, create 
income opportunities, and generate carbon benefits. This will be accomplished by developing and 
implementing participatory land and resource use planning and management–including fire control and 
prevention–and providing specialized technical assistance and training to identify viable investments 
from the sustainable production of timber and not-timber forest products. Activities to be supported 
will be consistent with the land and resource use plans developed at the village and district levels. The 
sub-component would finance specialized technical and extensions services, small works and 
equipment, operational costs and non-consultant services (e.g. workshops and study tours).  
 

22. Land tenure and resource rights regularization. The sub-component will provide analytical and 
technical assistance support to expand past and ongoing efforts at documenting land rights that could 
underpin adoption of sustainable low-carbon land management practices and private sector 
engagement.  Activities will feed into the National Land Titling Program, and will comprise (i) developing 
cost-effective systems to sustainably manage information on land rights and linking it to land use; (ii) 
identifying new possibilities of private sector engagement based on an assessment of the extent and 
impact of existing arrangements; (iii) documenting different types of land rights in ways that are 
supported by local stakeholders, and provide incentives for adoption of CSA, sustainable land use and 
intensification; and (iv) linking land rights to key parameters of land use (crop cover, soil moisture, soil 
carbon) using remotely sensed imagery.  

 
23. Wildlife management. This sub-component will have two major focus areas: i) improved management of 

the complex of protected areas centered on Lukusuzi National Park in the Eastern Province; and ii) 
adoption of improved management practices of wildlife at the community level, which can contribute to 

improved livelihoods of targeted communities. The project will support (i) preparation of park 
management plans; (ii) investments in infrastructure such as guard houses or other park buildings, 
upgrading of existing roads and tracks to facilitate park management and ecotourism, provision of water 
holes, fencing (only in limited areas where judged necessary to minimize human-wildlife conflict, HWC); 
(iii) purchase of equipment such as radios for communication, park guard equipment, patrol equipment, 
etc.; and (iv) support to park patrols, with a particular focus on management of poaching. 

 
24. Component 3: Project management. This third component will finance activities related to national and 

provincial-level project coordination and management, including annual work planning and budgeting; 
fiduciary aspects (financial management and procurement); human resource management; safeguards 
compliance monitoring; M&E and impact assessment studies; and communication strategy and citizen 
engagement).   

 
25. Component 4: Contingent emergency response. This is a zero budget component which is included to 

facilitate the use of IDA funds in the event of a disaster and to be able to respond quickly to a potential 
government request to reallocate some funding from existing World Bank projects to provide 
emergency relief.  

 
E. Implementation 
 
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 
 

26. The major investments of the ZIFLP will take place in the Eastern Province. However, there are activities 
such as those related to REDD+ policy, MRV, safeguards, etc. which are national in scope. 
Implementation of ZIFLP will therefore be at both the national and at the Eastern Province level. A 
National Project Unit (NPU) will be responsible for activities at the national level, and will be located 
within the Ministry of National Development Planning. At the provincial level, the Provincial 
Administration of the Eastern Province will be the executing agency of the project. This implementation 
arrangement aims to: (a) ensure sectoral mainstreaming of investment; (b) lessen the approval layers 
for faster decision-making, enabling more efficient project implementation; and (c) respect the 
constitutionally mandated decentralization process and governance structures at the national and 
provincial levels, to the extent possible.  

 
 

 
 
 .    
F. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 

Project location is the Eastern Province of Zambia. Wildlife conservation activities will focus on improved 
management of Lukusuzi National Park (and surrounding areas). The land planning, agriculture, and forestry 
investments will take place throughout the Province. 

 

 
G. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 
 

Kenneth M. Green,Majbritt Fiil-Flynn,Nicholas Meitiaki Soikan 

 
 
 

SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The policy is triggered as this is an integrated forest 
landscape project that will involve afforestation, 
reforestation, promotion of sustainable conservation 
farming methods as well as preservation of wildlife 
habitat in national parks and adjacent GMAs, all of 
which could have environmental or social impacts 
which must be assessed and managed. As a 
landscape management project its impacts are 
nonetheless expected to be overwhelmingly 
positive. 
 
The positive impacts of the program will be a 
reduction in greenhouse gas emissions with 
improved forest cover, rural livelihoods 
improvement, and wildlife conservation. The 
potential negative environmental impacts will be 
known with more specificity as project activities are 
identified during project implementation but are 
expected to be limited, localized, small-scale and not 
significant given that many of the on-the-ground 
project activities will be from community-driven 
development initiatives. An Environmental and 
Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been 
prepared to assess and guide the screening and 
mitigation of any negative impacts of the program. 
The project will monitor possible cumulative 
negative impacts and take action as needed. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

The policy is triggered given the potential impacts on 
natural habitats either directly or indirectly, through 
REDD+ activities, conservation farming, and the 
management of wildlife habitats. The expected 
impact on habitats is overall positive. Changes in 
livelihoods of rural farmers, due to increased 
agriculture activities and the introduction of new 


agricultural technologies, are likely to have limited 
negative impacts on natural habitats. The proposed 
avoidance and mitigation measures for these 
impacts are included in the project's ESMF. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes 

The policy is triggered as the project forestry 
management activities seek to assist local 
communities and their organizations to improve the 
management and conservation of their forests. The 
project will have impacts on the health and quality 
of forests, will affect the rights and welfare of people 
and their level of dependence upon and interaction 
with forests, and aims to bring about changes in the 
management, protection, and utilization of natural 
forests. However, the project will not lead to 
significant conversion or degradation of critical 
forest areas or related critical natural habitats. There 
may be continuing intrusion of smallholder farming 
into natural forests in the project area but the 
overall purpose of the project investments is to limit 
such intrusions and never to promote them. The 
project's Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF) and Process Framework (PF) 
address the potential impact of the project on 
forests and/or the rights and welfare of local 
communities. 
Since the project potentially finances harvesting 
activities carried out by local communities under 
community or even possibly joint forest 
management, such communities will adhere to a 
time-bound phased action plan to achieve a 
standard of forest management developed with the 
meaningful participation of locally affected 
communities, consistent with the principles and 
criteria of responsible forest management as 
outlined in paragraph 10 of OP 4.36. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The policy is triggered as increased agriculture 
activities and the adoption of new climate smart 
agriculture technologies could conceivably result in 
increased usage of agrochemicals by farmer 
beneficiaries. The project additionally will procure 
supplies and equipment for nurseries which may 
include pesticides. While a stand-alone Pest 
Management Plan (PMP) is not required for this 
project, the ESMF contains an abbreviated PMP to 
avoid usage of restricted pesticides, promote use of 



personal protective equipment (PPE), training of 
producers in proper handling of agrochemicals, and 
to promote integrated pest management. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 

The policy is triggered as a preventative measure in 
the event of potential impacts on the known and 
currently unknown physical cultural resources (PCR) 
of the area. The ESMF contains measures for 
avoiding and managing impacts on known PCR in the 
project area as well as chance-find procedures in the 
event new resources are discovered in the course of 
project implementation. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 

The policy is not triggered as the proposed program 
activities in the Eastern Province of Zambia are in 
areas that do not include indigenous groups as 
defined by the policy. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

OP 4.12 is triggered and applies mainly to certain 
activities relating to project interventions in 
protected areas. A Resettlement Policy Framework 
(RPF) was prepared in consultation with key 
stakeholders, consulted, and publicly disclosed. A 
Process Framework (PF) will also be required given 
that the project will support improved management 
of Lukusuzi National Park, adjacent GMAs and 
possibly other protected areas, thus potentially 
limiting access to resources. 
 
The PF is intended to avoid or minimize any adverse 
impacts upon local livelihoods and to support the 
development of alternative livelihoods as needed, 
on the lands already available to the affected 
households or communities. The project will support 
the preparation and implementation of follow-up 
action plans to provide livelihoods support where 
needed, following the criteria and procedures 
specified in the PF.  
 
The Zambian Government has recently resettled 
communities who encroached into Lukusuzi National 
park in the recent past. The Government has 
prepared and sent to the Bank a review of how the 
resettlements were carried out and an action plan to 
cover any remaining gaps that might remain. 
 
During the project, the Government could be 
required to continue to deal with those who have 

dy encroached into the park, or with new 
encroachers. If the project will in any way be 
associated with new resettlements, this would have 
to be done in strict accordance with the RFP. 
Additionally, the PF outlines the process of dealing 
with such situations following the Zambian laws, the 
provisions of the PF in accordance with OP 4.12, as 
well as international best practices.  
 
The Land tenure and resource rights regularization 
activities will be informed by and will be 
complementary to the PF and RPF as appropriate. 
 
All project-supported civil works (such as 
construction of office space, staff accommodations, 
and ranger posts) will be on government, public, or 
voluntarily donated community lands. This will be 
verified through the environmental and social 
screening mechanism specified in the ESMF, before 
any civil works commence. 
 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 

The policy on the Safety of Dams is not triggered as 
the project will not involve the construction of water 
retention structures that are likely to pose potential 
hazards to human or animal health and safety. The 
project will not fund any dams as defined in OP 4.37 
that would trigger the requirements of the policy. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 

The policy for Projects on International Waterways is 
not triggered as the proposed activities will not 
potentially impact any shared international 
waterway. Any conceivable increase in water use 
and direct abstraction of water resources in the 
Luangwa watershed will be of low significance and of 
local impact only. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
The Bank policy on Projects in Disputed Areas is not 
triggered by the project, as it is not located in any 
disputed territory of the country. 


KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
While there are environmental and social safeguard issues associated with the proposed project, no large-scale, 
significant, or irreversible negative impacts are foreseen. In general, the project is expected to generate positive, 
environmentally friendly land management practices including climate-smart agriculture and implementation of 
national park management plans. However, the project takes place in and could conceivably negatively impact natural 
habitats, protected areas, and forests. Additionally, as a project with an agricultural component, there are safeguard 
issues related to pesticide use. In all these cases, activities are largely community and demand-driven, and potential 
impacts are small-scale and localized. There may be cumulative impacts from these small-scale activities which will 
need monitoring. 
 
Zambia in the past has resettled persons illegally encroaching into national parks, including from Lukusuzi National 
Park, to be supported under the project. There could be possibilities of dealing with encroachment in the life of this 
project. The Government has conducted a review of how resettlement was carried out in the past in Lukusuzi NP as 
well as a gap analysis to identify any additional measures that may be needed to ensure compliance with both 
Zambian law and World Bank requirements. Any resettlement carried out during the project will be subject to the 
project's Resettlement Policy Framework. Additionally, the Process Framework (PF) outlines the process of dealing 
with limiting access to resources, following Zambian laws and the provisions of the PF in accordance with OP 4.12, as 
well as international best practices. 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
No negative long-term impacts are expected. As mentioned, a potentially indirect impact due to increased or new 
agricultural practices may be increased pesticide use but since such activities are largely community and demand-
driven, these issues are small scale and localized. The project will also support livelihood restoration activities and 
sustainable community forestry, which in turn is expected to be beneficial to the local communities. 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. 
In order to achieve the project objectives of promoting landscape management in the Eastern Province, in agricultural, 
forestry, and wildlife sectors, no project alternatives were identified that would further minimize environmental or 
social impacts and still allow for achievement of project objectives. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower 
capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The borrower has developed an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), a Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF), and a Process Framework (PF) in order to address safeguard policy issues. Specifically for issues 
related to the resettlement of encroachers out of Lukusuzi National Park, the Government has prepared a review and 
action plan. Although not related to potential impacts of the project activities, it should also be noted that the project 
includes significant funding to support the preparation of the safeguard instruments that will be needed to advance 
toward signature of an Emissions Reduction Purchase Agreement, in the context of REDD+. 
 
The Interim Climate Change Secretariat, under the Ministry of National Development Planning is currently 


implementing the Pilot Program for Climate Resilience (PPCR) in the Western Province of Zambia. Hence, the 
implementation unit has good knowledge of safeguards and of implementation requirements. At present there is a 
knowledgeable Environmental and Social Safeguards Officer with proven experience with implementing management 
measures in line with World Bank safeguard policies. Safeguards capacity is much more limited or absent in the 
provincial administration unit; staff will need to be hired or training will need to be provided. Safeguards training 
needs have been identified in the ESMF, which would be provided through the technical assistance component of this 
project. 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, 
with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Citizen engagement and participation for the project’s implementation will build on the various multi-stakeholder 
consultations that have taken place in the Eastern province during project preparation, and will take account of 
existing communication structures.  
 
Specifically, the project collaborates with stakeholders regularly through the following channels: project preparation 
missions, Monthly REDD+ Working Group meetings organized by the Interim Climate Change Secretariat and Forestry 
Department and Chipata Round Table meetings. The Chipata Roundtable was established to provide a forum for 
government and non-governmental stakeholders to discuss major environmental threats to the Luangwa Valley 
ecosystem, and is chaired by the Permanent Secretary, with active participation of chiefs and civil society. The 
Roundtable will likely be expanded to cover the entire Eastern Province. The ICCS will also develop a clear consultation 
and participation plan and protocols to be operationalized during implementation of this project, to ensure that all 
relevant stakeholders are targeted by the project.  
 
 
 
B. Disclosure Requirements  

 
OPS_EA_DISCLOSURE_TABLE Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other 

Date of receipt by the Bank Date of submission to InfoShop 
For category A projects, date of 
distributing the Executive Summary of 
the EA to the Executive Directors 

20-Jan-2017 15-Feb-2017 
 

   