














































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Moldova Economic Governance Development Policy Operation (P156963) 

 
 

  
April 17, 2018 Page 1 of 5  

     

 

      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   

Program Information Document  
 (PID) 

 
 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 17-Apr-2018 | Report No: 125879 

 
BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Moldova P156963 
Moldova Economic 
Governance Development 
Policy Operation 

 

Region 
Estimated Board Date 
 

Practice Area (Lead)(s) Financing Instrument 

EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA June 19, 2018  
Development Policy 
Financing 

Borrower(s) Implementing Agency 

Moldova Ministry of Finance 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 

The proposed EGDPO supports ongoing reforms to enhance the transparency and sustainability of the public sector and 
to level the playing field for private sector development. They enjoy coordinated support from the EC, the IMF and the 
World Bank, including by targeted technical assistance.  

  
 
 Financing (in US$, Millions) 

FIN_SUMM_PUB_TBL 
SUMMARY 
 

Total Financing 30 million 

 
   
DETAILS-NewFin3 

  
Source: IDA 
 

 
Decision 
 

Following the Corporate Review, the decision was taken to proceed with appraisal and negotiations. 
   
 
 
 

B. Introduction and Context  
 
Moldova’s recent macro-economic performance has been characterized by consumption-led growth and low fiscal 



deficits. In 2016-17, GDP growth resumed reaching 4.5 percent on account of strong agricultural output and robust 
private consumption growth largely driven by remittances and public and private wage increases. At the same time, 
credit growth remains negative reflecting the limited pass-through of the monetary policy stance to commercial 
interest rates and tighter prudential standards in the banking sector.  The fiscal deficit is estimated to reach 0.8 
percent in 2017, lower than the deficit forecasted at budget stage and public debt remains sustainable under 
different stress-test scenarios. In 2018, growth is expected to remain robust and reach 3.8 percent but to moderate 
over the medium term. The inflation rate is expected to re-enter the target corridor due to base effects and lower 
regulated prices. Fiscal deficits are projected to remain under control.  
 
In a context of slowing growth over the medium term, addressing the structural impediments to efficient public and 
private sector governance is paramount for igniting new sources of growth. As a large share of the population is 
already living and working abroad, and the attachment of subsequent-generation migrants to Moldova declines along 
time, Moldova needs to search for new drivers of growth reliant on higher private sector investments and in this 
context, remove barriers to private sector access to and use of resources. Moreover, governance challenges undermine 
the efficiency of public resource use and constrain competition among businesses.  

 
 
 

Relationship to CPF 
 

In line with the World Bank FY18-21 Country Partnership Framework and the Moldova National Development 
Strategy, the proposed Economic Governance Development Policy Operation (EGDPO) supports Moldova’s transition 
towards a more sustainable and inclusive growth model. It builds on the progress achieved under the previous DPO by 
supporting actions to enhance the transparency of the banking sector and recent analytical work, which identifies 
strengthening the rule of law and the accountability of economic institutions as one of the top three constraints that are 
holding back economic growth and prosperity in the country.  
 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 

This operation supports reforms to strengthen economic governance in Moldova linked to the management of fiscal 

risks (Pillar A) and private sector development (Pillar B).  

D. Program Description   
 

This stand-alone Economic Governance Development Policy Operation (EGDPO) supports reforms to reduced fiscal risks 

and level the playing field for private sector development. The authorities are committed to restore investors’ and 

citizen’s trust in the integrity of the public sector by developing transparent and stable economic institutions and 

improving equity in access and use of resources. Reforms under the first pillar focus on reducing fiscal risks by reforming 

the pensions system, strengthening tax collection form tobacco taxation, pre-empting potential conflicts of interest of 

high level officials, and improving the reliability of SOEs and municipal enterprises’ financial information.    Reforms under 

the second pillar aim at removing bottlenecks in obtaining licenses, authorizations, and certificates and in accessing key 

agriculture inputs (seeds, seedlings, fertilizers, and pesticides), and at improving the governance regime in the banking 

and energy sector.  

 


E. Implementation  
 

The Ministry of Finance will steer the administration of this operation, as the main body responsible for financial aid 

coordination and management. The Ministry of Finance has recently assumed this role and will be responsible for the 

supervision for the monitoring of progress in the policy areas supported by the operation.  

 
F.  Poverty and Social Impacts and Environment Aspects 
 

The operation is not expected to have adverse impacts along poverty, social, gender or environmental dimensions. 
Some of prior actions could have positive impacts on poverty and equity. The pension and tax related reforms promote 
social sustainability, reduce privileges that do not benefit large segments of population, especially poor, and incentivize 
healthier lifestyle. The pension reform and higher tobacco taxation contribute to the reduction of gender gaps in income 
and non-communicable diseases.  
 
G.  Risks and Mitigation 
 
Risks to the program implementation are moderate to substantial. Macro, sector strategies and technical design risks 
are considered substantial and are partially mitigated by the reforms supported by this operation, the recent record of 
Moldova’s prudent fiscal policy, the IMF program which serves as a macro-fiscal stability anchor, and the technical 
assistance (TA) provided by the World Bank Group (WBG) which will help continue the reform agenda. 

 . 