














































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Jamaica Rural Economic Development Initiative-Second Phase (P166279) 

 
 

  
Oct 05, 2018 Page 1 of 16  

     

 
 
      

 

Combined Project Information Documents /  
Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (PID/ISDS) 

 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 29-Nov-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSA24700 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Jamaica P166279 Jamaica Rural Economic 
Development Initiative-
Second Phase 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

LATIN AMERICA AND CARIBBEAN 12-Nov-2018 26-Feb-2019 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Jamaica Jamaica Social Investment 
Fund (JSIF), Ministry of 
Finance and Public Sector 

 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 

To enhance access to markets and to climate resilient approaches for targeted beneficiaries. 

 
Components 

Climate Resilient Agriculture and Community Tourism Investment Subprojects for Rural Enterprises 
Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building of Public Sector Entities 
Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation 
Contingent Emergency Response 

 
 

PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
   

SUMMARY-NewFin1  
 

Total Project Cost 42.00 

Total Financing 42.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 40.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 

 
   
DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) 40.00 



 

The World Bank  
Jamaica Rural Economic Development Initiative-Second Phase (P166279) 

 

 

  
Oct 05, 2018 Page 3 of 16  

 

Non-World Bank Group Financing 

     Counterpart Funding 2.00 

          LOCAL: BENEFICIARIES 2.00 

    

Environmental Assessment Category 

B-Partial Assessment 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate     
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
B. Introduction and Context 

 
Country Context 

1. The Jamaican economy has historically been characterized by low growth and high public debt, but 
fiscal and structural reforms launched in 2013 are helping to reverse the trend. Real gross domestic product 
(GDP) per capita grew by only 0.5 percent on average per year between 1990 and 2016. Fiscal restraints, higher 
tax revenue, and well-timed liability management operations have reduced the debt-to-GDP ratio by around 25 
percentage points. GDP growth has seen a modest acceleration since the start of reforms, rising to 1.4 percent 
in 2016. The informal sector continues to be large in relative terms, accounting for 43% of official GDP according 
to an ILO 2014 study. The economy remains vulnerable to external shocks.  

2. Rural poverty has remained consistently higher than urban poverty, with an increasing urban-rural gap. 
The national incidence of poverty for 2015 was 21.2 percent, with an urban-rural gap of 14 percentage points 
(28.5 percent in rural areas1 compared to 14.3 percent in the Kingston Metropolitan Area). Socio-economic 
disparities for women and youth continue to contribute to the higher level of rural poverty. If Jamaica is to 
achieve “Developed World” status, as is the goal of the GOJ’s Vision 2030 plan, development of rural areas needs 
to keep pace with development in urban areas. The tourism and food/agriculture sectors hold significant 
potential for rural growth and development because of their importance to the economy overall as well as their 
potential reach into rural areas. 

3. Jamaica is highly vulnerable to climate change and faces significant environmental threats due to its 
geographical location. Between 2004 and 2008, five major storm events caused damages and losses estimated 
at US$1.2 billion. Evidence suggests that Jamaica will likely see increases in severe weather events, such as 
droughts, extreme precipitation, flooding, and increases in the intensity and frequency of hurricanes2. 
Additionally, Jamaica’s vulnerability to sea level rise is more pronounced than in other regions due to the 
potential impact of storm surges from tropical storms and hurricanes on the coast. 

            
Sectoral and Institutional Context 

Agricultural Sector 

4. The agricultural sector is an important contributor to the country’s economic development and is 
recognized as a priority in the GOJ’s mid-term plans. The agricultural sector accounts for 8.0 percent of Jamaica’s 
GDP, and employs 18.7 percent of the active population (of which 44.7 lives in rural areas). Agriculture and agro-
processing in Jamaica are characterized by a few sub-sectors with relatively tight value chains and high-quality 
standards serving export markets and the tourism industry, along with domestic production sub-sectors serving 
local parish markets and supermarkets. Traditional export crops (sugar, bananas, coffee, and citrus) are in 
decline. The “non-traditional” export sector showing strong growth and market potential includes agricultural 
products such as preserved fruits (e.g. ackee) and sauces, condiments, and mixed seasonings (e.g. jerk sauces). 
Jamaica is a net importer of livestock commodities (dairy and meat products). 

5. The small-scale agricultural and food products sector exhibits significant potential for growth, but 
significant challenges remain to be addressed.  Small-scale agriculture has ample potential for serving domestic 
markets but needs to become more competitive with respect to imports by increasing land and labor 
productivity, the quality and reliability of distribution, and climate resiliency.  Small-farmers and micro and small-
sized agri-businesses enterprises tend to be at a comparative disadvantage in accessing higher value markets due 
to lack of market information, inefficient production practice, outdated technologies, lack of value addition, 
diseconomies of scale, and high logistics costs. Limited access to financing is among the key challenges to 
agriculture competitiveness and related MSMEs. Weaknesses in the connectivity of rural areas is also limiting 
marketing opportunities and access to potentially attractive inland tourism sites.   

6. The natural environment exposes the agriculture and food sector to frequent weather shocks and high 
levels of climatic variability – further exacerbated by climate change.  Climate change has caused a trend of 
rising temperatures, worsening rainfall variability, and droughts, and here the frequency and intensity of extreme 
events is likely to rise in the future.  This will make soil and crop management more difficult, especially in coastal 
areas, which are threatened by a decline in fertility or being washed away. Crops need to be able to withstand a 
more extreme and diverse set of environmental challenges, including worsening of pests and disease occurrence. 
In the livestock sub-sector, these weather trends may put additional strains on cattle, adding to the vulnerability 
of livestock facilities.    

Tourism Sector 

7. Tourism is also a critical driver of the Jamaican economy.  The tourism sector accounted for 9.3 percent 
of the national GDP in 20163.  This sector is considered mature, with international arrivals still growing more 
rapidly than elsewhere in the region. Jamaica’s tourism strategy4 sets a target of 5 percent annual growth for the 
sector for the years 2017 to 2022, as well as 5 million visitors with US$3.5 billion in total earnings annually from 
visitor spending. The goal is also to reduce significantly the amount of leakage that results from the large amount 
of imports used in the sector. Jamaica retains about 30 percent of every dollar spent by tourists, while the target 
set by The Ministry of Tourism (MOT) is 50 percent. As such, Tourism has the potential to be strongly linked to 
agriculture and small-scale production: Sandals Resorts in Jamaica reports that 90 percent of produce purchased 
in Jamaica annually are locally produced by a network of around 180 farmers5.   

        

8. Jamaica’s tourism market has traditionally focused on the “sun, sea and sand” concept model but more 
diversification is being pursued. Attempts are being made by the GOJ and the private sector to provide a more 
diversified visitor experience through new product offerings targeted to wider groups of visitors.  The MOT 
intends to move towards a more inclusive tourism model to spread the benefits of tourism, provide more 
entrepreneurship opportunities, and deepen economic linkages in rural areas. This policy is laid out in the 
National Community Tourism Policy and Strategy, which was funded under the previous REDI project. Many 
challenges to the further development of community tourism in rural areas remains They include: (a) excessive 
licensing and standards that are too complex for small NGOs and Community Tourism Enterprises (CTEs) to 
manage; (b) low levels of available capacity and resources for expanding community tourism operations; and 
(c) poor marketing support and inadequate connections to the tourism supply chain, operators, and hotels.  

9. Climate resilience is also important for the tourism sector. More severe storms and hurricanes, rising sea 
levels, droughts, and heatwaves can degrade tourism assets such as coral reefs, shorelines, freshwater supply, 
and ecosystems, and can damage tourism infrastructure and destination communities with potentially 
significant losses to GDP and employment.  Changing weather conditions and milder winters in various parts of 
the world may also affect tourist demand, underscoring the need for sun, sea, and sand destinations to diversify 
their offerings.  

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
Development Objective(s) (From PAD)  
To enhance access to markets and to climate resilient approaches for targeted beneficiaries. 
 

Key Results 
10. The results of the proposed Project will be measured through the following set of outcome indicators: 

• Percentage of participating rural enterprises that have accessed new markets;  

• Percentage of participating rural enterprises operating on or above the projections (gross sales value) 
of their corresponding business plan; and 

• Number of targeted beneficiaries reached with climate resilient approaches supported by the project 
(of which number of rural enterprises and public institutions). 

 
D. Project Description  

 
11. Enhancement to the REDI I approaches. Building on the experience and results of REDI, the new Project 
will focus on strengthening value chains6  and tourism clusters development, placing emphasis on the linkages 
between producers/service providers and buyers, to improve economies of scale for small agricultural and 
tourism enterprises and to mainstream climate resilience.  

A. Project Components 

12. Component 1. Climate Resilient Agricultural and Community Tourism Investments Subprojects for Rural 
Enterprises (Total US$ 28.0 million, IBRD US$26.0 million).  The objective of this component is to promote the 
development of agricultural/community tourism enterprises that are better integrated in productive 

         
 liances" and operate more competitively in selected value chains, with more reliable linkages 
with buyers and markets and increased capacity to manage climate risks.  

13. This component will finance consulting and non-consulting services, good, works and operating costs 
(through matching grants) for demand-driven and competitively selected agriculture/fisheries or community 
tourism subprojects presented and implemented by participating rural enterprises to increase their production 
and to capture and/or increase their market share and level of profits.  Financed activities will support the 
promotion, identification, design, feasibility, and implementation of competitive and climate resilient 
investment subprojects for business ventures established by beneficiary enterprises (small farmer/fisher 
associations – cooperatives, friendly or benevolent societies, or any formal form of legally established 
associations – as well as, agribusinesses, community tourism operators, and related entrepreneurs such as craft 
makers).  

14. Investments proposals will be prepared in response to calls for proposal and submitted by the beneficiary 
rural enterprises. They will be appraised and competitively selected for project support and funding considering 
pre-established criteria assessing, inter-alia: market demand, product quality, technical and financial feasibility, 
environmental and social sustainability; approaches to enhance climate resiliency and the potential for local 
impact; and the level of participation by women and youth.  It is estimated that a total of 90 investment 
subprojects will be supported through this component, benefitting directly around 200 rural enterprises. As 
such, around 20,000 individual members of these rural enterprises will benefit directly from these investments 
(of which 40 percent will be females and 30 percent youth).  

15. Component 2.  Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building for Relevant Public Entities (IBRD 
US$8.0 million).  This component aims to strengthen the capacity of relevant public-sector institutions (MICAF, 
MOT, and JSIF) and associated entities (RADA, TPDCo, and others) to provide public infrastructure and quality 
services needed to promote inclusive rural development (based on the agriculture and tourism nexus) and to 
ensure the sustainability of the rural enterprises and productive partnerships supported by the project. It is 
organized in the following two subcomponents: (i) 2.1 –Public Infrastructure Investments (IBRD US$ 6,0 million) 
will finance civil works, goods, and consulting services for priority public infrastructure investments (new or 
rehabilitated) that are needed for improving the efficiency and climate resilience of targeted agri-food and 
tourism value chains; and (ii) 2.2: Technical Assistance and Capacity Building (IBRD US$2.0 million. will finance 
technical assistance (consultant and non-consultant services, goods, training, workshops, and study tours) to 
strengthen the capacity of relevant national organizations and other relevant partner entities responsible for 
assisting the agricultural and community tourism enterprises.  

16. Component 3. Project Management (IBRD US$6.0 million).  This component will finance incremental 
costs associated with the management, supervision, and monitoring and evaluation of project implementation 
by JSIF and its technical Project Management Team (PMT) for REDI II. Cost to be financed include technical 
expertise (agriculture, tourism, business development, monitoring and evaluation, etc.), staff training, annual 
audits, vehicles, office equipment, and other operating costs. This component will also ensure that effective 
safeguards, fiduciary, and M&E arrangements are in place during implementation.   

17. Component 4.  Contingent Emergency Response (US$ 0).  This component will allow for a reallocation of 
loan proceeds from other components to provide emergency recovery and reconstruction support following an 
eligible crisis or emergency at the national or sub-national level. Considering the Project design, the CERC is 
expected to be operationalized through a reallocation from component 1 to provide emergency recovery and 
reconstruction support.  To ensure that there is capacity, the Project Operations Manual includes a CERC annex 
applicable to eligible disasters, detailing fiduciary, safeguards, monitoring and reporting, and any other 

necessary implementation arrangements. 

E. Implementation 
 

Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 

18. Implementing Agency for REDI II.  Building on the REDI I experience, the Jamaica Social Investment Fund 
(JSIF) will be the lead implementing agency for REDI II and will work in close coordination and under the technical 
leadership of the Ministry of Industry, Commerce, Agriculture and Fisheries (MICAF), ,the Ministry of Tourism 
(MOT), and their respective operational agencies RADA and TPDCo. JSIF will have overall responsibility for the 
coordination and management of project implementation. JSIF will establish a Project Management Team (PMT) 
that will be responsible for overall technical implementation and will coordinate with all relevant national 
institutions on component implementation. The implementation period is expected to be six years. 

19. Project Oversight: Inter-Ministerial Project Steering Committee. This committee will be responsible for 
ensuring that the Project is in line with national development priorities.  The Committee will be chaired by the 
Planning Institute of Jamaica (PIOJ) with membership to include representatives from MICAF and MOT and other 
relevant agencies i.e. Office of the Prime Minister, Rural Agricultural Development Authority (RADA), Tourism 
Product Development Company (TPDCo), JSIF, and Ministry of Finance and Public Service (MOF&PS). 

20. Beneficiary Rural Enterprises in the agriculture and community tourism sectors will be eligible for 
subproject financing and responsible for the operating, maintenance, and sustainability of the corresponding 
investments. 

 .    
F. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 

The project will take place nationally in Jamaica and specifically in rural agricultural and tourism landscapes. 
Specific location details are unknown at this time because the sub-projects will be demand driven. 

 
 
 
 

SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 
The project is rated as a Category B in terms of its 
risk profile.  
 



 

The World Bank  
Jamaica Rural Economic Development Initiative-Second Phase (P166279) 

 

 

  
Oct 05, 2018 Page 8 of 16  

 

Component 1 will finance rural agricultural and 
tourism subprojects that support revenue 
generating activities including support to rural 
producers (inputs, equipment, seeds, water access, 
drip irrigation, greenhouses etc.) as well as support 
to tourism operators and enterprises (marketing, 
small renovations such as painting and refurbishing 
guest housing, equipment for craft making, etc.). 
Component 2 finances small scale public 
investments aimed at improving the efficiency of 
priority value chains for selected products (e.g., 
storage facilities, cold chain supply infrastructure 
equipment at the regional level as well as at 
airports/ports, fresh products grading, clearing hubs, 
agricultural research and development, 
seeds/seedling production and certification 
activities}.    Most of the impacts related to the 
implementation of Component 1 and 2 are minor, 
short-term and highly localized and thus easily 
mitigated. No cumulative impacts are expected. Any 
impacts are therefore easily mitigated through 
standard mitigation measures. .    
 
Subcomponent  2.2:  Technical Assistance and 
Capacity Building will finance TA and capacity 
building for key organizations and agencies that 
deliver support services in agriculture and rural 
tourism at the local level. While the TA activities 
themselves do not have direct adverse 
environmental or social impacts, the Bank team will 
integrate environmental and social principles and 
objectives as an integral part of the terms of 
reference and supervision of the TA.   
 
JSIF has prepared an Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) that outlines 
potential risks and guidelines to mitigate potential 
impacts, outlines roles and responsibilities of key 
actors, provides budget and costs for mitigation and 
training (where needed) and gives guidance to 
contractors and PIU environmental specialists in 
terms of managing contracts with firms.  The ESMF 
also serves as the guiding document for any site-
specific Environmental and Social Management 
Plans (ESMPs).  This document has been reviewed 
and cleared by the bank and was recently disclosed 



to stakeholders in Jamaica and on the Bank's 
website. A separate integrated pest management 
plan was prepared and also disclosed similarly under 
the project. Institutional arrangements outlined 
within the document will guide the use of pesticides 
according to OP 4:09.  During implementation, each 
subproject will be screened to determine its risk 
profile and, accordingly, it will be determined 
whether further documents (ESMPs) will need to be 
developed to manage these risks.  Any activity that is 
rated Category A will be screened out.  
The ESMF points to additional guidance, as 
applicable, in the General EHS Guidelines and the 
Industry Sector Guidelines specifically guidelines for 
AGRIBUSINESS/FOOD PRODUCTION and FORESTRY 
http://www.ifc.org/ehsguidelines.  

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No This is not a private sector activity. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

Given the scale of the activities, it is unlikely that 
natural habitats will be impacted.  However, the 
locations are unknown and are in the rural areas of 
Jamaica, which has significant natural resources. For 
this reason, the OP is triggered as a precaution.  
However, every effort will be made to avoid working 
in or impacting critical natural habitats. The ESMF  
includes measures to avoid/mitigate the alteration 
of critical or sensitive areas. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes 

The project activities are highly localized and are 
unlikely to impact forests but the project will 
operate in a rural landscape and therefore it is 
possible that some activities may impact tree 
clusters. For this reason, OP 4.36 is triggered as a 
precaution.  All subprojects will  be screened and 
any impacts on forests, or tree clusters, quantified.  
Alternatives will be considered as a means to avoid 
negative impacts on any forests or significant tree 
clusters. The ESMF includes specific screening tools 
to identify any potential negative impacts on forests 
or tree clusters. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

Given that support is provided to producer 
organizers, pesticides may be supported.  However, 
World Bank guidance regarding the use of pesticides 
and  IPM will be observed, and a pesticide 
management plan has been prepared. 



 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No 

This OP is not triggered because the project will not 
operate in culturally sensitive areas.  However, 
during implementation, small rehabilitation works 
and minor mitigation works may result in the chance 
find of culturally significant objects. The ESMF 
includes procedures to address chance findings of 
archeological and cultural resources during 
construction works. 
  

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 
The policy is not triggered because there are no 
groups in Jamaica who meet the definition of IPs 
under OP 4.10. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

The policy will be triggered for activities under 
Component 2. The activities under Component 1 are 
small in scale and scope and therefore unlikely to 
have long-term or cumulative impacts. The JSIF 
evaluation found no sub-project activity financed 
under the REDI I that required physical involuntary 
resettlement. The CDD-type of activities/sub-
projects proposed under Component 1 will exclude 
Involuntary Resettlement as a result of land take 
and/or the physical relocation of households as the 
costs and complexity could easily outweigh the 
benefits and costs of the sub-projects project.  
Under Component 1 a negative list will be developed 
in the ESMF including clear criteria for excluding 
Category A high-risk activities. 
 
While OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement was not 
triggered for REDI I there may be investments under 
REDI II Component 2: Support to Critical Public 
Infrastructure that could result in involuntary 
resettlement through land acquisition. Component 2 
finances medium scale public investments aimed at 
improving the efficiency of priority value chains for 
selected products. There is scope within the project 
to also finance other public investments that are 
outside the scope of agriculture or tourism yet are 
needed to improve competitiveness and enhance 
access to markets in the two sectors.  Specific 
location details are unknown at this time and sub-
projects will be demand driven. As a result, a 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been 
prepared to guide the selection and compensation 
aspects under Component 2 which will be disclosed 




prior to appraisal. The project has also prepared 
guidelines for Voluntary Land Donation.  Upon 
identification of cases of involuntary resettlement, 
resettlement action plans (RAPs) will be prepared, 
consulted on, and disclosed in accordance with the 
policy. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 

This policy will not be triggered because the project 
will not support the construction or rehabilitation of 
dams nor will it support other investments which 
rely on the services of existing dams. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
This policy will not be triggered because the project 
will not affect international waterways as defined 
under the policy. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
This policy will not be triggered because the 
proposed project will not intervene in disputed areas 
as defined under the policy. 

 
 

KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The possible activities to be financed are small in scale and scope and therefore unlikely to have long-term or 
cumulative impacts. Any impacts would be short-term, highly localized, and therefore easily mitigated through 
standard mitigation measures.  The ESMF prepared by the Government has been reviewed by the Bank and has been 
found satisfactory.  That document outlines the procedure for minimizing risks within the project.  For Component 1 
which has many subprojects (e.g. greenhouses, water harvesting, expansion of efficient irrigation methods, integrated 
pest management, introduction of new crop varieties, development of integrated landscape models, improvement in 
stock breeding, and small group marketing infrastructure) the ESMF outlines a screening mechanism to categorize 
each subproject according to its risk profile.  ESMPs will also be developed for certain higher risk subprojects (cleared 
by the Bank and disclosed publicly) prior to implementation of the subcomponent.  For Component 2 which supports 
critical public infrastructure negative impacts will include construction related impacts such as   noise, occupational 
health and safety risks, waste management issues and so on.  In terms of safeguard however, these impacts are all 
small scale and reversible.  None of the project's activities in Component 1 are likely to result in large scale, significant 
or irreversible  impacts. 
 
There may be investments under REDI II Component 2: Support to Critical Public Infrastructure that could result in 
involuntary resettlement through land acquisition. Component 2 finances medium scale public investments aimed at 
improving the efficiency of priority value chains for selected products. These could include building storage facilities, 
processing areas, cold chain supply infrastructure equipment at the regional level as well as at airports/ports, fresh 
products grading, clearing hubs, agricultural research and development, seeds/seedling production and certification 
activities. There is scope within the project to also finance other public investments that are outside the scope of 
agriculture or tourism yet are needed to improve competitiveness and enhance access to markets in the two sectors.  


Specific location details are unknown at this time and sub-projects will be demand driven. As a result, a Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF) has been prepared to guide the selection and compensation aspects under Component 2 and 
has been consulted upon and disclosed. Upon identification of cases of involuntary resettlement, resettlement action 
plans (RAPs) will be prepared, consulted on, and disclosed in accordance with the policy. 
 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
Most of the impacts related to the implementation of the project are anticipated to be minor, short-term and highly 
localized and thus easily mitigated through standard mitigation measures.    
 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. 
The project has already been able to examine alternatives through lessons learnt from REDI which was the previous 
project that supported similar activities.  The successful aspects of the first project have become a core aspect of the 
current project. Safeguard implementation under the first project was deemed very successful due, in part, to a 
trained PIU- the same PIU that will manage this current project. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower 
capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Borrower capacity is relatively high.  The JSIF will establish a Project Management Team (PMT) that will be responsible 
for overall implementation and will coordinate all the actors involved in the Project’s execution. The JSIF will be 
responsible for financial management, procurement and compliance with safeguards. The JSIF managed the recently 
closed project (Jamaica REDI (P10522)) and the ICR noted that its management of safeguards was highly satisfactory.  
In terms of social implementation, some activities may be undertaken on land that has been donated voluntarily from 
the state (through a lease and nominal peppercorn rent) or though private individual (s). Voluntary Land Donation 
(VLD) will be applied according to good global practice and in line with the World  Bank guidelines on VLD including 
that VLD applies directly to project beneficiaries and that impacts are minor.  The protocols and guidelines to be 
applied to the Voluntary Land Donation (VLD) are included in the RPF. The project has also prepared a Worker's Code 
of Conduct for all workers and contractors working on the project and a Grievance Redress Mechanism.  
 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, 
with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The ESMF has been completed, reviewed by the Bank and disclosed in Jamaica (November 12th, 2018) and on the 
Bank's website (November 15th, 2018).  Consultations were held with the relevant Government officials and Ministries 
and a with a subset of the project's estimated 50,000 beneficiaries.  Disclosures in Jamaica have occurred on relevant 
websites including JSIFs and further disclosures will occur through discussions during the launch meetings and follow 
up meetings with project beneficiaries. The Ministry of Tourism (MOT) and TPDCo will be a lead partner with JSIF.  
The RPF has been completed, consulted upon and disclosed in country on November 12, 2018 and on the Bank's 
website on November 20, 2018. 
 

 