














































World Bank Document


Page 1 of 11

COMBINED PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENTS / INTEGRATED 
SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET (PID/ISDS)  

ADDITIONAL FINANCING
Report No.: PIDISDSA21270

Date Prepared/Updated: 08-Feb-2017
I. BASIC INFORMATION

  A.  Basic Project Data

Country: Benin Project ID: P160029
Parent 
Project ID 
(if any):

P115886

Project Name: Agricultural Productivity and Diversification Additional Financing (P160029)
Parent Project 
Name:

Agricultural Productivity and Diversification (P115886)

Region: AFRICA
Estimated 
Appraisal Date:

07-Feb-2017 Estimated 
Board Date:

08-Mar-2017

Practice Area
(Lead):

Agriculture Lending 
Instrument:

Investment Project Financing

Borrower(s): MInstry of Economy and Finance
Implementing 
Agency:

Minist#re de L Agriculture de L Elevage de la P#che (MAEP)

Financing (in USD Million)
Financing Source Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT 0.00
International Development Association (IDA) 45.00
Total Project Cost 45.00

Environmental 
Category:

B - Partial Assessment

Appraisal 
Review 
Decision (from 
Decision Note):

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate

Other Decision:
Is this a 
Repeater 
project?

No

B.   Introduction and Context

Country Context
Benin is a low-income country of about ten million people (2013 population census) with a per 
capita income of US$820 in 2014.  The economy is driven by agriculture and services, 
particularly import/export activities through the Port of Cotonou. Agriculture accounts for 25 
percent of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) and 47 percent of the country's employment. Cotton is 
the primary export commodity. The informal sector, including subsistence agriculture, contributes 
up to 56 percent of GDP and engages over 90 percent of the labor force. Informal re-export to 
Nigeria contribute Â¼ of the government revenue (a part of that activity goes through formal 
channels for it to be able to generate so much of the government revenue). The country was able 
to maintain macroeconomic stability, which laid the foundation for accelerating growth. Real 
GDP grew by 4.6 percent in 2012; 6.9 percent in 2013; 6.5 percent in 2014; is estimated at 5.0 
percent in 2015; and is projected at 4.5 percent in 2016; which is higher than the previous 5-year 
average of 3.7 percent. Steady gross domestic product (GDP) growth of about 5 percent during 
the period (2012-2015) was partially offset by rapid population growth averaging 3.5 percent per 
year, which led to a modest and unequal increase in household consumption.  As a result, poverty 
levels grew from 36.2 percent in 2011 to 40.1 percent in 2015 . Growth was particularly modest 
in agriculture, which employs almost half the labor force. The economy remains poorly 
diversified and vulnerable to external shocks. This vulnerability underscores the need to promote 
economic diversification (including exports) as recommended in the 2013 Country Partnership 
Strategy (CPS) for Benin. Poverty reduction has been enshrined in successive poverty reduction 
strategies, but results have proven erratic and difficult to sustain. There are significant regional 
disparities in poverty rates, and while female-headed households have typically experienced 
lower poverty levels, women continue to suffer from a lack of economic opportunity, are 
underrepresented in politics and in other decision making positions, and are more susceptible to 
falling into poverty (Table 1). 
 
The disconnect between economic growth and poverty reduction during the last five years has 
been reinforced by the fact that higher growth stemmed mainly from more capital-intensive 
sectors like banking, telecommunications and the port. In contrast, agriculture, which employs 
half of the labor force, only grew at 4 percent per annum, with its growth derived from more land 
and more labor, but with modest increase in productivity. In addition, population growth has 
limited per capita growth and its impact on poverty reduction. Furthermore, Nigeria➢❨ s 
economic slowdown and policy changes have led to decreased opportunities for informal trade, 
both in the gas sector, where gas flows informally from Nigeria to Benin, and in the broader 
consumer goods sector, where rice, chicken, edible oil, used cars, used clothing etc., flow from 
Benin to Nigeria. For instance, the suppression of subsidies in Nigeria➢❨ s oil sector affected 
negatively the informal Beninese gas trade in areas adjacent to Benin➢❨ s border with Nigeria 
(Adjarra), where poverty increased from 34.8 percent in 2011 to 50.4 percent in 2015.
Sectoral and institutional Context
The agricultural sector in Benin is subject to the vagaries of climate and price fluctuations. 
Increase in productivity for major crops, including cotton has remained modest over time. Overall 
agricultural growth is around 4 percent, which is often offset by the relatively high population 
growth (3.5 percent). Yet, agriculture will remain one of the main source of growth and 
employment for the near future in the country. This will require higher and faster growth.  The 
past performance of 4% was insufficient to drive meaningful poverty reduction, due to the very 
high population growth. The agricultural production systems rely on an extension of cropped area 
and family labor, with no or limited use of improved inputs, production methods, and farm 



Page 3 of 11

equipment. Access to financing is limited outside the cotton system. The country➢❨ s agricultural 
trade performance is generally weak, with a persistently negative agricultural trade balance. 
Agricultural exports are concentrated on three groups of products: cotton, fruits (pineapple), and 
nuts and oilseed (cashew, soy and cottonseed). To meet the needs for a growing urban population, 
Benin continues to import a large share of horticultural products from neighboring countries (such 
as Burkina Faso and Nigeria), rice from Asia, wheat, frozen meat and milk from Europe, and 
frozen poultry products from Brazil. The sector faces the triple challenges of diversifying exports 
(consolidating cotton exports and increasing export volume for pineapple and cashew nut), 
increasing food production, and sustainably increasing farm and post-harvest productivity. These 
challenges must be addressed by taking into account the structural vulnerability of the 
country➢❨ s agricultural production system to floods and occasional droughts.  
 
Improving productivity and strengthening diversification are on the top of the agenda of the 
agricultural and overall development strategy in Benin. The agriculture sector strategy in Benin is 
defined within the broader framework of the Comprehensive Africa Agricultural Development 
Program (CAADP) by which the country commits to achieve a 6 percent growth in agriculture 
and to allocate at least 10 percent of the national budget to agriculture as recommended in the 
Maputo declaration . The country➢❨ s long-term development strategy (Benin 2025 - Alafia) 
establishes the long-term vision of the country and gives clear directions in relation to the 
promotion of agricultural value chains. The vision is that the country must move towards a greater 
diversification of agricultural production in order to become a major exporter of agricultural 
products by 2025. The achievement of this vision would require a sound public and private 
financing of agriculture and financial sector reforms that would support the promotion and 
implementation of specialized financing instruments for accelerated productivity growth and 
sustainable diversification in the agriculture sector.

C.  Proposed Development Objective(s)

Original Project Development Objective(s) - Parent
The Project Development Objective of the Agricultural Productivity and Diversification Project 
(PADA) is to restore and improve productivity and value addition for selected value chains in the 
Recipient's territory.

Key Results 
The key performance indicators will remain unchanged, although targets will need to be adjusted 
where necessary and new indicators will be introduced to account for the new activities and 
changes in corporate indicators. These new indicators include: (i) Number of farmers reached 
with assets or services  of whom 40 percent are women; (ii) Farmers adopting improved 
agricultural technology; (iii) Number of micro projects transformed into SMEs. The end date for 
all targets will also be extended to February 28,2021, in line with the proposed revised Closing 
Date of the original project. .

D.  Project Description

The proposed Additional Financing (AF) will be used to support the government of Benin in 
consolidating and scaling-up the achievements of the initial project, and to strengthen the project 
focus on income generating activities for poor households as well as improving their nutritional 
status.



Page 4 of 11

Component Name
Component 1. Adoption of Improved Technologies
Comments (optional)
Like for the initial project, the objective of this component is to improve productivity and quality 
standards along the promoted value chains.  The component will continue supporting adoption of 
improved technologies for the development of the food security (aquaculture, rice, poultry, sheep 
and goat,) and export-oriented value chains (cashew and pineapple) to boost productivity and 
improve producers➢❨  incomes.

Component Name
Component 2 Development/rehabilitation of Production and Market Infrastructures
Comments (optional)
This component focuses: on (i) promoting small-scale irrigation systems for pineapple and 
cashew plantations to improve productivity; (ii) further supporting small-scale irrigation of rice 
production to maintain and expand productivity gains; and (iii) supporting the construction of 
market infrastructure (warehouses, drying areas, cold chambers, etc.) to reduce post-harvest losses 
and facilitate access to markets

Component Name
Component 3. Value Chain Coordination and Access to Finance for Private Initiatives
Comments (optional)
This component has two sub-components: (i) value chain coordination and (ii) facilitation of 
access to finance in support of private initiatives.

Component Name
Component 4. Sector Program Coordination and Project Management
Comments (optional)
This component has two sub-components: (i) capacity building of value chain coordination 
institutions, including strengthening the capacities of civil society and producers➢❨  
organizations as well as of MAEP in coordinating the implementation of the new agriculture 
sector program, and (ii) supporting Project management and monitoring and evaluation.

E.  Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis (if known)

The project is nationwide and will be implemented in the 12 Departements (Atacora, Donga, 
Atlantique, Littoral,  Borgou, Alibori, Mono, Couffo, Oueme, Plateaux, Zou, Collines).

F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

Abdoul Wahabi Seini (GSU01)

Abdoulaye Gadiere (GEN07)

II. Implementation
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
There will be no major change to the implementation arrangements. The Project Coordination Unit 



Page 5 of 11

(PCU) is currently composed of staff who have been recruited based on the skills needed for the 
various positions. Given the nature of the scaling up and new activities, the PCU will include an 
additional animal production specialist. In addition, given the strategic orientation of the Programme 
Cadre-ProCAD  that hosts the PCU, some additional staff will be recruited with cost sharing between 
PADA and WAAPP: (i) an operations officer; (ii) a finance controller; (iii) a computer and 
information management specialist; (v) a logistics management specialist; (iv) an accountant; and (v) 
two administrative assistants.  
 
Financial Management (FM). The proposed AF will build on the existing institutional and fiduciary 
arrangements of the Project Coordination Unit of PADA under oversight of the Ministry of 
Agriculture. The overall performance of the PADA in financial management is Satisfactory. Staffing 
is adequate but needs to be strengthened with a Financial Controller and proper books of accounts 
and supporting documents have been kept in respect of all expenditures. The PCU is familiar with 
the Bank FM requirements and has demonstrated solid technical and fiduciary capacities to manage 
Bank-financed Projects. The audit for the year ended December 31, 2015 for the PADA was 
submitted on time, and was unqualified. The interim un-audited financial reports (IFR) are prepared 
every quarter and regularly submitted to the Bank on time.  
 
The overall FM risk of the Agricultural Productivity and Diversification Project including the 
proposed additional financing is rated Moderate. It is considered that the financial management 
satisfies the Bank➢❨ s minimum requirements under OP/BP 10.00, and therefore is adequate to 
provide, with reasonable assurance, accurate and timely financial management information on the 
status of the project required by the Bank.  
 
Procurement. The New Procurement Framework (including Procurement Regulations for Borrowers) 
that apply to projects with PCN held after July 1st, 2016 will normally apply. Given the fact that 
waiver has been obtained from CPO to apply the old procurement Guidelines, procurement 
arrangements of the original project will remain largely the same under the proposed Additional 
Financing in accordance with: (a) the World Bank➢❨ s ➢❨ Guidelines: Procurement of Goods, 
Works, and Non-Consulting Services under IBRD Loans and IDA Credits and Grants➢❨  dated 
January 2011; revised July 2014, and (b) ➢❨ Guidelines: Selection and Employment of Consultants 
under IBRD Loans and IDA Credits and Grants by World Bank Borrowers➢❨  dated January 2011, 
revised July 2014.  Although procurement on PADA has been quite challenging, the PCU has 
conducted procurement activities for the original project in a satisfactory manner.  
 
Environmental and Social Safeguards. The AF triggers: OP/BP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment; 
OP4.09 on Pest Management; OP/PB4.11 On Physical Cultural Resources and OP/BP 4.12 on 
Involuntary Resettlement. The original project was rated as environmental assessment Category 
➢❨ B➢❨  so as the proposed AF. The environmental and social impacts of the Project are expected to 
be moderate, site specific, and manageable. The Project is expected to have a positive environmental 
impact through its support for agricultural technologies that promote the better use of land and water 
resources. Potential environmental risks could include point and nonpoint pollution of water sources, 
and other issues associated with the use of agricultural chemicals, and negative environmental 
impacts associated with the rehabilitation of irrigation or small-scale civil works. The parent 
project➢❨ s safeguards documents (Environmental and Social Management Framework-ESMF, Pest 
Management Plan-PMP and Resettlement Policy Framework-RPF) have been adapted and updated to 
include activities planned under the AF. Thereafter, all the three safeguard instruments have been 
consulted upon and disclosed in-country on February 03, 2017 and at the Infoshop on February 03, 



Page 6 of 11

2017. The latest implementation support mission (December, 2016) rated the safeguard compliance 
Satisfactory, based on review of progress reports and project site visits. The Project Management 
Unit has an extensive experience in Bank➢❨ s safeguards policies and a dedicated team has been 
appointed to follow up on environmental and social issues; especially the implementation of the 
safeguards instruments. In addition, the national body in charge of environmental and social 
management plans (ESMPs) implementation monitoring (ABE Agence Beninoise pour 
l➢❨ Environnement) will ensure the compliance with national legislation while Bank➢❨ s safeguards 
specialists guide and provide guidance to the PIU through regular supervision missions.

III. Safeguard Policies that might apply

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental 
Assessment OP/BP 
4.01

Yes The ongoing Additional Financing intends to finance small 
equipment to ensure proper use of irrigation facilities (sub-
component 2-1). More specifically, the project under sub-
component 2-2, will also fund the construction and 
rehabilitation of critical market and storage infrastructures: (i) 
cold chamber for pineapple packaging and storage before 
export; (ii) construction of centers of bulking up in pineapple 
production areas and distribution centers of pineapple to 
expand domestic marketing of pineapple; (iii) construction of 
25 warehouses to support the bulk marketing of cashew nuts; 
(iv) construction and equipment of 10 cashew apple juice 
processing units to support income-generating activities for 
women based on good results of the initial phase; (v) 
construction of 100 threshing and drying areas for rice to 
improve quality and marketability of the final product; and (vi) 
construction and equipment of fresh fish distribution centers. 
These several civil works will potentially impact 
environmental and social components. However, the exact 
locations of these investments were not determined with 
certainty an Environment and Social Management Framework
(ESMF) has been developed, reviewed, consulted upon and 
disclosed within the Benin on February 03,2017 and at the 
World Bank➢❨ s Website on February 03, 2017

Natural Habitats OP/
BP 4.04

No This policy is not triggered as there will be no potential impact 
on natural habitats.

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No The project is not expected to have any impact on forests.
Pest Management OP 
4.09

Yes The Additional Financing of PADA aims also at increasing the 
agricultural productivity. By this way, it is expected that 
farmers use fertilizers to improve soil fertility and pesticides to 
fight against pests and predators. To handle in a proper manner 
the potential use of these chemical products, the borrower has 
prepared a Pest Management Plan (PMP). After its preparation, 
PMP has been reviewed by the Bank, consulted upon and 
disclosed within Benin on February 03, 2017 and on the 
Bank➢❨ s website on February 03, 2017.



Page 7 of 11

Physical Cultural 
Resources OP/BP 
4.11

Yes The civil works associated with activities will unquestionably 
involve excavations within the framework of the construction 
of new infrastructures with the probability to discover cultural 
resources. However, no specific safeguard instrument is 
required. The ESMFthat has been prepared includes a chapter 
in order to provide guidance in case of such discoveries.

Indigenous Peoples 
OP/BP 4.10

No There are no indigenous people as defined by the Bank within 
the Benin

Involuntary 
Resettlement OP/BP 
4.12

Yes The project could involve land take. To be in full compliance 
with the policy, the borrower has prepared a Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF) that has  also been reviewed, 
consulted upon, disclosed in-country on February XXX, 2017 
and at the World Bank➢❨ s Website February XXX, 2017.

Safety of Dams OP/
BP 4.37

No The project will not finance any dam construction.

Projects on 
International 
Waterways OP/BP 
7.50

No The project will not finance any activities with impacts on 
international waterways.

Projects in Disputed 
Areas OP/BP 7.60

No The project will not finance any activities in disputed areas.

IV. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify 

and describe any potential large scale,  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
There are no significant or irreversible adverse impacts that are expected from the implementation 
of activities that will be financed under this AF. Most of the adverse environmental and social 
impacts associated with these investments will be small-scale and site-specific.  Hence, they will 
be manageable at an acceptable level. 
 
The project remains EA category B and triggers four safeguards policies namely OP/PB 4.01; 
OP4.09;OP/PB4.11 and OP/PB 4.12.  Safeguard instruments (ESMF, IPMP and RPF) have all 
been updated and will be implemented as guidance/guidelines for the activities during the 
Additional Financing phase.  
 
During the parent project➢❨ s implementation, Overall safeguard compliance (OP/BP 4.01 on 
Environmental Assessment; OP4.09 on Pest Management and OP/BP 4.12 on Involuntary 
Resettlement) is rated Moderately Satisfactory.  All safeguard documents have been prepared and 
disclosed in accordance with national legislation and Bank policies.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities 
in the project area:
The assessment of potential environmental and social adverse impacts does not foresee long-term 
impacts associated to this project.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse 



Page 8 of 11

impacts.
N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an 
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Given that the exact location of future investments are not yet known and activities are diversified, 
the borrower has prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF). That 
safeguard instrument contains standards, methods, and procedures specifying how future activities 
whose location, number, and scale are unknown will systematically address environmental and 
social issues.  It includes procedures for screening and mitigating impacts from construction and 
operation of the irrigation schemes, and includes the following: (a) checklists of potential 
environmental and social impacts and their sources; (b) procedures for participatory screening of 
proposed sites and activities and the environmental and social considerations; (c) procedures for 
assessing potential environmental and social impacts of the planned project activities; (d) 
institutional arrangements for mitigating, preventing, and managing the identified impacts; (e) 
typical environmental management planning process for addressing negative externalities in the 
course of project implementation; (f) a system for monitoring the implementation of mitigation 
measures; and (g) recommended capacity building measures for environmental planning and 
monitoring of project activities. 
 
To manage land acquisition, involuntary resettlement or loss of livelihoods induced by the 
implementation of activities and other sub-projects, the client has developed a Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF).  That safeguard instrument clarifies the principles, organizational 
arrangements, and design criteria to be applied to investments/sub-projects to be prepared during 
project implementation. Investment-specific Resettlement Action Plans (RAP) will be prepared, as 
necessary, in line with the RPF and submitted to the Bank for approval.  
 
The PMP encourages the use of organic fertilizers and biological technics to fight against 
agriculture predators. In addition to that, It sets up guidance and guidelines with the aim to protect 
population health and environment integrity in promoting best practices in the case of use of 
chemical products. 
 
All the above safeguard documents provide detailed mitigation measures to ensure sustainability 
and compliance with Benin➢❨ s regulations and legislations, as well as with the World Bank 
environmental and social safeguard policies. 
 
Activities financed under the project will be screened using a standardized approach based on the 
tools developed under the original project.  ESIA including ESMPs will be prepared as needed for 
the small civil works expected to be undertaken under this AF.  For works with negligible impacts 
environmental measures based on national laws and regulations will apply. 
 
The PIU includes currently an environmental specialist who is responsible for safeguards 
implementation. Moving forward, under this AF, the same staff will continue to oversee the 
implementation of the project safeguards instruments and coordinate efforts at the national level. 
Moreover, the PIU staff will continue to regularly monitor and follow-up with any safeguard 
issues with the assistance of the ABE(Agence Beninoise de l➢❨ Environnement) involved since 
the beginning of the parent project in ESMPs implementation monitoring. Lastly, the Bank➢❨ s 
implementing support missions will also continue to include environmental and social safeguard 
specialists.



Page 9 of 11

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure 
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Stakeholders concerned by the AF are constituted by farmers, breeders, fishermen, NGOs, and 
ministries in charge of Agriculture, Livestock, Water, Forestry, Environment and land 
management. During the safeguard instruments preparation, these various stakeholder groups have 
been consulted. During the updating of the safeguards documentation, new series of consultations 
were held where all of these stakeholders have been consulted and their recommendations, 
comments and suggestions taken into account in the safeguards documents finalization. The latest 
consultation in the process of safeguard instruments preparation was the workshop held in 
Bohicon from December 13 to 16, 2016 at Hotel Fifatin.

B. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank 09-Jan-2017

Date of submission to InfoShop 03-Feb-2017
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors

"In country" Disclosure
Benin 03-Feb-2017
Comments:

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank 23-Dec-2016

Date of submission to InfoShop 03-Feb-2017
"In country" Disclosure

Benin 03-Feb-2017
Comments:

Pest Management Plan
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal? Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank 09-Jan-2017

Date of submission to InfoShop 03-Feb-2017
"In country" Disclosure

Benin 03-Feb-2017
Comments:

If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:

