













































World Bank Document


 

PROGRAM-FOR-RESULTS INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 

APPRAISAL STAGE 

Report No.:PIDA0101994  

 

Program Name Transformation of Agriculture Sector Program Phase 3  
Additional Financing 

Region Africa 

Country Rwanda 

Sector Agriculture 

Lending Instrument Program for Results 

Program ID P161000 

Parent Program ID P148927 

Recipient Republic of Rwanda 

Implementing Agency Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Resources (MINAGRI) 

Date PID Prepared December 6, 2016 

Estimated Date of Appraisal 

Completion 

December 23, 2016 

Estimated Date of Board 

Approval 

February 28, 2017 

 

 

 Country Context 
 

Rwanda is a small (26,000 km2) landlocked country with few natural resources and a population 

of 10.7 million (2012) and projected population of 13 million by 2020.  Its hilly terrain covers 85 

percent of the land mass and the country has the highest population density in Africa with 416 

people per square kilometer, with 53 percent of them female. Rwanda has made a remarkable 

transition from genocide to peace and development. Between 2000 and 2012, GDP growth 

averaged 8.1 percent per year. Development efforts and results have been significant. Rwanda 

experienced 14 percentage points reduction in the poverty headcount, from 59 percent in 2001 to 

45 percent in 2011 and with the remaining poor on average much closer to the poverty line in 

2011 than in 2001. Developments in agriculture were key drivers of this poverty reduction 

accounting for more than 45 percent in total due to increased agriculture production (35 percent) 

and increased agriculture commercialization (10 percent). Self-employment in small off-farm 

non-agriculture business accounted for an additional 13 percent of poverty reduction. Part of this 

self-employment was associated with agriculture value chain employment. 

 

Despite this impressive performance in the last decade and particularly in the last 5 years, 

significant challenges remain. While improving, Rwanda remains a low income country with 

annual per capita income of US$644 in 2012 (with more than 45 percent below the national 

poverty line). About one in four rural households live in extreme poverty. Poverty is still mostly 

a rural phenomenon with 49 percent of the poor in rural areas compared to 22 percent in urban 

areas. Poverty is highest (76.6 percent) among households (often landless) who obtain more than 

half of their income from working on other people’s farms. The land distribution is skewed – 36 

percent of households own 6 percent of farm land, with an average of 0.1 ha per household 

(compared to the national average of .33 ha per household). Women are more likely to fall into 

this category.  In addition, women provide the bulk of labor in the crop sector, but function 

mainly at subsistence level with insufficient skills, access to markets and control over land and 

other agricultural services. If Rwanda is to achieve its targets to reduce the number of people 

living below the national poverty line to less than 20 percent and eliminate extreme poverty by 

the year 2020, continuation of the past strong growth performance will not be sufficient. A 

further acceleration of inclusive growth would be needed, on top of further reductions in 

inequality. 

 

The strategy for stimulating rapid and sustainable economic growth and reducing poverty is 

articulated in Rwanda’s Vision 2020. Vision 2020 is the national vision and policy framework 

which articulates key priorities for the country’s development by the year 2020. This vision is 

further laid out in the Second Economic Development and Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper 

(EDPRS 2) which delineates the agriculture sector as a key sector and a significant engine of 

inclusive growth for the country. Likewise, in the recent report Rwanda Economic Update, 

Maintaining Momentum it states that increasing agriculture productivity is the main driver of 

poverty reduction in Rwanda. Agricultural transformation, especially through competitive value 

chain development, is expected to boost growth in both the formal and informal sectors, with the 

effect of reducing the proportion of the population dependent on agriculture from the present 73 

percent (2009) to less than 50 percent in 2020. In addition, while agricultural productivity is 

increasing, there is considerable potential to accelerate and continue to raise productivity, 

increase commercialization of agriculture production, increase self-employment in small on and 

off-farm business and achieve significant poverty reduction, income gains and increased 

prosperity.  Gender equity and equality has also been highlighted as a foundational and cross-

cutting issue under EDPRS 2 and the Third Phase of the Transformation of Agriculture Sector 

Program (known by its French acronym, PSTA 3) building on a solid foundation with the highest 

percent of women in parliament in the world at 64 percent and 32 percent women's participation 

in all decision-making local government bodies. Accordingly, the Government of Rwanda (GoR) 

has made a strong commitment to continue to increase gender equity and equality particularly at 

the local level, and is determined to see it well integrated in government policies and programs at 

all levels. 
 

 

 Sectoral (or multi-sectoral) and Institutional Context 
 

Accounting for 32.7 percent of the GDP (2015), agriculture is a critical driver of economic 

growth (7.6 percent, 2000-15) and poverty reduction, contributing to 35 percent of the total 

decline in poverty rates over the past decade. A well-established policy framework, facilitating 

enhanced access to better agricultural inputs, has greatly contributed to the positive agriculture 

sector performance.  As a result, the total production of cassava and maize, as well as milk, meat, 

fish and eggs, more than doubled between 2005 and 2015. 

 

Despite these positive developments, Rwanda has yet to meet its production potential. Although 

key agricultural yields have greatly increased since 2000 (e.g. cereal and cassava yields have 

trebled, sweet potato yields have doubled etc.), they reached a plateau in 2011. At their current 

levels, they are estimated to be at 40-50 percent of their productivity potential, resulting from 

suboptimal use of production factors. Similarly, livestock yields have remained consistently low 

over time. 

 

A contributing factor is small farm size – a rural household, on average, cultivates 0.6 ha, and 


has 2-5 animals – and 96 percent of rural households are directly reliant on agriculture as their 

main or only source of income. The projected increase in the rural population, an estimated 

additional 2.5-3.5 million people by 2032, is likely to add more pressure on land resources and 

farm incomes, unless alternative employment opportunities become available. 

 

In addition, Rwanda remains challenged by malnutrition, with a stunting rate of 37.9 percent, 

while its food security index lies below the average of the Sub-Saharan African countries. Some 

20 percent (2015) of Rwandan households remain food insecure, and most of them are located in 

the western and northern parts of the country. 

 

 

 Program Scope 
 

The proposed operation supports the Government of Rwanda’s strategic objectives of the 

Transformation of Agriculture Sector Program Phase 3 with aims to enhance food security and 

nutrition contributing to a reduction in poverty and inclusive economic growth. The operation 

supports four broad program areas: (i) agriculture and animal resource intensification; (ii) 

research, technology transfer and professionalization of farmers; (iii) value chain development 

and private sector investment; and (iv) institutional development and agricultural cross-cutting 

issues. 
 

 

 Program Development Objective(s) 
 

The program development objective (PDO) is to increase and intensify the productivity of the 

Rwandan agricultural and livestock sectors and expand the development of value chains. 
 

 

 Environmental and Social Effects 
 

The Additional Financing (AF) will introduce a new disbursement-linked indicator (DLI) on the 

development of an updated National Agricultural Policy (NAP) and increase several of the 

existing DLI targets. Increasing the DLI targets and incorporating a new DLI will support GoR’s 

on-going efforts to maximize the productivity of the agriculture sector while transforming the 

overarching policy environment. 

 

The updated NAP will provide an overarching vision for the agriculture sector. It will place 

significant emphasis on sustainable production and food security. However, the policy will not 

include specific policy instruments. Individual policy instruments for all sub sectors will be 

reviewed, revised, or developed. All policies will need to be compliant with the principles 

outlined in the NAP (including those of protecting the environment while maintain food 

security). This approach ensures that sustainable practices will be mainstreamed throughout all 

sub sectoral policies. 

 

The assessment of these adjustments to the Program is as follows: 

 

a) DLIs that are focused on improving the productivity of land and increasing the 
productivity of key crops (DLI 1, 2, 3 and 4) will not induce new environmental and 


 

social risks but may request to pay more attention to potential direct, indirect or 

cumulative risk generated from activities such as expansion of irrigation, as some 

irrigation structures will include canals, as well as small dams. As with any irrigation 

structure, these dams may have safety-related risks, which were effectively managed by 

the GoR during RSSP investment projects. Other potential impacts include water quality 

and quantity degradation (both surface and ground water), surface water sedimentation, 

and spread of waterborne diseases. 

b) Inclusion of DLI 8 focusing on the production of an updated NAP which will integrate 
new initiatives, such as the climate smart Agriculture and Information Communication 

Strategy, which could benefit environmental management.  

 

The level of risk remains moderate and can be addressed through: (i) the existing GoR 

Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) including the small dam safety 

guidelines and the Environmental and Social Implementation Manual (ESIM). The process for 

rolling out the ESIM to all Districts is part of the on-going decentralization process. The rollout 

to 30 Districts is expected to be concluded by September 2017; and (ii) exclusion of high-risk 

interventions which include activities that are judged likely to have significant adverse impacts 

on the environment and/or affected people. Among these high-risks interventions are dam 

construction/irrigation or drainage infrastructures on transboundary water resources. 

 

While the existing ESMS is adequate, it will be strengthened to further benefit and improve the 

GoR’s understanding of social issues in the following areas by: 

 

 Strengthening measures to enhance GoR’s capacity to implement the ESMS Program. As 
a result, this new action includes a “capacity building program based on the ESIM, and 

the small dam safety guidelines” to benefit the District officers. This program will ensure 

that: (a) the ESIM has sufficient guidelines on small dams; and (b) all relevant staff are 

trained in the ESIM. The manual and training program will be prepared by involving the 

relevant MINAGRI SPIU teams which are already conversant with the safeguards 

policies; and implemented before the end of the Program. 

 

 The Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) database will be fully functional (including 
relevant staff training) within MINAGRI by July, 2017. This will be supported by the 

development of a communication strategy (included in the updated PAP) to ensure there 

is awareness of the database and that the outcomes of grievances are made public. 

 

 

 Financing 
 

The updated financing table for PSTA3 (see Table below) reflects original commitments from 

2013, as well as actual (to June 30, 2016) and projected contributions (to June 30, 2018).  

Table: Updated PSTA Financing to June 2018
1
 (US$ Millions) 

                                                 
1
 The PAD for the original PforR operation indicated that the PforR represented 12 percent of PSTA financing from the World 
Bank, USAID, and other DPs exploring the viability of providing co-financing as part of ensuring aligned donor support to the 

sector. The PAD clarified that co-financing would not change the overall budget envelope and would not bring additional 



5 

 

Source 

Original 

Commitment 

to PSTA 3  

Actual 

contribution as 

of June 30, 2016  

Projected 

Contribution 

to FY 

2016/17 

Projected 

Contribution 

to FY 

2017/18 

Total 

(Actual + 

Projected) 

Government  300.0 132 60.0 60.0 252.0 

IDA (Agriculture PforR)  100.0 66.3 22.7 0.0 89.0 

EU  160.0 52.0 37.0 37.0 126.0 

IDA (LWH, RSSP, FRDP)  194.0 106.4 31.9 31.9 170.2 

USAID 138.0 121.0 28.5 25.0 174.5 

IFAD 120.0 43.0 21.0 21.0 85.0 

DFID  39.4 20.3 2.8 2.7 25.8 

MDTF (DFID) 50.6 29.1 15.4 6.1 50.6 

Netherlands  10.0 8.6 1.4 0.0 10.0 

Swiss  6.0 6.0 
 

 6.0 

Japan/JICA  32.0 20.7 11.0 8.0 39.7 

AfDB  20.0 56.6 
  

56.6 

FAO  30.0 18.0 8.0 10.0 36.0 

Sub-total 1200.0 680.0 239.7 201.7 1121.4 

Financing Gap     78.6 

(-) IDA (Ag PforR AF)   23.0 23.0 46.0 

(-) MDTF (Ag PforR AF)    5.0 5.0 10.0 

Revised Financing Gap     22.6 

Total 1200.0 680.0 267.7 229.7 1177.4 

 

Foreign exchange rate losses have resulted in a total financing gap of US$78.6 million from both 

GoR and IDA-financed programs. Included in the above projected contribution for 2016/2017 

and 2017/2018 is the proposed AF from the IDA Credit (US $46 million) and the MDTF Grant 

(US$10 million) totaling US$56 million. The combined proposed AF would reduce the financing 

gap to US$22.6 million. 

 

 

 Program Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 
 

The Public Sector 

 

The lead government ministry for the agriculture sector is MINAGRI.  Organizationally, it is 

composed of four main entities as follows: 

 

MINAGRI Central guides policy, strategy and key programs for the Ministry. It comprises the 

Minister and Principal Secretary, and four departments/directorates: Planning, Inspection, Crop 

Production, and Animal Resources. 

 

Rwanda Agricultural Board (RAB) is a semi-autonomous implementation agency of MINAGRI 

that is responsible for promoting food crop production. It has a national network of research 

stations, projects and staff that focus on improved production and yields of food staple crops. It 

has agronomists based in four zones corresponding to the four provinces, and who are 

responsible for expanding farmer access to enhanced extension services. The RAB is also 

responsible for all research and certification of seeds and houses two Task Forces (Irrigation and 

Post-Harvest Infrastructure) which will be assimilated within MINAGRI’s structure as of July 1, 

                                                                                                                                                             
resources, but would mean switching modalities from either sector budget support or project financing to programmatic 

financing (PforR). Apart from DfID, no other donors are providing programmatic support through co-financing of the PforR or 

participation in the MDTF. 



6 

 

2014 as they have completed their mandates; 

 

National Agricultural Export Board (NAEB) is similarly a semi-autonomous implementation 

agency of MINAGRI that is responsible for export crop production. It has concentrated in the 

past on coffee and tea, but is broadening its mandate to cover and expand horticulture and non-

traditional export crops. It also has a national network of projects and staff focusing on improved 

production, yields and competitiveness of export crops. It also has agronomists based in some 

districts and on plantations responsible for expanding farmer access to improved extension 

services in support of increasing export crops. 

 

Single Project Implementation Units (SPIUs) were established to ensure efficient and timely 

implementation of a large portfolio of donor funded projects and are headquartered at MINAGRI 

Central.  Most of the projects being implemented by the SPIUs cover most of the 24 SPs. Three 

SPIUs are responsible for managing projects/operations funded by three key DPs: (i) IFAD 

funded projects: the Kirehe District Water Management Programme; Project for Rural Income 

Through Exports; Climate Resilent Post-harvest and Agribusiness Support Project (PASP); (ii) 

AfDB-funded Projects: Bugesera Natural Rural Region Infrastructure Support Project; Livestock 

Infrastructure Support Project; and (iii) World Bank funded projects: LWH (basket fund), RSSP 

3, and the FRDP. 

 

In addition to MINAGRI, six additional government ministries have significant responsibilities 

in the agriculture sector, as follows: 

 

The Ministry of Local Government (MINALOC) is responsible for 30 Districts, which in turn, 

are responsible for expanding local level service delivery. They promote agriculture development 

as part of their responsibility for local economic development. Funds are earmarked in District 

budgets for implementation of MINAGRI priorities as defined in PSTA 3 (currently 10 percent 

of MINAGRI’s total budget). Although these resources pass directly to the Districts from 

MINECOFIN, they form part of MINAGRI’s overall budget ceiling and programs. Each District 

and sector has an agronomist that is responsible for local level implementation of agriculture 

activities. These agronomists work closely with RAB and NAEB agronomists who work in the 

Districts. The on-going local government restructuring exercise is expected to further expand 

fiscal decentralization, including expanded earmarking of funds from MINAGRI and other 

central ministries, and strengthen local government implementation capacities. The 

implementation of the ASIP, as well as PforR program will involve expanded roles of the local 

government actors, while also restructuring central government organizational and staffing 

structures to be more supportive of these decentralization changes/reforms. MINALOC also 

collaborates on implementation of the National Nutrition policy with MINAGRI, ensuring 

community training and service provisions to improve nutrition outcomes. 

 

The Ministry of Natural Resources (MINIRENA) is responsible for state forests around the 

country, although MINAGRI is responsible for on-farm agroforestry. MINIRENA is also 

responsible for environmental protection and in this capacity has its own programs of hillside 

terrace construction, which reinforce the land conservation terracing that MINAGRI undertakes. 

MINIRENA is also responsible for the RNRA water resources department, and seeks closer 

collaboration with MINAGRI. 

 

The Ministry of Trade and Industry (MINICOM) has the key responsibility of promoting 



7 

 

business and trade growth and development, including expanded agribusiness. It leads the 

development of policy and strategy to accomplish Rwanda’s goal of an expanding, competitive 

and healthy private sector. 

 

The Ministry of Infrastructure’s (MININFRA) Rwanda Transport Development Agency (RTDA) 

has the responsibility of supporting Districts and monitoring implementation of feeder roads 

rehabilitation, upgrading and maintenance. RTDA works closely with the Districts in 

procurement, contract management and management of social and environmental systems.  In 

addition, MININFRA/RTDA provides guidance on technical standards and specifications.   

 

The Rwanda Development Board (RDB) is responsible for investment promotion in Rwanda. 

Although it concentrates on foreign direct investment (FDI), it also promotes local investment. It 

brings together all the government agencies responsible for investment under one roof. This 

includes key agencies responsible for business registration, investment promotion, environmental 

clearances, privatization and specialist agencies which support the priority sectors of 

Information, Communication and Technology (ICT) and tourism as well as Small and Medium 

Enterprises (SMEs) and human capacity development in the private sector. RDB has a 

substantial portfolio of agriculture and agri-business investment projects which it is promoting 

for private sector-driven investment, including expanding the public and private partnerships. 

 

The Rwanda Development Bank (RDB) is the government’s main investment arm and offers 

long and medium-term loans. The GoR is pursuing privatization of the Bank and has signed an 

MOU with a prospective investor. In April 2014 the RDB had an agriculture and agri-business 

loan portfolio of RWF 33.3 billion accounting for a significant proportion of the Bank’s total 

lending. Most agricultural loans were for coffee and tea production and processing and the 

import of fertilizer. On May 16, 2014 the International Finance Corporation (IFC) issued its first 

bond denominated in Rwandan francs, raising RWF 15 billion (about US$22 million) to expand 

the availability of long-term local-currency finance for local businesses through the RDB. 

 

The Private Sector 

 

In addition to the public sector agriculture entities, there are two organizations dedicated to 

supporting private sector actors in agriculture as follows: 

 

The Private Sector Federation (PSF) is the representative umbrella body for the private sector in 

Rwanda and advocates and dialogues with government for policies and programs which will 

promote the growth of the private sector. Amongst its objectives are business promotion and 

development, building private sector capacity and effective private sector advocacy. It is 

composed of nine chambers, including the Chamber of Rwanda Farmers. The Chamber conducts 

a program to train farmers and build entrepreneurship. The member associations of the Chamber 

cover most of the major agricultural commodities produced in Rwanda. 

 

The Rwanda Cooperative Agency (RCA) is the representative body for the cooperative 

movement in Rwanda. There are 1,953 agricultural and 1,307 livestock cooperatives operating as 

farmer associations involved in crop production, agricultural savings and credit, livestock 

development and processing and marketing of outputs. RCA promotes the interests of the 

cooperative movement and runs support and training programs in helping cooperatives function 

and perform as private sector entities 


 
