














































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Lesotho Second Smallholder Agriculture Development Project (SADP) (P165228) 

 
 

  
Mar 13, 2019 Page 1 of 20  

     

 
 
      

 

Combined Project Information Documents /  
Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (PID/ISDS) 

 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 10-Apr-2019 | Report No: PIDISDSA26662 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Lesotho P165228 Second Phase Smallholder 
Agriculture Development 
Project 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA 10-Apr-2019 30-May-2019 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Finance Ministry of Agriculture 
and Food Security (MAFS) 

 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
The development objective of the project is to support increased adoption of climate smart agricultural technologies 
in Lesotho's agriculture, enhanced commercialization and improved dietary diversity among targeted beneficiaries. 

 
Components 

Scaling Up Climate Smart-Agricultural Practices and Advisory Services 
Improving Commercialization and Nutrition 
Project Management, Coordination and Monitoring and Evaluation 
Contingency Emergency Response Component 

 
 

PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
   

SUMMARY-NewFin1  
 

Total Project Cost 57.00 

Total Financing 57.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 50.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 

 
   
DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 50.00 



 

          IDA Credit 50.00 

Non-World Bank Group Financing 

     Counterpart Funding 5.00 

          Local Beneficiaries 5.00 

     Trust Funds 2.00 

          Japan Policy and Human Resources Development Fund 2.00 

    

Environmental Assessment Category 

B-Partial Assessment 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate     
 
 
 
 
B. Introduction and Context 

 
Country Context 

1. The Kingdom of Lesotho is a small, mountainous, landlocked country in Southern Africa with a population of 
2.2 million. It is an open economy, traditionally centered on trade, with textiles, water, and diamonds as its 
main exports. Lesotho is a member of the Southern African Customs Union (SACU), the Southern African 
Development Community, and the Common Monetary Area all of which create strong opportunities for regional 
trade. As a member of the Common Monetary Area, its currency is pegged to the South African Rand.   
 

2. Lesotho is one of the poorest countries in the region, with high levels of poverty and inequality.  An estimated 
57 percent of the population lives below the national poverty line and 34 percent fall below the extreme poverty 
line. Income inequality is among the highest in the world. Rural areas, heavily dependent on subsistence and 
semi-subsistence agriculture, account for 70 percent of the population and 87 percent of all people living below 
the poverty line (SCD, 2015). A wide (30 percent) poverty gap, high rates of unemployment, wide prevalence of 
HIV/AIDS, and climate vulnerability further constrain the scope for inclusive growth and improvements in living 
standards. GDP per capita is estimated at US$1,181 (2017) and when adjusted by Purchasing Power Parity is 
equivalent to 16 percent of the world's average.    
  

3. Economic performance declined after 2012 as Lesotho’s growth drivers shifted from exports to high public 
expenditure and consumption. Real annual GDP growth was at a low 2.5 percent in 2016-2017 down from a 4.5 
percent average over the previous five years.  The sharp decline in SACU-related revenues over 2016-2017 and 
increase in public expenditures to 60 percent of GDP, fueled by wage and employment growth in the public 
sector, have resulted in a widening of the fiscal deficit and a difficult economic outlook for the country.  Output 
is estimated to have contracted by 1.6 percent in 2017 and is projected to remain subdued in the near term.       
 


4. Recognizing the inherent unsustainability of this economic model, Lesotho has endorsed a new template for 
development. The recently completed National Strategic Development Plan (NSDP)-II 2018/19 – 2022/23 seeks 
to pursue inclusive, sustainable growth and private sector-led employment creation.  The Government of 
Lesotho (GoL) has identified four productive sectors, viz. agriculture, manufacturing, tourism and creative 
industries and technology and innovation as potential sectors for job creation and inclusive economic growth 
under a new growth path led by the private sector.   

 
 

Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 

5. Agriculture plays a significant role in Lesotho’s economy.  Over 70 percent of the country’s population lives in 
rural areas and depends, directly or indirectly, on agriculture for employment and livelihood.  The sector has 
the highest potential to increase food security, reduce rural poverty, and generate both on- and off-farm 
employment opportunities.  Main crops include maize, sorghum and wheat which are planted as monocrops on 
85 percent of the country’s arable land which comprises 10 percent of Lesotho’s total land area.  Livestock 
contributes 75 percent of total agricultural output, including semi-intensive and intensive production of pigs 
and poultry, as well as extensive (free range) production of goats and sheep on rangelands in the foothills and 
highland areas (Johane, 2011). Sheep and goats, which dominate the livestock sector, are reared mainly for wool 
and mohair.  
 

6. Lesotho’s agricultural sector suffers from low levels of productivity and commercialization which has made 
the country heavily dependent on food imports to meet domestic consumption needs.  Despite 70 percent of 
the rural population engaged in some form of agricultural activity, the sector contributes less than 10 percent 
to the national gross domestic product (GDP). Most of the rural population is engaged in subsistence farming: 
rain-fed, undiversified farming (primarily cereal production) and extensive livestock grazing characterize the 
sector. Productivity challenges in the sector, include, inter alia, limited size of arable land1, unfavorable farm 
structures (average land holding of about 1.0 ha per family), outdated farm technologies and farm management 
practices, limited technical expertise, sub-optimal use of inputs, lack of an adequate irrigation and drainage 
system, weak rural infrastructure, a rudimentary rural advisory system, and limited access to credit and 
investment capital. In addition, the country has experienced severe land degradation.  Massive soil erosion and 
loss of scarce agricultural land have resulted in extremely low agricultural productivity levels: land productivity 
averaged about USD 70 per hectare per year compared to the regional average of about USD 120 per hectare 
per year for the period 2008-2013; cereal yields average less than 1,000 kg per hectare, failing to meet the SADC 
RISDP target of achieving at least 2,000 kg per hectare2. Consequently, marketable surplus remains low.  A 
nascent private sector further constrains commercialization. Private sector activity in Lesotho is dominated by 
micro-enterprises, with a marked absence of the small and medium-sized enterprises that drive economic 
growth and job creation in most countries.3  

                                                           
1 While the agricultural land area of 2.36 million ha accounts for 78 percent of total land area, only 357,000 ha (12 percent) 
is suitable for crop production. Most agricultural land is mountain pasture, suited to extensive livestock production – which 
accounts for 75 percent of the total value of agricultural output. FAOSTAT 
2 Charles Nhemachena, Greenwell Matchaya and Sibusiso Nhlengethwa.  Agricultural Growth Trends and Outlook in Lesotho. 2016 
3 A survey of registered business enterprises in 2015 shows that of 9,625 registered business enterprises, 75.6 percent were 
micro-enterprises (1-4 employees) and 37.5 percent had a turnover of less than one million maloti (approximately 
$US70,000). Only 15 percent of the enterprises surveyed were small to medium (5-50 employees), and only 4.3 percent had 
a gross revenue of 1-5 million maloti ($US 70,000-$350,000). This pattern is even more evident in agro-processing and agri-
business. Five large enterprises dominate the food and beverage sector3, with few medium- or micro-enterprises. 




 
7. Climate change poses major challenges to the development of Lesotho’s agricultural sector.  The Inter-

Governmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) categorizes Lesotho as one of the countries highly vulnerable to 
the impacts of climate change.  The country has a temperate climate with subalpine characteristics and 
experiences regular droughts, floods, frosts, snow, hailstorms, and strong winds. The El Niño-Southern 
Oscillation (ENSO) phenomenon particularly affects climate variation in Lesotho (MEMWA, 2013)4. High intra-
seasonal and inter-annual rainfall variability, with frequent droughts, has often resulted in delayed planting or 
farmers not planting at all, reduced seed germination due to hardened soil and lack of water, crops failures, 
deterioration of rangelands and pasture, water scarcity for livestock, and increased food prices of staple grains 
such as maize.5  Chronic droughts have also negatively impacted the livestock sector, resulting in rangeland 
degradation and limiting the carrying capacity of pastoral land. The drought of 2015-16 growing season was the 
most severe on record putting over 534,000 people at risk of food insecurity. The current rain-fed crop 
production system with its focus on maize at the expense of diversification to more drought-tolerant crops 
(sorghum, millet, cowpeas) increases vulnerability to climatic shocks. The crop production system also makes 
limited use of climate smart agricultural technologies such as new varieties, conservation agriculture, 
intercropping, integrated pest management and simple water harvesting technologies, all of which compromise 
productivity. The erratic and severe weather patterns and land degradation reinforce the need to mainstream 
climate resilience in Lesotho’s agricultural sector.  
 

8. Provision of irrigation is critical for addressing climatic risks in Lesotho’s agriculture; however, the subsector 
is beset with challenges. Despite the ready availability of water from the mountains, only 2,600 ha of arable 
land has been developed for irrigation.  Poor management and inadequate maintenance have reduced the area 
under irrigation, with only an estimated 1,200 ha under irrigation in 2014.  The modernization of national water 
resource management policies and institutions has been slow and physical infrastructure has deteriorated due 
to lack of public funds for maintenance. Many pump stations are no longer operational and existing headworks 
and reservoirs have silted up. On-farm irrigation systems have also deteriorated due to ill-defined property 
rights over infrastructure and weak local capacity for management. There are few effective community-based 
irrigation management systems and poor links between the existing institutions and the local public institutions 
responsible for water management. Combating the effects of climate change and increasing productivity 
towards food security and commercialization will require sustained efforts to provide adequate, reliable and 
timely delivery of irrigation to Lesotho’s crop and livestock farmers.    
 

9. Development of high value cash crops, such as fruits and vegetables and potatoes as well as dairy and small-
scale pig and poultry production offer opportunities for moving from uncompetitive maize monocropping 
production to a more diversified production base responsive to climatic risks.  Lesotho’s higher altitude, 
potential for early season production and access to cheap water and labor combine to create favorable 
conditions for the production and export of vegetables, fruit and seed potatoes. Regional demand for fruit and 
vegetables is increasing as urban populations grow, incomes rise, and the popularity of healthy diets increases. 
Higher production and sales of these high value crops would also deepen domestic agricultural markets, 
generate rural employment and improve nutrition. Diversification and commercialization need a much broader 
base than this however, as current commercial vegetable production currently ranges from 100-600 ha and 
commercial potatoes are less than 500 ha. Government and donor support for increased production and 

                                                           
4 World Bank, 2016. “Lesotho Water Security and Climate Change Assessment.” World Bank, Washington, DC. 

5 CIAT; World Bank; 2018, 201Climate-Smart Agriculture in Lesotho. CSA Country Profiles for Africa Series.  



 
commercialization of small-scale dairy, pig and poultry enterprises will also be necessary, in addition to 
continued support for mohair and fine wool.   
 

10. A more diversified production base, with greater emphasis on horticulture and livestock production also 
offers a means to increase dietary diversity and reduce child malnutrition. Lesotho’s high rates of child 
malnutrition are attributed to poverty, low dietary diversity and inadequate consumption of fruits and 
vegetables. Limited dietary diversity affects all children - only 23 percent of children have minimum dietary 
diversity and 11 percent have a minimum acceptable diet. Fruit and vegetable availability was estimated at 128 
grams in 2013, compared with the WHO recommended daily intake of 400 grams. Increased horticulture and 
livestock production would contribute to improved nutrition by (a) increasing the availability of fruits and 
vegetables as well as protein-rich foods; and (b) improving incomes and so access to a more diverse diet.   

 
11. Recognizing the significant role of agriculture in Lesotho’s overall economic growth agenda, the Government 

of Lesotho (GoL) is undertaking critical measures to build a commercial and climate resilient agricultural sector.  
The National Strategic Development Plan (NSDP) II (2018/19-2022/23), which prioritizes the development of the 
agricultural sector, identifies three broad areas of strategic action: (i) sustainable commercialization and 
diversification of agriculture, (ii) a well-functioning agri-food system, and (iii) rehabilitation of range lands and 
wet lands. Priorities for action within these areas include: (i) improved technology and infrastructure (including 
irrigation and climate smart agriculture); (ii) increased production of high value crop and livestock products; (iii) 
the development of institutional frameworks for producer and industry organizations; (iv) building the capacity 
of farmers to benefit from these institutions; and (v) the development of value chains and agricultural markets. 
The NSDP II also calls for the need to scale up current nutrition systems towards strengthening human capital 
and expanding the use of water harvesting for irrigation. Gender and climate change are indicated as critical 
cross-cutting issues. Several policies and strategies, including Vision 2020, National Climate Change Policy (2017), 
Lesotho Food and Nutrition Policy (2016) and Lesotho Zero Hunger Strategic Review (LZHSR) accord high priority 
to scaling up climate-smart practices and actions to promote agricultural adaptation and increased food security, 
achieving zero hunger by 2030, access to adequate food and healthy diets all year round, ending malnutrition, 
doubling of smallholder productivity and incomes, and eliminating food loss and waste. The GoL has also initiated 
reform of the water sector to promote sustainable and productive use of Lesotho’s water resources.  
 

12. The Bank has provided substantial support to the development of Lesotho’s agriculture sector over the past 
decade. Through the ongoing Smallholder Agricultural Development Project (SADP) as well as Private Sector 
Competitiveness and Economic Diversification Project (PSCED) the Bank has provided financial and technical 
assistance  to improve commercialization and competitiveness in Lesotho’s agricultural sector. SADP is providing 
training and competitive grants to smallholder farmers for improving marketable surplus in several value chains, 
including horticulture (fruit and vegetable production), poultry, piggery and dairy.  The project is also supporting 
the development of an irrigation master plan to assist the government in its efforts of defining strategic priorities 
for improving the irrigation subsector in terms of alignment with agriculture growth potential, improving 
resource utilization, water delivery service, and institutional and financial sustainability and identify a pipeline of 
high priority irrigation investments for support from donors, government, private sector and other non-state 
actors. The PSCED is assisting in building an  enabling business environment, leveraging private investment 
support, providing access to finance to increase productivity and increasing market opportunities in Lesotho’s 
horticulture subsector.  The Bank has also supported the preparation of the Lesotho Climate Smart Agricultural 
Profile which provides an overview of the agricultural challenges in Lesotho and recommends country-specific 
climate smart agricultural practices that can help the country adapt to and mitigate climate change.  
 


13. The proposed Lesotho Climate Smart Agriculture Project (LCSAP) is being prepared at the request of the 
Government of Lesotho to contribute to its efforts in developing a climate smart agricultural sector.  The 
proposed project, an IDA credit in the amount of US$50 million and a Japanese Policy and Human Resources 
Development (PHRD) grant of US$2.0 million aims to harness the triple wins of CSA in Lesotho’s agri-food sector, 
i.e., improved productivity, increased adaptive capacity to climate risks and reduced greenhouse gas emissions.  
Through the provision of technical assistance and investment support, the proposed project would introduce and 
scale up best practices in CSA and sustainable land management thereby mainstreaming climate and 
environmental considerations into agriculture as well incentivize a shift from uncompetitive maize monocropping 
to high potential value chains, all of which are expected to result in positive outcomes of enhanced climate 
resilience, increased commercialization, food security, job creation, improved rural livelihoods and improved 
nutritional outcomes.  

 
 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
Development Objective(s) (From PAD)  
The development objective of the project is to support increased adoption of climate smart agricultural technologies in 
Lesotho's agriculture, enhanced commercialization and improved dietary diversity among targeted beneficiaries. 
 
 

Key Results 

• Land area brought under climate-smart agriculture and sustainable landscape management  

• Household Commercialization levels (value of produce sold as a % of value of produce 

• Farmers adopting improved agricultural practices 

• Households with increased dietary diversity (disaggregated by women and children) 
 
 
D. Project Description  

 
 

25. The project will build on the achievements and lessons learned under SADP as well as the Lesotho Climate 
Smart Investment Plan (CSIP).  Through a robust, multi-stakeholder process, the CSIP has developed a normative 
vision and CSA goals for Lesotho’s agriculture sector and pathways for achieving the vision and goals. It has 
prioritized key policy actions and investments towards building a productive, climate-resilient and low-
emissions agriculture sector in Lesotho.  The CSA goals, developed under the three pillars of CSA, call for, inter 
alia, increasing yields of major crops, reducing losses across agricultural value chains, including post-harvest 
losses, increasing arable land under stress-tolerant crops, conservation agriculture, and agroforestry as well as 
reduced livestock emissions.  Strategies for achieving these goals include measures reflected in project design, 
i.e. climate resilience and nutrition security (such as agricultural diversification, CSA practices at the farm level, 
stress tolerant crops); commercialization (agricultural value chain, market infrastructure development) and 
capacity development (knowledge development, integrate weather and market advisories using ICT).     
 
26. The following four components are envisaged under the project: (i) Promoting Climate-Resilient 
Agriculture; (ii) Improving Agricultural Commercialization and Nutrition; (iii) Project Management, Coordination 
and Monitroing and Evaluation; and (iv) Contingency Emergency Response.  


Component 1: Scaling Up Climate-Smart Agricultural Practices and Advisory Services (Total Cost: US$20.0 
million) 

27. This component aims at strengthening the adaptive capacity of smallholder farmers to adjust and modify 
their production systems to minimize the potential future impacts from climate variability. The overall goal is to 
enhance climate resilience through solutions that improve soil health, increase water use efficiency, and 
increase farm productivity and crop diversification. The component focuses on: (i) capacity building for scaling‐
up the adoption of climate‐smart agriculture technologies by farmers and enhancing farm management 
practices aimed at improving soil health, water‐use efficiency, crop diversification, and farm productivity; (ii) 
promoting a more efficient use of surface water accompanied with a more sustainable use of groundwater, 
leading to improved availability and quality of water at the farm level; and (iii) improving access to climate and 
market advisory services through ICT, thereby strengthening farmers’ adaptation and resilience.   
 
Component 2: Improving Agricultural Commecialization and Nutrition (US$30.0 million of which IDA 

US$23.0 million; PHRD Grant US$2.0 million; Beneficiary Contribution US$5.0 million) 

 
28. The objective of this component is to support the development of high potential value chains (VCs) in 
Lesotho’s agricultural sector by strengthening backward and forward linkages within selected VCs with overall 
aim of promoting diversification from uncompetitive maize monocropping to high value cash crops and 
sustainable livestock production animal husbandry, improving productivity, quality, value addition and market 
linkages towards increased agricultural commercialization and improved nutrition.   
 
29. Component interventions will foster the integration of a greater number of smallholder producers that 
dominate Lesotho’s rural landscape in potentially remunerative VCs, promote sustainable intensification of 
production through adoption of  CSA and environmentally friendly agricultural technologies supported under 
Component 1, incentivize contract farming, strengthen horizontal alliances and encourage farmers to establish 
producer groups, strengthen vertical alliances by building trusted commercial partnerships between farmers 
and private agri-businesses and drive enterprise operations towards more lucrative domestic and export 
markets.  Activities under the component are expected to result in the positive outcomes of job creation, 
improved beneficiary incomes, better nutritional outcomes and increased economic opportunities for women 
and youth in the rural sector.   
 
30. The component will finance services to support the formation of new as well as strengthen the existing 
(e.g., those established under SADP-1) farmer groups in Lesotho’s agriculture sector.  Special attention will be 
accorded to the need and interests of women and youth6.  Where feasible, the formation and strengthening of 
horizontal alliances will draw on the Smallholder Horticulture Empowerment Project (SHEP7) approach 
developed by the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA).  This approach shifts smallholder thinking from 
subsistence farming to farming as a business by training farmers to conduct their own market surveys to identify 
local crops with potential for commercialization; training them to grow these crops profitably; organizing 
stakeholder forums to exchange information with other like-minded farmers, input suppliers and potential 
buyers; and by helping them to build good relations with these market agents.  


31. Two matching grant programs are envisaged under the component: grants up to US$30,000 for 
smallholder farmers for increased productivity and grants ranging from US$30,000 to US$100,000 to agri-
enterprises for post-harvest infrastructure and management.  All grants will require an equity contribution: 25 
percent for the smaller grants and 40 percent for the larger grants.  The procedures and selection criteria used 
for both matching grant programs will be detailed in a Grant Manual which will be prepared in a manner 
satisfactory to the Bank. The Grant Manual will specify implementation arrangements of the Matching Grant 
Programs and include appropriate technical, fiduciary, environmental and social safeguards provisions to ensure 
that the grant funds will be used for intended purposes only. It will also include the Bank’s Anti-Corruption 
Guidelines and consequences should the agreed commitments not be met. Any changes to the Grant Manual 
during project implementation will require prior Bank approval. The PMU will be responsible for administering 
the Grant Scheme. 
 
32. Towards improved nutrition, the project will support a broad advocacy campaign to increase the 
knowledge among the people of Lesotho of the benefits of dietary diversity. In addition to media campaigns, 
the project will finance the development of industry guidelines for sugar, salt, and fat content, nutrition 
fortification in food products, and labelling through stakeholder consultations. This work will be coordinated by 
the Food and Nutrition Coordination Office (FNCO) in collaboration with CGIAR and other partners. Activities to 
enhance knowledge on diets and nutrition will include nutrition education and demonstrations on production, 
processing, cooking demonstrations, food safety and storage.  The project will also provide grants to individuals 
for increasing household-level production and consumption of safe and nutritious foods. This activity will target 
women to increase their capacity to feed their families a diversified diet through the consumption of inter alia, 
a variety of fruits and vegetables as well as protein-rich food such as eggs and meat. Grants will be provided for 
cultivation of horticulture products as well as purchase and rearing of small livestock and ruminants.  Grants will 
also be provided for small-scale processing which will generate income opportunities for grant recipients.  Under 
this window, small grants in the size of USD 2,000-20,000 (up to 80 percent of total investment cost) will be 
available for production of nutritious foods and small-scale, nutrition-sensitive processing (e.g. purchase of 
small equipment such as dryers, canning). Women and youth will be given priority under this program.  
 
COMPONENT 3: Project Management, Coordination, Monitoring and Evaluation (US$7.0 million) 
 
33. This component will support project management, coordination, monitoring and evaluation (M&E) of 
project activities.  The existing Project Management Unit (PMU) within the Ministry of Agriculture and Food 
Security will be responsible for project implementation including fiduciary aspects (including audits); knowledge 
management/communication (including public awareness campaigns); grievance redress mechanism; citizen 
engagement; and monitoring the implementation of safeguard related measures. It will finance PMU staff 
related costs (training etc.), goods, equipment and vehicles, incremental operating costs, 
assessments/analyses/studies for preparation of future projects/operations, and other eligible expenses 
associated with overall project implementation. Support will also be provided for social/results/impact surveys 
at project mid-term as well as project completion. Additional periodic surveys will be supported to improve 
project implementation, for example to assess and improve women and youth participation. The monitoring 
and evaluation (M&E) system will be strengthened to improve the efficiency of data collection, analysis, 
evaluation and reporting.  The capacity of the PMU will be enhanced by hiring additional technical and 
administrative staff as needed,  

 
COMPONENT 4: Contingency Emergency Response Component (US$0.0 MILLION) 


 
34. A Contingency Emergency Response Component (CERC) with zero allocation to partially cover emergency 
response via implementation of key activities by the appropriate agencies to respond to the emergency. The 
CERC could also be used to channel additional funds should they become available as a result of an eligible 
emergency. 
 

 
E. Implementation 

 
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 

 
35. Project oversight. The project will be implemented under the direct oversight of Principal Secretary 
MAFS. A Project Management Committee (PMC) that was established under SADP will be maintained given the 
multi-sectoral nature of project interventions. The PMC will include representatives from several ministries 
such as Ministry of Finance (MoF), Ministry of Development Planning (MoDP), Ministry of Agriculture and Food 
Security (MAFS), Ministry of Forestry and Land Reclamation (MFLR), Ministry of Trade & Industry, Cooperatives 
and Marketing (MTICM), Ministry of Environment and Tourism (MoET), Ministry of Local Government and 
Chieftainship (MLGC). The PMC, which is an extension of the Technical Working Group formed during project 
preparation of the ongoing SADP will review all project reports and Annual Work Plans and Budgets (AWPB). 
The PMC will meet quarterly with the Project Manager acting as the Secretary to the PMC. 

 
36. Project Implementation. The existing Project Management Unit (PMU) within the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Food Security (MAFS)will be responsible for project implementation including fiduciary aspects 
(including audits); knowledge management/communication (including public awareness campaigns); 
grievance redress mechanism; citizen engagement; and monitoring the implementation of safeguard related 
measures. It will finance PMU staff related costs (training etc.), goods, equipment and vehicles, incremental 
operating costs, assessments / analyses / studies for preparation of future projects/operations, and other 
eligible expenses associated with overall project implementation. Support will also be provided for 
social/results/impact surveys at project mid-term as well as project completion. Additional periodic surveys 
will be supported to improve project implementation, for example to assess and improve women and youth 
participation. The monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system will be strengthened to improve the efficiency of 
data collection, analysis, evaluation and reporting. 

 
 
 
 .    
F. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 

The Project will be undertaken in all the ten districts of Lesotho–Teyateyaneg, Butha-Buthe, Leribe, 
Mafeteng, Maseru, Mohale’s Hoek, Mokhotlong, Qacha’s Nek, Quthing and Thaba-Tseka. Lesotho is 
predominantly mountainous, with the highlands and mountain zones covering approximately 59 percent of 
the total land area. This land is mostly characterized by steep slopes with fragile soil formations which are 
extensively degraded. The highlands cover approximately 15 percent of the country, while the lowlands and 
Senqu (Orange) River Valley make up approximately 17 percent and 9 percent of the country, respectively. 
The cultivable land is largely confined to the lowlands and highlands along the Western border and the 


Senqu River valley in the south, the latter being densely populated and resulting in much pressure on 
natural resources. Land degradation in various forms is a dominant landscape feature in the country, and 
inherent infertile soils affect the productivity of both arable and rangelands. Lesotho is highly susceptible to 
climate-related events such as frost, drought, strong winds, snow, hailstorms and floods, all of which have a 
devastating effect on agricultural productivity, including crop failure and increased incidences of invasive 
plants and infestation by pests. Specific geographical locations for the proposed sub-projects have not been 
identified yet but will be selected on a demand-driven basis during the implementation of the Project. Site-
specific environmental and social assessments will be carried out during implementation and biophysical 
characteristics comprehensively described. The designs of the sub-projects will also incorporate climate 
resilience engineering measures and take into consideration the various environmental conditions which 
could exacerbate impacts on the natural resource base. 

 
 

SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The environmental risks of the Project are moderate 
given the potential adverse but manageable impacts 
likely to be generated from the construction and 
operation of small-scale irrigation and drainage 
schemes. The project will finance minor 
rehabilitation works, the purchase and installation of 
on-farm pipeline systems and irrigation auxiliaries, 
irrigation canal and head work repair, provision of 
pressure pipes and network repairs. The project will 
also finance the rehabilitation of existing pump 
stations and construction of water harvesting and 
distribution reservoirs and where feasible also 
establishment and repair of existing vertical wells 
(boreholes). The total command area (hectares) for 
rehabilitation of the on-farm irrigation infrastructure 
is not known, but will be determined from the 
recommendations of the Irrigation Master Plan 



 

currently being developed with full participation of 
key stakeholders, including smallholder farmers who 
will directly benefit from the Project. Key 
environmental impacts associated with the 
construction and operation of irrigation schemes 
include (a) changes to the low flow regime of rivers 
which may have significant negative impacts on 
downstream users, (b) changing hydrological regime 
associated with irrigation schemes may alter the 
capacity of the environment to assimilate water 
soluble pollutants, (c) excessive use of both natural 
and chemical fertilizers may result in excess of 
nutrients which might have impacts on water bodies 
and human health, (d) areas with water tables that 
have a low hydraulic gradient are at risk from 
salinization, (e) reduction in low flows and flood 
flows may alter the river morphology, reducing the 
capacity to transport sediment and thereby causing 
a buildup of sediments in slower moving river 
reaches, (f) irrigation schemes may fail if the 
sediment load of water supply is higher than the 
capacity of the irrigation canals to transport 
sediment loads, (g) irrigation schemes may have 
ecological impacts, particularly in wetland areas 
affecting natural habitats. 
 
The Resettlement Policy Framework has been 
prepared to  guide the PMU in avoidance, 
minimization and mitigation of any potential 
resettlement impacts associated to rehabilitation of 
irrigation infrastructure and activities related to 
commercialization of agricultural that will require 
land acquisition or restricted access to land and land 
use.The Resettlement Policy Framework has been 
prepared to guide the preparation of Resettlement 
Action Plans 

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No  

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

The policy is triggered. Reduction in natural river 
flow and discharge of polluted return flows from 
irrigation schemes, have potential impacts to 
habitats both within and alongside rivers. Significant 
changes to low flows (+/-20%) will alter micro-
habitats particularly wetlands. 


Forests OP/BP 4.36 No 
The Project will not support sub-projects located 
within forested areas or plantations as defined 
under OP 4.36. Therefore, the policy is not triggered. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The Pest Management Policy is triggered as agro-
chemicals will be used for irrigation subprojects. 
Based on observations from the ongoing Smallholder 
Agriculture Development Project, the risk of 
pesticide use is considered low to moderate due to 
the small quantities of pesticides currently being 
used in the sub-projects. An Integrated Pest 
Management Plan (IPMP) will be prepared to 
provide guidance on the sustainable application of 
fertilizers and pesticides taking into consideration 
the soil type and slope to ensure protection of both 
surface and ground water. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 

The policy is triggered given the likelihood of chance 
finds in conjunction with earth works and/or an 
encounter of graveyard sites from the experience 
implementing infrastructure projects in Lesotho.The 
ESMF will include Physical Cultural Resources 
Management Plan (PCRMP) that includes measures 
for avoiding and mitigating any adverse impacts on 
physical cultural resources as well as providing 
Chance Find Procedures (CFP).  The CFP will entail 
measures to screen for and manage potential 
impacts on cultural heritage or property that could 
be affected by project activities. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 
The policy will not be triggered as there are no 
indigenous peoples in Lesotho. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

OP 4.12 will be triggered. The project will likely 
expand the irrigation service area; however, this will 
only be confirmed once the Irrigation Master Plan 
has been prepared and investments to be supported 
under SADP-2 are identified for support during 
project implementation. At this stage while it is 
unknown whether there will be any land acquisitions 
as a direct result of the project, there might be 
restricted access to resources (whether related to 
private or communal resources) related to 
rehabilitation of irrigation infrastructure and 
therefore Involuntary Resettlement OP 4.12 is 
triggered to address any adverse impacts.  Since the 
exact location of these structures is not known, a 
Resettlement Policy Framework will be prepared, 
consulted and disclosed prior to appraisal. The 



 

Resettlement Policy Framework will guide the 
preparation of Resettlement Action Plans. The 
Resettlement Policy Framework will guide the PMU 
in avoidance, minimization and mitigation of any 
potential resettlement impact. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 Yes 

This policy has been triggered as a precautionary 
measure. At this stage, Tthere is insufficient 
information to determine whether irrigation 
schemes and drainage canals would rely on water 
from existing dams or new small dams would need 
to be supported under the project. An exclusion 
clause will be included in the ESMF indicating that 
the project would not support activities that are high 
risk and trigger a full environmental assessment. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

Yes 

Exception notification to be sent to riparian states 
will be requested since the proposed small-scale 
irrigation schemes will not adversely change the 
quantity and quality of water flows to other riparian 
states.  In addition, the proposed schemes will not 
be adversely affected by the use of water 
downstream by the other riparian states. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 

The project will not finance activities located in any 
known areas under territorial dispute as defined in 
OP 7.60. Therefore, the 
policy is not triggered. 

 
 

KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Potential environmental impacts are anticipated under Component 1: Support for Irrigation and Component 2: 
Agricultural Commercialization. The provision of grants may result in agricultural intensification and increased 
application of fertilizers and pesticides by grant recipients.  The grants will be awarded based on screening criteria set 
forth in the ESMF/ IPMP currently under preparation. The screening criteria as set forth in the ESMF will help to  
screen out project activities corresponding to a category A, and to provide adequate due diligence on a case-by-case 
basis for the grants. The approach outlined in the ESMF/IPMP will apply to the matching grants, irrigation 
rehabilitation and any activity that would be proposed to be financed within the project or the subsequent AFs.  
The environmental impacts associated with the grants program and irrigation rehab should be readily mitigated 
through sound construction practices (dust and noise, waste management, material sourcing) while the operational 
impacts can be mitigated through environmentally friendly farming approaches (manure management, waste 
disposal, emissions from food processing facilities, improved water resource use). 
Under Component 1rehabilitation of the irrigation schemes is foreseen to lead to better management of water 



resources. This activity will potentially entail minor construction related impacts that can be mitigated through a site-
specific ESMP.  The overall project would lead to an increase in agricultural practices therefore having implications on 
pest management, which should apply and follow the Integrated Pest Management Plan as prepared under the ESMF.   
 
The potential social issues are likely to be on restriction to land use and access and possible land acquisition for the 
rehabilitation of irrigation infrastructure and agricultural commercialization activities. The project will likely expand 
the irrigation service area; however, this will only be confirmed once the Irrigation Master Plan has been prepared and 
investments to be supported under SADP-2 are identified for support during project implementation. At this stage 
while it is unknown whether there will be any land acquisitions as a direct result of the project, there might be 
restricted access to resources (whether related to private or communal resources) related to rehabilitation of 
irrigation infrastructure and activities under commercialization of agriculture, as a result Involuntary Resettlement OP 
4.12 is triggered to address any adverse impacts.  Since the exact scope of works for rehabilitation of irrigation 
infrastructure and commercialization of agriculture activities is not known, a Resettlement Policy Framework has been 
prepared for the project. The Resettlement Policy Framework will guide the preparation of place specific Resettlement 
Action Plans. The Resettlement Policy Framework will guide the PMU in avoidance, minimization and mitigation of any 
potential resettlement impact. 
 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
There are no long term or indirect impacts associated with the project, beyond the potential increase in agricultural 
production and therefore implications on pest management, where the  Integrated Pest Management Plan as 
prepared under the ESMF should apply. 
 
There are no long term adverse social impacts anticipated for the project, however, the project is expected to have 
significant positive effects on households, by improving dietary diversity in households, increasing climate resilience of 
farmers and promote adoption of climate smart agricultural technologies for enhanced agricultural commercialization. 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. 
NA 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower 
capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Government of Lesotho has prepared an ESMF/IPMP and RFP.    
The project will be implemented by the Project Management Unit (PMU) under the MAFS that is currently 
implementing SADP.   The PMU has demonstrated limited capacity in assessing environmental and social (E&S) risks 
and impacts, developing appropriate mitigation measures and implementing and monitoring E&S aspects of the 
project. Currently, it does not have full-time and qualified E&S safeguards specialists to oversee the monitoring and 
implementation of safeguards. Before LCSAP appraisal, the PMU has prepared a comprehensive Environmental and 
Social Management Framework (ESMF) and Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and carried out stakeholder 
consultations in line with both the Lesotho Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) law and regulations and the World 
Bank Safeguard Policies. The ESMF and RPF will provide clear procedures and methodologies for carrying out site-
specific E&S assessments, review, approval and implementations of physical investments (sub-projects) to be financed 
by LCSAP.  During implementation, the PMU will be responsible for carrying out site-specific E&S impacts assessment 
for each sub-project including the associated Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) and Resettlement 
Action Plans (RAPs) according to procedures outlined in the ESMF and RPF. The site-specific ESMPs and RAPs will be 
included in the bidding documents for any civil works to be implemented. The PMU will ensure that all the mitigation 

 

measures recommended in the site-specific ESIAs and RAPs are implemented, monitored and reported in progress 
reports submitted to the Bank.  The Bank will also work with the PMU in recruiting full-time dedicated and qualified 
E&S specialists whose responsibilities will be to screen sub-projects, determine the level and degree of E&S risks and 
impacts, prepare site-specific ESMPs and RAPs, and ensure that mitigation and management measures are 
implemented, monitored and reported in progress reports. The E&S specialists would also train/re-train PMU staff and 
district agriculture officers in the implementation of appropriate mitigation measures for types of impacts expected. 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, 
with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders include representatives of the Project Management Unit and the Ministry of Agriculture and 
Food Security (MAFS), farmers associations, entrepreneurs, local authorities, irrigation schemes, as well as the 
members of the local communities where the project will be implemented. The ESMF/IPMP, RPF have been subjected 
to public consultations and disclosure before appraisal while each of the subsequent ESMPs and RAPs prepared for 
each specific subproject will also be subjected to disclosure and public consultations. The ESMF/IPMP and RFP will be 
disclosed through the MAFS website and Bank's external website. 
 
 