














































World Bank Document

PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
CONCEPT STAGE

Report No.: PIDC12805

Project Name Burundi Coffee Sector Competitiveness Support Project (P151869)
Region AFRICA
Country Burundi
Sector(s) Crops (35%), Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (30%), Agricultural 

extension and research (20%), Public administration- Agricultur e, fishing 
and forestry (10%), General finance sector (5%)

Theme(s) Rural services and infrastructure (30%), Export development and 
competitiveness (30%), Rural policies and institutions (25%), Other 
environment and natural resources management (15%)

Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P151869
Borrower(s) Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock
Implementing Agency INTERCAFE
Environmental 
Category

B-Partial Assessment

Date PID Prepared/
Updated

28-Aug-2014

Date PID Approved/
Disclosed

13-Mar-2015

Estimated Date of 
Appraisal Completion

31-Mar-2015

Estimated Date of 
Board Approval

29-May-2015

Concept Review 
Decision

Track II - The review did authorize the preparation to continue

I. Introduction and Context
Country Context
1. Burundi is a post-conflict, landlocked, small country with an estimated population in 2013 
of nearly 10.20 million increasing at a rate of 3 percent annually. After more than 13 years of 
conflict, Burundi is now showing positive signs of economic recovery. Over the last 5 years, the 
annual GDP growth in Burundi has consistently remained around 4%. Despite these positive signs, 
the country is unlikely to meet the Millennium Development Goals 2015: (a) the human capital base 
is weak due to limited access to social services; (b) a large majority of youths are under-employed 
because of lack of opportunities; (c) less than 3 percent of the population has access to electricity; 
(d) 52 per cent of children under five are chronically malnourished; and (e) 67 percent of 
Burundians are living below the poverty line. Poverty is overwhelmingly rural and most of the 

country’s poor are small-scale farmers. These data explain why Burundi finds itself at the bottom of 
the list of countries for most development indicators. According to the Human Development Index, 
Burundi is ranked 178 out of 186 countries . 
 
2. Following substantial improvement in security and peace consolidation, the Government 
focused its resources to expand basic social services in the country and initiated the modernization 
of existing economic infrastructure and institutions. The Government launched also key reforms 
addressing improved governance, public finance management system, business environment and 
investment climate, etc., which led to the country achieving considerable progress towards macro-
economic stabilization. These efforts have been recognized by the World Bank which in its reports 
“Ease of Doing Business”, ranked Burundi as one of the world’s top economic reformers for 
streamlining business and attracting foreign investment. Nonetheless, Burundi has still to address 
major challenges in terms of good governance, vulnerability to external shocks, diversifying the 
economy, and generating productive employment for its largely young population. 
 
3. The Government of Burundi’s second Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP II, 
2012-2015) and the joint International Finance Corporation (IFC)-World Bank Business Plan have 
identified potential growth sectors. The focus is rightly put on modernizing the agricultural sector 
since it accounts for nearly 41 percent of the GDP and about 90 percent of current labor force. 
Burundi’s main traditional export crop - coffee has been identified as a key sub-sector with high 
growth potential which can contribute to achieving the results of the PRSP - Pillar II “Transforming 
Burundi’s economy to generate sustainable, job-creating growth”. Other sub-sectors with potential 
growth identified are tea, cotton and cinchona. Furthermore, as part of it PRSP, the Government 
plans to support corps diversification by promoting nontraditional agricultural exports, including 
horticultural products, essential oils, medicinal plants, avocados, and macadamia nuts.

Sectoral and Institutional Context
4. Burundi has all of the factors which make agricultural investment essential. The sector 
plays a key role in economic growth, poverty reduction, food security and employment. It 
contributes most to gross domestic product, using 90 per cent of Burundi’s labor force and earning 
90 percent of export revenues - primarily from coffee production, which constitutes the key source 
of income for more than 600,000 rural households (about 30 percent of the population).  Despite the 
country's dependence on the primary sector, agriculture has not been modernized and continues to 
depend essentially on subsistence agriculture (1.2 million rural households) using unreliable and 
inefficient technology. Over the past decade the growth rate of agricultural production (2 percent) 
has been less than the growth rate of the population (3.0 percent); which aggravates the country’s 
food security situation. 
 
5. The farms in Burundi are highly fragmented with an average size of less than 0.5 hectare 
and the pressure on the land is increasing due to demographic pressure . The farming systems are 
determined by weather cycles and organized around multiple crops to reduce risk. A comparison of 
crop yields in the country with those in neighboring regions shows that Burundi’s agriculture faces 
major productivity challenges. For example, over the period last years the growth rate in cereal 
productivity in the East African Community (EAC region) increased by 3.13 percent while it 
declined by 0.08 in Burundi. Various interlinked factors contribute to the low agriculture 
productivity in Burundi, for instance: degradation of natural ecosystems and declining soil fertility, 
low use of improved inputs (quality seeds, fertilizers, pesticides, etc.), low use of modern 
technologies, inadequate access to agriculture extension services, poor physical infrastructure 

affecting market access and access to improved inputs, limited access to credit, marketing 
constraints and post-harvest losses among others. With the continued fragmentation and scarcity of 
agricultural land, future growth in agricultural production can only be generated from intensification 
and productivity gains. In addition, only market-oriented agriculture will allow rural households an 
adequate livelihood from their small plots, abundant labor, and relatively ample water resources. 
 
6. Burundi’s agricultural sector policy is articulated in its national agricultural strategy 
document adopted in 2008. The latter is based on the priorities identified in the country’s basic 
strategic documents, primarily Outlook 2025 and the Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers (PRSPs). 
Furthermore, with the support of the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Program 
(CAADP), the Government of Burundi put forward a National Agricultural Investment Plan 
(NAIP), covering the period 2012-2017, which was fully integrated with the PRSP II. A top priority 
sub-sector identified within the NAIP for investment is coffee which plays a strategic role in the 
national economy as a source of foreign exchange earnings and incomes for a large number of rural 
households. The Burundi coffee value chain presents considerable potential for growth. Its impact 
extends to several other sectors through backward and forward linkages (inputs, processing, 
transport, financial services, and taxes) and therefore plays a key role in the country for jobs 
creation, food security and poverty reduction. 
 
7. The NAIP main focus are on: (a) the increase in crop and livestock production by raising 
productivity and ensuring optimal management of soil and water resources; and (b) the 
strengthening of human resources capacities of national institutions and farmers organizations. 
Other important elements of the NAIP address common issues such as land tenure and natural 
resources preservation, the development of infrastructure and measures related to agribusiness 
promotion and market access, including an improved investment climate and access to rural finance. 
For the coffee sub-sector, the focus is on increasing productivity associated with actions to promote 
quality, such as rejuvenating orchards, periodic field maintenance, farmers’ organization and 
restructuring and/or modernizing washing facilities through privatization and a niche marketing 
strategy. 
 
8. The NAIP is structured around four major programs as follows: (a) Sustainable growth in 
production and food security; (b) Professional training of farmers and promotion of innovation; (c) 
Development of value chains and agribusiness; and (d) Institution-building for public bodies. The 
NAIP is also promoting partnership between the public and private sectors in implementing its 
programs and achieving its objectives. This proposed project is particularly the type of financing 
which would be shared between the state and private operators, producers and investors. While the 
private sector is encouraged to increase investment in productive, industrial and marketing 
activities, the state needs to establish an environment favorable to the development of the sector. 
Efforts are being undertaken in this direction, for the coffee value chain – private operators are 
encouraged to be involved at several levels, notably at those of export, curing and de-pulping 
stations and roasting. Such initiative should be further promoted and expanded to establish 
sustainable public-private partnerships.  
 
9. The coffee sector: Coffee production is mostly a smallholder based activity with around 122 
million coffee trees and a production area of 70,000 hectares . The species grown is mainly the 
Arabica, though some Robusta is also planted. The average production of coffee cherries is 
estimated at about 164,800 tons and around 20,000 tons of green coffee  - of which about 70-80 
percent are fully washed. Average coffee cherries production per tree is about 1kg which is far 


below the yields of 2.5 to 3.0kg observed in other coffee growing areas; for instance in Asia and 
Latin America. Registered production of green coffee  in Burundi in 1990/91 was 33,912 tons while 
observed figure in 2011/12 was about 15,000 tons. The highest pick was registered in 1994/95 with 
40,985 tons. The cyclical swing of seasons sometimes leaves the country with very limited 
quantities to export (5,673 tons in 2003/4).  
 
10. Despite the current low and declining productivity level of the coffee sector in Burundi, it 
continues to play a vital role in the country’s economy and represents the main industry and export 
product – accounting for up to 80 percent of the foreign currency earnings. During the harvest of 
raw and green coffee, the sector plays also a key role in stimulating the rural economy. The 
associated industry (de-pulping and washing stations) and traders inject an important sum of cash 
into rural areas which increases spending in purchase of goods for rural households, manufactured 
products, payment of social expenses, and reimbursement of credit. Furthermore, the construction of 
washing stations in rural areas led to a modest first stage of industrialization, off-farm jobs for local 
labor during the coffee campaign and, most importantly, the development of rural access roads to 
the washing stations which are also used for other purposes.  
 
11. The coffee industry was one of the priority sectors targeted for deregulation reforms and 
privatization in the structural adjustment program (initiated in 1986) that aimed to limit the state’s 
involvement in the productive sector. Due to the civil war and subsequent recovery challenges, this 
process (sector reform and privatization of state entities: OCIBU, SODECO and washing stations) 
experienced some delays. But it subsequently led to positive developments, among others: (a) the 
establishment of a new regulatory body (ARFIC) and an inter-professional association 
(INTERCAFE); and (b) an effective deregulation of de-pulping and export through the construction 
of new washing stations by private investors and SOGESTALs . 
 
12. Today, the government is eager to complete the process of privatization which consists of a 
3rd phase (some 77 washing stations and a mill firm) – although different actors of the value chain 
have different ideas about how this should be carried out. For instance, coffee farmer associations 
are determined to take part in the privatization and the emergence of these associations adds a 
politico-socio-economic dimension to the on-going reform process. Even if some of the competing 
interest groups are small, their diverse political, regional and even ethnic backgrounds prompt the 
coffee reform to be a central peace-building focus for Burundi. Important to note that a recent 
Poverty and Social Impact Assessment (PSIA) concluded that the earlier privatization (Phases I and 
II) had mostly a positive impact on the incomes and welfare of affected coffee producers. 
 
13. While several steps have been taken toward improving the performance of the Burundi 
coffee sector, it is currently experiencing serious instability and decline which cannot be explained 
by chance or climatic conditions alone. Some of the causes behind this situation: (a) Persistence of 
structural deficiencies, such as inefficiencies in the governance of the value chain. The institutions 
and the actors involved in the value chain are facing several constraints (incomplete reform and 
privatization process, lack of technical and managerial capacity for emerging farmers’ association, 
non-transparent pricing mechanisms, etc.) that hamper their operations and, consequently, limit the 
development of the coffee sector in Burundi; (b) Low productivity due to insufficient technical and 
financial support to farmers. Lack of investments in productivity enhancing technologies following 
the liberalization of the market resulted in low and highly fluctuating productions, poor maintenance 
and degradation of the orchards, low input application as well as pest and disease problems, etc.; (c) 
Limited competitiveness with a decrease in quantity and quality caused by the aging of orchards at 



the farm level (28 percent are more than 30 years old and 62 percent are between 9 and 30 years), 
limited technical know-how moving downstream the chain to support quality improvements 
(milling, tasting, etc.); and inefficient marketing structures for promoting the Burundi brand; and (d) 
Primary production has also not kept pace with the expansion of processing capacity, leading to a 
situation in which all raw materials are competitively sought with little price differentiation. Many 
washing stations have experienced low profitability due to high operational costs (partly related to 
capacity underutilization) and management limitations.  
 
14. Under such circumstances it will be extremely difficult for Burundian coffee producers to 
be able to compete with the world coffee industry (or even maintain their competitiveness at the 
regional level). The resulting economic and social consequences are severe for Burundi. Despite 
these weaknesses, the coffee value chain in Burundi is not entirely without its strengths and 
therefore presents  some advantages which justify transformative investments in reversing current 
trends: (a) climate and altitude to produce specialty Arabica coffee that attracts premium world 
market prices; (b) opening of the sector to private investors; (c) local producers interested and 
experienced in growing coffee; (d) emerging farmer associations and private-led governance 
structures; (e) well-established processing infrastructure - washing stations and dry milling capacity 
to support increased production of high quality coffee; (f) increasing worldwide consumption with 
an average annual growth rate of 1.9 percent during the last 50 years and a high demand for 
specialty coffee in developed markets ; and (g) in term of the macro-economic situation of the 
country, Burundi is heavily depending on  coffee export proceeds that failure is not an option. Also, 
since coffee is a perennial and the land is already tied to it for the lifecycle of the tree, it is not 
readily easy to convert and diversify the production base. 
 
15. Against this background, the proposed World Bank project is supporting the Burundi 
Government in implementing its PRSP II and NAIP’s programs - enhancing the productivity and 
competitiveness of the coffee value chain. The proposed project is aligned with the ECCAC 
regional strategy for the development of the coffee sector.  It builds on ongoing operations by the 
World Bank in the country such as PRODEMA (Agriculture and Livestock Modernization Project) 
and PAZDOC (Sustainable Landscape Coffee Project) . It benefits from the coffee sector reforms 
and privatization supported by the World Bank and other development partners (AfD, EU, USAID, 
etc.). It is also complementing on-going operations by IFAD focusing on food security, namely the 
Agricultural Intensification and Value Enhancing Support Project (development of marshlands, 
increase the productivity and yields of rice and other food crops, access to quality inputs and seed, 
etc.), and the Value Chain Development Program (promotion of rice and milk and six other 
secondary value chains).

Relationship to CAS
16. The proposed support project is aligned with the Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for 
Burundi for FY13-16 that aims to support Burundi’s development as an “increasingly stable, 
competitive and diversified economy with enhanced opportunities for productive employment and 
improved standards of living”. Within the CAS framework, the proposed project supports the first 
strategic objective of increasing competitiveness to achieve inclusive growth and reduce poverty.

II. Proposed Development Objective(s)
Proposed Development Objective(s) (From PCN)
17. The project development objective (PDO) is to increase sustainable coffee production and 


enhance coffee quality, for the benefit of smallholders. This will contribute to: (a) improving the 
sector productivity and competitiveness; and (b) the country’s strategic goals of poverty reduction 
and enhanced exports revenues.

Key Results (From PCN)
18. At PDO level, the key results expected from this project are as follow: (a) Increased coffee 
production at the country level at project-end through the combined effect of application of good 
agricultural practices and rejuvenated/renewed plantations; (b) Higher coffee quality demonstrated 
by an increase in the share of coffee sold with price premiums on export; and (c) Enhanced farmers’ 
share of the net FOB price on coffee exports. 
 
19. It is estimated that approximately 200,000 small-scale farmers (from a total of roughly 
600,000 coffee growers at the national level) will directly benefit from the project planned 
activities. These are mostly composed of hillside farmers with less than 1 hectare of land, who 
cultivate an average of 150-250 coffee trees as an integral part of their livelihoods.

III. Preliminary Description
Concept Description
20. Burundi is a small player in international coffee markets and is operating in an environment 
of aggressive competitors. The area where the best results may be realized in terms of the sector 
productivity and competitiveness is not only limited to production increase, but most importantly, 
quality improvement along the value chain and a focus on the lucrative specialty coffee markets. 
Such efforts would certainly allow differentiating the country’s products and also provide a better 
buffer for the inevitable periods of low prices. However, the business principle driving 
improvements needs to be that quality starts at the farm level and can be maintained only through 
proper processing and storage. 
 
21. In this respect, the proposed project will operate through multiple interventions, along 
different segments of the coffee value chain, to address productivity and quality bottlenecks and to 
open new market opportunities to Burundi– the specialty coffee markets.  The proposed project 
would reinforce the private sector role in leading and structuring the sector, namely the coffee 
producers and the industry. More specifically, the following key areas of the value chain will be 
addressed: (a) Governing structure of the value chain and institutional strengthening; (b) increasing 
production and productivity; (c) improving quality and market access. A particular focus would be 
put on greater organization and integration of smallholders into the chain and on more equitable 
sharing of the benefits from improved quality and market access.   
 
22. Component 1 – Institutional strengthening and value chain governance: An essential 
property of the chain is its governance structure, which determines to a considerable extent how 
resources and gains are allocated and flow within the chain. In the case of Burundi, this structure is 
developing but constrained by lack of capacity to implement concerted specific sector policies; 
weak coordination; limited information exchange and non-transparent price mechanisms. The 
project will support streamlining the governance structure of the sector by: (a) reviewing and 
adapting the current intuitional framework to improve its level of effectiveness and efficiency with a 
particular focus on transparency in the decision-making process and on quality and pricing 
mechanism; (b) upgrading the capacities of existing institutions/organizations overseeing the sector; 
and (c) improving the dialogue among the key public and private actors of the chain to arrive at a 


consensus on solving value chain bottlenecks. 
 
23. More specifically, the institutional architecture for coffee sector management that the 
project would support strengthening comprises: (a) INTERCAFE -- a stakeholder-driven 
coordinating body that has the mandate for most sector management decisions; (b) ARFIC-- a 
public regulatory authority that ensures that the basic “rules of the game” for managing the sector 
are adequately defined, transparently implemented, and where necessary, enforced by Government 
authority. This intervention will aim also at upgrading the capacities of ARFIC to provide quality, 
inspection and certification services to the coffee industry. The project will support both the 
modernization of existing labs in line with international standards (and possibly their expansion 
within the producing regions) and developing ARFIC human resources capacities for managing 
regulatory areas and for coffee testing; (c) CNAC-- a coffee grower organization largely represented 
in all coffee growing region; and (d) other stakeholder organizations for each of the main sector 
constituencies, to provide representation into the INTERCAFE’s collective decision making on 
sector management. This architecture is broadly similar to successful agriculture value chain 
management elsewhere in Sub-Saharan Africa and many other producing countries as well, with 
strong public-private sector participation. 
 
24. The project will also support increased consultations among the chain stakeholders; for 
instance, through regular forums to: (a) discuss the various problems and constraints of the sector 
within a “value chain approach”; (b) elaborate (or update) a comprehensive strategy for the coffee 
sector aiming at the general interest of the sector; (c) find harmonized and shared solutions to the 
various challenges facing the sector; (d) eliminate or minimize potential conflicts among the various 
actors in view of the general and common interest; and eventually (e) coordinating donors, 
government and private sector investments to avoid overlap, scale-up impacts, etc. 
 
25. Furthermore, under this component the project will support the development of a Data Base 
on the sector which would provide reliable data on the number of producers, number of trees, 
production, quality, washing stations performance and other ecological and socio-economic factors. 
This Data Base to be initially placed within ARFIC and linked to INTERCAFE, can be further 
expanded to include a formal GI S module that can capture more of the agro-ecological variables 
such as soil types, water sources and other variables that affect coffee quality. This investment will 
constitute an important tool for the value chain actors in terms of planning, monitoring and 
evaluation of their activities and return on investments. It can also be used as an export promotion 
tool (see component 3 below).  
 
26. Component 2 – Support to increased production and productivity: Under this component the 
project will support investments aimed at increasing production and productivity with a focus on: 
(a) the adoption of good agricultural practices - sustainable land management, planting trees, 
nutrition and fertilizer management, pests and diseases control, pruning, rejuvenation (25 percent of 
existing trees), harvesting, quality assessment and improvement, etc.; (b) improving production 
technology and soil fertility; (c) the dissemination of improved varieties to renew old plantations 
(20 percent of existing trees); (d) supporting specific research topics (coffee under shade, variety 
improvement and germplasm enhancement, etc.); and (e) a support fund to facilitate access to 
inputs. 
 
27. In addition special emphasis will be on: (a) linking coffee growers to national agricultural 
research bodies and extension services (public and private) and promoting a two-way flow of 

information between these entities; (b) expanding the tested models for productivity enhancement 
implemented as part of the PRODEMA project (community based mechanisms); (c) disseminating 
sustainable water and land management (SWLM) best practices and more diversified plantations, 
with fruit trees, inter-cropping with food crops, etc.; and (d) encouraging south-south exchange for 
coffee production, for instance, with coffee growing countries including Rwanda, Ethiopia and 
Colombia. This exchange will aim at various learning programs: production techniques, extension 
methodologies, coffee under shade, etc., and will build on cooperation already established between 
the PAZDOC project (Sustainable Landscape Coffee Project – GEF) and Columbia coffee growers. 
 
28. For the implementation of the productivity investments, the proposed project will make use 
of INTERCAFE’s current contractual system provision for extension services and supply of inputs, 
and extend these to a larger share of coffee farmers as well as to coffee-specific agronomic and 
processing research. INTERCAFE has a cess revenue mechanism  already in place to finance such 
activities but, at current levels of national coffee production, the cess revenues only permit activities 
at a modest scale. 
 
29. Component 3 – Support to improved quality and market access: The management of quality 
in the coffee value chain is the most immediate instrument growers can use to improve their 
upgrading opportunities and it is a critical element of the current trend toward coffee differentiation. 
Furthermore, it is specifically vital in Burundi where the existence of “potato taste”, a strong off-
flavor resulting from the interaction between agro-climatic conditions and antestia bug infiltration, 
is endemic . Currently, cherries washing stations have only limited capacity to evaluate their coffee 
and do not have the experience or the cupping infrastructure to evaluate their production. In this 
respect, the project will promote quality enhancement activities along the value chain which would 
require changes in the field, at the washing station and at the dry mill. Applying good agricultural 
practices, flotation of cherries at the washing stations reception, meticulous hand sorting during pre-
drying and several other technical improvements are needed before Burundi can be recognized as a 
reliable supplier of coffee specialty markets. Under this component, the project will build on 
successes of recently closed USAID project in the country  and will in particular support the 
following investments: 
 
Sub-component 3.1- Improving quality: 
 
30. Developing cupping capacity: A main focus of this activity will be on educating all value 
chains actors on quality and cupping and establishing cupping labs in main producing areas.  This 
will be achieved by: (a) selecting a number of “leader” coffee washing stations to serve as an initial 
focus for specialty coffee value chain development and as models for other stations to learn from; 
and (b) the selection of a set of second tier washing stations to serve as “training hubs” aimed at 
maximizing the dissemination of production, processing and marketing best practices that will help 
in improving the quality and market access throughout all coffee producing regions in Burundi. 
 
31. Improving washing stations technical, operational and managerial capacities: Under this 
sub-component, assistance will be provided to the managerial staff of the washing stations to 
develop and implement customized Quality Improvement Plans (QIPs), including infrastructure 
improvement, best practices and Quality Control (QC) systems. The production and processing of 
high quality coffees requires sound technical and business management skills and systems. 
Currently the management (and governance) capacity of most private and cooperatively owned 
washing stations needs improvement. This element is critical to obtaining the highest returns, 

continued access to financing and sustainability. Furthermore, selected strategic supplier 
certification programs offer substantial price premiums to growers but require the implementation 
of detailed and transparent financial reporting systems. In the particular cases of cooperatives where 
the governance can be problematic, it is also important to maintain a fully transparent financial 
management system to ensure cooperative cohesion. 
 
32. For highly performing washing stations, traceability systems from the plantations to the 
destination market may be introduced. Such systems will enable buyers and sellers to track each lot 
from the time it enters the washing station (or even the field) until it is delivered to its final 
destination. This feature is also an essential element that distinguishes specialty coffee production 
from the production of standard grade coffee. The ITC component described below (parag. 34) will 
be integral to the development of the coffee traceability system and to using this system to its full 
potential. 
 
33. Improving existing processing infrastructure to meet environmental concerns: As pulping 
coffee can be the source of significant environmental problems (pollution of water table and the soil 
surrounding the washing stations, etc.), the project proposes integrating environmental mitigation 
measures in existing (and new) washing stations. These investments (water treatment and recycling) 
can lead to substantial cost reduction of production (reduction of water quantities used for de-
pulping) and, most importantly, responsible environmental stewardship is not only a best practice, 
but is an obligation for certification to several preferred supplier programs such as the Neumann 
Kaffee Gruppe (NKG) and the Starbucks’ C.A.F.E. Practices Program. 
 
34. Developing an information technology and communication system specific to the sector: 
Wireless internet access is now available in much of Burundi, presenting an exciting opportunity for 
washing stations to broaden their horizon in terms of technology access, learning opportunities and 
direct communications with buyers. The Data Base described in parag. 25 above can also be 
expanded to track and report on key performance characteristics of all washing stations for purposes 
of monitoring and planning and assessing the impacts of investments in quality improvement. 
Similarly, the Data Base can serve as an important tool for export promotion, accessible to buyers 
interested in visiting and buying Burundi’s coffee. Hot-links to individual washing stations sites will 
allow buyers to download fact sheets, learn about the coffee characteristics, and communicate 
directly with the stations that interest them most. From a basic training point of view, access to the 
internet by washing stations staff will be a powerful tool for the dissemination of training materials 
across the country. Other countries, particularly in Latin America and more recently in Rwanda 
have benefited greatly from the development of information and communications technologies. 
Burundi will be no different in this regard.  
 
Sub-component 3.2- Marketing and promoting the Burundi Coffee brand:  
 
35. Burundi must learn to market its coffee to the new consumers and also minimize the risk 
and uncertainties associated with coffee production, processing and marketing. In addition to the 
investments made on increasing production and productivity, profiling of coffee quality for more 
focused marketing, upgrading t he processing infrastructure, etc., this component of the project will 
support investments in: (a) building a recognizable image for Burundi’s coffee, including, a country 
logo, brochures, standardized washing station fact sheets, coffee maps and other information that 
may be useful to coffee markets; (b) developing a reliable coffee industry intelligence and 
forecasting system; (c) establishing direct sales relationships with roasters and buyers; and (d) 


introducing other innovative promotional activities such as buyer tours, certifications strategies, 
competitions such as the “cup of excellence”, and many other features that will place Burundi’s 
coffees in some of the very best markets in the world. These activities will focus on cultivating 
appropriate contacts and potential coffee relationships in North America, Europe, Japan and other 
emerging markets such as China and Russia. 
 
36. This component of the program will require the full coordination of investments and 
activities at multiple levels, including growers, washing stations, mills and other supporting 
institutions. A key player in this process will be INTERCAFE which would be reinforced to take a 
lead role in coordinating these activities and promoting the Burundi coffee brand. 
 
37. International Finance Corporation (IFC): The IFC Advisory Services Department has been 
supporting the 3rd phase of the coffee sector privatization. A main focus of IFC assistance was to 
advice on financing options for the coffee growers to buy shares of washing stations and to develop 
a target list of experienced international investors in the coffee sector who may be interested in the 
opportunity offered by the privatization. Further support will be sought from IFC, in particular for 
developing industry partnership and linkages with potential international specialty coffee buyers. 
 
38. Component 4 – Program coordination, monitoring and knowledge management: This 
component will facilitate: (a) administrative, technical, and financial management of the program; 
(b) coordination among all institutional partners to ensure efficient flow of information and support 
to all value chain actors, in particular the small coffee growers; (c) effective contractual 
arrangements with key implementing partners (INTERCAFE, CNAC, ARFIC, etc.) and other 
private sector operators; (d) monitoring and evaluation of the performance and the financial, 
environmental, and social impact of the program; and (e) development of communication activities 
to publicize and disseminate the project results, best practices and success stories.  
 
39. Inclusion of youth and women: This population already active in the coffee value chain 
(trees maintenance, harvesting, grading, etc.) will be systematically considered in all project’s 
interventions. In line with the PRSP-2 and the National Gender Policy, a special focus will be given 
to promoting increased youth employment (both women and men) in all segments of the value chain 
by involving them in technical and entrepreneurial training programs and other planned 
developments actions. The project will aim at a target of 50 percent of youth and women directly 
benefiting from the project supported activities. 
 
40. Project costs: The indicative cost for the Coffee Competitiveness Support Project is US
$50.00 million. The proposed Bank-financed support would cost about US$45.00 million. It is 
expected that the beneficiaries (INTERCAFE, ARFIC and CNAC) will contribute up to US$5.00 
million. Furthermore, a GEF project is being considered for potential co-financing of selected 
productivity enhancement activities (PAZDOC: Sustainable Landscape Coffee Project - US$ 4.2 
million). Finally, USAID and the French Development Agency (AfD) are preparing parallel 
financing for the sector with a focus on productivity and trade issues. The exact amount for this 
financing is not yet defined, but is expected to be made available in the 2015 fiscal year. 
Coordination with these projects is foreseen to ensure complementarities and cost effectiveness. 
 
41. Categories of expenditures: For all project’s components, there will be various categories of 
expenditures including: (a) civil and rural works – case of upgrading the processing infrastructure 




(CWSs); (b) materials and equipment; (c) technical assistance and studies; (d) training and 
information; (e) support fund; (f) provision of services; and (i) operation and maintenance.

IV. Safeguard Policies that might apply
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No TBD
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖

V. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 72.25 Total Bank Financing: 55.00
Financing Gap: 0.00
Financing Source Amount
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 0.00
 IDA Grant 55.00
 LOCAL  BENEFICIARIES 17.25
 Total 72.25
