













































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Accelerating Impacts of CGIAR Climate Research for Africa (AICCRA) (P173398) 

 
 

  
Jun 09, 2020 Page 1 of 11  

     

 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document (PID) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 09-Jun-2020 | Report No: PIDC29338 

 
The World Bank  
Accelerating Impacts of CGIAR Climate Research for Africa (AICCRA) (P173398) 

 
 

  
Jun 09, 2020 Page 2 of 11  

     

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Africa P173398  Accelerating Impacts of 
CGIAR Climate 
Research for Africa 
(AICCRA) (P173398) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA Jun 16, 2020 Sep 30, 2020 Agriculture and Food 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing International Center for 
Tropical Agriculture (CIAT) 

International Crops Research 
Institute for the Semi-Arid 
Tropics (ICRISAT), 
International Livestock 
Research Institute (ILRI) 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The Development Objective is to increase access for agriculture research and extension service providers in Africa to 
knowledge, technologies, and decision making tools relevant to enhancing the resilience of agriculture and food 
systems in the face of climate change. 
 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 60.00 

Total Financing 60.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 60.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 60.00 

          IDA Grant 60.00 

 

Environmental and Social Risk Classification Concept Review Decision 

Moderate  Track I-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
A policy waiver will be sought from IDA to allow the International Center for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT), an international 
organization, to serve as recipient of a regional IDA grant. 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

 
Agriculture remains central to the livelihoods of millions of Africans, yet far too many agriculture-dependent Africans 
remain food insecure and malnourished. After a period of moderate improvement, food security throughout the region 
has recently deteriorated. Slowdowns in productivity growth, combined with increasingly frequent food production 
failures, point to the need to significantly raise the bar when it comes to increasing the productive capacity and 
strengthening the resilience of rural households. The economic hardship resulting from the COVID-19 crisis are expected 
to further worsen food insecurity in the region, making resilience-building an even more urgent task. 

The livelihoods of African farmers and livestock keepers, long known to be vulnerable to the vicissitudes of weather, are 
being severely impacted by climate change. Climate-related shocks to food production have increased in frequency from 
occurring once every 12.5 years to occurring once every 2.5 years. The increased frequency of climate-induced production 
shocks have made it increasingly difficult to maintain positive growth in per capita food production over the longer term.   

Climate change is projected to further increase the number of drought days in Africa and shorten growing seasons. 
Droughts, floods, and tropical storms are the climatic events that affect food production the most. Substantial increases 
in these major drivers of crop and livestock production shortfalls are projected for large parts of Africa. This at a time when 
the number of people to feed will almost double by 2050 to over 2 billion―a population that will be increasingly urbanized. 

Climate change poses a serious threat to crop productivity in sub-regions within Africa that are already food insecure. The 
impact is projected to be highest in maize, millet, sorghum, and wheat. Climate change will also affect productivity in 
Africa’s livestock sector. Depending on the location and prevailing production systems, water scarcity will lower the 
productivity of pastures, reduce yields of milk and meat, and increase the incidence of diseases. All this will translate into 
a significant deterioration in food security, if no action is taken. 

Agriculture is an important livelihood source for women throughout sub-Saharan Africa and an important source of 
employment. Studies consistently show that in most parts of sub-Saharan Africa, productivity of women farmers 
consistently lags behind that of men farmers. The sources of the productivity gap have been amply documented including 
land, improved technologies, lesser access to inputs, credit, insurance, and advisory services. They are thus generally less 
well-resourced, and hence more vulnerable to shocks that negatively impact farming and livestock keeping activities.  

Women farmers are especially vulnerable to climate change impacts, due to household responsibilities as well as increased 
agricultural work from male out-migration. Climate-smart agriculture (CSA) options have the potential to provide benefits 
for women; when they have access to information on CSA, they are just as likely as men to adopt the practices. Women 
can be important agents of innovation, including in response to climate change, and ensuring that women beneficiaries 


of the project are able to avail of CSA technologies and climate information will be a focus of the project’s gender strategy.  

The ambition of many African governments to improve food security, nationally and at household level, is in danger of not 
being met. The 2014 Malabo Declaration set ambitious 2025 targets to end hunger, double agricultural productivity, halve 
post-harvest losses, and sustain agricultural GDP growth of at least 6 percent per year. The region is not on track to meet 
these targets, and it will be difficult to make sustained progress in the face of large climate-induced production shocks.  

Strengthening the productivity and resilience of African agriculture will depend critically on the ability of governments and 
their partners to bring science and innovation to the forefront of the development agenda. Urgent action is needed to 
improve climate adaptation of Africa’s food systems. Incentives, knowledge, science, and finance will all need to play a 
role, together with increased co-ordination among development partners to improve the climate resilience of production 
systems, build efficient value chains, facilitate internal and external trade, and boost the purchasing power of the most 
vulnerable households. As countries contemplate a shift towards climate-smart investments, investing in agricultural 
research is more critical than ever. The high returns to investment in agricultural research and innovation are well 
documented, and a large body of evidence shows that such investment is very effective at reducing poverty and hunger. 

In recognition of the critical role played by science and innovation in enabling the adaptation of African agriculture to 
climate change, the World Bank recently announced an increase in support to CGIAR. At the Climate Action Summit that 
took place during the UN General Assembly held in September 2019, President Malpass announced an increase in support 
to CGIAR. While the CGIAR system has in the past received direct grants from the World Bank, the unprecedented decision 
to use IDA financing to support CGIAR reflects the World Bank’s strong commitment to step up support to CGIAR despite 
a constrained budget environment. The incremental financing presents a unique opportunity to support critical CGIAR 
work being done for the benefit of millions of poor households in IDA countries whose livelihoods depend on agriculture.   

The World Bank’s increased support for CGIAR comes at a critical time, when the COVID-19 pandemic is further 
threatening food security throughout the region and undermining the livelihoods of millions of agriculture-dependent 
households. Going forward, efforts will be needed to increase domestic food production throughout the region and make 
food supply chains more resilient to the threat of pandemics, by promoting innovation and building additional capacity to 
manage pests and diseases while monitoring the health and safety of food. CGIAR will be at the forefront of these efforts. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 

 
CGIAR is the world leader in international agriculture research on climate change adaptation. With a budget of around 
US$1 billion, CGIAR operates at a scale that when combined with the investments made by its many partners is having a 
measurable impact on climate adaptation efforts worldwide. CGIAR specializes in “translational research,” adapting 
knowledge produced through basic research so it can be applied in specific contexts. CGIAR does this by partnering with 
regional organizations, national research institutions, civil society organizations, and private firms and individuals.  

CGIAR can play a vital catalytic role in strengthening the agriculture research architecture in Africa, if the “missing middle” 
can be filled. At present, regional and national programs in Africa have difficulty engaging with CGIAR in a systematic way, 
and what is happening now is often done in an ad hoc manner. A major obstacle is the absence of resources to support 
interactions between CGIAR Centers on the one hand (funded mainly by international donors) and regional and national 
programs on the other hand (funded mainly by African governments). New sources of flexible funding are needed to 
facilitate the engagement between CGIAR and regional and national programs in Africa.  

The CGIAR Research Program (CRP) on Climate Change, Agriculture, and Food Security (CCAFS) is at the forefront of 
fostering climate adaptation in agriculture and food systems. The over-arching objectives of CCAFS are: (i) to identify and 
test pro-poor climate change adaptation and mitigation practices, technologies and policies for food systems, adaptive 
capacity and rural livelihoods; and (ii) to provide diagnosis and analysis that will ensure cost effective investments, the 


inclusion of agriculture in climate change policies, and the inclusion of climate issues in agricultural policies, from the sub-
national to the global level in a way that brings benefits to the rural poor.  

CCAFS is being implemented by a consortium of CGIAR and non-CGIAR partners, under the leadership of the International 
Center for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT), an international agricultural research center within the CGIAR system with the 
mandate to carry out research on problems of tropical agriculture for the benefit of developing countries. CCAFS work is 
led by staff at CGIAR Centers and at six partner universities, including: (1) Leeds University, (2) Columbia University, (3) 
University of Vermont, (4) University of Oxford, (5) Utrecht University, and (6) Wageningen University.  

CCAFS activities are focused on enhancing climate resilience in Sub-Saharan Africa, but the level of funding is inadequate. 
During 2017-2019, nearly one-half (48 percent) of the total CCAFS budget of $160 million went to support work in Africa, 
including 26 percent allocated to CCAFS programs in West Africa and 22 percent allocated to CCAFS programs in East 
Africa. CCAFS has an approved expenditure framework, but shortfalls in expected donor financing have resulted in 
significant funding gaps that threaten the achievement of some critical results. Moreover, since CCAFS was approved in 
2018, new evidence has emerged (for example, IPCC’s 2019 1.5 degree assessment report) that makes clear that the level 
of ambition to promote climate adaptation must increase dramatically. 

AICCRA will support CCAFS programs and activities that are targeted specifically to Africa and will help take to scale the 
most strategic and impactful CCAFS-Africa programs, promoting resilience to climate change and improved food security 
in the region. AICCRA will fill a critical gap by making cutting-edge CGIAR research and innovation available to NARS and 
other key stakeholders in Africa. It will support knowledge creation and capacity building activities to enable regional and 
national-level stakeholders to take CSA innovations to scale. It will achieve that by fostering partnerships between CGIAR 
and local research institutes, universities, civil society organizations, farmer organizations, and private sector. AICCRA will 
facilitate the development of Climate Information Services (CIS) and promote the adoption of CSA solutions across sub-
regions within Africa that are extremely vulnerable to climate change. The project will also support on-the-ground 
activities in selected countries in Western, Eastern and Southern Africa where CGIAR science has the greatest chance of 
success in delivering catalytic results, which can be adopted by other countries in the region. 

 
Relationship to CPF 

 
AICCRA is well aligned with World Bank regional strategies. AICCRA will support the World Bank Africa Regional Integration 
and Cooperation Assistance Strategy (2018). It will contribute to the World Bank Group Strategy for Fragility, Conflict and 
Violence 2020–2025, as well as to the World Bank Group Adaptation and Resilience Action Plan (2018) and the World Bank 
Africa Climate Business Plan (2018) and New Generation Climate Business Plan (under preparation). In addition, it will 
contribute to the activities proposed under World Bank Country Partnership Frameworks for many countries being served 
in Africa by CCAFS.  

AICCRA will build upon the achievements of past and current engagements by the World Bank in Africa. The design of 
AICCRA incorporates lessons learned from other World Bank initiatives in the region, including the West Africa Agricultural 
Productivity Programs (WAAPP), the Great Green Wall initiative (GGW), the Sahel Irrigation Initiative Support Project 
(SIIP), and the Regional Sahel Pastoralism Support Project (PRAPS), among others.  

AICCRA will complement and add value to future World Bank lending operations in Africa. The World Bank is preparing a 
series of new lending operations to mobilize cutting-edge science in addressing food security needs in the face of the 
global climate crisis by promoting the successful adoption of proven technologies on a massive scale. Noteworthy among 
these is the West Africa Food System Resilience Program (FSRP) The success of FSRP, which forms part of the Africa 
Regional Integration and Cooperation Assistance Strategy, will depend critically on the ability of the participating entities 
to access the newest and most effective technologies available, especially those generated by CGIAR. AICCRA will 
complement FSRP by serving as a conduit for the international science generated by CGIAR Centers to reach the regional 


and national actors who will be supported by FSRP (e.g. ECOWAS, CORAF).  

As a regional project, AICCRA will fill an important niche in the Word Bank’s’ Africa portfolio and help to advance the 
regional integration agenda. By supporting activities that will be implemented at sub-regional level through multi-actor 
networks, AICCRA will be able to achieve outcomes that cannot be achieved easily, if at all, by engaging with individual 
partners at country level. On the research supply side, working at regional level justifies investment in infrastructure and 
personnel at scales that surpass minimum critical mass and allow economies of scale to be captured. On the research 
demand side, working at regional level facilitates the flow of innovations across national borders and enhances learning 
effects, increasing the number of adopters and amplifying the benefits. 

 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
The Development Objective is to increase access for agriculture research and extension service providers in Africa to 
knowledge, technologies, and decision making tools relevant to enhancing the resilience of agriculture and food systems 
in the face of climate change. 
 
Key Results (From PCN) 

 
Achievements of the Project will be measured using the following PDO level indicators: 
 
Results Area 1: Knowledge and tools needed to project likely impacts of climate change on agricultural systems available 
for use by beneficiaries in project area.  

Results Area 2: Climate-smart agriculture technologies available for upscaling in project area. 
 
D. Concept Description 
 

AICCRA will focus on bridging the gap between the research institutes that produce improved technologies and the 
development organizations that promote the adoption of improved technologies, for the purpose of enhancing the 
resilience of Africa’s agriculture and food systems in the face of climate change. Through support to CCAFS, AICCRA will 
strengthen the technical, institutional, and human capacity needed to move CGIAR innovations off the shelf and achieve 
impacts at scale in IDA-eligible countries in Africa. 

AICCRA will strengthen systemic capacity to monitor climate change in Africa, project the likely impacts of climate 
change on local agri-food systems, identify improved technologies that can strengthen the resilience of those systems in 
the face of climate change, and transfer knowledge about the improved technologies to agri-food system actors. The 
knowledge, technologies, and decision making tools promoted under AICCRA will be of value not only to productive agents 
(e.g., farmers, livestock keepers, assemblers, processors, and distributors), but also to the public, private, and civil society 
organizations that play critical roles in delivering improved technologies to productive agents.  

Climate advisories generated through monitoring networks and early warning systems work much better when they 
flow rapidly and easily into decision support systems and are integrated with input provision. For that reason, there is 
a need not only to strengthen monitoring and analytical capacity to make sure systems are in place that can generate 
timely and relevant climate advisories and early warnings, but also a need to implement policies and reinforce institutions 
to ensure that those climate advisories and early warnings can be translated into effective preventive actions, for example 
through changes in the types and amounts of inputs being used, or adjustments in management practices. In addition, 
decision support systems must be capable of channelling information from service users back to service providers, to 
inform research so that it becomes more demand-driven and responsive to local needs.  



AICCRA will consist of four components. Box 1 provides illustrative examples of the results which are anticipated from the 
three large areas of support under AICCRA. The results will be further elaborated during project preparation and 
development of the results framework. All activities will be undertaken for the benefit of IDA-eligible SSA countries.   

Component 1. Knowledge and Services 

Component 1 will support the generation and sharing of knowledge products and tools that will address critical gaps in 
the design and provision of climate services, enable climate-informed investment planning, and support the design of 
policies to promote uptake of CSA practices. Activities to be supported under Component 1 will include one set of 
transversal activities to be pursued Africa-wide, as well as two subsets of geographically tailored activities to be pursued 
in Western and Eastern/Southern Africa, respectively. 

Subcomponent 1.1. Africa-wide. Sub-component 1.1 will support the generation of new knowledge and associated 
delivery platforms that are expected to be relevant throughout the region to improve targeting in the provision of agro-
climatic services as well as planning of CSA investments. The following activities will be financed, inter alia: (i) Identification 
of adaptation interventions targeted to agricultural land-use categories, small-scale farmer groups and associated climate 
hazards; (ii) Development of climate information service packages to accompany climate-smart interventions based on 
needs assessments and qualitative-quantitative cost-benefit analyses; (iii) Development or refinement of indicators and 
other adaptation tracking systems that can feed into planning processes and assist with national reporting related to NDCs 
and NAPs; (iv) Identification of big-ticket CSA investment opportunities, detailing the potential social, economic, and 
environmental benefits at national, regional, and continental scale (an example might be assessing the potential to launch 
large-scale initiatives to produce and distribute seed of drought-resilient varieties); (v) Development of business models 
and identification of innovative finance options for scaling-up CSA and climate-resilient value chains, with special 
consideration of gender and social inclusion; and (vi) Undertaking climate, agricultural and environmental policy 
coherence analyses to identify regional policy overlaps, gaps and alignment. 

Sub-component 1.2. Western Africa. Sub-component 1.2 will support the development of new or improved climate 
service tools that can help bridge the gap between meteorological services and agricultural extension systems. Activities 
to be financed include the development of ag-data hubs, design of climate service and visualization tools and 
dissemination systems and strengthening of partnerships for the delivery of early warnings, climate services, and climate-
informed digital agro-advisories to support agricultural decision-making. The sub-component will also seek to identify 
tailored climate information services and digital agro-advisory packages for use in building new extension systems or 
strengthening existing extension systems. Activities will take place in selected countries in Western Africa (Mali, Ghana 
and Senegal).  

Sub-component 1.3. Eastern and Southern Africa. Sub-component 1.3 will support the development of new or improved 
climate service tools that can help bridge the gap between meteorological services and agricultural extension systems. 
Activities to be financed include the development of ag-data hubs, design of climate service and visualization tools and 
dissemination systems, and strengthening of partnerships for the delivery of early warnings, climate services, and climate-
informed digital agro-advisories to support agricultural decision-making. The sub-component will also seek to identify 
tailored climate information services and digital agro-advisory packages for use in building new extension systems or 
strengthening existing extension systems. Activities will take place in selected countries in Eastern and Southern Africa 
(Ethiopia, Kenya and Zambia). 

Component 2. Partnerships for Delivery 

Component 2 will support building of partnerships and networks to strengthen the ability of actors all along the research-
to-development continuum to anticipate climate effects and project their likely impacts on agriculture, food security, and 
rural livelihoods, with the goal of accelerating the identification, prioritization, and uptake of best-bet adaptive measures 


within defined application domains. Activities to be supported under Component 2 include training and building of 
partnerships and networks, at regional and national levels. A particular focus will be on planning and implementing 
appropriate delivery channels to promote the flow of innovative knowledge generated under Component 1, via regional 
and national partners.  

Subcomponent 2.1. Africa-wide. Sub-component 2.1 will support capacity development activities designed to strengthen 
the ability of regional multi-stakeholder platforms to conduct participatory visioning and priority setting, supported by 
quantitative and qualitative analytical methods at different scales. It will encourage engagement with regional institutions 
(AGRHYMET, ICPAC, and others) to collaborate in sharing knowledge and scaling up national climate services within and 
across regions. Where needed, it will backstop national, regional and continental groups involved in climate negotiations. 
Activities to be financed include, inter alia: (i) formal and informal training, (ii) workshops, (iii) study tours, (iv) knowledge 
exchanges, and (v) technical assistance. 

Sub-component 2.2. Western Africa. Sub-component 2.2 will support training and provide institutional support to 
enhance the capacity of diverse groups of beneficiaries to form innovative partnerships that can ensure sustained delivery 
and use of climate services. Activities to be financed include: (i) Strengthening of national meteorological services (NMS) 
real-time monitoring, weather forecasting, data archiving and generation systems; (ii) Capacity building of public and 
private sectors (e.g., NMSs, NARES, MoA, ICT companies and media) for effectiveness of context-specific climate services 
delivery models; (iii) Strengthening National Frameworks for Climate Services (NFCS) and supporting national stakeholders 
to implement effective governance for sustained national early warning, climate services and agro-advisory delivery; (iv) 
Training farmer organizations and other value chain actors in the use of climate services, co-production and feedback 
processes; and (v) Training extension officers, input providers, development agents, private sector and media for effective 
implementation and use of prioritized CSA options in crop and livestock value chains. Activities will take place in selected 
countries in Western Africa (Mali, Ghana and Senegal) 

Sub-component 2.3. Eastern and Southern Africa. Sub-component 2.3 will support training and provide institutional 
support to enhance the capacity of diverse groups of beneficiaries to form innovative partnerships that can ensure 
sustained delivery and use of climate services, Activities to be financed include: (i) Strengthening of national 
meteorological services (NMS) real-time monitoring, weather forecasting, data archiving and generation systems; (ii) 
Capacity building of public and private sectors (e.g., NMSs, NARES, MoA, ICT companies and media) for effectiveness of 
context-specific climate services delivery models; (iii) Strengthening National Frameworks for Climate Services (NFCS) and 
support national stakeholders to implement effective governance for sustained national early warning, climate services 
and agro-advisory delivery; (iv) Training farmer organizations and other value chain actors in the use of climate services, 
co-production and feedback processes; and (v) Training extension officers, input providers, development agents, private 
sector and media for effective implementation and use of prioritized CSA options in crop and livestock value chains. 
Activities will take place in Eastern and Southern Africa (Ethiopia, Kenya and Zambia). 

Component 3. Supporting the Uptake of Climate-Smart Agriculture  

Component 3 will support the uptake of CSA among small-scale farmers and intermediaries in selected value chains by 
supporting the validation of CSA technologies in the field, linking validated CSA technologies to technology transfer 
systems, and improving assess to climate-informed agricultural advisory services that will help farmers and other value 
chain actors make better decisions about CSA technologies and practices. It will also support the development of climate-
smart agriculture investment plans (CSAIPs) at national level as a sustainable scaling mechanism for CSA, coupled by CSA 
and CIS bundling collaborations through regional bodies.  

Subcomponent 3.1. Africa-wide. Sub-component 3.1 will support regional and continental efforts to promote the use of 
CIS in support of CSA at scale by influencing the planning and implementation mechanisms of regional bodies (i.e. African 
Risk Capacity) and large implementation agencies (i.e. WFP). Activities to be financed include: (i) Identification of initiatives 


that are seeking to promote regional and continental collaboration around climate modeling, introduction or 
strengthening of early warning systems, and/or promotion of CSA technologies; (ii) Promoting dialogue among 
participants in these initiatives, with the goal of securing agreement on common standards and protocols for delivery of 
climate advisory services; (iii) Identification of opportunities to use regional and continental networks to promote 
dissemination of the results of CGIAR climate research; and (iv) Development of approaches and mechanisms to ensure 
sustainability of regional and continental initiatives.  

Sub-component 3.2. Western Africa. Sub-component 3.2 will support the uptake of CSA at national level in selected 
countries in Western Africa. Activities to be financed include: (i) Assessment of the climate-smartness of candidate 
technologies; (ii) Participatory selection and prioritization of best-bet and promising CSA options in key value chains, 
through stakeholder engagement; (iii) Identification of scaling mechanisms, especially for women and youth; (iv) 
Formulation of recommendations to be integrated into tailored climate-informed agro-advisory systems for distinct 
smallholder profiles; and (v) Refining of investment opportunities from existing climate-smart agriculture investment plans 
(CSAIPs), developing investment prospectus, and identifying specific investors and funding instruments, including new 
CSAIPs for countries without CSAIPs, as needed. Activities will take place in selected countries in Western Africa (Mali, 
Ghana and Senegal) 

Sub-component 3.3. Eastern and Southern Africa. Sub-component 3.2 will support the uptake of CSA at national level in 
selected countries in Eastern and Southern Africa. Activities to be financed include: (i) Assessment of the climate-
smartness of candidate technologies; (ii) Participatory selection and prioritization of best-bet and promising CSA options 
in key value chains, through stakeholder engagement; (iii) Identification of scaling mechanisms, especially for women and 
youth; (iv) Formulation of recommendations to be integrated into tailored climate-informed agro-advisory systems for 
distinct smallholder profiles; and (v) Refining of investment opportunities from existing climate-smart agriculture 
investment plans (CSAIPs), developing investment prospectus, and identifying specific investors and funding instruments, 
including new CSAIPs for countries without CSAIPs, as needed. Activities will take place in Eastern and Southern Africa 
(Ethiopia, Kenya and Zambia). 

Component 4. Project Management 

Component 4 will support project management functions. Consistent with the objective of strengthening systemic 
capacity in CGIAR, project management activities will be distributed among all of the CCAFS partners. CIAT as the Lead 
Center for CCAFS and recipient of the IDA grant will hold ultimate responsibility for technical, administrative, fiduciary, 
legal, and safeguards compliance functions. The CCAFS management team will provide oversight of the technical work 
program, ensure coordination among and between the implementation entities, supervise monitoring and evaluation 
activities and compile consolidated M&E reports documenting progress achieved. Under the shared accountability 
approach, the CCAFS implementation entities will be expected to comply with all applicable administrative, fiduciary 
(procurement and financial management), monitoring and evaluation, and safeguards requirements, and they will be 
responsible for providing information needed by the CCAFS management team and by CIAT to fulfill compliance with the 
terms of the IDA grant.   


Legal Operational Policies                                  Triggered? 

Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50 No 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60 No 

 
Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts 
.  
 

The relevant Environmental and Social Standards (ESSs) are: ESS 1 (Assessment and Management of Environmental and 
Social Risks and Impacts; ESS 2 (Labor and Working Conditions); ESS 3 (Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention 
Management); ESS 4 (Community Health and Safety); and ESS 10 (Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure). 
Key risks are related to: waste management, pest management, resource use (including water, soil, energy), Occupational 
Health and Safety (OHS) and labor issues. The Project will not finance activities that involve land acquisition, restrictions 
on land use and involuntary resettlement, or adversely affect biodiversity conservation, sustainable management of living 
resources and cultural heritage. The Project will be implemented mainly in established agricultural research stations and 
will not be implemented in areas in which Indigenous Peoples / Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional 
Local Communities are present, or have collective attachment to a proposed project area. 

 

 
 
  