














































World Bank Document


Page 1 of 13

COMBINED PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENTS / INTEGRATED 
SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET (PID/ISDS)  

ADDITIONAL FINANCING
Report No.: PIDISDSA20175

Date Prepared/Updated: 23-Jan-2017
I. BASIC INFORMATION

  A.  Basic Project Data

Country: Congo, Democratic Republic 
of

Project ID: P159037

Parent 
Project ID 
(if any):

P092724

Project Name: DRC Agriculture Rehabilitation and Recovery AF (P159037)
Parent Project 
Name:

DRC - Agriculture Rehabilitation and Recovery Support (P092724)

Region: AFRICA
Estimated 
Appraisal Date:

23-Jan-2017 Estimated 
Board Date:

15-Mar-2017

Practice Area
(Lead):

Agriculture Lending 
Instrument:

Investment Project Financing

Borrower(s): DRC Ministry of Finance
Implementing 
Agency:

PARRSA PIU

Financing (in USD Million)
Financing Source Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT 0.00
International Development Association (IDA) 75.00
Total Project Cost 75.00

Environmental 
Category:

B - Partial Assessment

Appraisal 
Review 
Decision (from 
Decision Note):

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate

Other Decision: The Decision Meeting granted a conditional authorization to proceed with 
appraisal subject to resolution of the outstanding safeguard issues and RVP 
approval of the exception waiver.

Is this a 
Repeater 

No
?

B.   Introduction and Context

Country Context
Between 2010 and 2014, the overall economy grew at 7.7 percent and the extractive industry 
grew at 25 percent , making the DRC one of Africa's fastest growing economies. Extractive 
industry exports account for about 95 percent of DRC➢❨ s exports.  While mining revenues have 
contributed to strong macroeconomic growth and poverty reduction, high export concentration 
exposes the country to exogenous shocks and instability .  The recent trends of falling world 
commodity prices, lower export revenues, and the associated slow-down in DRC➢❨ s mining 
sector have contributed to a tight fiscal environment. In this context, the government has placed 
significant priority to economic diversification and has identified the Agriculture sector, 
DRC➢❨ s second biggest sector- as a key sector for expanding its export base and buffering the 
economy against oil price shocks. 
 
Despite high rates of macroeconomic growth, poverty and malnutrition remains widespread in 
DRC.  The national poverty rate is 64 percent, with poverty rates only slightly higher in rural 
areas (65 percent) relative to urban areas (62 percent). Almost one quarter of children are 
underweight. In rural areas, deficiencies in food storage and market access create seasonal food 
shortages. In urban areas, import tariffs (commonly 10 percent) and low domestic production, 
thus requiring sizable food imports, result in food prices that are amongst the highest in Africa.  
About six million people are classified as food insecure in the country. 
 
Climate change will exacerbate droughts, floods, and other extreme weather events. Although the 
Congo basin seems to be less exposed than dryer parts of Africa, Congolese farmers are 
particularly poor and isolated, therefore vulnerable to climate impacts and other external shocks. 
 
In addition, DRC is undergoing a process of decentralization. Last year, the number of provinces 
officially grew from 11 to 26. Equateur Province, where PARRSA is located, has been sub-
divided into five new Provinces, three of them falling under the project area (Sud Ubangi, Nord 
Ubangi, and Mongala). Within the decentralization process, the provincial services of the 
ministries are being revitalized to better serve the rural population. However, some new provinces 
lack the structures and fiscal resources to function independently. Consequently there is a need for 
new investments, including agriculture investments, to make these new provinces more fiscally 
secure. 
 
Socio-Political System. Following the African Union led dialogue, the 2016 elections were 
postponed and a second more inclusive dialogue led by the Conference Episcopale Nationale du 
Congo (CENCO) is still underway but has already achieved an agreement for a new government 
of national unity and a commitment from the President to not run for a third term. Presidential 
elections are expected to be held in December 2017, but this date has been viewed as not credible. 
The majority of the provinces are under-resourced (human and financial) and ill equipped. As a 
result, the majority of the provinces have increased taxes in order to cover their operational costs. 
Democratic process in the DRC faces a myriad of challenges, including a legacy of exploitation 
and conflict, lack of physical and communications infrastructure, extreme poverty and continuing 
pockets of insecurity.  
 



Page 3 of 13

Governance system, conflict and institutional fragility. The factors blocking an economic 
development in the country include: (a) a crisis resulting from contested 2011 election results; (b) 
weak governance; and (c) the weakness of state institutions in implementing appropriate policies. 
As a result, the agricultural sector is operating in an environment of fragile socio-political context, 
low quality human capacity with an outdated skills base, an unattractive business environment, 
rent based economy with low agricultural productivity, dilapidated infrastructure and under 
developed service markets (agricultural inputs, logistics services, financial services). 
 
Enabling environment and tax burden. The macroeconomic indicators for the country have 
remained relatively stable with annual inflation stable at 1.6 percent over the past 5 years. Real 
interest rates have remained at about 17 percent. This is illustrative of a business enabling 
environment which is characterized by: (i) high import taxes; (ii) high sales taxes; (iii) unofficial 
taxes levied across road, rail, river and air transport; (iii) high port handling fees; (iii) unreliable 
electricity supply; (iv) corruption; (v) ➢❨ red tape➢❨  bureaucratic procedures that make it more 
costly to close a transaction or sell a product; and (vi) very high logistical hurdles and costs. In 
addition, the agricultural sector has outdated laws and regulations on seed, land, food quality and 
control. Because of poor transport infrastructure, it is much harder to reach markets and the net 
effect is reduced competitiveness of domestically produced products in local, national and 
regional markets. Under-developed input markets and fragmented value chains further reduce the 
competitiveness of locally produced commodities, but itpresents opportunities for private 
investors.
Sectoral and institutional Context
Agriculture currently accounts for about 20 percent of GDP and employs some 70-75 percent of 
the economically active population. Related agro-industries employ another 10 percent of the 
population. Jobs in agriculture tend to be informal, with low value added per worker (US$227/
year ), often providing only for subsistence. Agriculture and other sectors are hampered by the 
fact that DRC is recovering from more than 15 years of civil war, which has created serious 
infrastructure and institutional vacuums. The country faces systematic challenges in its business 
environment and enabling services such as rural connectivity, power infrastructure, and extension 
systems. Public spending is constrained by weak budgetary processes, inefficiencies, and poor 
coordination. 
 
The Government➢❨ s objective is to reduce rural poverty by 2020 by restoring and modernizing 
agricultural production systems, improving nutrition and food security, and mobilizing significant 
public and private sector investments. In recent years, agriculture has become a top priority for 
DRC Government as evidenced by the allocation of 8 percent of total budget in 2016 (up from 3 
percent) in line with the Africa Heads of State Maputo Declaration. The 2013 Programme 
National d➢❨ Investissements Agricoles (PNIA), with a total estimated cost of US$5.7 billion 
over seven years, builds upon five pillars: (i) fostering value chains and agribusiness; (ii) 
achieving food security; (iii) enhancing research, extension, and training; (iv) improving sector 
governance, gender participation and institutional capacity; and (v) adapting to climate change. In 
2014, the Government launched the agro industrial park strategy to boost agribusiness and 
agroindustry, and attract private investments in the sector. 
 
The proposed AF project is aligned with the Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for DRC as it 
aims at contributing significantly to the Government➢❨ s efforts to alleviate extreme poverty and 
malnutrition (MDG1). It is also fully aligned with the fourth outcome of the CAS FY13-16, 



Page 4 of 13

addressing fragility through ➢❨ increased agriculture productivity and production and access to 
markets➢❨ . It is also consistent with major strategic initiatives for DRC, the Great Lakes region, 
and sub-Saharan Africa, including the second pillar (vulnerability and resilience) of the World 
Bank➢❨ s Africa Strategy and Africa Climate Business Plan. By supporting the development of 
agricultural value chains with strong economic potential, the proposed AF project is in line with 
the national strategy of DRC and the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Program 
(CAADP). 
 
Several policy documents govern the agriculture sector, including the National Agriculture 
Investment Plan (NAIP), the Agricultural Code, a new proposal for Integrated Rural Development 
Centers, and the Agro-industrial Action Plan. In practice, ownership of these policies at the 
provincial level ➢❨  and even occasionally at the central level ➢❨  is low.  There is weak 
coordination and harmonization across the different policies and implementing agencies, and 
human, technical, and financial capacity to implement agricultural strategies is poor. 
 
DRC➢❨ s green revolution will require a technological leapfrog combined with progress on 
cross-cutting infrastructure, institutional and business climate issues in order to facilitate private 
investment and access to markets. From an operational perspective, DRC➢❨ s green revolution 
would pursue a two-track approach: (i) enabling traditional small-scale farmers to transition from 
subsistence farming to small holder commercial farming ; and (ii) promoting private investment 
in commercial agriculture using modern technologies geared toward mechanized farming and 
agro-processing for domestic and regional markets. 
 
DRC➢❨ s agro-industrial action plan (2015) proposes to privatize several government-owned 
farms, establish agro-industrial parks across all provinces, and has identified 60 abandoned   
farms for development. A focus on large commercial farms has the advantage of tackling many 
constraints simultaneously to promote faster growth in a challenging environment, albeit in a 
limited geographical area. Concentrating resources and political will in specific commercial zones 
can also serve to demonstrate the benefits of specific policy interventions, so that these could be 
scaled up.  Furthermore, incorporating smallholders into agro-industrial revitalization schemes 
will be critical for promoting peace, stability, and inclusive growth.

C.  Proposed Development Objective(s)

Original Project Development Objective(s) - Parent
The project development objective (PDO) is to increase agricultural productivity and improve 
marketing of crops, and animal products by smallholder farmers in targeted areas.

Proposed Project Development Objective(s) - Additional Financing
To increase agricultural productivity and improve marketing of crops and animal products crops 
and animal products in targeted areas.

Key Results 

D.  Project Description

The proposed Additional Financing will provide additional resources to reinforce the basic 
production capacity (staple crops and livestock) of smallholder farmers in three provinces to 



Page 5 of 13

ensure food and nutrition security, relaunch the perennial crops production and embark on 
commercial farming by selling surplus production on local markets. The AF will support the re-
emergence of a sustainable mixed farming system which is prevalent in the project areas. It will 
also revamp the extension and advisory services in the project areas giving a more prominent role 
to government institutions and involving the private sector. The AF will also assist the 
Government in setting up a sustainable feeder roads maintenance program and strengthening 
agriculture research and development. The AF will introduce information and communication 
technologies at different levels of the activities to enable mobile banking, remote sensing and 
other innovations to the beneficiaries. It will also expand a demand driven matching grant facility 
and combine it with free technical assistance so different actors can fully participate in the project 
activities. Finally the proposed AF also aims to promote climate adaptation (new technologies and 
management practices) and build community resilience (micro projects storage facilities, 
warehouses, processing centers, nurseries etc.). A partnership with the Central African Forest 
Initiative (CAFI) Fund is to be confirmed. The potential CAFI financing in the amount of US
$3.64 million as a grant would help enhance the environment benefits of the subprojects and 
increase the project efforts to reduce or mitigate deforestation and forest degradation.

Component Name
Component 1: Improving agricultural and animal production
Comments (optional)
Component 1 will consolidate and further develop the activities undertaken under the parent 
project which sought to increase the capacity of smallholder farmers in targeted areas to produce 
staple crops and small stock including chicken. The scope will be broadened to include the two 
additional territories and perennial crops like coffee and cocoa. The AF will support the private 
sector or small private enterprises interested in investing in commercial crops.  Cross-cutting 
issues such as nutrition, gender, climate smart agriculture, and employment will be fully 
embedded into the AF activities..

Component Name
Component 2: Improving marketing infrastructure
Comments (optional)
Component 2 aims to continue with the rehabilitation and maintenance of feeder roads and 
construction of key local markets and storage facilities across the three provinces with a focus on 
building capacity at local and provincial levels to ensure that all infrastructure investments are 
maintained and sustainable.

Component Name
Component 3: Capacity Building support to the Ministry of Agriculture and Ministry of Rural 
Development, and project management
Comments (optional)
Component 3 will support the government efforts to: (i) re-engineer the national agriculture 
extension and advisory services so it is responsive and inclusive (non-governmental 
organizations, private sector and producer organizations as advisory service providers); (ii) 
strengthen the planning, coordination and monitoring and evaluation capacity at national and 
provincial levels (statistics and georeferenced data system); and (iii) strengthen the agricultural 
research and development for efficiency and effectiveness gains in their service delivery and 
conduct a skills needs assessment in the areas of agribusiness and agronomy; (iv) introduce 



Page 6 of 13

landscape management planning at local and provincial levels to support climate adaptation and 
community resilience; and (v) manage the project.

E.  Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis (if known)

The Additional Financing will be implemented in South Ubangi, North Ubangi, Mongala and 
Kinshasa.

F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

Abdoulaye Gadiere (GEN07)
Antoine V. Lema (GSU05)
Claude Lina Lobo (GENDR)
Lucienne M. M'Baipor (GSU01)

II. Implementation
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
The same structure that governed the implementation of the parent project will remain, with a 
National Project Implementation Coordination Unit in Kinshasa and three Project Implementation 
units at provincial level, one per each newly created province. The delegated management contractor 
will be responsible for implementing the infrastructure component with an extension of UNOPS 
contract. For each province, a provincial coordination monitoring committee will be established to 
oversee the project's planning process and implementation.

III. Safeguard Policies that might apply

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental 
Assessment OP/BP 
4.01

Yes Project activities will generate impacts on environment, 
especially the ones relating to the rehabilitation and 
maintenance of feeder roads and construction of key local 
markets. In addition to this, the ongoing operation intends to 
fund sub-projects such as storage facilities, warehouses, 
processing centers, nurseries, etc. These activities will 
unquestionably induce adverse impacts on environmental 
components. However, adverse impacts are expected to be 
moderate, site specific and easily manageable. Besides, the 
exact locations of these investments are unknown to date. 
Consequently, an Environmental and social Assessment 
Framework (ESMF) which is the proper safeguard instrument 
in such a case has been prepared, reviewed, consulted upon 
and disclosed both in DRC on January 13, 2017 and at the 
Infoshop on January 17, 2017.

Natural Habitats OP/
BP 4.04

Yes This policy is triggered in the preventive way because of the 
potential of the project to cause loss or degradation of natural 
habitats, whether directly or indirectly. This policy is also 
triggered to draw attention when activities may be undertaken 



Page 7 of 13

near Natural habitats, with the possibility to impact them. The 
ESMF was prepared in line with the OP/BP4.01 includes a 
section handling this matter.

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes The policy on Forests is triggered preventively as the project 
will be implemented in forested areas with the possibility of 
impact on the natural or plantation forests, and/or can bring 
some changes in management or protection of these forests. 
This is to avoid any significant conversion (loss) or 
degradation. This concern was taken in account in the ESMF.

Pest Management OP 
4.09

Yes Activities in the component 1 aims to improve agricultural and 
animal production where the main focus will be on improved 
access to fertilizers, pesticides, veterinary drugs and access to 
high quality and affordable agro-veterinary services. 
Consequently an Integrated Pest Management Plan (IPMP) 
about the safe use of agricultural pesticides and a promotion of 
the use of biological or environmental control methods was 
developed as a separate document. This safeguard tool has 
been reviewed, consulted upon and disclosed within DRC and 
at the Infoshop respectively on January 13 and January 17, 
2017.

Physical Cultural 
Resources OP/BP 
4.11

Yes In order to anticipate and to be sure that all the precautions 
have been taken to protect and safeguard physical cultural 
resources, a section addressing these concerns was included in 
the ESMF.  This is because activities related to the 
rehabilitation and the maintenance of feeder roads and other 
infrastructure works will induce excavations with potential 
discoveries of physical cultural resources.

Indigenous Peoples 
OP/BP 4.10

Yes As the project is focusing mainly on rural areas, and as there 
are Indigenous People in the project area, the Indigenous 
People Policy Framework (IPPF) of the parent project has been 
updated. Once the project site is clearly identified, the project 
will prepare an Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP).

Involuntary 
Resettlement OP/BP 
4.12

Yes This policy is triggered because of the potential restriction of 
access to assets or sources of livelihood as a result of the 
proposed project activities. Since the exact geographic 
coverage of proposed activities is still to be determined, the 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) of the parent project 
has been updated by the Borrower for the project to clearly 
outline the basic principles and guidelines for mitigating any 
potential impact that may require compensation in the event of 
land acquisition and in some cases involuntary resettlement in 
the broad sense.

Safety of Dams OP/
BP 4.37

No The project will not finance dam works or activities associated 
to existing dams.

Projects on 
International 

Yes Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 is triggered 
because of planned irrigation activities. An exception to the 



Page 8 of 13

Waterways OP/BP 
7.50

Riparian Notification Requirement under OP 7.50 (Projects on 
International Waterways) was approved by the RVP on 
December 15, 2016. Due diligence was also completed under 
the parent project and an exception to the Riparian Notification 
Requirement was approved by the RVP on Oct 27, 2009..

Projects in Disputed 
Areas OP/BP 7.60

No The project will not be located in a Disputed Area.

IV. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify 

and describe any potential large scale,  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The Additional Financing will support activities related to the rehabilitation and the maintenance 
of feeder roads, the construction of key local markets, storage facilities, warehouses, processing 
centers, nurseries, etc. These civil works will unquestionably induce environmental and social 
adverse impacts in terms of trees cutting, dust, noise, waste management, and security and health 
issues both for populations and for employees. However, most of adverse impacts associated with 
these investments will likely be site-specific, so manageable at an acceptable level.  
In addition, those civil works will take place in forested areas. Potential adverse impacts could 
occur on forests and natural resources. The civil works could also induce impacts on Physical 
cultural resources.  
 
On social level, the rehabilitation/maintenance of feeder roads and the construction of local 
markets as well as warehouses may induce the displacement of populations. In addition, 
Indigenous people are present within areas where some civil works will be undertaken with the 
possibility to some adverse impacts on them.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities 
in the project area:
Anticipated negative environmental and social impacts of the project would result mainly from 
civil works associated with rural roads rehabilitation, but also from increase and intensified crop 
production. The consequence would be change in routine activities, use of fertilizers and 
pesticides, generation of solid and liquid waste, acquisition/taking of private land. In addition, the 
potential use of quarry materials for consolidation of rural roads could also be sources of negative 
impacts on both the natural and physical environment, which will require restoration actions after 
use.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse 
impacts.
Not relevant.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an 
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The project remains EA category B and triggers eight safeguards policies which are OP/BP 4.01; 
OP/BP 4.04, OP/BP4.36; OP4.09; OP/BP4.11, OP/BP7.50; OP/BP4.10 and OP/PB 4.12.   
 
Considering that the exact geographic locations of project specific interventions are not yet 
determined with certainty, the Borrower updated four environmental and social safeguards 
instruments, namely an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), a 



Page 9 of 13

Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), the Indigenous People Policy Framework (IPPF) and a 
Pest Management Plan (PMP) in compliance with the core requirements of the triggered 
safeguards policies : OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment), OP 4.09 (Pest Management), OP/
BP.4.10 (Indigenous People) and OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement).  The ESMF has also 
made provision to address basic requirements from both OP/BP 4.36 (forestry) and OP/BP 4.04 
(Natural Habitats). Both the ESMF and the PMP were reviewed and cleared by the Bank and the 
Government and disclosed both in-country on January 13, 2017 and at the InfoShop on January 
17, 2017. The RPF and the IPPF was were also reviewed and cleared by the Bank, and disclosed 
both in-country on  January 13, 2017 and at the InfoShop on  January 17, 2017. 
 
During the parent project implementation, screening of sub-projects has taken place to ensure 
proper identification and mitigation of any adverse impacts. Consequently, many ESIA, RAP and 
IPPs have been prepared, disclosed and implemented as guidance/guidelines prior to activities 
implementation. As the parent project, the ongoing AF will follow the same process regarding the 
safeguard aspects.  
 
There is a recently recruited safeguards specialist in the PIU, who is familiar with project activities 
in the parent project, he has also been implicated in the preparation stage. For Component 2, the 
Contractor (UNOPS) has equally recruited a safeguards specialist, as well as the Netherlands 
Development Organization (Stichting Nederlandse Vrijwilligers/SNV) that implemented the IPP 
of the parent project, also has a safeguards specialist in the team. To supervise the implementation 
of social measures, it is recommended that the project recruit a social expert. 
All the environmental and social safeguard specialists involved in the team will ensure that all the 
sub-projects to be financed under the AF are in full compliance with Bank safeguards policies and 
in line with the national regulatory framework. Furthermore, the National Agency in charge of 
environmental impact assessment and safeguards monitoring (Agence Congolaise de 
l➢❨ Environnementale-ACE) is also involved in the environmental and social aspects monitoring.  
 
Lastly, the safeguards specialists at the World Bank, part of the project team, will ensure that all 
the project staff are trained on safeguards on the one hand and will be part on supervision missions 
on the other hand with the aim to make sure safeguards aspects are properly handled.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure 
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders are the beneficiary communities, Ministries in charge of Agriculture, 
fisheries and livestock, rural development, transport, Environment and sustainable development 
(and their relevant agencies/departments), municipalities, NGOs and other relevant institutions. 
 
One of the key principles of this project from the outset was to foster participation of all relevant 
stakeholders. This approach will be sustained throughout project implementation. The 
environmental and social assessment studies, namely the ESMF, IPMP. IPPF and RPF, were also 
carried out according to the same principle, using broad-based public consultation approach, 
involving the above stakeholder groups. The objective was to raise awareness of project activities 
and impacts and foster ownership on their part. All the relevant bodies have been adequately 
informed of the Project. Concerns of the communities and some details of consultations have been 
taken into account in the body of the different reports and other results provided as Annexes. The 
key concerns raised during the consultation process included: (i) permanent information and 
sensitization of the population, (ii) compensation process for those impacted by the project, (iii) 
participation of local population as employee on works they qualify for, (iv) the involvement of 



Page 10 of 13

NGOs and state technical services during the execution of works. All these concerns have been 
addressed in the alternatives proposed through the developed safeguards instruments.

B. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank 28-Nov-2016

Date of submission to InfoShop 17-Jan-2017
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors

"In country" Disclosure
Congo, Democratic Republic of 13-Jan-2017
Comments:

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank 22-Nov-2016

Date of submission to InfoShop 17-Jan-2017
"In country" Disclosure

Congo, Democratic Republic of 13-Jan-2017
Comments:

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank 27-Nov-2016

Date of submission to InfoShop 17-Jan-2017
"In country" Disclosure

Congo, Democratic Republic of 13-Jan-2017
Comments:

Pest Management Plan
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal? Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank 20-Nov-2016

Date of submission to InfoShop 17-Jan-2017
"In country" Disclosure

Congo, Democratic Republic of 13-Jan-2017
Comments:

If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


