














































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Niger Forcibly Displaced Support Project (P164563) 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 22-Feb-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSC22908 
     

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Niger P164563  Niger Refugees and 
Host Communities 
Support Project 
(P164563) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA Jun 11, 2018 Sep 12, 2018 Social, Urban, Rural and 
Resilience Global 
Practice 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministère du Plan Cabinet du Premier Ministre, 
Projet de Gestion des 
Risques de Catastrophes et 
de Développement Urbain, 
Stratégie de Développement 
et de Sécurité dans les zones 
sahélo sahariennes du Niger 
(SDS) 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The project development objective is to improve access to basic services and economic opportunities for refugees and 
host communities in select areas. 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 80.00 

Total Financing 80.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 80.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 80.00 



          IDA Credit 47.50 

          IDA Grant 32.50 

   
 

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B - Partial Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

 

Niger is one of the world’s poorest and least developed countries in the world, with a per capita income of 
US$390 in 2015 and almost half of Nigeriens living beneath the poverty line (45.7 percent in 2014). In 2015, 
Niger ranked last of 188 countries on the United Nations Human Development Index. The Nigerien economy is 
highly dependent on its agricultural sector and a few commodities (uranium, oil and gold), making it vulnerable 
to climate and price shocks. With a variable and changing climate, the country suffers from recurrent drought 
and food crises. Niger has one of the fastest population growth rates in the world (4 percent in 2015) and the 
youngest population in the world, with a dependency ratio of 113 in 2015. Niger has significant institutional 
deficits, ranking 99 of 168 countries in the 2015 Corruption Perceptions Index. 

 

Niger meets the very definition of a country at risk of fragility, conflict of violence. The country—which held 
presidential and general elections in March 2016—has managed to remain stable in a difficult regional 
environment. Some of the factors that account for this achievement include: (i) a relatively strong social 
cohesion and (ii) a political settlement in which the elites manage to solve their disputes in a regulated manner. 
However, several factors contribute to the country’s fragility. These include demographic trends combined 
with notable climate change–related events and the deterioration of natural resources in the most populated 
areas; the contestation of the political elite and state institutions; external stresses; and a lack of economic 
opportunities. Because several risk factors — such as climate-related events or the tightening of the elite 
coalition — could trigger instability and violence, Niger remains a country at risk. 

 

Niger is hosting over 280,000 people displaced by conflict: approximately 158,000 refugees, 109,000 Internally 
Displaced People (IDPs) and 16,000 Nigerien nationals who returned from Nigeria as a consequence of the 
conflict. This displacement has been caused by two regional conflicts: the crisis in Mali (accounting for 22 
percent of the total displaced) and the Boko Haram regional crisis (78 percent).  



 

Since 2011, there has been an increasing number of attacks on Niger’s territory. The country, which held 
presidential and general elections in March 2016, has managed to remain an “island of stability”, but the 
relatively strong social cohesion is fragile. Niger is part of internationally-supported military efforts against 
Boko Haram (through the Joint Multi National Force) and in Mali, but increased military spending is putting a 
severe strain on public finances. The Risk and Resilience Assessment (RRA) highlights the security and economic 
impacts of regional conflicts and forced displacement on Niger, including the crises in Libya, Mali and Nigeria 
and notes that the expansion of Boko Haram into Niger has had an adverse impact on economic activities in 
the Diffa region and also raises concerns about the weakness of the Nigerien Army (e.g. following the attack in 
Bosso, Niger had to call on Chad for military assistance). The RRA argues that each military defeat raises the 
risk of a military coup in Niger. 

 

Overall, the situation remains in flux. Despite a recent slowdown, further flows of population may be caused 
by Boko Haram until the region is fully stabilized. The authorities are eager to demonstrate the normalization 
of the situation both in the Diffa region and along the Mali-Niger border, but insecurity remains very high. On 
the one hand, there may be pressures to eventually encourage the return of forcibly displaced people in the 
Diffa area, on the other hand there seems to be a degree of acceptance that the situation along the Mali-Niger 
border may last.  

Across all forced displacement situations, the conditions for women and girls are very specific. Gender-based 
violence and survival sex are relatively prevalent. Early marriages are often the norm, including within host 
communities and economic opportunities and access to education are very limited for women and girls. Unless 
the gender dimension of the situation is effectively dealt with, progress is likely to remain elusive. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 

 

Niger has adopted a relatively progressive approach to managing refugee situations. This is also reflected in 
the solidarity demonstrated by host communities in particular in the Diffa Region. The overall legal and 
protection environment in Niger is conducive to an effective socio-economic response to the forced 
displacement crisis. Niger is a party to applicable international conventions on refugees, IDPs, and stateless 
persons, and it has domesticated some of these instruments. In particular, refugees are to be treated equally 
under the law with respect to key socio-economic rights: property ownership, security, access to the courts, 
access to basic services, and freedom of expression and movement. Efforts are underway to strengthen the 
legal framework applicable to IDPs in light of the situation in the Diffa Region. 

 

Niger is party to the 1951 United Nations Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees (1951 Convention), 
1967 United Nations Protocol Relating to the Status of Refugees (1967 Protocol) and 1969 Organization of 
African Unity Convention Governing Specific Aspects of Refugee Problems in Africa (OAU Convention), without 
any reservations. Niger has also domesticated these instruments: the government has affirmed both in national 
legislation and at representations to the CERD that refugees are to be treated equally under the law with 
respect to all rights: property ownership, security, access to the courts, access to basic services, and freedom 
of expression and movement (CERD 2013). Article 10 of the 1997 law ensures the equal treatment of refugees 
in the protection of property; freedom of movement; and access to health, education, and housing. Elsewhere, 


the Labor Code prohibits discrimination on the basis of nationality in hiring, and Décret n° 87-
076/PCMS/MI/MAE/C of June 18, 1987, permits foreigners to be contracted for employment provided that the 
contract is approved by the Ministry of Labor. 

 

Niger is also party to the African Union Convention for the Protection and Assistance of Internally Displaced 
Persons in Africa (Kampala Convention), but has yet to domesticate it. Preliminary discussions are underway 
for the domestication of the convention and authorities have indicated willingness to improve the legal 
framework on IDPs, especially in light of the situation in the Diffa Region. Finally, Niger is signatory of both 
1954 Convention on the Status of Stateless Persons (Convention on Statelessness) and 1961 Convention on the 
Reduction of Statelessness. Efforts to align domestic legislation with the provisions of both conventions are 
underway, with an ongoing review of the domestic legislation on nationality and civil status registration. 

 

Malian refugees are recognized on a prima facie basis and enjoy a favorable protection environment with 
the right to settle where they wish and to access basic social services and the formal and informal job market. 
A tripartite agreement between UNHCR and the Governments of Niger and Mali, signed in 2014 provides a 
legal framework for voluntary returns in respect of the related international standards. The parties consider 
that the conditions in parts of northern Mali are not yet conducive to returns in safety and dignity. As a result, 
voluntary repatriation is currently not promoted. Persons that wish nevertheless to return to Mali are 
counseled on the prevailing situation and sign a Voluntary Repatriation Form. They receive one-time cash 
assistance to pay for their transport (UNHCR 2016). Out-of-camp policy applied in Malian refugee-hosted areas 
with success, leading to the creation of so-called Zones d’Accueil des Réfugiés. Several institutions work closely 
with UNHCR to process status determinations for refugees, including the Comité National d’Eligibilité (CNE), 
the Comité d’Appel, the secretariat within the Direction Générale de l'État Civil et des Réfugiés, and the Comité 
de Recours Gracieux (CRG).  Regional administrations such as those in Diffa are also key partners to the national 
government and international NGOs.  The Direction Générale de l'État Civil et des Réfugiés is in charge of 
ensuring administrative protection to refugees and asylum seekers. 

 
Relationship to CPF 

 

The CPF recognizes the need to mitigating the three negative consequences of forced displacement in Niger: 
(1) the effect on the economy of increased insecurity and the subsequent outlays on security and humanitarian 
assistance; (2) increased food insecurity (exacerbating the effects of drought, environmental degradation, high 
grain prices and poor food access); and (3) increased poverty due to the loss of productive assets (land, 
agricultural tools and inputs, seeds, animals, etc) caused by forced displacement. Specifically, within the 
objective 5 of the CPF namely “Improved Social Protection System and Ability to Manage Forced Displacement” 
the CPF includes two expected outcomes to which this operation directly contributes: 5.3 Refugees who benefit 
from a vulnerability-based assistance system and 5.4. Refugees who benefit from country systems in the health 
sector The CPF also tracks the “percentage of refugees who benefit from a vulnerability-based assistance 
system” in its Result Matrix.  

 

The successful support to displaced and host population would require synergies among the proposed project 
together with (i) the Disaster Risk Management and Urban Development project, (ii) the Safety Net Project, (iii) 


the Skills Development for Growth project and (iv) the Community Action Project – Phase 3. Each of these four 
projects target chronically poor or vulnerable households living in disadvantaged and marginal areas which 
may also overlap with areas hosting refugees. 

 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The project development objective is to improve access to basic social services and economic opportunities for forcibly 
displaced and host communities in select areas. 

 
Key Results (From PCN) 

 

a. Number of direct beneficiaries out of which 

i. percentage of refugees 

ii. percentage of internally displaced persons 

iii. percentage of returnees 

iv. percentage of host population 

v. percentage of young 

vi. percentage of female 

 

b. Number of sites with access to social and economic services measured by an indicator 

i. no access 

ii. access with major constraints 

iii. access with minor constraints 

 

c. Reported increase in income/welfare/food security by beneficiaries of individual-level resilience 
activities (disaggregated by type of service, gender and target groups).  

 

d. Increased government capacity to manage refugee fluxes, as measured by capacity assessment surveys 
(Survey rating) 

 
 
D. Concept Description 

 

The project will finance activities aimed at initiating the revitalization of socio-economic economic opportunities in the 
Diffa region and at equipping refugees along the Malian border with portable skills.  

 

Activities  

The activities listed below are a comprehensive representation of the government strategy on durable solutions for 
refugees and host communities as identified in the refugee development policy letter received for the IDA18 refugee sub-
window. The list reflects the entirety of needs under the government’s strategy in the targeted regions. The evaluation 
period (between September 2017 - March 2018) will allow for further assessments and an extensive consultative process 
to identify those activities within this framework that will be directly financed through this project. The overall 
comprehensive list of activities will be developed into a comprehensive monitoring and evaluation framework to enable 



 
The World Bank  
Niger Forcibly Displaced Support Project (P164563) 

 
 

  
Jul 18, 2017 Page 7 of 12  

     

the government in leading and coordinating the overall program, inclusive of all different partner activities, in the targeted 
regions. The identification of the specific type of activities in the targeted regions will be based on a rapid Markets and 
Needs Assessment. 

 

Components 

Activities identified under the government strategy are grouped below into three main project components along the 
three resilience levels targeted for improvement: 1) community, 2) individual, and 3) local authorities.  

 

COMPONENT 1 - Community level resilience: Access to basic social services and local capacity building 

This component will aim to build resilience on the community level through investment in community infrastructure and 
services; capacity building to government authorities; and social cohesion measures.  Investments will be identified in 
consultation with communities by updating and/or preparing the Local Development Plans. Communes/communities will 
be responsible for the identification and preparation of the subproject proposals as well as the supervision of their 
implementation and operation and maintenance. Final subprojects selection and contracting will be done by the 
respective line agencies in accordance to the national planning process. 

 

This component will focus on two main types of activities: 

A. Investment in community infrastructure and services: 
1. Municipal services: Reconstructing and repairing small water supply facilities, latrines and other sanitation 

infrastructure, as well as solid waste management infrastructure and service delivery. 
2. Education: Reconstructing and repairing damaged school infrastructure such as classrooms, offices, fences, 

playground, latrines, labs, and other associated service delivery interventions. 
3. Health: Reconstructing or rehabilitating health center buildings, and other associated service delivery 

interventions in respect of staff, furniture and supplies. 
4. Economic infrastructure: Constructing or rehabilitating of rural markets, community storage facilities, rural 

roads, small bridges, culverts, and small irrigation schemes.   
5. Natural Resources: Restoring and protecting natural resources and supporting environmental management 

measures to decrease environmental impacts of protracted refugee presence. 

 

B. Community Resilience and Social Cohesion Measures: 
1. Community associations: Setting up and strengthening community associations that bring together local 

authorities (government, traditional and religious) and representatives of all different segments of the 
population in order to build and reinforce social cohesion.  

2. Small social cohesion grants: Supporting initiatives that address key drivers of the conflict and needs 
emerging in the post-conflict period such as out-of-school children and youth literacy, sports for peace 
activities, community radio programing, cultural activities that promote common identities, sexual and 
gender based violence prevention campaigns and de-stigmatization campaigns. 

3. Community-based psychosocial support: Providing targeted support to communities to address potential 
mental health risks resulting from the forced displacement experience.   

 

COMPONENT 2 - Individual level resilience: Strengthening economic opportunities and professional training 

This component will focus on two main types of activities: 

A. Transitional Support towards Stabilization and Self-Reliance by (a) increasing and improving the access to basic 
necessity kits; (b) restoring immediate access to productive assets by providing agricultural inputs and livestock 
for farming families and trading commodities for non-farmers; and (c) setting-up Cash for Work programs to 


support community assets recovery and reconstruction. The cash-for-work component activities will be closely 
linked to the priority infrastructure investments in component 1. 

B. Support to Business Development and Individual Skill Building: provision of professional education, on-the-job 
training,  “portable skills” and support of small business development opportunities for youth/women. provide a 
package of interventions that combines short-term trainings (including basic financial literacy) and accompanying 
mentoring/technical assistance, access to small matching grant, and citizen engagement mechanisms. The focus 
of skills trainings might differ between locations based on an assessment of the market and needs in the region.  

 

COMPONENT 3 - Capacity building of local authorities 

This component will focus on two main types of activities: 

A. Local planning and decentralized service delivery: Providing capacity building interventions for communes and 
local implementing institutions to ensure adequate capacities in the areas of community‐driven planning process, 
local development management, service delivery capacities enhancement, mainstreaming of project 
interventions with the government’s development planning and budgeting process, as well as coordination of all 
development stakeholders on the local level and community level. 

B. Preparedness of Government institutions to manage displacements:  Strengthening government actors to be 
more prepared for potential future displacements by supporting their administrative management capacity (i.e. 
supporting and coordinating biometric registration of population) as well as humanitarian management capacity 
(i.e. contingency planning for displacements). 

 

COMPONENT 4 - Contingency Emergency Response Component 

This contingent emergency response component is included under the project in accordance with OP/BP 10.00, 
paragraphs 12 and 13, for situations of urgent need of assistance. This will allow for rapid reallocation of project funds in 
the event natural or manmade crisis in the future, during the implementation of the project. This component will have 
no funding allocation initially, but will be used to draw resources from the unallocated expenditure category and/or allow 
the government to request the WB to reallocate financing from other project components to cover emergency response 
and recovery costs, if approved by the WB. 

 

COMPONENT 5 - Project Management 

This sub-component will cover: (a) strengthening the capacity of the Project Steering Committee for overall Project 
coordination; and (b) strengthening the capacity of the Project Implementation Unit for project management, 
coordination, monitoring and evaluation, including: (i) fiduciary (i.e. financial and procurement management); (ii) 
environmental and social assessments; (iii) preparation of project reports; and (iv) monitoring and evaluation. 

 
 
    

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
The specific sites for infrastructure investments and their scope will be determined during project preparation based on 

the government’s detailed assessments of priority needs within the target regions in consultation with local population 
and authorities and detailed technical studies to be undertaken. The general areas include sites hosting refugees in Diffa 
region and along the Malian border in Tillaberi, Tahoua and Agadez regions. 
 


B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 
 
The Government of Niger has previously successfully implemented Bank-financed projects for which Environmental and 

Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs), Environmental and Social Management Frameworks (ESMF), Resettlement Policy 
Frameworks (RPFs), Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) and Pest Management Plans (PMPs) were approved by the Bank.  
The Bureau des Evaluations Environnementales et des Études d’Impacts (BEEEI), the National Environmental Agency 

(NEA), and its decentralized structures, have the capacity to assure the external monitoring of the implementation of the 
of the ESMF, RPF and PMP under the project, including ensuring and validating that the provisions of the ESMF and RPF, 
leading to further sub-projects environmental and social assessments, are followed (i.e., sub-projects categorization, 
review, clearance and monitoring of the sub-project-specific EIAs/EMPs and RAPs), on behalf of the Government.  
Overall project environmental and social safeguards compliance, with national laws and regulations and applicable World 

Bank operational policies and procedures, will be devolved to BEEEI. 
 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 
Demba Balde, Social Safeguards Specialist 
Emmanuel Ngollo, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 

 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The project will rehabilitate and upgrade 
infrastructures in several locations. As the sites and 
works are not yet finalized, an Environmental and 
Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be 
prepared, consulted upon, and disclosed both in-
country and at the World Bank Website before 
appraisal. The ESMF will formulate standard methods 
and procedures, along with clear institutional 
arrangements for screening, review, approval, 
implementation and monitoring of sub-project-specific 
safeguards instruments (Environmental and Social 
Management Plans ESMPs, Environmental and Social 
Impact Assessments ESIAs) as necessary. These 
instruments will also be consulted upon and disclosed 
in-country and at World Bank Website. A Social 
Assessment will be conducted in parallel to 
complement the safeguards documents. 

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No  

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 No 

Due to the location of interventions in areas were 
infrastructure and/or productive activities were 
already in place, no negative impacts to critical or 
sensitive natural habitats are expected. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No 
No interventions are financed in forest areas, nor do 
they involve forests. 




Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

Although procurement of pesticides is not envisaged 
under the project, it is expected that intensification of 
agricultural production and productivity will likely lead 
to an increased use of pesticides. 
The Government will update its existing Pest 
Management Plan and submit it to the Bank for 
clearance and then disclosure in-country and at World 
Bank website, prior to appraisal. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 

The Physical Cultural Resources Policy (OP 4.11) is 
triggered because Niger is viewed as a rich cultural 
heritage area. Though it is unknown at this time which 
sites may contain such resources, due to the lack of 
specifics on the locations, size, scale of planned 
investments under the project. Chance Find 
Procedures will be applied as indicated in the ESMF. 
The ESMF will address potential impacts and includes 
suggested mitigation measures. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project area. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

OP 4.12 is triggered due to the potential impacts 
related to civil works, which may lead to minor land 
acquisition, loss of assets and/or access to resources. 
A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be 
prepared, consulted upon, approved and disclosed in-
country and at the World Bank website prior to 
appraisal. The RPF will formulate standard methods 
and procedures, along with clear institutional 
arrangements for screening, review, approval, 
implementation and monitoring of sub-project-specific 
safeguards instruments such as Resettlements Action 
Plans (RAPs) if necesary. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 

The project will not finance the building of dams and is 
not supporting dam infrastructure. Subject to 
technical studies the project may finance local flood 
prevention structures that may temporarily retain 
excess water during peak volume events, but which do 
not pose dam safety issues. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 

OP 7.50 is not triggered as there are no infrastructure 
investments likely to affect water flow of Niger or 
Komadougou international waterways under the 
project. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
OP 7.60 is not triggered as there are no known 
disputes over project areas. 

 


     

E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Feb 13, 2018 
 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be 

developed, the Pest Management Plan (PMP) will be updated. All three documents will be submitted to the Bank for 
clearance and then disclosed in-country and at the World Bank website, prior to appraisal. 
 
 
