













































World Bank Document


 

PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 

APPRAISAL STAGE 

Report No.: 110552  

Project Name Land Bank Financial Intermediation Loan (P150008) 

Region AFRICA 

Country South Africa 

Sector(s) General finance sector (30%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry 

sector (20%), SME Finance (50%) 

Theme(s) Rural markets (50%), Other Financial Sector Development (50%) 

Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing 

Project ID P150008 

Borrower(s) Land and Agricultural Development Bank of South Africa 

Implementing Agency Land Bank 

Environmental Category F-Financial Intermediary Assessment 

Date PID Prepared/Updated 12-October-2016 

Estimated Date of Board 

Approval 

23-January-2017 

Appraisal Review Decision 

(from Decision Note) 
 

Other Decision  

I. Project Context 

 Country Context 

 

More than twenty years after the end of apartheid, unemployment, poverty and inequality remain 

important development challenges in South Africa, despite substantial progress in overcoming the 

legacy of the past. While total employment increased from 9 million in 1996 to 16 million in 2015, the 

unemployment rate has stayed stubbornly high in the range of 20-26 percent. In 2015 approximately 5.4 

million South Africans were unemployed, of which about 40 percent were new entrants.  A 30 percent 

increase in per capita GDP since the late 1990s and a sharp expansion of the social grant coverage 

enabled a significant decline in the poverty rate—from 43.5 percent of the population living below 

ZAR219 (inflation-adjusted) a month in 2000 to 36.7 percent (or 18.3 million people) living below R501 

in 2015. Nevertheless, pockets of poverty remain deeply entrenched, mostly among the historically 

disadvantaged population. With a relatively stagnant income Gini coefficient of around 0.69 in 2011 

(versus 0.72 in 2006) and expenditure Gini of 0.634 in 2015 (versus 0.67 in 2006), South Africa has one 

of the highest inequality rates in the world. Land distribution, in particular, is one of the most unequal in 

the world. Threatening progress in poverty alleviation is the impact of the drought on agriculture and the 

widening gap between those with and without jobs. 

Recent developments in economic activity are not indicative of major improvements in growth or 

employment. South Africa’s annual GDP is estimated to have increased by 1.3 percent in 2015, 


compared to 1.5 percent in 2014 and 2.2 percent in 2013, a result of depressed global conditions, as well 

as labor unrest and electricity shortages which compounded structural constraints. This weak growth is 

well-below the projected 5 percent growth needed to drive down unemployment. Inflation was relatively 

subdued in 2015 amid lower food and fuel prices (5.2 percent as of December 2015, up from 4.8 percent 

in November). However the Reserve Bank increased the repurchase rate by a total of 125 basis points 

from start 2015 to end March 2016 due to a deterioration of the inflation outlook as a result of the effects 

from rising food prices due to the drought, the risk of a higher pass-through from the sharp depreciation 

of the rand (depreciated by more than 30 percent against the dollar in 2015 and continued to weaken in 

January 2016, before showing a subsequent moderate recovery) and subdued global growth. 

A weaker growth environment will pose a challenge in the management of the fiscal deficit, which in 

turn increases the sovereign credit risk.  In an effort to mitigate sovereign credit risk, the National 

Budget Speech of February 2016 announced a strong fiscal adjustment effort, bringing the fiscal deficit 

from 3.9 percent of GDP for 2015/16 to 2.8 percent by 2017/18. The original target of the 2015 budget 

had been 2.5 percent, however deterioration in the growth outlook rendered the target unrealistic. In 

December 2015, Fitch and Standard and Poor’s (S&P) downgraded South Africa’s creditworthiness 

rating to BBB-, one notch above speculative grade, and S&P placed its rating on negative watch. The 

turmoil in markets experienced in December 2015 when a weakening in the government’s commitment 

to fiscal discipline was perceived, hints at the potential fallout from a further ratings downgrade.  

A substantial reduction in poverty and inequality will be hard to achieve without a major success in rural 

development. As stated by South Africa’s National Development Plan (NDP), the main challenge for 

rural development in South Africa is to “combat the marginalization of the poor”. While the rural share 

of poverty fell from 70 percent in 1993 to 58.3 percent in 2011, partly due to migration of the poor to 

townships and informal settlements around urban centers, rural areas remain characterized by greater 

poverty and inequality than urban areas.  The contraction in agricultural production at double-digit 

rates in the first three quarters of 2015, as extreme weather conditions related to El Nino led to the most 

severe drought in almost 20 years, pushed an estimated 50,000 South Africans into poverty. 

Agriculture development and successful land reform are key pillars of the strategy laid out by the NDP 

for integrated and inclusive rural development. South Africa’s agriculture sector is characterized by 

dualism: a modern, market-oriented capital intensive farming sector consisting of a small number of 

large commercial farms (around 40,000 farming units) and a large number of subsistence and 

small-scale or emerging farms, many in the former homeland areas. In addition, there is growing 

consolidation in the industry with a number of mergers taking place and the acquisition of smaller 

players. While improving economies of scale, this consolidation may also lead to lower competition in 

the market. Around 2006, over 80 percent of South African farmers worked on a piece of land of one 

hectare or smaller, and another 11 percent on one to five hectares. Only 3 percent had access to land of 

larger than 20 hectares. It is estimated that there are 2.5 – 3.5 million households engaged in subsistence 

farming, about 350,000 – 700,000 who can be classified as emerging farmers, producing part of their 

output for the market, and between 11,000 – 15,000 small to medium scale farmers who are 

commercially oriented. 

The progress of land reform has been slow and a large number of land reform beneficiaries are not using 

the land productively. The government committed itself to transfer 30 percent of the 82 million hectares 

of agricultural land owned by whites in 1994 to historically disadvantaged farmers by 2014, a total of 

24.5 million hectares, through both land restitution and land redistribution. According to the Twenty 

Year Review published by the Presidency, only 9.4 million hectares have been redistributed since 1994 

through both land restitution and redistribution. Achieving the objective of “productive use” of 

redistributed and restituted land requires even greater efforts and innovation. Land reform in South 

Africa to date has involved the transfer of relatively large commercial farms in their entirety to groups of 



beneficiaries. Land reform beneficiaries are typically resource-poor, risk-averse, and inexperienced 

historically disadvantaged farmers. Support provided to them after their takeover of the land, that is 

post-settlement support, has been inadequate. Land reform beneficiaries have experienced numerous 

problems accessing services, such as credit, training, technology extension, transport, plowing services, 

veterinary services, and marketing services. The well-developed agribusiness sector that services 

large-scale commercial agriculture has not been seen extending its operations to emerging farmers who, 

in most cases, would be cash-strapped and incapable of paying for such services anyway. As a 

consequence, there is limited integration of small farmers into the value chain.  

Support for small-scale farmers is equally crucial to job creation. Employment in the formal agriculture 

sector declined from 1.1 million in 1992 to 739,000 in 2014 despite output growth. Nevertheless, the 

NDP believes that with successful rural development and land reform the agriculture sector has the 

potential to create 1 million new jobs by 2030. The NDP counts on small-scale/ emerging farmers for 

over 35 percent of the job creation target, in addition to a 10 percent share from subsistence farmers, a 10 

percent share expected from better use of the land that has already been redistributed or restituted to land 

reform beneficiaries, and a 30 percent share from expansion of labor intensive commercial farming.   

 
 

Sectoral and institutional Context 

 

South Africa’s financial sector is the most developed in Sub-Saharan Africa and is significantly larger 

and more diversified compared to regional and income-group peers. It is supported by an elaborate legal 

and financial infrastructure and a generally effective regulatory framework. South Africa’s financial 

system totaled approximately ZAR 10 trillion in assets as of year-end 2014 (US$ equivalent of 1,026 

billion). As of end 2014, the banking sector constitutes almost 40 percent of the financial system assets, 

with pension funds and long-term insurers each contributing roughly 35 and 18 percent, respectively. 

The banking sector is highly concentrated, but at the same time commercially driven and professional. 

The ‘big four’ banks in South Africa, two of which are foreign owned, account for over 83 percent of 

total banking assets. This concentrated ownership structure has led to limited competition and distorted 

incentives for these banks to serve the lower end of the market, especially micro, small, and 

medium-sized enterprises and the low-income population. Nevertheless, the banking system generally is 

highly professional and commercially driven, and does not suffer from distortionary policies.   

Provision of agricultural finance and support  

One of the main challenges for rural and agriculture development is affordable access to working capital 

for emerging farmers and medium to long-term finance for small and medium-sized agricultural 

enterprises. While the financial services needs of the large commercial farms are generally well catered 

for by the private sector, farmers in rural areas experience many of the challenges faced by their peers in 

other African countries, ranging from difficulties in accessing markets, poor infrastructure, and little or 

no physical assets that could be used as collateral for accessing financing. With few exceptions, 

emerging and small-scale farmers are unable to use the land that they farm on as collateral given that the 

state owns most of the land in the former homelands. FinScope’s 2010 Small Business Survey estimates 

that of the roughly 700,000 emerging and small commercial farmers, only 5.6 percent used formal credit 

services and only 2.5 percent from a bank. In contrast, nearly half of those farmers used formal savings 

and/ or payments services and about 30 percent formal insurance. 

Without adequate collateral, rural farmers face challenges in accessing credit from traditional 

commercial banks. While the ‘big four’ commercial banks have made efforts to become more inclusive, 

their business models and cost structure do not lend themselves to serving the agricultural sector. Some 



banks are funding value chain off-take agreements with large processors and retailers for on-lending to 

smaller farmers, but such lending is small compared to the overall loan book of commercial banks. 

According to the Department of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries (DAFF), total farming debt 

amounted to ZAR 116,576 million (US$10,137 million) in 2014, out of which ZAR 66,345 million 

(US$5,769 million) was from commercial banks and ZAR 30,580 million (US$2,659 million) from the 

Land Bank. Compared to total commercial bank loans and advances of ZAR 2,967 billion (US$258 

billion), agricultural lending amounts to about 1 percent of their total loan book. 

A wide range of programs have been implemented by the government to provide financial support to 

land reform beneficiaries and small-scale farmers. In 1994 the government introduced the 

Settlement/Land Acquisition Grant (SLAG) to enable individuals and groups to finance the purchase of 

land from a willing seller. Until 2000, redistribution policy centered on the provision of a grant of ZAR 

16,000 (~US$1,034) to qualifying households with an income of less than ZAR 1,500 (~US$97) a 

month. In 2001 the Land Redistribution for Agricultural Development (LRAD) Grant was introduced to 

establish and promote emerging farmers. LRAD offered higher grants, paid to individuals rather than to 

households, and made greater use of loan financing through institutions such as Land Bank to 

supplement the grant. A few years later, the slow pace of land reform led to the introduction of the 

Proactive Land Acquisition Strategy (PLAS) in 2005-06. The use of grants for land acquisition was 

discontinued and the focus was shifted to the acquisition of strategically located land through PLAS by 

the state. Since its inception, PLAS has become the biggest single program area within redistribution, in 

terms of both budget and land area. 

There are also initiatives designed to provide post-settlement support to land reform beneficiaries. The 

LRAD policy for example sets out to close the post-settlement support gap that prevailed under SLAG. 

In addition, the Comprehensive Farmer Support Program (CFSP) provides two grants, one for capacity 

building and one for on-farm infrastructure. In order to access on-farm infrastructure grants ranging 

from a minimum of ZAR 5,000 to a maximum of ZAR 100,000 (~ US$323 to 6,462), beneficiaries must 

make an ‘own contribution’ along a sliding scale similar to that of the LRAD grant program. It is a 

once-off support package designed for LRAD beneficiaries. The Comprehensive Agricultural Support 

Program (CASP) supported by DAFF offers grants to support short-term operating expenses and small 

operating needs such as machinery. These grants are managed at the provincial level and come from 

funds that are transferred from the national to the provincial level. Combined land acquisition grants, 

both for redistribution and restitution, totaled ZAR 13.6 billion (US$1.61 billion) between 2008 and 

2012 while grants for movable equipment and fixed improvements amounted to ZAR 3.4 billion 

(US$1.58 billion) between 2004 and 2012 (DAFF). Borrowing for working capital needs to operate and 

expand farms has been one of the most acute challenges for emerging and small farmers as well as land 

reform beneficiaries due to the reasons mentioned above.  

Value chain integration is an opportunity to address significant skills and financing gaps of emerging 

farmers. In South Africa, there is a growing recognition in government and the private sector that value 

chain integration may be an effective way of building up a new class of commercial emerging farmers. 

Drawing on the successful experiences in the sugar, poultry, cotton, tobacco and forestry sectors, the 

government and private sector are joining forces to scale up efforts in these and other sectors. A new 

area opening for value chain integration is in the supply of fresh fruits and vegetables to retail 

supermarkets. With new BBBEE procurement policies government is encouraging the private sector to 

get involved. For example, Walmart-Massmart has established a supplier fund to support emerging 

farmer integration into their supply chain. The South African Poultry Association through the creation 

of the Developing Poultry Farmers Organization (DPFO) facilitates technical and financial assistance to 

access contracts with egg and poultry businesses. 



Land Bank 

In addition to government grants, financing from Land Bank has been expected to play a critical role in 

land reform and agriculture development. Land Bank was established in 1912 and is governed by the 

Land and Agricultural Development Bank Act of 2002. Land Bank was given a mandate of 11 aspects, 

which fall into five broader areas: (i) access of the historically disadvantaged population to land; (ii) 

agriculture productivity, growth and job creation; (iii) gender equity; (iv) environmental sustainability; 

and (v) food security. The NDP published in 2011 continues to call for a key role of Land Bank in 

providing financial support to land reform beneficiaries and to help them overcome difficulties in entry 

into commercial farming. 

As the leading development financial institution in the rural and agriculture sector in South Africa, Land 

Bank had an approximately 29 percent market share in agricultural financing as of July 2015. The bank 

has achieved a significant turnaround during the past five years. It is now on a sustainable trajectory with 

profits of ZAR 420 million in 2014/15 (up 61 percent from 2013/14), and a Return on Average Assets of 

1.12 percent and a Return on Average Equity of 6.78 percent. Total assets stood at ZAR 39.4 billion in 

2014/15 with a performing loan book of ZAR 36 billion. Non-performing loans (NPLs) under Land 

Bank methodology were at 3.72 percent in 2014/15 and the cost-to-income ratio was 54.9 percent. Fitch 

Ratings upgraded Land Bank from AA to AA+ in January 2014. The rating was maintained at AA+ in 

December 2015. The bank does not take general deposits and funds itself mainly through the debt and 

capital markets, issuing instruments such as promissory notes.  

Land Bank is fully owned by the South African government and supervised by the National Treasury. It 

follows prudential guidelines as issued by its Board of Directors. It is consequently not prudentially 

supervised by the South African Reserve Bank (SARB). The bank is audited by the Auditor General. 

Land Bank is engaged in both wholesale lending through intermediaries as well as direct lending. 

Intermediaries are mainly credit providers, cooperatives, or agri-businesses.  

In 2015, Land Bank adopted a new strategy following the completion of its organizational review. The 

review was undertaken following conditions set by NT pursuant to the issue of a Government guarantee, 

aimed at enabling the Land Bank to raise longer term funding. The review was completed in August 

2015 and subsequently an implementation plan was approved by the Land Bank Board. Land Bank has 

started implementing the new strategy and key changes are planned to be put in place over a two-year 

period in line with the priorities of Land Bank. The changes focus on: (i) a strategy to optimize the retail 

commercial banking segment of Land Bank, the long term viability of which was a concern owing to 

loan losses and significant operational costs; (ii) new initiatives to potentially expand the development 

portfolio of Land Bank for emerging farmers in a sustainable and commercially viable manner by 

adopting a project finance approach in partnership with large corporates and intermediaries to integrate 

the emerging farmers into established value chains; and (iii) steps to align Land Bank financial 

soundness indicators, credit appraisal processes and risk management practices with international 

banking standards.  

Following the adoption of this new strategy, Land Bank has two main business lines: Corporate Banking 

(CB) and Commercial Development Banking (CDB). The new CDB business line is a combination of 

previous Retail Emerging Markets (REM) and Retail Commercial Banking (RCB) business lines. In 

2014/15, CB accounted for 83.6 percent of the bank’s loan book and CDB accounted for 16.4 percent, of 

which 1.3 percent was composed of loans provided under REM. 

Under CDB, the REM sub-business line continues to focus exclusively on lending to emerging farmers 

for development purposes. Farmers supported under REM typically have no or limited access to 

commercial funding and little or no collateral, but can be commercially sustainable and viable with 



financing and technical support. Subsistence farmers are not supported under REM. Lending is based on 

cash-flows and non-financial support (end to end on-farm support) is provided by Land Bank 

intermediaries and agricultural specialists based in Land Bank branches. REM uses wholesale as well as 

direct lending and offers production financing, installment sale finance, and medium-term loans. The 

total REM portfolio amounted to ZAR 489 million in 2014/15 (increase of ZAR 97 million in that year).  

Intensive and high-quality extensions services under the REM program are effectively provided by Land 

Bank’s intermediaries. These intermediaries have a comparative advantage in providing these services 

due to their close interaction with the beneficiaries. The non-financial complementary services, 

especially extension services, are critical for emerging farmers to develop. The costs for the extension 

services are embedded in the overall cost structure under REM and are borne by the intermediaries. 

While the provision of extension services is costly, especially for new emerging farmers, intermediaries 

can generate profits from these clients over time due to the long-run and comprehensive nature of 

engagement between intermediaries and their clients. The current model of providing extension services 

is considered to be of high quality according to the assessment carried out during project preparation. 

Under CDB, the RCB business line which was exclusively focused on direct retail lending to medium 

scale farmers, through 27 Agriculture Finance Centers (AFCs), has been significantly restructured to 

improve its long term sustainability. RCB was loss-making due to high operating costs of the large 

branch network and had NPLs of 11 percent in 2014/15. RCB was losing clients to commercial banks 

and agricultural enterprises who started to lend in that space and could offer a wider range of products. 

The competitiveness and long-term viability of RCB was therefore questionable. The new strategy aims 

at consolidating the branch network into 9 provincial offices in strategically important geographical 

locations which will also result in significant staff reduction. Importantly, the consolidated branch 

network’s role will specifically focus on facilitating effective partnerships in their respective regions 

with corporate retailers, emerging farmers, government programs, as well as technical and financial 

intermediaries to leverage on high impact and high value chain finance deals. 

Importantly, as part of the new strategy, Land Bank aims to scale up financing support to emerging 

farmers in a sustainable and commercially viable manner through their integration in established value 

chains. The approach is anchored in identifying high-potential value chain projects in a given 

geographic region and securing buy-in from large agriculture corporates or technical partners to assist in 

supporting emerging farmers’ integration into the chain. The agriculture corporates will provide 

technical support (directly or indirectly) to the emerging farmers, building up their capacity to be 

sustainable suppliers to the chain. Land Bank has identified selected potential value chain projects and 

agriculture corporates to partner with in the grains, winery, horticulture and livestock sectors for this 

type of financing. 

The CB business line is the corporate part of the bank and the most viable business line. The CB 

business line involves both direct and wholesale lending. Lending takes place primarily through 

intermediaries (cooperatives and agri-businesses). CB operates through two offices in Pretoria and Cape 

Town. The total portfolio of CB amounted to ZAR 31 billion in 2014/15. While CB targets commercial 

farmers, the workers employed on these farm tend to be part of the low-income population.  

Land Bank aims at increasing its developmental focus in both CB and CDB business lines by 

strengthening its wholesale business as well as its direct lending to emerging farmers. Both business 

lines contain a development portfolio with “development” referring to a focus on supporting the 

historically disadvantaged population in line with Broad-Based Black Economic Empowerment 

(BBBEE). International experience with development banks suggests that wholesale lending is more 

likely to be successful than retail lending. The key reason is that wholesale lending does not require a 

large branch network which is costly to build and maintain but rather leverages the networks already 



built by other financial service providers. Wholesale lending is also more market enabling and does not 

aim at competing with the private sector.  Direct lending via value chain financing leverages the 

corporate partner’s ability to provide technical support to the borrower, building up their capacity to be 

sustainable suppliers to the chain. As such, emerging farmers in this scheme have the potential to 

increase their revenues and thus a greater likelihood of fulfilling debt obligations to the bank. The 

project will therefore focus on supporting Land Bank in scaling up its wholesale portfolio as well as 

expanding direct lending through LB’s new approach of integrating emerging farmers into established 

value chains. Using long-term financing to fill existing funding gaps will additionally help Land Bank 

meet its investment needs as well as improve its asset liability management.  

Land Bank is making an important contribution to job creation. Land Bank estimates that the impact of 

its loan disbursements on employment opportunities in South Africa was close to 400,000 in 2013-2014. 

This estimate is comprised of over 23,000 new employment opportunities generated and over 370,000 

jobs maintained during the year. One employment opportunity constitutes 240 days worked per year. 

The estimated new jobs created are arising out of the medium and long-term loans Land Bank is 

providing.  

II. Project Development Objective(s) 

 
The project’s development objective is to sustainably scale up Land Bank’s financing, specifically to 

benefit emerging farmers. 

III. Project Description 

 Component Name 

 Line of Credit for Agricultural Financing 

 Comments (optional) 

 

Land Bank will provide both wholesale finance to participating PFIs for on-lending to commercial 

and emerging farmers and direct financing, in partnership with large agriculture corporates, to 

emerging farmers to support their integration in established value chains. It will do so through two 

main financing windows 

Window 1: Wholesale finance to commercial and emerging farmers. This window will provide a 

wholesale line of credit to Land Bank. Land Bank will on-lend the funds to participating financial 

intermediaries (PFIs) which comply with eligibility criteria agreed with the World Bank. The PFIs 

will on-lend funds to eligible agriculture enterprises, commercial and emerging farmers, communal 

property associations and other eligible borrowers supported under the Land Bank’s CB and CDB 

business lines. Currently, the wholesale line under CDB primarily includes the REM portfolio, 

however, over the life of the project this may change to include other wholesale loans under CDB. 

Window 2: Financing to integrate emerging farmers into established value chains. This window will 

provide a line of credit to Land Bank to finance direct lending to emerging farmers for integrated value 

chain finance. For direct lending to value chain finance/development projects, Land Bank will finance 

eligible emerging farmers and agriculture enterprises in collaboration with large agriculture 

corporates and/or technical partners in a targeted value chain. 

. 

IV. Financing (in USD Million) 



 Total Project Cost: 95.00 Total Bank Financing: 95.00 

 Financing Gap: 0.00  

 Financing Source Amount 

 Borrower 0.00 

 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 95.00 

 Total 95.00 

. 

V. Implementation 

 

The project is a financial intermediary loan (FIL) of US$95 million to Land Bank as the borrower and 

implementing agency with a guarantee of the Republic of South Africa. The project has one component: 

a Line of Credit for Agricultural Financing in the amount of US$95 million. 

 

The loan will be extended to Land Bank as the borrower and implementing agency with a guarantee of 

the Republic of South Africa. Land Bank will use the funds under the LOC component for on-lending to 

PFIs. Land Bank will be responsible for project implementation and monitoring. Dedicated staff in Land 

Bank has been identified for managing all aspects of the project, including reporting on implementation 

progress and monitoring and evaluation, ensuring compliance with environmental and social safeguards 

as well as with financial management and procurement arrangements. 

 

Land Bank will report on the PDO and intermediate indicators on a semi-annual basis. The data will 

come from Land Bank’s internal reports and from information provided by the PFIs. Land Bank will 

prepare quarterly Interim Financial Reports for the project. The specific reporting templates will be 

defined in the Project’s Operational Manual. Land Bank’s financial performance will be audited 

annually by the Auditor General. 

VI. Safeguard Policies  

 WBG Performance Standards Applicable  Yes No 

 
PS 1: Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks 

and Impacts 

X  

 PS 2: Labor and Working Conditions X  

 PS 3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention X  

 PS 4: Community Health, Safety, and Security X  

 PS 5: Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement X  

 
PS 6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living 

Natural Resources 

 X 

 PS 7: Indigenous Peoples  X 

 PS 8: Cultural Heritage  X 

 Comments (optional) 

  

