














































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Yemen Food Security Response and Resilience Project (P176129) 

 
 

  
Mar 10, 2021 Page 1 of 22  

     

 
 
 
      

 

Project Information Document (PID) 
 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 31-Mar-2021 | Report No: PIDA31193 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Yemen, Republic of P176129 Yemen Food Security 
Response and Resilience 
Project 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH 
AFRICA 

18-Mar-2021 27-Apr-2021 Agriculture and Food 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing United Nations 
Development Programme, 
World Food Programma, 
Food and Agriculture 
Organization 

World Food Programme, 
Food and Agriculture 
Organization, United 
Nations Development 
Programme 

 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
The Project Development Objective is to improve the availability of and access to food and nutritious diets, both in the 
short and medium term, for targeted households in the Project Area, and to enhance Yemen's capacity to respond to 
food insecurity. 

 
Components 

Improving household incomes through CFW for agricultural production infrastructure and building climate resilience 
Increasing Production and Sale of Nutritious Crop, Livestock and Fish Products 
Improving the Nutritional Status of Vulnerable Rural Households 
Capacity building for food security management and climate resilience 
Project Management and Knowledge Management 

 
OPS_TABLE_FCC The processing of this project is applying the policy requirements exceptions for situations of urgent need of 
assistance or capacity constraints that are outlined in OP 10.00, paragraph 12.     
Yes 

 

PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
   

SUMMARY-NewFin1  
 

Total Project Cost 127.00 

Total Financing 127.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 100.00 



 

Financing Gap 0.00 

 
   
DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 100.00 

          IDA Grant 100.00 

Non-World Bank Group Financing 

     Trust Funds 27.00 

          Global Agriculture and Food Security Program 27.00 

    

Environmental and Social Risk Classification 

Substantial 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate     
 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
B. Introduction and Context 

 
Country Context 

 
1. Violent conflict, now in its seventh year, has crippled Yemen’s economy and created an 
unprecedented humanitarian crisis. Oil exports, the main source of government revenue and foreign 
exchange, came to a virtual halt in 2015 due to repeated sabotage of vital infrastructure and increased 
insecurity. The resulting wide-scale suspension of basic public services and civil service salary payments, 
rapid currency depreciation, and shortages of imported goods weakened the non-hydrocarbon sector and 
left many Yemenis without a regular income. More than 50 percent of Yemenis between the ages of 18 
and 24 were unemployed in 2017 (United Nations Development Program 2017). A liquidity crisis hit the 
country in mid- to late-2018 with the local currency depreciating significantly and food prices rising, 
making food virtually unaffordable to many households. External assistance financed imports of food and 
other necessities and helped stabilize the economy in 2019 but was largely depleted by early 2020 and 
foreign reserves were not replenished. Some respite was provided through IMF financing in late spring 
and summer of 2020.  
 
2. The macroeconomic policy environment differs spatially due to the bifurcation of 
administration between areas of control. In the areas controlled by the internationally recognized 



 

The World Bank  
Yemen Food Security Response and Resilience Project (P176129) 

 

 

  
Mar 10, 2021 Page 4 of 22  

 

government (IRG), significant revenue underperformance and continued monetization of the fiscal deficit 
have undermined macroeconomic stability. Oil prices remain low, eroding the government’s hydrocarbon 
revenue. Non-oil economic activity has suffered significantly from COVID-19 related trade slowdown, 
desert locust outbreaks and exceptionally heavy rainfalls, which have caused intense flooding, 
infrastructure damage and human casualties in 2020. The severe revenue shortfall has led to expenditure 
compression. Since early 2020, salary payments to public sector workers have seen frequent delays. 
Payables to suppliers (mostly to energy suppliers) have continued building up, disrupting fuel imports and 
electricity supply. The complete ban on using new banknotes since December 2019[1] has resulted in two 
exchange rates, complicating trade and financial flows across Yemen. The DFA’s fiscal policy operates 
under a cash-constrained budget. The collection of corporate profit and sales taxes and customs revenue, 
the three largest revenue sources, was affected negatively by COVID-19 related trade slowdown and 
movement restrictions, and administrative disruption caused by flooding. In 2020, the DFA disbursed half-
month salaries to public sector workers under its controlled areas every other month 1. 
 
3. Over 24 million people (or 83 percent of the total estimated population) are food insecure2, 
including a staggering 16.2 million people in IPC Phase 3+ requiring urgent emergency assistance. Food 
insecurity in Yemen is driven by constrained food production, supply and distribution and households’ 
diminishing purchasing power. An estimated 4.3 million people have fled their homes since the start of 
the conflict, and 3.3 million remain internally displaced. Hunger, food insecurity and malnutrition are 
among the most pressing and overwhelming challenges Yemen now faces, at a scale that is not being fully 
met by national authorities and the international development and humanitarian communities. Low food 
access has resulted from a combination a high household dependence on food imports, high food prices 
and significantly reduced household income. It is estimated that Yemen imported 8 percent less wheat 
per month between January and May 2020 than during the same period in 2019 due to limited funds, 
which is an insufficient imported amount of wheat to meet the 2020 consumption requirement.  
 
4. Socio-economic conditions deteriorated further in 2020, significantly worsening poverty. 
Distortions created by the fragmented institutional capacity and the divergent policy decisions between 
the areas of control have compounded the economic and humanitarian crisis. This dramatic deterioration 
of conditions in Yemen means that an estimated 80 percent of the population (around 24 million) were 
living below the poverty line even before COVID-19 pandemic crisis (World Bank 2019). The likely result 
based on anecdotal evidence is a contraction of the economy from an already low base in 2020. In addition 
to monetary poverty, it is estimated that up to 80 percent of households experience overlapping monetary 
and non-monetary deprivations (World Food Program 2020). 
 
5. Multiple indices point towards a significant gender gap, with Yemeni women having a lower 
standard of living than men, and less access to education, health, productive employment and food 
security than men (World Bank 2014). The Gender Inequality Index (GII) measures Yemen’s GII value as 
0.8343 vs. the world’s average at 0.439.  Yemen ranks 153 out of 153 countries, meaning Yemen has the 
most massive gender gap in the world, in the 2020 Global Gender Gap Report4 by the World Economic 

 
[1] Notes printed after September 2016 when the Central Bank of Yemen (CBY) headquarters was moved to Aden. 
1 The Yemen Macro-Poverty Outlook, the 2020 Annual Meetings Edition. 
2 IPC Phase 2 and above.  
3 The Borgen Project, 2018. 
4  The Global Gender Gap considers the economic participation, education, health and political empowerment of all genders. 

 

Forum. International Labor Organization (ILO)- modeled estimates5 suggest that 46 percent of women 
work in agriculture (versus only 27 percent of men). Yet far fewer women participate in the labor market 
and in productive employment, with only 6 percent of women participating in the labor force compared 
to 72 percent of men. One out of four women in the labor market are unemployed (24 percent) compared 
to 12 percent of men. Vulnerable employment is high for all but especially for women; 68 percent of 
women fall in this category compared to 44 percent of men. Income inequality is stark: for every dollar a 
man makes in Yemen, a woman is estimated to make only thirty cents6. In 2011, the adult literacy rate 
was 80 percent for men and 45 percent for women, but among youth aged 15-24, these rates were 96 
and 72, respectively7 8. Finally, while men face a higher direct burden of war through fighting and battle 
deaths, women are disproportionately affected by the indirect and often lasting effects of conflict (World 
Development Report 2011, Buvinic et al. 2012, Justino 2018) that exacerbate existing gender-based 
deprivations and development shortfalls. 
 
6. Economic and social prospects for 2021 and beyond are highly uncertain. With the ongoing 
difficult political and security situation, socio-economic conditions will remain difficult. Urgent progress 
to address the current restrictions of access to supplies and fuel imports would improve public service 
provision and the operational environment for humanitarian operations. Ceasing hostilities and eventual 
political reconciliation, including the return of unitary macroeconomic policy implementation, are 
prerequisites for reconstructing the economy and rebuilding social fabric. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 

 
7. Yemen’s agriculture supplies around 15 – 20 percent of its food needs due to limited agricultural 
land and water resources and poor agricultural practices. However, agriculture—including fisheries and 
livestock—is the backbone of Yemeni livelihoods and the most important non-oil sector of the economy, 
even as its contribution to gross domestic product (GDP) has decreased during this period of severe 
economic disruption. Agriculture’s share of GDP contracted from 10.3 percent in 2010 to 4.03 percent in 
20189. Agricultural land is less than three percent (3 percent) of Yemen’s land area (FAOSTAT) and supplies 
around 15 - 20 percent of its needs for food. The principal agricultural systems are in the rainfed highlands 
characterized by terraced agriculture for coffee, fruits, grains and qat10 and extensive livestock (meat) 
production. Horticulture and field crops predominate in the plains, using groundwater for irrigation. 
Groundwater resources are very limited, fossil and non-renewable, and agriculture accounts for up to 90 
percent of groundwater use. The current annual renewable freshwater resources in Yemen are estimated 
at 80 m3 per capita versus an 8,900 m3 per capita global average. Yemen therefore falls well below the 
absolute scarcity threshold of 500 m3 per capita11. Up to 85 percent of food consumed is imported, mostly 
staples, such as wheat, rice, oil, sugar and milk. Yemen has self-sufficiency in some cereals (sorghum, 
millet, and barley), while 90 percent of wheat is imported. The agricultural sector accounts for a large 
portion of non-oil domestic exports and supports livelihoods through agricultural and livestock 
production. Over three thirds of Yemenis depend on agriculture for their livelihoods.  

 
5 World Bank Data.  
6 The Borgen Project. 
7 World Bank: data.worldbank.org/country/yemen-republic. 
8Description of Yemen’s education system is summarized in Annex 2.  
9 https://www.theglobaleconomy.com/Yemen/share_of_agriculture/ 
10 Qat is a mild stimulant leaf chewed for recreation, and for which up to 40 percent of total water resource use is dedicated 
11 Dire Straits: The Crisis Surrounding Poverty, Conflict, and Water in the Republic of Yemen, World Bank, 2017.

 
8. Agriculture is very important for job creation and food security, especially for women, yet 
women have less access to agricultural assets and higher food insecurity. Women have a major role in 
agricultural production; up to 87 percent of rural women are involved in agriculture sector activities (FAO), 
yet women rarely have land ownership rights and they commonly relinquish inherited land rights to male 
family members. It is estimated that only 13 percent of women are agricultural landholders (UNDP). 
Women working in agriculture face many constraints, such as limited access to land ownership, finance, 
markets, livelihood activities, and information, aside from legal and cultural restrictions on economic 
independence. It is estimated that only 2 percent of women have access to a formal bank account or 
mobile financial provider compared to 11 percent of men (which is also low). According to UNOCHA, 
female-headed households are more at risk of food insecurity due to scarce work opportunities for them. 
Women are generally excluded from economic transactions in the local markets. When food is scarce, 
women are the first family members to eat less as a coping mechanism, even though they continue to do 
hard work, including in the fields. Lack of official papers are an obstacle for women, boys and girls when 
registering for humanitarian assistance distribution. Restrictions in mobility (for security and cultural 
reasons) are often an obstacle for women and girls to go to humanitarian distribution points. Given the 
agriculture sector’s importance in producing food for consumption and commercialization, and 
generating incomes, it will continue playing an important role in households’ coping strategies and is 
expected to play a leading role in post-conflict recovery and reconstruction12. 
 
9. Vulnerability to climate change and pest outbreaks are exacerbating Yemen’s dire food 
insecurity, creating a crisis within a crisis. Yemen is highly vulnerable to climate change, further 
threatening food security and intensifying the development of locust swarms. By 2060, mean annual 
temperature is expected to increase by 1.2oC to 3.3oC, and the rate of warming is projected to be more 
rapid in interior regions than in coastal areas. Sea level rise will result in increased coastal flooding and 
possible damages to infrastructure and ecosystems, leading to sea-water intrusion affecting the country’s 
already fragile freshwater balance. Climate change has already triggered the strongest alterations in water 
temperature in the Indian Ocean in 60 years. Warmer seas also create more extreme rainfall as well as 
stronger and more frequent cyclones, providing ideal conditions for desert locusts to hatch, breed, and 
disperse widely. Fall Armyworm breeding areas are also increasing in Yemen as a result of ecologically 
favorable conditions, including extensive rains, with several governorates affected. 
 
10. Despite the agricultural sector’s importance, agricultural productivity remains low and the 
conflict has severely disrupted access to markets, transportation and distribution. Yemeni farmers 
operate around 1.18 million farms, with an average land holding of 1.36 ha (FAO). About 75 percent of 
agricultural production comes from the highlands, home to 60 percent of the population. While 
productivity has always been low, conflict has worsened production conditions, resulting in a shortage of 
inputs such as seeds, fertilizer and fuel, damage to agricultural machinery, irrigation systems and storage 
facilities along with a deterioration of water, sanitation and electricity services, and a breakdown of 
logistical chains. These disruptions, coupled with the relatively small and fragmented land holdings, have 
been preventing the sector from making a larger contribution to rural incomes and addressing food trade 
imbalances. The insufficient availability of inputs and post-harvest losses have been exacerbated by 

 

inadequate marketing systems, low human resource capacity, and lack of infrastructure and access to 
markets. 
 
11. Acute malnutrition is among the world’s highest, and both underlying acute and chronic 
malnutrition will adversely impact the country’s human capital outcomes in the long term. Prior to the 
2015 escalation of conflict, Yemen already had one of the world’s highest malnutrition levels. In 2021, 
over 2.25 million children under the age of five in Yemen are threatened with acute malnutrition. Of those 
children, 395,000 are expected to suffer from severe acute malnutrition and could die if without 
treatment. The projected figures in the IPC nutrition analysis13 mark a 16 percent increase in acute 
malnutrition and a 22 percent increase in severe acute malnutrition among children under five compared 
to last year’s estimate. This is the highest number on record in Yemen. An additional concern are the more 
than one million pregnant and lactating women who are projected to suffer from acute malnutrition 
during 2021 in Yemen. Acute severe malnutrition14 has immediate effects, including greater susceptibility 
to diseases like cholera, wasting and a whole range of other poor physical and mental health outcomes. 
Malnutrition impacts on children is particularly severe, as it results in long term declines in cognitive 
development, along with poorer health outcomes in both short and longer terms. This looms as a longer-
term societal issue. According to UNICEF, a shocking 46 percent of all children in Yemen are stunted. At 
this rate, malnutrition will create a lost generation. Undernutrition is particularly prevalent in rural areas, 
related to lean seasons or food security crises, and in areas remote from food aid. This suggests that 
enhanced, rural household-focused nutritional awareness, combined with improved local production can 
improve nutritional outcomes. 
 
12. Several aggravating factors that emerged in the spring and summer 2020 have been driving a 
worsening of the food security situation. Those factors include:  
 

(a) Widespread floods. In most of the governorates, the 2020 agriculture season started in March with 
strong rains, which lasted into August and led to heavy floods across the country. The floods resulted 
in substantial damage to cultivated lands and infrastructure and affected agricultural activities such 
as horticulture and livestock. Floods coincided both with harvesting and planting, resulting in damages 
to the standing crops and delayed planting activities. Destruction of water infrastructure alone (not 
including impacts on crops and livestock) is estimated at US$50 million (FAO). The estimated recovery 
and reconstruction needs for the short- and medium-term are between US$763 million and US$932 
million15. 
 

(b) Desert locust invasion. Yemen is one of the main breeding grounds of desert locust swarms, with 
swarms developing across the entire year and in multiple locations. The rains created favorable 
conditions for desert locusts to reproduce, resulting in extensive damage to cultivated crops. 
Residents and farmers in selected governorates reported a huge number of locusts invading farms, 
cities and villages, devouring important seasonal crops such as dates and causing heavy losses. The 
World Bank’s estimates put the damages and losses for the 2020 agricultural season at US$ 222 
million.  

 
13 Yemen: High levels of food insecurity persist | IPC Global Platform (ipcinfo.org)  
14 Severe acute malnutrition is defined by a very low weight for height (below -3z scores of the median WHO growth standards), 
by visible severe wasting, or by the presence of nutritional oedema (WHO). 
15 Yemen Dynamic Needs Assessment (DNA): Updated 2020 (World Bank). 

 

(c) Livestock disease incidences and prevalence in 2020. The above normal and intense rains created 
conducive environments for disease vectors to multiply and easier disease transmission of livestock 
diseases, resulting in increased outbreaks. In livestock, suspected outbreaks of Foot and Mouth 
Disease (FMD), Peste des petits ruminants (PPR), sheep and goat pox (SGP) in areas of low/absence of 
vaccination coverage, Lumpy Skin Disease (LSD) and other disease conditions have devastated 
livestock population, increasing vulnerability of livestock dependent population to food security 
shocks. 
 

(d) Well below-average cereal harvest in 2020. The total cereal production in 2020 was estimated at 
365,000 tons, almost 25 percent below the five-year average. Rural food crop production is expected 
to continue declining unless action is taken. With reduced food imports, higher food prices and for 
most households significantly reduced income earnings, the result will be lower food access. 
 

(e) The COVID-19 pandemic continues its spread across Yemen, negatively impacting food supply chains 
and food trade and contributing to sharp food price increases. By early March 2021, Yemen had 
reported 2,436 COVID-19 cases with 660 deaths, although it is likely COVID-19 cases are significantly 
under-reported. Market functionality and logistics in many areas have been hampered due to curfews 
and other COVID-19 pandemic prevention measures, greatly affecting farmers’ access to markets. 
Although farmgate prices did not change, poor market access has resulted in high post-harvest losses 
of horticulture products with only a few farmers finding alternate marketing channels to sell their 
produce, resulting in lower incomes. Movement restrictions and high input costs could further affect 
the next planting season. Negative coping strategies observed amongst pastoralists, such as selling 
herds, could continue without assistance to secure the upcoming planting season and to preserve 
productive assets in rural areas. In the coming months, localized and temporary increases in COVID-
19 control measures are expected in areas where higher numbers of cases are suspected, with further 
disruptions to trade and access to food and income. 
 

(f) Food price increases have continued through a combination of rapid currency deterioration, COVID-19 
pandemic impacts on the agri-food sector and lower food imports. Food represents a large share of 
poor households’ consumption expenditures, estimated between 60 to 70 percent. The disruptions 
to supply chains of locally produced foods are resulting in postharvest losses, and informal food flows 
across land borders are expected to continue at reduced levels relative to the pre-conflict period. 
Trade across land borders will likely remain difficult as continuing insecurity is now compounded by 
border closures due to COVID-19. As a result, the cost of the minimum food basket (MFB) increased 
by more than 20 percent during February 2020 – January 202116. For instance, wheat flour price 
gradually increased throughout 2020 and in November 2020 was 27 percent higher than at the same 
time previous year17. At the same time, incomes in the informal sector have dropped dramatically, 
remittances are also down sharply, and from December 2019 to June 2020, the local currency (Yemeni 
riyal) lost an average of 19 percent of its value against the US dollar18.  

13. The ability of Yemen’s physical food markets  to operate varies across the country. Yemen’s food 
market landscape is  fragmented and market ability to operate depends on the security situation.  In many 
areas, markets are operating reasonably well and are reasonably well stocked, however, in many food 
insecure areas poorly operating markets and dis-functional logistics are among the reasons contributing 
to the food insecurity.  The Yemen Joint Market Monitoring Initiative19 regularly monitors market 
operations in 56 districts in 16 governorates. They report that price inflation is the most commonly 
reported constraint faced by the assessed vendors when obtaining fuel, Water, Sanitation and Hygiene 
(WASH) items, food items, and water trucking services. Among the vendors interviewed, results showed 
86.2 percent saw price increases as the key constraint. Other constraints listed by respondents were 
insecurity (17.7 percent), demand shortages due to the population’s low purchasing power (14.9 percent), 
transportation difficulties (12.8 percent), with supply shortages only mentioned by 2.4 percent of 
respondents. Yet farmers report worsening access to markets due to the COVID-19 restrictions. 
Horticulture farmers, mainly women, are selling a highly perishable commodity and rely on this income to 
sustain their families. Poor market access has both, kept the farmgate prices steady, but also resulted in 
high post-harvest losses of horticulture products with only a few farmers finding alternate marketing 
channels to sell their produce, resulting in lower incomes. Another significant factor that negatively 
impacts overall private sector operations is fuel scarcity and its trading in the black market at double the 
price, which have disrupted the production process, service delivery, decreased working hours, and 
increased costs of production, transportation, storage and marketing20. 
 
14. Climate change is already worsening the existing challenges and negatively impacting all four 
dimensions of food security: availability, access, stability, and utilization of food. Food availability is 
compromised by projected yield declines due to temperature and precipitation patterns change. Climate 
change also compromises food access by affecting consumers' purchasing power through price increases 
as a result of climate change. Climate change affects food utilization primarily by reducing food safety 
through a higher incidence of food-borne diseases and the spread of novel pests and diseases. Regarding 
food stability, the risks to food and nutrition security are exacerbated by the expected increase in the 
frequency and intensity of climate-related events. Furthermore, according to the World Bank's 
Groundswell report21, climate change will scale up internal climate migration. The poorest people in rural 
areas will be forced to move due to slow-onset climate change impacts, including decreasing crop 
productivity, shortage and deterioration of water’s quantity and quality, and rising sea levels. Therefore, 
actions geared towards building improved and climate-smart agri-food systems will contribute to 
increased food security, climate change adaptation and mitigation. 
 
15. Food security situation forecasts for the first half of 2021 predict that food insecurity across the 
country will intensify due to the continued, combined effects of the aggravating factors described in 
paragraph 12 above, a warning uniformly sounded across the UN agencies working in Yemen, including 
the FAO, UNICEF and the World Food Programme (WFP)22. This includes large areas of the country 
previously in IPC Phase 2 (Stressed) moving to IPC Phase 3 (Crisis), with the share of the population in IPC 
Phases 3 and 4 significantly increasing by June 2021. The number of people likely to experience high levels 
of acute food insecurity (IPC Phase 3 or above) is estimated to be nearly 16.2 million (54 percent of the 


total population). Food insecurity is more severe both in areas with active fighting and bordering areas 
with limited access. It is particularly affecting Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs) and marginalized groups 
such as the landless laborers and the Mohamasheen23. Food insecurity is also severe in areas where 
people survive on low and irregular sources of income and low access to public services. The population 
in Catastrophe (IPC Phase 5) are found in five districts of Al Jawf, Hajjah and Amran. The governorates 
with the highest proportion of IPC Phase 4 districts (>75%) are located in Al Dhale’e, Al Jawf, Hajjah, Marib 
and Rayma Governorates. Each of the governorates of Al Hudaydah, Dhamar, Hajjah, Ibb, Sana’a City and 
Taizz have more than one million people in IPC Phase 3 (Crisis) or above. The upcoming “lean” season, 
between March and June 2021 is expected to aggravate this situation. 
 

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 

Development Objective(s) (From PAD)  
 
16. The Project Development Objective is to improve availability and access to food and nutritious 
diets, both in the short and medium term, for targeted households in the Project Area, and to enhance 
Yemen’s capacity to respond to food insecurity. 
 

Key Results 
 

17. Progress toward the achievement of the PDO will be measured by the following outcome 
indicators:  
 

Outcome 1: Short-term access and availability of food and nutritious diets at household level 

improved  

• Percentage of households (HH) with improved Food Insecurity Experience Scale (FIES), of which 
female-headed households;  

• Percentage of women in beneficiary households with minimum dietary diversity; 

• Percentage of children (6-23 months) consuming minimum acceptable diet.  
 

Outcome 2: Medium-term access and availability of food and nutritious diets at household level 

improved 

• Increase in the volume of food/agricultural products commercialized/sold by beneficiaries, of which 
by female beneficiaries.  
 

Outcome 3: Country capacity to respond to food insecurity strengthened 

• Food security preparedness improved, through the adoption of the food security preparedness plan 
and the use of the EO monitoring tool.  

 
 

 

D. Project Description  
 

 
18. Component 1: Improving household incomes through CFW for agricultural production 
infrastructure (US$20.0 million, including US$5.0 million from GAFSP and US$15.0 million from IDA). 
UNDP will implement this component through the Social Fund for Development (SFD) and the Public 
Works Project (PWP). The  SFD will  take the lead in implementing the CFW program, which will provide 
employment opportunities directly to beneficiary laborers from the communities in the project area. The 
PWP will implement small-scale infrastructure-related works through selected locally sourced contractors 
which are also expected to create employment opportunities for the communities. Both organizations 
have extensive experience implementing their respective responsibilities under a number of other 
interventions, including under several Bank-financed projects.  It is expected that 85 percent of the 
component financing will be allocated for CFW activities, which the remaining 15 percent would be 
channeled through the PWP. Component 1 activities will be implemented in close collaboration with the 
FAO to ensure that they are closely coordinated with the productive investments made under Component 
2. Component 1 would ensure immediate access to food for an estimated 26,500 food-insecure 
households by creating temporary employment opportunities through a Cash-for-Work (CFW) program, 
focusing on restoring damaged public and collective productive assets, including those affected by the 
recent floods. The project would target youth (18 – 32 years of age) through the community outreach 
programs and encourage them to participate in the CFW program. The Component will also seek to 
support employment generation activities targeting women. 
 

19.  Component 1 activities would directly contribute to climate change adaptation and mitigate 
greenhouse gas emissions. Implementing climate-resilient irrigation and water conservation and 
management practices will restore degraded lands (including terracing) and affected water infrastructure 
for subsequent productive, climate-smart technology use in agricultural production and allow 
beneficiaries to earn much needed income from their repair and maintenance through cash-for-work. An 
estimated 15,700 farmers will have improved access to water infrastructure, irrigation networks and 
rehabilitated lands. These actions also contribute to climate change mitigation and adaptation by 
increasing carbon sequestration and improving water management. The Component will finance 
beneficiary compensation, estimated as US$660 per household per six month period, and the operating 
costs of SFD and PWP. The detailed criteria for beneficiary selection will be included in the Project 
Operations Manual (POM), and care will be taken to ensure that the beneficiaries of this Component are 
not engaged in parallel Bank-financed projects24. 
 

20. Component 2: Increasing production and sale of nutritious crop, livestock and fish products 
(US$33.0 million, including US$10.0 million from GAFSP and US$23.0 million from IDA). This Component 
will be implemented by FAO. The Component would allocate resources to provide key support for 
smallholder farmers and producers to invest in productive assets and help improve their capacity to better 
commercialize their products and enter new markets. The Component would support: (1) restoring 
climate-smart local food production to increase household access to food and food availability in local 
markets, and (2) improving farmer’s access to markets for staple and high value cash crops (such as 
horticultural crops and coffee), by strengthening value chains’ vertical and horizontal linkages, to increase 
incomes for beneficiary households. Component 2 would collaborate with IFC in developing selected high 

value agricultural value chains, building value chains between the project-supported farmers/agricultural 
producers and IFC’s advisory services and investment clients25. This component is therefore expected to 
restore climate-smart agricultural production while also stimulating the local economy and promoting the 
production of nutrient-dense foods (e.g., horticulture, pulses, meat (chicken and livestock), dairy and fish). 
This component would finance two types of support packages. Detailed criteria for beneficiary selection 
and implementation arrangements will be included in the POM. 
 

21. Sub-component 2.1: Restoring climate-smart agricultural production (US$15.0 million, including 
US$ 5.0 million from GAFSP and US$10.0 million from IDA). The Input Package for agricultural producers 
will promote climate-smart agricultural production focusing on smallholder’s re-engagement in 
horticulture, crop and livestock farming, bee-keeping and fish production. Producers would receive 
support to restart or expand production, including input starter packages for crops, animal feed, improved 
forage seeds, equipment and inputs to start fish farming, bee-keeping kits, farm equipment such as fodder 
choppers and small dairy equipment, energy efficient post-harvest handling and storage facilities. The 
Input Packages will be supported by complementary climate-smart practices supporting diversified 
production and climate resilience—for instance, by introducing improved varieties and plantings and ways 
to preserve and manage grasslands. The Sub-component will also provide extension support to producers, 
including training and advisory services through Farmer Field Schools (FFS) on good agricultural practices, 
enhanced animal husbandry and feeding practices  and climate-smart technologies. SFD, which has 
extensive prior experience in implementing the types of activities supported under this Component, will 
work alongside FAO to restoring and enhancing access to  some agriculture inputs. It would also 
strengthen access to supporting services to ensure maximum benefits from those assets, including 
extension services to be supported under Component 4, veterinary services (including vaccinations for 
animals) thought Community Animal Health Workers (CAHWS) and General Directorate for Animal Health 
and Quarantine (GDAHWQ), and mechanical services support.  
 

22. Sub-component 2.2: Promoting value addition and sale of nutritious food products (US$20.0 
million, including US$5.0 million from GAFSP and US$15.0 million from IDA). The second package of 
interventions (Value Addition Package) will provide in-kind grants to support enterprising producers, 
processors and traders to scale up, add value to their products, improve product quality and aggregation, 
consolidate production, and access local and regional markets with their products. The sub-component 
will work with the value chain participants to structure the value chain, providing both training and 
advisory support in technical aspects (aggregation, development of linkages with farmers, product quality 
and others), business skill capacity building, and provide beneficiaries with key assets (equipment, 
machinery and working capital), enabling them to increase the quality and commercialization of food 
products. In areas with high caseloads of Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs), the project will build 
capacities of farmers with agriculture techniques, value chain development and maintenance of local 
infrastructure, to improve mutual trust, understanding and collaboration between displaced and host 
populations. SFD, which has extensive prior experience in implementing the types of activities supported 
under this Sub-component, will work alongside FAO to increase the farm-gate value and nutritional 
content of some agricultural products through provision of improved technologies and practices for key 
horticulture crops. The equipment and machinery provided under the sub-component will be climate-
smart and more environmentally friendly than conventional technologies. Most of the equipment and 
machinery is expected to be procured, imported and distributed to the value chain/value addition 

 
25 One such opportunity for a black sesame value chain has already been identified. 




beneficiaries by FAO. Some of the value chain activities may also cover the beneficiaries who received 
support under the SAPREP and ECRP.  
 

23. Sub-component 2.2 will support key value chains mostly focused on the local market, including 
beans and cereals, vegetables, dairy, livestock and fish value chains. To increase production, improve 
product quality, extend shelf-life, reduce food loss, and improve energy efficiency, the component will 
complement the Input Packages by providing in-kind grants for value chain development, post-harvest 
enhancement and value addition activities. The size of in-kind grants will depend on the type of 
beneficiary financed – a group or individual, as well as on the nature of the activity. Larger-scale 
investments, such as seedling centers, post-harvest centers, hydroponics, dairy processing facilities, etc., 
will be implemented though groups of beneficiaries. For group beneficiaries, the upper value of the in-
kind grants should not exceed a maximum of US$70,000 per group. The only exception to this maximum 
size limit may be groups engaged in milk collection and dairy processing where construction of 
infrastructure is necessary. Given the high start-up costs, the maximum value of such in-kind grants should 
not exceed a maximum of US$120,000 per group. Individual beneficiaries who will receive support for 
activities such as beekeeping, poultry production, horticulture production and processing, food 
preservation, agro-logistics services and other income-generating value-addition activities, the grant shall 
not exceed US$2,000 per individual beneficiary. All in-kind grant financed by the project should be 
supported by a business idea description, description of the market, value chain arrangements and 
financial viability. The length of the business idea description should be commensurate with the size of 
the in-kind grant. Detailed description of the in-kind grants is in Annex 3. 
 

24. The component will also support investments and technical assistance in selected high-value, 
high-growth value chains (such as coffee, fruits and nuts, and poultry and eggs26), some of them in 
collaboration with IFC and aiming to generate IFC and/or private sector investments. This should generate 
higher employment and household incomes, improve access to food, and allow for higher diversification 
of household diets. To ensure that the products are delivered to the market, and to create additional jobs, 
selected small-scale agro-logistics service providers may also be supported. The component will prioritize 
the adoption of climate-smart crop and livestock practices to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and 
enhance resilience to climate change. SMEPS will be working alongside FAO and IFC to ensure knowledge 
transfer on value chain development and support to build SMEPS’s capacity to engage in similar activities 
in the future. To further review and strengthen opportunities for development of value chains, the Sub-
component will also finance studies in two areas: (1) A fisheries and coastal 
aquaculture needs assessment and a fisheries and coastal aquaculture stock assessment; and (2) agro-
logistics constraints and solutions for selected value chains. The sub-component will also support limited 
small-scale laboratory equipment for selected Universities to support the value chain development 
activities. 
 
25. Component 3: Improving the nutritional status of vulnerable rural households (US$49.3 million, 
all IDA). Sub-component 3.1 will be implemented by FAO and Sub-component 3.2 and 3.3 will be 
implemented by WFP. This component would aims at improving the nutritional security of very vulnerable 
(Sub-components 3.1 and 3.3) and moderately vulnerable (Sub-component 3.2) households through a 
variety of instruments, including: (1) targeted nutrition-sensitive agriculture activities and facilitating 

 
26 Based on the results of application of the Agricultural Investment for Development Analyzer (AIDA) model by the 
International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI).  

Uptake by poor households of appropriate dietary and nutrition practices, in particular improving nutrient 
intakes of pregnant mothers and children under two, (2) promoting women’s entrepreneurship activities 
and improving the diets of the female-led households, and (3) improving nutrition in vulnerable 
households with malnourished women and children. Component 3 beneficiaries may also include the 
Cash-for-Nutrition beneficiaries under the ECRP, to ensure that they receive support allowing them to 
start their own production of food or improve nutritious diets on a more sustainable basis.  
 
26. Sub-component 3.1: Promoting kitchen gardens and backyard production for improved diets 
(US$10.0 million, all IDA). FAO will implement this Sub-component which will target beneficiary 
households that have received malnutrition treatment and prevention services referred to under Sub-
component 3.3, former beneficiaries of the Cash-for-Nutrition programs under the ECRP, households with 
pregnant mothers and children under two, and other eligible households with a similar vulnerability level. 
The Sub-component will provide inputs (vegetable seeds, chicken, etc.) for households to establish kitchen 
gardens and backyard production of nutritious food items (vegetables, eggs, and meat). It is estimated 
that the sub-component will reach 20,000 beneficiary households. Beneficiaries would also receive two 
types of training. For improving backyard production, they will receive training on best and climate-smart 
agricultural production practices. The Sub-component will prioritize the adoption of climate-smart crop 
and livestock practices to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and enhance resilience to climate change. To 
maximize the nutritional value of available food, training sessions will be offered to beneficiaries of this 
sub-component on how to maximize the nutritional value of foods when preparing family meals. Also, the 
project will use different communication channels to spread nutrition messages to trigger behavioral 
change in target populations. Since women are the main family caretakers, mostly women beneficiaries 
are expected to partake in these activities, however, the training will be open to both women and men. 
 
27. Sub-component 3.2: Promoting women’s rural entrepreneurship for improved nutrition and 
food security (US$14.3 million, all IDA). The Sub-component will be implemented by WFP and will focus 
on promoting women’s entrepreneurship to generate higher income and improve nutritious diets and 
food security at the household level. WFP’s resilience and livelihoods interventions will mainly target 
moderately food-insecure people to prevent them from slipping into further food insecurity. WFP will 
work with national NGO partners and provide Food for Training to food-insecure women, especially 
targeting those who are heading their households in rural communities. The training will develop their 
skills, aimed at restoring or establishing their livelihoods, and starting their own businesses. The support 
in most cases will range from six to nine months (at the monthly payment of US$105), giving participants 
access to various trainings, such as skill development, business development and management, digital skills, 
entrepreneurship, improved nutrition and life-skills (e.g. health practices) while they are supported by a 
monthly allowance. Once trainings are completed and a business plan submitted, the women would 
receive a start-up grant to start diversified income generating activities (both agricultural and non-
agricultural). The grant amount per individual will not exceed US$800. Increasing the productive capacity 
and livelihoods potential of rural women, especially in agriculture and food production, will help sustain 
their food and nutritional security when the assistance period ends. Similar to 3.1, for agricultural 
activities, the Sub-component will prioritize the adoption of climate-smart crop and livestock practices to 
reduce greenhouse gas emissions and enhance resilience to climate change. WFP’s comprehensive 
approach also includes training and support related to gender-based violence, awareness on preventing 
infectious disease spread, and child-care, nutrition and health practices. Participants will be encouraged 
to work together in joint business ventures with an estimated 3 participants per business, although the 
number may vary based on participant preferences and conditions for joint ventures in the targeted areas. 



It is expected that around 7,910 women will participate in the training, establishing an estimated 2,637 
businesses.  
 
28. Sub-component 3.3: Providing nutrition assistance to treat and prevent malnutrition (US$25.0 
million, all IDA) for pregnant and lactating women and girls (PLWG) and children under 5 years old. This 
Sub-component will be implemented by WFP and constitutes an integrated malnutrition prevention and 
treatment response. WFP will provide blanket supplementary feeding with specialized nutrition products 
to children aged 6–23 months and PLWG to prevent acute and chronic malnutrition in the project area 
districts prioritized for integrated famine response. Elsewhere, WFP will provide targeted supplementary 
feeding to malnourished children aged 6–59 months and PLWG girls to treat moderate and acute 
malnutrition across the country. Beneficiaries of targeted supplementary feeding will be screened in local 
health centers, through community health volunteers and screening campaigns organized by the Ministry 
of Public Health and Population (MOPHP), using mid-upper arm circumference (MUAC) and weight-for-
height measurements. This is accompanied by social behavior change communication (SBCC), designed to 
reduce barriers to adequate infant and young children feeding practices and healthy eating and hygiene 
habits. The SBCC campaign will target PLWG, health workers and caregivers, and also other decision 
makers and influencers within the community such as parents-in-law, husbands and local leaders. 
Messaging will focus on ensuring that responsibility for the care of children is shared within the household 
and not only limited to women. During the project period, around 195,000 beneficiaries are expected to 
be reached through the  Treatment Program, including 150,000 acutely malnourished children under the 
age of five and 45,000 acutely malnourished pregnant and lactating women and girls, as well as around 
277,000 beneficiaries through the Prevention Program, including 150,000 children under the age of two 
and 127,000 pregnant and lactating women and girls. 
 
29. Component 4: Capacity building for food security management (US$6.0 million, all IDA). FAO 
will lead implementation of this component in cooperation with other partner organizations as described 
below. This component includes a set of activities that are expected to significantly strengthen the 
capacity of both the private (households) and public sectors for food security crisis planning and response: 

 

(a) Developing an evidence-based Food Security Preparedness Plan (FSPP). The FSPP development 
will be co-led by the World Bank (financed under a separate budget) and the FAO, and will be 
carried out in a highly participatory manner, consulting with the main line ministries and 
Institutions involved in the agricultural sector, multilateral and bilateral organizations, the private 
sector; and civil society including international and local NGOs. This FSPP will be prepared within 
six months of project effectiveness and it will be reviewed by the World Bank’s Technical Expert 
Group on Food Security. The FSPP implementation will be monitored on a regular basis 
throughout the project period.  
 

(b) Establishing a satellite-based Earth Observation (EO) crop and pasture monitoring and early 
warning system for detecting climate-induced hazards. This tool would support monitoring 
agricultural production, providing information to the GOY for decision-making regarding food 
imports planning. The data generated by the EO Tool will also feed into the FSPP implementation. 
The EO tool will initially be housed by FAO and arrangements to transfer to the appropriate agency 
will be identified during the project Mid-Term Review (MTR). The project will be designed in a 
manner to ensure its use for the intended (civilian) purpose only.  



(c) Strengthening agriculture extension services by financing capacity building of the existing 
extension services, including current extension services staff, Community Animal Health Workers 
(CAHWs) and other extension service agents working in the communities. A significant number of 
women, enrolled on the basis of selection criteria which will be reflected in the POM, will be 
trained as extension workers, agricultural technicians, and CAHWs under this activity and 
recruited to be part of FFS.  
 

(d) Piloting alternative agricultural production technologies will introduce alternative, climate smart 
land- and water-efficient agricultural production technologies for producing nutritious crops (soil-
less technologies, such as hydroponics and aquaponics) by financing technology pilots and 
demonstrations in areas where previously, production would not have been possible, due to 
limited land resources. 

 
30. Component 5: Project Management and Knowledge Management (US$16.7 million, including 
US$3.2 million from GAFSP and US$13.5 million from IDA). This component would cover the costs 
associated with project management for all three Implementing Agencies (FAO, UNDP and WFP), 
recognizing the particularly challenging operating conditions in Yemen. Covered implementation costs 
include financial management, procurement, monitoring the project’s environmental and social 
safeguards, communication and stakeholder engagement, and overall monitoring and evaluation (M&E). 
Additionally, M&E is expected to be strengthened by using the Geo-Enabling initiative for Monitoring and 
Supervision (GEMS) and by carrying out an additional impact assessment (in collaboration with IFPRI), to 
assess the suitability and impact of project interventions. This component would also finance a third-party 
monitoring (TPM) mechanism and establishing and maintaining a grievance redress mechanism (GRM). 
 
31. For real-time data collection and analysis, the project will implement the Geo-Enabling method 
for Monitoring and Supervision (GEMS). The GEMS method enables project teams to use open-source 
tools for in-field collection of structured digital data that automatically feeds into a centralized M&E 
system and Management Information System (MIS). The integrated data can include any kind of 
indicators, based on tailor-made forms; photos, audio, videos; time and date stamps; and GPS coordinates 
that allow for automated geo-mapping of the information. Using these tools systematically allows the 
project to enhance the transparency and accuracy of project planning as well as M&E and third-party 
monitoring throughout the project cycle. Moreover, GEMS allows for establishing a digital platform for 
remote supervision, real-time safeguards monitoring, and portfolio mapping for coordination across 
project components as well as with other operations in the region.  
 
32. Integration of COVID-19 response. The project will use its resources (such as field consultants) to 
integrate COVID-19 awareness and preventive measures in the training events and awareness campaigns 
planned for beneficiaries. Awareness raising and training events will follow precautionary measures 
described in workshop/training protocols, as well as enforce and maintain adequate distancing during 
control, distribution, training, payment, and other project activities. These will also be held in locations 
and during times that are convenient for women. The project will work with local communities, female 
and male consultants, and beneficiaries to reach households with awareness and hygiene materials (such 
as masks, hand sanitizers and other relevant consumables) that will be developed to resonate with women 
and men’s different roles and behaviors at home and in society. The decision on which hygiene materials 

to procure will be made in coordination with the Bank-financed COVID-19 health emergency project in 
Yemen.  .

.  
Legal Operational Policies 

            Triggered? 

Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50             No  

Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60             No  

 

Summary of Assessment of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts 
. 

 
Environmental Risk Rating 
 

33. The environmental risk is considered Substantial given that the project will support several 
interventions that might be associated with environmental risks and impacts and the implementation 
agencies' ESF capacity remains limited. Environmental risks and impacts are expected to be site-specific, 
reversible, and generally of low magnitude that can be mitigated following appropriate measures; 
nonetheless, based on the implementation experience of ongoing projects, particularly those involving 
labor-intensive interventions, and the identification of significant Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) 
gaps, there is a significant risk for fatal incidents or serious injuries to occur under the project, particularly 
under the interventions of component 1 (Alleviating immediate food security needs by improving 
household incomes) since the activities under this component will provide temporary work opportunities 
to a large number of local community members, with little or no knowledge or experience in applying OHS 
measures. 
 
34. Furthermore, there is a risk of COVID-19 transmission among community workers if worksites are 
not managed appropriately and injuries due to the potential explosion of a remnant of war (ERW). 
Component 1 will also support the rehabilitation of small-scale rural land and water infrastructure and 
access roads to isolated villages/communities, therefore improper management of materials that will be 
used for the rehabilitation activities might lead to the generation of waste and open dumping in the 
environment. In addition, the project might support some interventions such as rehabilitation of terraces 
and construction of hydroponics which might increase the use of pesticides (the project will not finance 
procurement of pesticides) and fertilizers which should be applied and disposed of adequately and in a 
controlled manner.  

 

35. It is mentionable that the project will have several positive impacts including through supporting 
the hydroponics and aquaponics which will enhance the economically - environmentally friendly and 
sustainable development solution for the beneficiaries and will pilot interventions which are of high 
productivity and save land and water consumption for irrigation. This may encourage other farmers to 
replicate this intervention at a larger scale and spreading scientific knowledge to other farmers 
countrywide. 
 

Social Risk Rating 
 

36. The proposed project is expected to bring significant social benefits to the targeted communities. 
It will contribute to the alleviation of food security and improvement of household income through the 
Cash for Work program, support restoration of local food production and increase the sales of crops and 
livestock and promote diversified nutrient crops.  Particular attention and efforts would be given to the 
promotion of youth and women participation and maximizing their benefits through dedicated 
subcomponents under the project.   
 
37. The project could face possible adverse social impacts and risks. The proposed interventions in 
farmland and irrigation works are of rehabilitation and maintenance nature.  They are planned to take 
place within their existing footprints and are expected to be quite small in scale. Therefore, land 
acquisition or resettlement needs are not anticipated under the project.  A negative exclusion list will be 
developed for the project. However, these activities could have potentials for labor-related impacts and 
risks, such as possible child labor, forced labor, discriminatory practices in recruitment, occupational 
health and safety issues, and GBV/SEA risks, and even possible conflicts within potential beneficiary 
communities.  The project faces a potential risk of elites or better-connected individuals or groups 
capturing project benefits, affecting poor and vulnerable groups receiving their due share of project 
benefits.  These could include the elderly, poor farmers, women, and individuals displaced by the ongoing 
conflict. The overall country security situation poses another challenge for the project and is a key risk for 
the project implementation. In addition to the general conflict and security situation the country faces, 
the project may face possible conflicts among local communities, interested groups, and factions over 
project benefits distribution. Given the above, the project's social risks are considered Substantial. 

 
E. Implementation 

 
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 

 
38. The project would be implemented by three UN Agencies, FAO, UNDP and WFP, ensuring project 
activities reach throughout both the South and the North of Yemen. Each Agency will implement part of 
the project based on their mandate and relevant experience: 
 

(i) FAO is the specialized UN agency responsible for and well positioned to respond to 
emergencies in agriculture and food security, including crop and food supply monitoring and 
needs assessments, evaluations of agricultural relief requirements, and mobilizing assistance 
and resources to restore agricultural activity. The FAO has prior experience in supporting the 
implementation of Bank-financed projects on the ground in Yemen (since 2017 it has led the 
implementation of SAPREP toward satisfactory achievement of results and more recently it 
became the Implementing Agency for the Desert Locust Response Project; P174170). SAPREP, 
implemented in collaboration with SFD,  supported a set of similar activities, including the 
CFW instrument implementation, support to agricultural production by providing input kits 
and ensuring access to associated services (such as animal health services). The project’s 
implementation performance rating is Satisfactory. Given their prior experience in 
implementing SAPREP, FAO is fully aware of the Bank’s fiduciary and safeguards 
requirements. FAO has put in place enhanced M&E mechanisms to supervise local 
implementation partners and has also been using TPM. 


(ii) UNDP is the UN’s development agency and it is committed to supporting the peacebuilding 
initiative in Yemen, political stability and enhanced local governance. UNDP has built a 
successful partnership with the World Bank in implementing the CFW activities of the ECRP. 
The project works in 317 districts out of 330 districts of Yemen. UNDP is partnering with the 
SFD and PWP and their community networks to deliver services. Given their prior experience 
in implementing the ECRP, the UNDP is fully aware of the Bank’s fiduciary and safeguards 
requirements. UNDP established an M&E system to ensure proper project management, 
assuring stakeholders and providing accountability and is also using a TPM mechanism to 
monitor project implementation. UNDP communicates with the World Bank team monthly on 
project implementation and to address  emerging challenges. UNDP had a good collaboration 
with FAO on water resource management, aimed at enhancing access to water in agriculture 
and improving the effective use and management of scarce water resources in Yemen.  

(iii) WFP is the food-assistance branch of the United Nations and is the world's largest 
humanitarian organization, the largest one focused on hunger and food security, and the 
largest provider of school meals. In Yemen, in addition to food and nutrition interventions, 
such as school feeding programs, WFP is also engaged in livelihoods development activities 
through a range of instruments, including Food-for-Assets and Food-for-Training in close 
cooperation with FAO. WFP’s vulnerability, mapping and assessment (VAM) expertise 
conducts joint nation-wide food security and livelihood assessments which inform the 
Integrated Food Security Phase Classification (IPC) for Yemen, as well as regular food security 
and price monitoring and analysis. WFP is an existing Implementing Agency under the World 
Bank-financed Restoring Education and Learning Project (P175036), engaged in school 
feeding activities, and it has therefore some exposure to the Bank’s fiduciary and safeguards 
requirements.  
 

39. The Country Representation Offices of the three UN Agencies will be responsible for the overall 
implementation of their respective activities and coordinating all relevant activities at the sub-national 
level, supported by the regional office staff who will monitor the activities in different governorates. 
The FAO will be the lead agency for the implementation of the project and will be a recipient of both IDA 
and GAFSP financing. Both UNDP and WFP will receive IDA financing. Each UN Agency will be responsible 
for the technical implementation of the relevant components and sub-components (as indicated in the 
PAD), as well as all fiduciary, environmental, and social aspects, monitoring and reporting. The UN 
Agencies will help ensure financial and technical accountability of the implementing partner organizations 
(such as SFD, SMEPS and PWP) and ensure appropriate training and capacity building of the staff of the 
implementing partner organizations. The FAO would have a Project Coordination Unit (PCU) based in 
Sana’a, and technical staff deployed in its Aden sub-office and other decentralized hubs to ensure day-to-
day project management, including all fiduciary, environmental, and social aspects, and monitoring and 
reporting. UNDP and WFP will assign dedicated staff to support project implementation and ensure timely 
and relevant contributions to the PCU work. This proposed structure would build on the experience with 
previous grants implemented by FAO in the country. Moreover, the FAO team in Sana’a is backstopped 
by a dedicated team of technical experts at Regional (Cairo) and Headquarters (Rome) level in line with 
the Level 3 fast-track procedures established due to the emergency situation in Yemen. 
 
40. Coordination. The three selected organizations are currently working in Yemen and exchanging 
information as part of their participation in partner meetings. The three UN Agencies will set up a formal 
project Coordination Committee for increased efficiency and efficacy, including to coordinate activities 


with and among the Implementing Partners. This committee will hold meetings on a regular basis 
(suggested monthly) to best coordinate their activities, evaluate progress, address bottlenecks and 
consolidate annual work plans. Frequency of meetings, attendance, communication tools, etc. will be 
developed in the POM. Collecting and reporting on indicators (including methodology, tools, devices, etc.) 
to inform the results framework and progress on implementation will be discussed and agreed among 
implementing partners with the support of the Bank. A mechanism will also be established to brief the 
authorities at various levels on regular basis on the project results and challenges of implementation.  
 
41. Local partners with prior extensive experience in implementing similar projects will have key 
implementation roles. The PWP and SFD would play a key role as the local implementing partners for 
Component 1, SFD and SMEPS would support implementation of small-scale value chain activities, 
provision of technologies and practices for some horticulture crops and restoration of agriculture inputs 
under Component 2, alongside FAO. The SFD and PWP are the key local partners in implementing the 
ongoing ECRP, SAPREP and DLRP, and they would lead the implementation of Component 1. SMEPS would 
contribute to the value chain development under Component 2. Selecting national institutions for these 
roles would contribute to building national capacity for community-based interventions. For activities that 
would be implemented by SFD, SMEPS and PWP, UNDP and FAO would provide technical guidance and 
backstopping as required. Under the CFW program of Component 1, SFD will be in charge of working with 
beneficiaries on the CFW program, while the PWP will implement the activities related to restoration of 
small-scale agricultural infrastructure in the cases it requires involvement of professional contractors, to 
ensure communities have access to good quality assets. SMEPS will ensure technical assistance to the 
value chain development activities. Additional personnel will be recruited to cover any skills or human 
capacity gaps as assessed during the project preparation. All staff are required to have satisfactory 
expertise, experience, and qualifications. All three national institutions have capacity and experience 
spanning over 20 years in undertaking participatory and community-based development activities 
involving women and men from local communities. 
 
42. Project Operational Manual (POM). A detailed POM and a separate CfW Transfer Manual will be 
prepared for all project components by effectiveness. The POM and the CfW Transfer Manual will be 
subject to the World Bank’s no objection.  
 
43. Financial Management and Procurement arrangements. The project’s financial management 
(FM) arrangements will be governed by the Financial Management Framework Agreement (FMFA) 
between the World Bank and the UN Agencies, which provides for the use of the UN’s Financial 
Regulations. For procurement, FAO will follow its own procurement procedures as Alternative 
Procurement Arrangements, as provided under the World Bank New Procurement Framework Policy 
Section III. F. This implementation arrangement is sound, since the procurement procedures of FAO were 
assessed and found acceptable to the World Bank under agreements with UN agencies. 
 
44. Implementing partners will prepare budgeted Annual Work Plans of implementation and a 
detailed procurement plan (in agreement with the World Bank). This budgeted Annual Work Plan will be 
prepared no later than four months after project effectiveness. It will highlight the activities to be 
implemented for the subsequent 12 months by component and sub-component with intended results, 
timeline, budgets and planned procurement activities. It will also identify issues / implementation 
bottlenecks and relevant remedial actions and outline key responsibilities. In the context of COVID-19 and 
virtual missions (video/audio), the budgeted Annual Work Plan will be the common communication 

interface between implementing partners and the World Bank to regularly monitor activities of each 
component, evaluate progress and discuss corrective actions or changes as needed. 
 