














































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Transforming landscapes for resilience and development in Zambia (P164764) 

 
 

  
July 12, 2018 Page 1 of 16  

     

 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 09-Aug-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSC23065 

     

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Zambia P164764  Transforming 
landscapes for 
resilience and 
development in Zambia 
(P164764) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA Oct 08, 2018 Mar 18, 2019 Environment & Natural 
Resources 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of National 
Devleopment Planning 

Luapula Provincial 
Administrative office 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
To improve natural resource management in the northern region of Zambia to support sustainable livelihoods, and in 
the event of an eligible crisis or emergency, to provide immediate and effective response to the eligible crisis or 
emergency. 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 75.00 

Total Financing 75.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 75.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 75.00 

          IDA Credit 75.00 

   
Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B - Partial Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
1. Zambia is a landlocked country in Southern Africa, surrounded by Malawi, Tanzania, Democratic Republic of Congo, 

Namibia, Angola, Botswana, Zimbabwe and Mozambique. It has a surface area of 752,614 km2 and population 

estimated at 17.6 million people that is growing at an annual rate of 3.2%. The country is endowed with rich natural 

resources including minerals, freshwater, forests, wildlife and fertile land. Nearly 56% or 42 million hectares of the 

total land area is arable. The country is also home to globally significant ecosystems and biodiversity. About 40% of 

freshwater resources in the southern African region are found in Zambia alone. Zambia is characterized as a service-

oriented economy with the tertiary sector at 53.7%; Mining (principally copper, emeralds, zinc, lead and cobalt) at 

12.9%; Agriculture; Forestry and Fisheries at 9.9%; and Manufacturing at 7.9%. The 2017 World Bank Zambia 

Economic Brief indicates that Zambia’s national economy experienced domestic pressures in 2015. Economic growth 

fell to 2.9 percent in 2015 and contributed to increased poverty in rural communities. Among the main factors are 

the reduction in the price of copper, El Nino induced lower seasonal harvest, political uncertainty and the power 

crisis which impacted local business operations of all sectors. Economic growth increased to 3.8 percent in 2016 and 

to 3.5 percent in 2017. Economic growth is expected to continue rising with a projected GDP growth of 4.1 percent 

in 2018 and 4.7 percent in 2019. 

 

2. Zambia's economy is heavily dependent on natural resources, particularly mining and increasingly forestry 

resources. Agriculture is largely rain-fed. Rural economies and livelihoods depend almost entirely on renewable 

natural resources i.e. biodiversity, forests, wetlands, fisheries, water, etc. The productive capacity of landscapes 

nation-wide is compromised by various drivers across agriculture, infrastructure development, unsustainable use of 

forest resources, land use, energy and mining activities. These drivers solely or in combination reduce productive 

capacity and resilience of landscapes and undermine ecosystem services, particularly due to the impacts of climate 

variability and climate change.  

 

3. Zambia is endowed with vast forests. These productive landscapes support rural livelihoods and investment 

opportunities that hold potential for national socio-economic development. About 65% of land is covered by 

forests, of which 40% constitutes miombo woodland. The country has an array of protected areas that include 20 

National Parks; 39 Game Management Areas; 432 Forest Reserve; 59 Botanical Reserves; 42 Important Bird Areas; 

and 2 Bird Sanctuaries. The forest lands, therefore, represent the life-line of rural economies and daily subsistence. 

For example, the forest sector currently contributes about 5.2% to the nation’s GDP, and provides formal and 

informal employment to about 1.1 million people in the country. The forest sector is also the greatest contributor to 

carbon emissions (61% of total emissions in 2011). It is a sector, therefore, that holds opportunity to contribute to 

national reductions in greenhouse gas emissions and for equitable sharing of both carbon and non-carbon benefits 

among stakeholders. However, the forest sector is under increasing pressure. From 2001 to 2017, Zambia lost 2.5 

million hectares or about 6% of total tree cover. This led to the release of 252Mt of carbon into the atmosphere1. 

According to FAO, current annual deforestation in Zambia is 160 000 hectares, which is approximately twice the size 

of New York City. Zambia is among the top ten deforested country’s in the world.  

 

Sectoral and Institutional Context 

4. Zambia has been implementing the World Bank led Pilot Program for Climate Resilience (PPCR) aimed at 

strengthening Zambia 's institutional framework for climate resilience (while) improving the adaptive capacity of 

vulnerable communities in selected sub-basins. Investments supported by the Zambia PPCR on the ground include 

participatory adaptation, climate-resilient infrastructure and strategic program support in agriculture, water, 

livestock, fisheries and natural resources and climate information services. Adaptation to climate change is one of 

the nation’s development priorities because the Zambian economy, particularly the rural economy, is highly 

vulnerable to the impacts and effects of climate change. This has become very important because the country has 

already been experiencing frequent droughts, extreme temperatures and dry spells in some parts, and seasonal and 

flash floods in others. Floods and droughts have increased in frequency over the past three decades, costing the 

nation an estimated 0.4% in annual economic growth. These trends are expected to intensify in the future. Based on 

records from 1960 to 2003, the mean annual temperature has increased by 1.3oC. This gives an average of 0.3oC per 

decade. Within the same period, mean rainfall has decreased by an average of 1.9mm/month (2.3%) per decade 

since 1960.  

 

5. Through different land and forest-related policies, the Government seeks to manage productive landscapes to 

enhance forest products and services for improved income generation, poverty reduction, job creation and 

protection and maintenance of biodiversity, and contribute to mitigation of climate change. In the Forest Act 2015, 

the Government has given direction on the new configurations of forests to increase people’s participation in the 

management of forests and forest resources and in their ownership of forest benefits at micro-level. This therefore, 

forms basis for a firm socio-economic and legal engagement in the collective management, including the private 

sector to transform landscapes for resilience and development in Zambia.  

 

6. Zambia is a Party to a number of global Multilateral Environmental Agreements. It is a Party to the three Rio 

Conventions: the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change; the UN Convention on Biological Diversity (UNCBD); 

and the UN Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD). In 2015, Zambia joined the Paris Agreement and 

submitted its Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC). As a Party, Zambia is mandated to respond to the 

policy directions and obligations of these Conventions. In this regard, the Government continues to pursue 

development goals that complement efforts from other development partners for socio-economic and 

environmental benefits. To realize the international as well as national development priorities, the Government has 

continued to pursue efforts to establish conducive policy and legislative instruments as well as strategic plans to 

address climate change and other sectoral development challenges. Among the pieces of legislation, the following 


constitute a set of important policies that can anchor the development objective of TRALARD to increase the 

ecosystem resilience and productivity within vulnerable landscapes and enhance the disaster related preparedness 

of Zambia: Vision 2030; Seventh National Development Plan (7NDP, 2017); Second National Biodiversity Strategy and 

Action Plan (NBSAP2, 2015); National Policy on Environment (NPE, 2007); National Policy on Climate Change (NPCC, 

2017); National Climate Change Response Strategy (NCCRS, 2012); Zambia National Forest Policy (ZNFP, 2014) and 

Forest Act (2015); National Agriculture Policy (NAP, 2016); Environmental Management Act (EMA, 2011); and the 

National Energy Policy (NEP, 2008) 

 

Relationship to CPF 

 

7. The proposed TRALARD project is aligned with the draft Zambia Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for the period 

FY18-FY21 which puts forward an integrated World Bank, IFC, and MIGA strategy to support Zambia’s development 

through the Seventh National Development Plan (7NDP). The project contributes to the CPF Objective Two on 

Increased resilience to hydrological, climate and environmental shocks and to associated outcomes: a) Local level 

community infrastructure and natural resources management practices reduce impact of hydrological shocks 

(droughts, floods) on livelihoods; b) Climate adaptation support to communities harmonized, institutionalized and 

decentralized; and c) Institutions for environmental governance strengthened. 

 

8. The Government has embraced an integrated approach to development investments at landscape level. This project 

builds on this vision, the CPF and Bank’s experience on climate resilience, particularly through the implementation 

of projects on resilience and adaptation priorities, including i) Zambia Strengthening Climate Resilience (PPCR Phase 

II); ii) Livestock Development Animal and Health Project (LDAHP); iii) Zambia Water Resources Development Project; 

iv) Irrigation Sector Development Project (ISDP); and v) Zambia Integrated Forest Landscape Project (ZIFLP). 

 

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 

9. To improve natural resource management in the northern region of Zambia to support sustainable livelihoods, and 
in the event of an eligible crisis or emergency, to provide immediate and effective response to the eligible crisis or 
emergency. 

 
10. The PDO will be achieved through activities under the following components: (a) Institutional Development and 

Capacity Building for Landscape Restoration and Resilience, (b) Sustainable Landscape Management Practices, (c) 

Infrastructure for Resilience and Market Access, and (d) Project Management, Coordination, and Monitoring. 

Through these components, TRALARD will offer a selection of interrelated activities that can be tailored to the needs 

of participating areas. The project also includes standard Contingency Emergency Response component. 

 
Project beneficiaries and expected outcomes 

 

11. Project beneficiaries include communities increasingly reliant on the exploitation of natural resources due to the 

absence of alternative sources of livelihoods and energy, partially resulting from the lack of sound management and 

planning. Rural communities, including women and children, will have an opportunity to take advantage of diversified 
     

selection of livelihood options based on prudent, environmentally sound natural resource management. Local 

authorities will gain from strengthened institutions and policies and capacity to manage, plan, operate, and enforce 

regulations to achieve both environmental improvement and poverty reduction. Rural and urban communities will 

benefit from reliable and environmentally sound infrastructure that will improve market access and in a broader 

context will promote the creation of new economic opportunities for the region. 

 

Key Results (From PCN) 

 

12. Project activities will be designed to advance and develop three dimensions of the resilience capacity of the 

vulnerable communities: absorptive capacity, adaptive capacity, and transformative capacity. This approach will 

facilitate measuring resilience at project level with Results Framework (RF) indicators being connected to these three 

capacities. In addition, RF will include Predictive Proxy Indicators (PPI) to evaluate the effectiveness of forest related 

interventions, as suggested in the Forest Action Plan2.  

 
13. Key outcome indicators 

 

1. Land area under sustainable landscape management practices (CRI) (ha) 

2. Forest area brought under management plans (CRI) (ha) (intermediate) 

3. Fisheries management plans implemented (CRI) (count of water bodies and/or area) 

4. Diversified livelihoods activities adopted by households (count), of which households headed by women (percent) 

5. Number of households using resilience infrastructure supported by the project (count) 

6. Small scale farmers/producers with improved market access (count), of which households headed by women 

(percent) 

7. Protected Areas approved management plans (count) (intermediate) 

 

Project level and intermediate indicators will be defined in the Project Appraisal Document. 

 

D. Concept Description 

 

14. In the 7th National Development Plan of Zambia for 2017-2021, the Government of Zambia recognizes the need to 

implement measures to reduce poverty through harnessing the potential of Luapula, Muchinga and Northern 

Province in agriculture, forestry, and tourism among other areas, and addressing the challenge of poor infrastructure. 

 

15. Given the complexity of socio-economic, environmental and climate change induced challenges facing the NRZ, 

TRALARD is proposed to bring the northern region to a new level of sustainable management of natural resources 

with expanded options for non natural resource based livelihoods and improved market access. The implementation 

of the program aims to trasform the region into a vibrant ecological and socio-economic system preserving the 

environment, resilient to climate change consequences, and offering communities broader development 

opportunities. 

       

16. TRALARD is focused on addressing the main drivers of environmental degradation, natural resource exploitation and 

persistent poverty. The project aims to contribute to improving the sustainability of poor rural community livelihoods 

in an environment already stressed by climate change impacts and rapid population growth. TRALARD will build on 

the lessons learnt from the successful PPCR currently under implementation in Zambia. For example, PPCR has 

worked with local structures and implementation partners to improve and mainstream climate risk into livelihood 

option decisions, local development planning, and implementation capacity and has gained experience in conducting 

microprojects in the intervention area. This experience informs the design of TRALARD.  

 

17. The examination of economic realities during the fact-finding mission to the NRZ reveals closely interconnected and 

mutually determined processes of natural resources degradation and deepening poverty. For example, declining fish 

stock in Lake Tanganyika and other water bodies forced some fisherman to switch to charcoal burning as an 

alternative source of income. While fish stock still continues to decline due to climate change impacts and increasing 

consumption by the growing population, forests are under increased pressure from the population whose economic 

options are severely limited and alternative sources of energy are absent. Unchecked access to natural resources and 

the lack of enforcement to protect them by authorities invite their unsustainable expolitation. As a result, the poverty 

level in the region is increasing while the natural resource base that those communities rely on is being destroyed.  

 

18. Funding and implementation capacity constraints mean that not all 26 districts will participate in TRALARD in the first 

phase. The selection criteria for districts that will be included in the first phase will include: (i) most vulnerable 

districts based on assessment of poverty and vulnerability maps; (ii) proximity to protected areas; (iii) districts 

bordering Lake Tanganyika; (iv) preparedness and commitment of districts and capacity of implementing 

stakeholders. The number of districts will be determined during preparation.  

 

19. TRALARD aims to improve value chains through greater community and private sector engagement, better market 

information and priority infrastructure. Sustainable resource management requires that environmental benefits are 

strongly linked to improved livelihoods and poverty reduction. The project design promotes greater community and 

private sector participation in sustainable natural resources management as the most direct path to fostering this 

linkage.  

 

20. Contributing to the sustainability aspect of the project, TRALARD intends to facilitate establishing robust mechanisms 

to monitor key environmental, climate and weather parameters, model longer-term challenges, including climate 

change and population growth, and develop measures to address issues in a long-term perspective. 

 

21. The project places emphasis on the adoption of advanced technologies in the natural resource management practices 

and in the measurement, monitoring, and reporting of project impacts. The application of innovative and disruptive 

technologies such as remote sensing, drones, mobile phone and online apps, biotech, water and energy saving 

technologies, will be examined during the preparation stage.  

 
22. The following areas of activities have been determined at the initial preparation stage of the project. These 

components are defined with a view of (a), (b) tackling immediate tasks of reversing degradation through adaptation 

and alternative livelihoods measures, and (c) improving infrastructure for resilience and facilitating creation of new 

opportunities through more developed market access. 

 

23. Component 1. Institutional Development and Capacity Building for Landscape Restoration and Resilience 

(indicative amount US$8 million) 

The aim of this component is to strengthen government institutions at the national, local and community level to 

develop and implement new approaches for sustainable natural resource management This will be achieved by 

reviewing and updating certain policies, providing better information, and improving the development planning and 

budget process by mainstreaming climate risk and environmental considerations into development plans. This 

component will finance policy and regulatory reviews, province, district and ward level development planning, 

technical assistance (TA), workshops, and trainings.  

 

1.1. Policy and Institutional strengthening and capacity building: This component will support the review of key 

natural resource policies and regulations relating to the forestry and fisheries sector. It will support the 

government to implement the Statutory Instrument NO 11 of 2018 which allows for community management 

for forests. In addition, this component will support policy analysis on the options and alternatives for charcoal 

production, enforcement, and government regulation to license charcoal production. The activities will also 

help development and disseminate a manual on community participatory co-management; as well as the 

establishment of effective interdepartmental structures to organize collaboration at the ecosystem level to 

enhance integrated approaches to natural resource management and coordinated land use planning and 

management. The outputs will focus on: integrated approaches for community mobilization, partnerships for 

sustainable forest landscape restoration (FLR), and targeted studies, for example, on models, resource 

mobilization for sustainable PA management. This will enhance the ability of the government to determine 

sectors that hold greater promise to transform landscapes for resilience and development and scale up 

interventions. 

 

1.2.  Advance the beneficial use of hydro-meteorological information: The project will finance the improvement of 

early warning systems and related institutional systems to improve the resilience of communities to climate 

change impacts. This will include technical assistance to develop a long term strategic plan to strengthen the 

institutions i.e. Zambia Meteorology Department (ZMD), Disaster Management and Mitigation unit(DMMU), 

Water Resources Management Authority (WARMA) etc. responsible for delivering meteorological and 

hydrological information, data management and forecasting systems. This sub-component will introduce the 

concept of using hydro-met information for better decision making and delivery that information to local 

governments and primary producers: (for water resources, landscape management, disaster management, 

agriculture, environment, hydropower utilities, PAs.); (c) priority infrastructure rehabilitation identified in the 

Hydromet Master Plan developed under the World Bank Water Resource project (including hydromet 

infrastructure and related office refurbishment and equipment); and (d) community training, awareness 

campaigns, knowledge on improved climate information use and disseminationto end-users nationaly, with 

specific focus in the Chambeshi-Luapula catchment area. 

24. Component 2. Sustainable Landscape Management Practices (indicative amount US$32.5 million) 

The component aims to improve the livelihoods and resilience of rural communities by improving the management 

of the rich natural resources base that rural communities are dependent upon through: (a) ecosystem based 

integrated natural resource management planning; (b) improved management of protected areas and protection of 

environmental services; and (c) diversification and increased sustainability of rural livelihoods.  

 

2.1. Invesment in ecosystem based Integrated Natural Resource Management Planning (INRMP): This activity will 

support the preparation and implementation of INRMP plans in the project targeted area. These plans will be 

based on the assessment of the available natural resources and their conditions, as well as the sustainable 

levels of production. The plans will be done in year one. They will be developed and implemented with the 

involvement of relevant stakeholders, including communities, cooperatives, and local government, and will 

be based on physical, ecological, and socio-economic baseline data. 

 

2.2. Improved Management of Protected Areas (PA) and Reserves: This activity will support the effective and 

sustainable development of the three PA systems in the northern region of Zambia – Lavushi Manda National 

Park, Lusenga Plain National Park and Nsumbu National Park – to preserve the biodiversity and ecosystem 

services for the well-being of people with focus on forest dependent communities and potenital to develop 

tourism opportunities. This support will include: (1) preparation of protected areas management plans; (2) 

capacity assessment of the staff and analysis of the financial resources required to fully protect the protected 

areas; (3) priority park infrastructure such as staff offices and housing nearer to the park; (4) equipment 

including vehicles, GPS, computers; disruptive technology for monitoring animal populations, poaching 

activities; (5) training.  

 

2.3 Strengthen opportunities for primary producers to transform their livelihoods into market based enterprises: 

The main aim of the activity is to identify key challenges, risks and opportunities for transforming livelihoods 

of producers into market based enterprises. The project will provide resources to conduct value chain studies 

(including secondary sources of information) to identify key challenges to market entry and design 

interventions to incentivize smallholder producers to initiate viable enterprises for increasing productivity, 

incomes and resilience to climate change. This component will draw from the lessons learnt during the pilot 

to support primary producers and small business operaters under the Zambia PPCR private sector approcah. 

 
2.4. Sustainable livelihoods: Rural populations in the north are dependent on subsistence agriculture and fishing, 

both of which have seen severe declines in productivity and have increased risk due to climate variablility. 

This activity aims to: increase smallholder production and productivity of diversified value chains; reduce 

farmers risk through insurance and prudent and informed risk taking strategies; improving access to markets; 

and diversifying into alternative livelihoods that are non resource based enterprises. This will be done through 

a program of support which encourages farmers to adopt conservation agriculture practices, promotes 

savings, provides technologies to reduce post harvest loss, establishes rural aggregation centers and linkages 

to buyers and advanced purchase contracts, and persue alternative livelihoods that are non natural resource 

based businesses. The alternative livelihood activities will target women and youths to lifting up the socio-

economic situation particularly of women who use natural resources with inferior financial value compared 


to men. The roster of alternative livelihoods will include increased rearing of livestock, agroforestry, 

agroprocessing, aqua culture, fingerlings production, fish processing, feed making for fisheries, bee keeping, 

caterpillars and mushrooms production, and other service industries such as tailoring, hair dressing etc.  

 

25. Component 3: Infrastructure for Resilience and Market Access (indicative amount US$27 million IDA) 

Activities under this component aim at supporting and improving NRZ infrastructure in vulnerable areas that suffers 

from the lack of investments and is additionally adversely impacted by climatic changes. Such impacts include drastic 

changes in rain patterns resulting in floods and droughts, shortages in water, changes in wind patterns, lack of 

passable roads and damaged bridges leaving entire communities cut off from the basic services and goods during 

floods where durations are becoming extended. This increases the likelihood of lack of water and nutrition, diseases, 

livestock loss etc. In addition, this component will help identify ways to improve market access for primary producers 

who often lack opportunities and/or knowledge on the ways to make their produce accessible to the market. 

 

3.1.  Investments in resilience strengthening infrastructure: identify in concert with stakeholders the most sensitive 

pieces of small-scale infrastructure in the most vulnerable areas that require prompt investments. 

Infrastructure is the backbone of well-being and safety of people and its reliability and even presence in such 

poorly serviced regions is central to communities’ resilience. Potentially, they include (a) feeder roads, 

bridges, culverts, (b) water harvesting structures (check and sand dams, earthen bunds, solar-powered 

irrigation), and (c) traditional and alternative energy sources.  

 

3.2. Examining opportunities for restoration of traditional canals: conduct feasibility study on possible restoration 

of traditional canals in the North. Traditional canals in Zambia play multiple roles: transportation, water body, 

fish harvesting, and traditional ceremonies. The canals in the North are in a state of disrepair after decades of 

no investment or maintenance, yet their potential for transportation and commerce remains high. This sub-

component will draw from the experience acquired from similar successful operations under the PPCR in the 

Barotse sub-region.  

 
3.3. Facilitated access to markets: determine ways and forms to support producers in establishing access to 

markets. Jointly with stakeholders, including producers, authorities, private companies and consumers, the 

project will examine constraints and bottlenecks in establishing connection between products and markets 

and suggest measures to address them. It is not an uncommon situation when farmers’ produce – mangos, 

oranges – goes to waste because farmers have no ability to deliver their products to potential consumers. This 

inability undermines income and negatively affects resilience of producers.  

 

26. Component 4: Contingency Emergency Response Component (CERC) (Standardized)  

This contingency component can be triggered by a joint Government and World Bank agreement in case of an 

emergency. This component had been embedded in the project to finance early recovery and/or specific emergency 

works, goods, and services, in case of eligible emergencies/crises/disaster caused by natural or man-made hazard 

including public health crisis. The mechanism is designed to support enhancement of preparedness, early recovery 

activities, and provision of rapid response to disaster that can be implemented in a relatively short period. This 

component was considered necessary because of the inherent in Zambia’s current socioeconomic and climate related 
hazards (unexpected flooding or drought, an aggravation of the state of fragility, as a result of influx of large groups 

of displaced people ( cross boarder and internal displacements) could potentially shift priorities. Reallocation of funds 

to CERC can only be done when there is a serious disruption of the functioning of a community or society causing 

widespread human, economic, or environmental losses that exceed the ability of the affected community or society 

to cope using its own resources. Following such a disaster event where both the region and national resources cannot 

sufficiently and adequately address the situation, the Government of the Republic of Zambia (GRZ) may trigger 

activation of CERC according to national law and subject to the World Bank’s activation policy.  

 

27. Component 5: Project Management, Coordination, and Monitoring (US$7.5 million IDA) 

This component will finance TA, works, goods, workshops, and operational costs to support the project’s day-to-day 

implementation and management, including procurement, FM, environmental and social safeguards, and 

preparation of annual work plans and organization of audit reports. The component also includes the design and 

implementation of a communication strategy to report on the project results and to raise awareness about land 

degradation, restoration and climate change impacts, vulnerability, and adaptation. It also supports the M&E system 

to report on the expected project’s results (disaggregating by gender, where appropriate) and systematizes the 

project’s lessons learned. The component also finances impact evaluation to assess project’s impacts on specific 

elements such as adopted livelihoods.  

  

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
The project covers the Northern region of Zambia (NRZ), which includes Luapula, Northern, and Muchinga provinces. This 

area has vast coverage of pristine Miombo forest, four national parks, four lakes, water falls and many rivers. They lie in 
the third agro ecological zone with the annual rainfall of about 1200 mm. NRZ encompasses over 35% of managed lands 
which contribute to protecting and maintaining large intact natural landscapes. The region is endowed with natural 
resources that include rich biodiversity and half of the wetlands of international importance listed under the Ramsar 
Convention. These wetlands contain habitats for several important fauna and flora species, are a natural flood controller 
and important for groundwater recharge. The natural resources in the area also represent a life-line for rural economies 
and daily subsistence.  
 
The provinces are home to over 3.5 million people with record high levels of poverty 81% (Luapula), 79% (Northern) and 

69% (Muchinga). The main economic stay for the people of this area is agriculture due to the availability of arable land, 
abundant water bodies and good annual rainfall. The area has experienced vulnerabilities due to climate variability and 
human related activities posing a challenge to conserving natural resources. Factors contributing to vulnerabilities include 
forest lands under threat from human encroachment for settlement and growing food insecurities due to population 
growth. Increased mining activities result in growing demand for energy met through heightened production of charcoal 
and logging. An estimated 16,000,000 hectares out of 21,423,600 hectares total land (75%) is under threat of degradation 
from these activities.. 
 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
The PPCR PIU under Ministry of National Planning and Development has implemented and monitored safeguard 
compliance in accordance with Bank policies. The project performance has been rated satisfactory, while the risk has 
been moderate. The PIU has a dedicated Safeguard Specialist who is supported by Community Adaptation Specialists in 
each district. The PIU has gained substantial experience with Bank funded projects through their active participation in 
the design and preparation of the Forest Investment Project, Displaced Person's and Border Communities, and the 
Zambia Integrated Forest Landscape Project (ZIFLP). The PIU played a pivotal role in setting up the ZIFLP PIU which is now 
operational. 
  
Given the PIU's involvement in design, preparation and implementation of climate resilient projects, the PIU is being 

transformed into a national coordinating unit that will assume a supervisory role in monitoring implementation of the 
TRALARD project at the national level.To fulfill  this new role, more experts (including Environmental and Social) will be 
recruited to strengthen their capacity to manage environmental and social risks.  
 
For the implementation of the TRALARD project, three PIUs will be established at provincial level (i.e. one for each target 

province). The staffing structure will include Environmental and Social experts as key personnel. These will collaborate 
with District officials that will be assigned to the project. Working through existing district structures will enhance project 
ownership and contribute to sustaining project investment. However, this being the initial engagement with Provincial 
and District counterparts in the 3 provinces, a capacity assessment will be undertaken as part of project preparation. 
Results on the assessment will feed into the a capacity building plan that will be developed for the project. 
 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 
Tito Joel Kodiaga, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 
Njavwa Namposya Chilufya, Social Safeguards Specialist 

 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The  policy on environmental assessment has been 
triggered as the proposed  TRALARD project will 
involve infrastructural works. The  infrastructural 
works are envisaged to be undertaken under 
component  2 and 3 of the project. Component 2: of 
the project will involve the promotion of sustainable 
landscape management practices and this will 
incorporate the improved management of protected 
areas  and reserves. Lavushi Manda , Lusenga Plain 
and Nsumbu National Parks and their buffer Game 
Management Areas (GMA's) have been identified as 
potential beneficiary parks. The project will support 
the construction and rehabilitation of  infrastructure 
such as, park structures, staff offices and their housing 
in the vicinity  of the parks. Component 3: of the 
project will involve the investment in infrastructure for 
resilience and market access. Investments will focus 
on the  sensitive pieces of small-scale infrastructure in 
the most vulnerable areas that require urgent 


attention. These will include  the periodic 
maintenance of  feeder roads (existing dirt or gravel 
roads) and support structures such as small access 
bridges and placement of culvert,  water harvesting 
structures (check and sand dams, earthen bunds, 
solar-powered irrigation), and the restoration of 
existing traditional canals.  
 
Since the project is at concept stage,  the scope and 
beneficiary areas have not yet been fully defined, an 
ESMF and  associated RPF is currently under 
preparation to assess potential safeguards 
risks/impacts associated with project activities and 
subprojects.In addition, line with the Bank's guidance 
on Contingent Emergency Response 
Components(CERC); Component 4 (CERC): This 
Component requires that the ESMF includes specific 
section (or a CERC-specific ESMF) describing the 
potential emergencies and the types of activities likely 
to be financed, and provide a preliminary evaluation 
of potential risks and mitigation measures associated 
with them. The ESMF will ensure to include a section 
addressing the CERC guideline. Once finalized, ESMF 
will be formally cleared by the Bank and disclosed at 
national level and on the Bank’s website.   
 
 
Furthermore, a Strategic Environmental and Social 
Assessment (SESA) covering 4 out of 10 provinces was 
conducted under a similar project,  PPCR in 2013. 
Since the  proposed TRALARD beneficiary areas were 
excluded in the initial assessment. The SESA will be 
updated to include Northern, Luapula and Muchinga 
provinces. For the benefit of future project, expanding 
the scope to cover the entire country will be 
considered. It is anticipated that TRALARD project will 
benefit from the findings of the SESA which will be 
incorporated in the development of INRM Plans and 
PA Management Plan.  
 
 

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No  

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 
The policy on natural habitat has been triggered as the 
project will be implemented in ecologically sensitive 

areas and  habitats such as wetlands and national 
parks. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes 

The Bank policy on forest has been triggered as the 
TRALARD will involve afforestation activities to 
improve forest health.  The project will provide 
incentives to communities in beneficiary areas to 
protect vegetation cover in  the existing  forests and  
regenerate deforested areas 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The policy on pest management has been triggered as 
the project will involve livelihood activities that may 
directly or indirectly support the use of pesticides. A 
Pest Management Plan (PMP) will be included in the 
ESMF. 
 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 

The policy on physical culture resources has been 
precautionary triggered as the project will be 
implemented across three provinces and the works 
may unearth artefacts of cultural and heritage value. A 
chance find procedure will be included in the ESMF to 
guide, should a chance find occur. It will further layout 
the process for notifying the National Heritage 
Conservation Commission (NHCC) in case of an 
occurrence.  
 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 

The policy on Indigenous Peoples has not been 
triggered as the project will be implemented in 
Luapula, Northern and Muchinga Provinces where 
there is no presence of Indigenous Peoples as defined 
by Bank Policy. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

Policy on Involuntary Resettlement has been 
triggered. This will apply to selected project activities 
which may result in land acquisition for the 
establishment of priority infrastructure to support 
local tourist operators. A RPF will be prepared in 
consultation with key stakeholders. The RPF will guide 
preparation of the RAP to address physical and 
economic impacts that may arise from project 
implementation. 
Luapula, Muchinga and Northern provinces are 
endowed with forests and national parks where 
communities derive natural resources for livelihood 
activities. Possible restrictions to natural resources 
arising from project implementation will be managed 
through preparation of a Process Framework. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 Yes 
The policy on dam safety has been triggered as the 
project will  support the construction of small water 


harvesting structures such as check and sand dams 
and earthen bunds. These will be small dams as 
defined by Bank policy and a generic safety guidelines 
for small dams will be incorporated in the ESMF.  
 
In compliance with the requirements of the policy, 
generic dam safety measures designed by qualified 
engineers will be included in the design and 
implementation/rehabilitation of small dams; with 
respective requirements outlined in the ESMF.”. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

Yes 

The policy has been triggered as it will be 
implemented in a catchment area that feeds into the 
Luapula River which falls within an international 
waterway. This will require the notification of riparian 
states in which the waterways falls. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
The policy has not been triggered as it will not be 
implemented in any disputed area as defined  by Bank 
policy. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Oct 01, 2018 
 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Studies launched September 30, 2017. Draft ESMF is currently being finalized. An RPF and PF are under preparation as 

part of the safeguards requirement. 
 
 