














































World Bank Document


Page 1 of 6

PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
ADDITIONAL FINANCING

Report No.:  PIDA21011

Project Name Moldova Agriculture Competitiveness Project Additional 
Financing (P154238)

Parent Project Name Moldova Agriculture Competitiveness Project (P118518)
Region EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
Country Moldova
Sector(s) Agricultural extension and research (50%), Agro-industry, 

marketing, and trade (50%)
Theme(s) Rural markets (100%)
Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P154238
Parent Project ID P118518
Borrower(s) Government of Moldova
Implementing Agency Ministry of Agriculture and Food Industry
Environmental Category B-Partial Assessment
Date PID Prepared/Updated 04-Mar-2015
Date PID Approved/Disclosed 11-Mar-2015
Estimated Date of Appraisal 
Completion

04-Mar-2015

Estimated Date of Board 
Approval

30-Mar-2015

Appraisal Review Decision 
(from Decision Note)

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate

I. Project Context
Country Context
Economic growth and poverty reduction gains achieved over the last decade in Moldova have been 
fueled by strong remittance flows that triggered increased, import-served consumption. The decade-
long growth has not been accompanied by an increase in employment. On the contrary, total 
employment in Moldova declined by 27 percent over the period 2000-2010. Agriculture released 
most of the labor that found jobs through internal and external outward migration. Another 
macroeconomic negative resulting from a consumption-led growth model was the buildup of an 
alarming trade deficit. With the value of imports more than triple to that of exports, the trade gap 
has reached over 50 percent of GDP in 2008. The fallout from the global crisis of 2008, as well as 
the lingering crisis in Europe and the Russian Federation in 2014 (key migration labor destinations), 
exposed the fragility of this growth model. As remittances declined, domestic demand fell by 10 % 
and the real economy contracted by 6% in 2009. Moldova’s quick recovery from the crisis in 2010 
and 2011 has been again largely based on the restored supply of remitances, but also on increased 

agricultural prices and growing exports. Remittance flows have not grown much in 2014, and are 
expected to stall in 2015 primarily due to the marked depreciation of the Russian Ruble, tighter 
labor migration controls and a slowing economy in the Russian Federation.  
 
The lessons from Moldova’s development pattern over the past decade, have underlined the critical 
need for a second engine of growth – the revival of exports. As Moldova’s working population 
declines, export-led growth needs to come from investment and improvements in productivity and 
competitiveness. The Government of Moldova recognizes the need for an investment- and export-
led engine of the growth based on on increased capital investments, innovation and 
competitiveness.  The National Development Strategy “Moldova 2020”, reinforces the 
Government's commitment to a development paradigm based on a dynamic model driven by 
domestic and foreign investment and export-oriented sectors. In addition, the Government's reforms 
in 2011-2014 focused on achieving closer trade integration with the European Union, which 
culminated in the conclusion of an Association Agreement between the Republic of Moldova and 
the European Union, complemented by a Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Agreement which 
came into effect on August 1, 2014. The latter, has brought about new and exciting opportunities 
for market diversification of the country's agro-food exports.

  

Sectoral and institutional Context
Recently, the country's shift to an export-led growth model has suffered a number of setbacks due 
to uncertainties with supply to the Russian market. Moldovan agricultural and food exports to the 
Russian Federation have been subject to various trade restrictions through 2013 and 2014 - starting 
with a ban on wines, followed by ban on meat and a nearly complete ban on fruits and vegetables, 
and canned goods. The most affected export items were wine, apples and plums. In 2013, prior to 
the bans, approximately thirty percent of the country's wine exports (valued at US$350 million), 
ninety three percent of apple exports (valued at US$43.7 million) and eighty percent of plum 
exports (valued at US$21.1) went to Russia.  The loss of the Russian Federation market represented 
a significant blow to horticulture in Moldova as there are few alternative markets for the agro-food 
produce, especially for apples and plums. There is very limited potential for meaningful import 
substitution. Moldovan imports of apples were only about 1,500 tons in 2013 (valued at US$1.34 
million) and imports of plums are negligible. Un-utilized processing capacity for apples and plums 
in the country is limited and has only absorbed additionally approximately 60,000 tons of apples 
and 40,000 tons of plums in 2014 (15% and 35% of output respectively). The resulting supply glut 
of apples and plums, compounded by an existing large stock of processed products has led to a 50% 
drop in the domestic market price for apples and plums. Similarly, as a result of the wine ban, and 
accumulating stocks in 2014, grapes are traded at 40% of the 2013 price.   
 
In recent years there have been significant productivity gains in the Moldovan horticulture sector 
due to significant investments and, these gains could easily be lost because of the impact of the 
Russian embargoes.  Productivity gains have contributed to a steady  increase in output and are 
likely to have come from stricter application of growing technologies, and/or replacement of old 
orchard/vineyards, more intensive production and use of modern technologies. This is a result of 
increased investment in the sector, which is a very positive development given Moldova’s 
comparative advantage in high value agriculture.  This transformation has been the result of a fairly 
long-drawn struggle, which is finally showing results. The embargos have the potential to have a 
major negative impact on fruit growers’ competitiveness by stalling, if not reversing, 
modernization, as a result of deteriorating financial standing and de-capitalization.   


 
The majority of fruit growers is represented by small peasant farmers (66% for apples, 69% for 
plums, 70% for vineyards) and provides significant rural employment and incomes, for an 
estimated 350,000 people. A large share of these jobs now are either at risk or are yielding 
significantly lower pay due to the impact of the embargo. The resulting social consequences could 
be severe, as the highest poverty rates are already registered among the agriculture-related 
population: 21.7 percent of farmers and 31.3 percent of agricultural workers have been found poor 
in 2013, these two categories accounting for 31 percent of country's poor.

II. Proposed Development Objectives
A. Current Project Development Objectives – Parent
The Project Development Objective is to enhance the competitiveness of the agro-food sector by 
supporting the modernization of the food safety management system, facilitating market access for 
farmers, and mainstreaming agro-environmental and sustainable land management practices.

III. Project Description
Component Name
Compensatory Sales Support Grants
Comments (optional)
The new component will finance targeted support to farmers with farms of less than or equal to 15 
hectares, who sold apple, plums and grapes domestically for processing in 2014. The grants will 
compensate the difference between the potential non-embargo price and the domestic sales price, 
with an aim of avoiding possible de-capitalization and collapse of the horticulture sector, thus giving 
it a much needed respite for reorientation to new markets and/or amortization of the financial losses.

IV. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 12.00 Total Bank Financing: 12.00
Financing Gap: 0.00
For Loans/Credits/Others Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT 0.00
International Development Association (IDA) 12.00
Total 12.00

V. Implementation
The parent - Agriculture Competitiveness Project (ACP) was approved by the Board on May 1, 
2012. It is financed by (i) an IDA credit in the amount of US$18.0 million; (ii) a fully-blended GEF 
grant of US$4.4 million; and (iii) a SIDA grant of US$3.0 million. The PDO is: to enhance the 
competitiveness of the country's agro-food sector by supporting the modernization of the food safety 
management system, facilitating market access for farmers, and mainstreaming agro-environmental 
and sustainable land management practices. The ACP has the following components: Component 1: 
Enhancing Food Safety Management; Component 2: Enhancing market access potential; 
Component 3: Enhancing land productivity through sustainable land management. The project 


became effective on September 24, 2012. The closing date for the ACP is June 30, 2017. 
 
The project was designed to contribute to the realization of the economic growth model described in 
the 2011-2014 Government Program aimed at enhancing export competitiveness, attracting 
investment and achieving closer trade integration with the EU. More specifically, the ACP is 
supporting the Government's ambitious efforts in reforming the food safety management system, 
efforts to improve farmers’ market opportunities through investment support (to bring about 
upgrades in post-harvesting infrastructure) and institutional development support (creation and 
strengthening of productive partnerships), and efforts to mainstream the use of good agricultural 
practices and sustainable land management.  
 
Project performance is currently rated “moderately satisfactory” for Implementation Progress (IP), 
“satisfactory” for the PDO, and “satisfactory” for procurement and financial management . Current 
commitments for the IDA credit stand at 70% , and generally progress continues to be solid across 
the project's three components at this phase of implementation.  Currently, disbursement under the 
IDA Credit is at US$3.6 million (20%), under the GEF grant at US$2.1 million (48%), and the 
SIDA grant at US$0.25 (8%). Disbursement rates under the IDA Credit are expected to reach 45% 
by the end of FY15. Procurement of goods, works and consulting services has considerably picked 
up in pace in 2014; calls for proposals for matching investment grants supporting the emergence of 
productive partnerships have been carried out and awards were made; capacity building activities 
have been increasing in scope and complexity. 
 
Component 1: Enhancing food safety management. There is solid progress in the implementation of 
this component. The country's Food Safety Agency, is a relatively new institution (established in 
2012) which has largely become functional due to the support of the project. Two major civil works 
activities are under way - the rehabilitation of the Food Safety Agency (FSA) building and the 
construction of the Border Inspection Point in Tudora on the country's Southern-Eastern border with 
Ukraine. Procurement of civil works for another three border inspection points - Leuseni (West), 
Giurgiulesti (South) and Criva (North) has been completed and works are expected to commence in 
the spring of 2015. Procurement of works for the construction of the country's national reference 
laboratory for safety of products of vegetable origin (Balti) has been completed. Capacity 
strengthening activities at the national reference laboratory for safety of products of animal origin 
and animal health aimed at future international accreditation are in full swing. Additionally, the FSA 
continues to receive support for legislative and regulatory improvements, capacity building 
activities, training and knowledge sharing with various European food safety institutions. 
 
Component 2: Enhancing market access potential. Progress in the implementation of this component 
has been very strong. One call for proposals for matching investment grants from emerging 
productive partnerships has been completed in the summer of 2014, and 8 producer groups received 
matching investment grant awards in an amount of US$2.1 million for a variety of investments in 
post-harvest processing of apples, table grapes and berries. A second call for proposals is currently 
under way until January 30, 2015. In parallel, outreach activities are under way to raise awareness 
about the project's opportunities for fruit and vegetable growers especially in light of on-going 
difficulties Moldovan agro-food exports have on the traditional Russian market, and a stringent need 
for reorientation of trade flows to different, more stable markets. 
 
Component 3: Enhancing land productivity through sustainable land management.  
Implementation of this component is progressing well. All activities related to the rehabilitation of 



protective shelter-belts are on schedule, and the equipment which was procured for these purposes is 
being utilized efficiently by two mobile mechanized agro-forestry squads. The component's 
sustainable land managed grant scheme has been launched and a first call for proposals yielded 
more than 80 applications that are currently under review. It is expected that about 30 awards will be 
made in the next few weeks, for an amount of approximately US$0.6 million.

VI. Safeguard Policies (including public consultation)
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖

