













































World Bank Document


COMBINED PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENTS / INTEGRATED 
SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET (PID/ISDS)

Additional Financing
.

Report No.: PIDISDSA16272
Date Prepared/Updated: 04-Mar-2017
I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data
Country: Pakistan Project ID: P157736

Parent Project ID (if 
any):

P125999

Project Name: Additional Financing for Punjab Irrigated Agriculture Productivity 
Program Phase-1 (P157736)

Parent Project Name: PK Punjab Irrig Agri Productivity Improvement Prog Phase-I 
(P125999)

Region: SOUTH ASIA

Estimated Appraisal Date: 18-Jan-2017 Estimated Board Date: 23-Mar-2017

Practice Area (Lead): Agriculture Lending Instrument: Investment Project 
Financing

Borrower(s) Islamic Republic of Pakistan
Implementing Agency Directorate General Agriculture (Water Management)
Financing (in USD Million)

    Financing Source Amount

International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 130.00

Local Farmer Organizations 70.00

Financing Gap 0.00

Total Project Cost 200.00

Environmental Category: B-Partial Assessment

Appraisal Review Decision 
(from Decision Note):

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate

Other Decision:

Is this a Repeater project? Yes
.

.

B. Introduction and Context
Country Context

Pakistan posted the GDP growth of 4.2 percent in FY2014/15, below the 5.1 percent target. Private 
investments as share of GDP declined to 9.7 percent, but overall deficit remained 5.3 percent of GDP, 
0.3 percent higher than estimated. While Pakistan continues to score poorly on doing business 
indicators, there are signs of improvement. Growth in FY16 was expected to be moderate at 4.5 
percent, well below the 5.5 percent target. For FY17, the expected growth is 5.2 percent while for 
FY18 it is projected at 5.5 percent.

Sectoral and Institutional Context

Pakistan’s agriculture sector is heavily depends on irrigation - more than 90 percent of production is 
form irrigated lands. However, per capita availability of useable water is decreasing with population 
growth, pollution and inefficient use of water. An estimated 40 percent of water is lost in the unlined 
watercourses due to seepage, spillage, side leakage and evapotranspiration. In Punjab, out of the total 
59,500 watercourses, about 43,700 were improved in various projects and Government’s National 
Program for Improvement of Watercourses (NPIW). Under PIPIPP 5,500 new watercourses are being 
improved leaving about 10,300 that still need improvements.

.

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
Original Project Development Objective(s) - ParentPHORGPDO

The project?s main objective is to improve productivity of water use in irrigated agriculture. This will 
be achieved through improved physical delivery efficiency and irrigation practices, crop 
diversification and effective application of inputs that will translate into greater agricultural output per 
unit of water used. The project?s objectives would contribute to increased agricultural production, 
employment and incomes, higher living standards and positive environmental outcomes.

Proposed Project Development Objective(s) - Additional Financing

The project?s main objective is to improve productivity of water use in irrigated agriculture. This will 
be achieved through improved physical delivery efficiency and irrigation practices, crop 
diversification and effective application of inputs that will translate into greater agricultural output per 
unit of water used. The project?s objectives would contribute to increased agricultural production, 
employment and incomes, higher living standards and positive environmental outcomes.

Key Results 

The AF would support: (a) installation of high efficiency irrigation systems; (b) improvement of 
community irrigation systems; (c) introduction of modern technologies and methods in irrigated 
agriculture, assistance in crop diversification and training; and (d) Project management, construction 
supervision, quality control, technical assistance and training.

.

D. Project Description

The AF would provide resources for: (i) component B of the project related to upgrading of the 
Community Irrigation Systems; (ii) a new sub-component C3 is added focusing on post-harvest 
processing, value addition and market linkages; and (iii) make up for loss of resources due to changes 
in exchange rates between SDRs to USD.
PHCOMP

Component Name:
Upgrading of the Community Irrigation Systems
Comments ( optional)
W/Cs would be improved using only pre-cast concrete sections (PCPS) with water-tight joints. The 
WUAs/farmers would share costs through providing labor, and the Government of the Punjab 



would provide PCPS and other material needed for watercourse improvement. The AF would 
improve 2,000 W/Cs and irrigation schemes – making the total number of schemes under 
component B 11,000.

PHCOMP

Component Name:
Improved Agriculture Technology/Practices and Monitoring and Evaluation
Comments ( optional)
Changes in this component are based on implementation experience and lessons learnt. These 
changes include: (i) supplementing support under sub-component C1 and C2 for monitoring and 
evaluation and impact assessment of the additional works under the AF; and (ii) adding a new sub-
component to address value addition and market access for farmers adopting efficient irrigation 
technologies.

E. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if 
known)
The AF project will be implemented in Punjab province of Pakistan. Agriculture in Punjab is affected 
by waterlogging and salinity. In central and southern Punjab, rainfall is more sporadic and agriculture 
is entirely irrigation dependent.

.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Ahmad Imran Aslam( GEN06 )

Salma Omar( GSU06 )

II. IMPLEMENTATION
The implementation arrangements under the AF will remain the same as for the Original 
Project. The Director General Agriculture (Water Management) (DG-AWM) will continue to be 
responsible for the implementation of the Project. The Directorate of On-Farm Water 
Management (OFWM) has demonstrated that it has the capacity to implement such programs in 
the Punjab.
.

III. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional)

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 
4.01

Yes The Government prepared an Environmental 
and Social Assessment (ESA) for the original 
project. An Addendum to ESA covering 
revised and up-scaled scope of work has also 
been prepared. The Addendum is cleared and 
disclosed. The key potentially negative 
environmental and social impacts of the 
proposed interventions under the AF project 
include changes in land use pattern 
particularly where barren/fallow land is 
brought under cultivation, contamination of 
soil and water caused by excessive use of 
agro-chemical inputs, salt build up in crop 
root zone, loss of natural vegetation and trees 
for water course improvement, loss of crops 
caused by water course improvement works, 



and reduced ground water recharge caused by 
water course lining.  These potential impacts 
are temporary and reversible in nature and can 
be mitigated with the help of appropriate 
mitigation measures, such as avoiding 
interventions in the environmental hot spots 
and wildlife protected areas when expanding 
the cultivation fields, awareness raising and 
capacity building of farmers for judicious use 
of chemical inputs, occasional flood irrigation 
in fields using high efficiency irrigation 
systems to avoid salt build-up in soil, tree 
plantation to compensate any tree cutting, 
avoiding cropped area while carrying out the 
water course improvement and other 
construction works during the project, and 
limiting the extent of water course lining in 
the sweet groundwater zone to minimize 
negative impacts on groundwater recharge. 
Some of the new activities proposed under AF 
may have additional environmental impacts 
like those related with disposal of waste and 
wastewater from fruit washing bays and 
cleaning platforms, construction related issues 
with small-scale platforms, and disposal of 
discarded fruits, vegetables (generally and 
largely biodegradable material). Occupational 
health and safety may be an additional 
potential environmental impacts for the new 
activities related to post-harvest processing 
centers. The Addendum proposes adequate 
mitigation measures for these issues and after 
the adequate implementation of mitigation 
measures, no residual impacts are forecasted.

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 No The project supports activities only in already 
disturbed environment and no project site is 
located in any natural habitat.

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No The project does not support any activity in 
the forest land.

Pest Management OP 4.09 No The proposed interventions are likely to 
reduce the quantities of agro-chemicals 
particularly the ones that are water soluble.

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 
4.11

No The project activities will be undertaken 
where cultivation is being practiced for 
decades if not longer. Hence presence of any 
physical cultural resources is extremely 
unlikely.  Chance Find procedures are 
nonetheless included in the main ESA.



Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No There are no indigenous communities in 
project area.

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 No No land acquisition is envisaged for the 
proposed activities.

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No The project does not include any component, 
which involves construction of new or 
rehabilitation/upgradation or renovation of 
any existing dam.

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50

Yes An exemption to notification was obtained for 
the original project that also applies to the AF.

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 
7.60

No The project is located in the Punjab province, 
which does not have any disputed area as 
defined in the policy.

.

IV. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and 
describe any potential large scale,  significant and/or irreversible impacts:

The project prepared an Environmental and Social Assessment (ESA) report, which suggests 
that the proposed project does not pose any long term or irreversible adverse environmental 
impacts. The key potentially negative environmental and social impacts of the proposed 
interventions under the original project include changes in land use pattern particularly where 
barren/fallow land is brought under cultivation, contamination of soil and water caused by 
excessive use of chemical inputs, salt build up in crop root zone, loss of natural vegetation and 
trees for water course improvement and reduced ground water recharge caused by water 
course lining.  Scope of additional work proposed under Component B does not bring in any 
additional or new environmental impacts other than those which have already been covered in 
the ESA prepared for the original project. New activities proposed under Component C3 may 
have additional environmental impacts like those related with disposal of waste and 
wastewater from fruit/vegetable washing bays and cleaning platforms, construction related 
issues with small-scale washing bays and platforms, and disposal of discarded fruits, 
vegetables (generally and largely biodegradable material). Occupational health and safety 
may be an additional potential environmental impacts for the new activities related to post-
harvest processing centers. These potential impacts are temporary and reversible in nature and 
can be mitigated with the help of appropriate mitigation measures, such as avoiding 
interventions in the environmental hot spots and wildlife protected areas when expanding the 
cultivation fields, awareness raising and capacity building of farmers for judicious use of 
chemical inputs, occasional flood irrigation in fields using high efficiency irrigation systems 
to avoid salt build-up in soil, tree plantation to compensate any tree cutting, avoiding cropped 
area while carrying out the water course improvement and other construction works during 
the project, and limiting the extent of water course lining in the sweet groundwater zone to 
minimize negative impacts on groundwater recharge. The Addendum proposes adequate 
mitigation measures for the issues arising out of the implementation of component C3 and 
after the adequate implementation of proposed mitigation measures, no residual impacts are 
forecasted. Land acquisition will not be required for the project rehabilitation works, which 



will be undertaken within their existing boundaries.  There are no indigenous communities in 
the project areas as defined under World Bank OP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples. The project 
will support livelihoods through improvements in food harvesting and handling of produce. In 
particular, women may benefit from these interventions through decreased work load in post-
harvest processing. The community water course improvement will benefit agricultural 
communities’ especially small farmers.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in 
the project area:

Agriculture and irrigation development are key priorities of the Government’s development 
agenda with the aim to improve agricultural productivity, irrigation efficiency and livelihood 
of the people. The long term impacts of the project will contribute to reduction in poverty in 
conjunction with environmental protection.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse 
impacts.

The ESA report elaborates on various project alternatives including, ‘no project’ option, 
alternative irrigation methods, alternative land-leveling methods, alternative methods of on-
farm water conservation and alternative methods of implementation. Analysis concluded that 
high efficiency irrigation results in reduced need of farm inputs such as fertilizers, pesticides, 
fungicides, and herbicides, as well as reduced vulnerability of crops to pest attacks and 
proliferation of weeds, leading to less use of pesticides and herbicides. In addition, fertigation 
(application of fertilizers or other soil additives through the irrigation system) is done through 
drip and sprinkler, which results in increased effectiveness of fertilizers with reduced 
quantities needed.  Similarly, through high efficiency irrigation systems, chemigation 
(application of pesticides, fungicides, and herbicides) is also done through drip and sprinklers, 
resulting in effective use of chemicals with reduced quantities needed. The overall result of 
high efficiency irrigation system is therefore a much reduced usage of chemical inputs and 
introduction of post-harvest technology under AF will help better achieve the PDO. The only 
comparable alternative for this activity is ‘no project option’.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an 
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.

The original ESA is based on detailed assessment and includes an Environment and Social 
Management Plan (ESMP) for any possible environmental and social impacts under the 
project. The Addendum to the ESA uses the same ESMP with some additions related to the 
proposed activities under Component C3 and proposes preparation of a separate ESMP for 
each post-harvest fruit/vegetable processing facility. These ESMPs will need to be cleared by 
the Bank before these facilities can be established. For establishing these facilities, transparent 
and accessible guidelines on the selection process will be established, and communicated 
widely to all farmers to ensure that the selection process is seen as transparent and fair, and 
possible social conflict is avoided. The ESA Addendum is cleared and disclosed.
The original ESA report presents a well-structured organogram for the implementation 
arrangements of EMP. The Director General Agriculture Water Management (DG-AWM) is 
overall responsible for environmental and social performance of the project in accordance 
with the national and WB requirements. An officer is designated as the Environmental and 
Social Coordinator (ESC) for ensuring effective implementation of ESMP. The ESC 



coordinates with the WMOs at the district level, who have been designated as the district 
environmental and social coordinators (DESCs) at district level. The DESCs supervise and 
coordinate with the WUAs and farmers for the actual implementation of the environmental 
and social guidelines and other ESMP requirements. These institutional arrangements have 
been effective in ESMP implementation of the original project and will be continued for AF 
project.
The Project Implementation and Supervision Consultant (PISC) are responsible for 
implementation of ESMP while M&E Consultants are responsible for monitoring. Production 
and maintenance of all documentation outlined in ESMP is to be done by PISC. The client has 
been successfully implementing the ESMP in the original project and understands fully the 
planning and operational levels of safeguards requirements. While GD-AWM does not have 
an environmental management unit within its operational hierarchy, it continues to implement 
project level implementation of ESMP. The implementation performance of environmental 
safeguards in the original project is satisfactory. Quarterly progress reports are done regularly 
and will continue for the AF. Training is conducted for field staff as outlined in the ESA and 
these will continue for the AF. Monitoring will include both quantitative and qualitative data 
through consultations and feedback from beneficiaries, especially women, and will be 
included in the progress reports.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on 
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

Key stakeholders consulted at various levels include: (i) People directly affected by the 
Project and Project beneficiaries (i.e., farmers, WUA members, and other villagers), (ii) Sales 
and service companies, (iii) Officials from the Agriculture Department and agriculture 
research institutes, (iv) Environment Protection Agency of Punjab, (v) Academia, (vi) Donors, 
and (vii) NGOs, international organizations, and other interest groups. Consultations with the 
project stakeholders were carried out during preparation of original ESA. The stakeholders 
have remained involved during the implementation including the project affected people, 
project beneficiaries and other local communities in several districts. Similar consultations 
were carried out for AF project during the preparation of the ESA Addendum and will 
continue during the implementation of the AF.

.