









































PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
CONCEPT STAGE

Report No.: PIDC33685

Project Name Poyang Lake Basin Town Water Environment Management Project 
(P153604)

Region EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC
Country China
Sector(s) Wastewater Collection and Transportation (40%), Solid waste management 

(20%), Wastewater Treatment and Disposal (20%), Animal produc tion 
(20%)

Theme(s) Rural services and infrastructure (30%), Pollution management and 
environmental health (30%), Water resource management (30%), Parti 
cipation and civic engagement (10%)

Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P153604
Borrower(s) People's Republic of China
Implementing Agency Jiangxi Provincial Development and Reform Commission
Environmental 
Category

A-Full Assessment

Date PID Prepared/
Updated

27-Dec-2015

Date PID Approved/
Disclosed

10-Jan-2016

Estimated Date of 
Appraisal Completion

02-Nov-2016

Estimated Date of 
Board Approval

31-Mar-2017

Concept Review 
Decision

Track II - The review did authorize the preparation to continue

I. Introduction and Context
Country Context
China's rapid urbanization over the past three decades has facilitated impressive economic and 
social gains. The country became the second largest economy in the world in 2010, with over half of 
its population now living in cities. About 500 million people have been pulled out of poverty in the 
process. Further transition is projected to add another 300 million to China's urban population by 
2030 and continue boosting the economic growth. Unfortunately, China's economic gains came at a 
significant cost to its environment, with serious implications on health and quality of life, as 
environmental depletion and degradation were overlooked during China's impressive economic 
growth period. The cost of environmental degradation and resource depletion in China is estimated 


to approach 10 percent of GDP, of which water pollution accounts for 2.1 percent, based on China 
2030 Study estimates. The Government of China has recognized that it cannot continue on this road 
and has put in place plans to ensure the environmental sustainability of its economic development 
pathways.

Sectoral and Institutional Context
The Chinese water sector suffers from both water quantity and quality challenges. In terms of water 
quantity, with 20 percent of the world's population but only 7 percent of its freshwater, water 
scarcity is a major problem for sustainable urban development in China. Moreover, there is also a 
strong disparity in spatial distribution of its water resources, as only 19 percent of China's water 
resources are available to 40 percent of the population in the north, where most of the major grain 
production is located, and in the west. In terms of water quality, due to environmentally 
unsustainable development trajectory pursued over the last three decades, a significant portion of 
China's freshwater sources are polluted. According to 2010 data, about 40 percent of rivers in China 
were seriously polluted and unfit for drinking water. Similarly, the groundwater quality in more 
than half of 200 cities surveyed was classified as 'bad' (in 40.3 percent of cities) or 'extremely 
bad' (14.7 percent). Similar figures are reported for the quality of other water bodies in the country, 
including lakes. 
 
Poyang Lake is the largest freshwater lake in China with a maximum surface area reaching 5,050 
km2 and a storage capacity - 30 billion m3. The basin area of the lake is about 162,200 km2 
covering over 97 percent of the land area of Jiangxi Province. The lake plays many vital functions, 
such as hydro-morphologic, environmental, social, cultural and economic; the livelihood of more 
than 40 million people is closely linked to the water and environment of Poyang Lake. Poyang Lake 
connects to Yangtze River in the middle reach at Hukou, Jiujiang County. The dynamics of the lake 
water movement is governed by both the stages of the Yangtze River and the discharges from its 
five major tributaries (Gan, Xin, Fu, Rao and Xin Rivers). While the annual water level in the 
Poyang Lake has remained stable in the recent years, the area of the lake fluctuates dramatically 
between the wet and dry seasons. In normal years, the average lake area is about 3,200 km2. The 
fluctuations are also affected by severe climate events, e.g., in early 2002, due to serious drought, 
the area of the lake reached a low of 200 km2.   
  
Poyang Lake is also a wetland of national and global importance, which provides a key habitat for 
half a million migratory birds. It is a house for over 95% of world's white crane, 60% of world??s 
white-napped cranes, 55% of world's hooded crane, 60% of world's white storks, and 96% of 
world's swan goose population. Poyang Lake is also a species gene pool with 156 kinds of aquatic 
plants, 136 planktons, 230 kinds of benthic animals, 58 kinds of fishes, 89 kinds of water birds, etc. 
It also plays a significant role in the seasonal flow regulation of the Yangtze River. The average 
amount of lake water entering the Yangtze River is about 150 billion m3, amounting to 15.6% of the 
mean annual runoff of the river.  
 
The water quality of the Lake has been comparatively good (with 83% falling under Class I ~ III, 
13% under Class IV, and 4% under Class V ). However, research results of the World Bank 
supported TCC5 project and the available monitoring data of Ministry of Environmental Protection 
show a concerning trend of water quality deterioration, with chemical oxygen demand (COD) and 
ammonia-nitrogen (NH3-N) gradually increasing and dissolved oxygen (DO) gradually decreasing. 
The existing data on COD discharge collected by the local governments in the lake basin show that 
domestic wastewater (about 60%) and solid waste disposal (about 30%) produce the major water 

pollution. While industrial pollution remains an issue, discharges from industries are gradually 
decreasing. Site visit also found uncontrolled solid waste disposal and insufficient treatment, and 
improper fish feeding and improper habit of farm land fertilizing also lead to severe water pollution. 
By provincial environmental statistics, only 79% of domestic wastewater is treated in urban areas of 
Jiangxi province, which is much lower than the national average of 85%. Similarly, solid waste 
collection and treatment rate in the province is 69% compared to the national average of 80%.   
 
Conclusions from recent studies and discussions with Provincial governments identify the following 
key causes for increase of pollution levels in the waterbodies feeding into Poyang Lake: (a) lack of 
basin wide integrated water/environment management; (b) weak water quality and pollution source 
pollution monitoring and disclosure system; (c) lack of public awareness and incentives in the 
communities on environmental protection; (d) weak enforcement of regulations related to disposal 
of untreated industrial and domestic wastewater directly into water bodies; (e) lack of investment in 
infrastructure for wastewater collection and treatment systems in urban and rural areas as well as for 
solid waste management in the small cities and towns and rural areas; and (f) lack of use of good 
practices on proper domestic solid waste disposal and agriculture practices. 
 
Government of China and Jiangxi Provincial government recognize the needs to protect the Lake. 
Series of measures have been triggered at national, provincial, and county levels to protect the value 
the Poyang Lake as a unique resource and a national heritage, and to control the lake's pollution and 
to restore the vital water quality and its associa ted functions. The Government of China issued the 
Poyang Lake Ecological Economic Zone Development Plan (PLEDP) in 2009 focusing on 
ecological development of Poyang Lake. Under the PLEDP, there is an implementation plan and 18 
specific sector plans, including water environment management, water resources, five river 
management plan, etc. In 2014, Jiangxi government also issued a plan for establishment of 
ecological and civilization demonstration areas, stating actions and targets for industrial, domestic 
wastewater and solid waste management. Based on the plan, by 2020, COD would be decreased by 
5% compared to the 2015 baseline, wastewater treatment ratio would reach 90% and urban solid 
waste treatment ratio - 85%. The PLEDP together with other relevant sector plans foresee 
significant increase in size of population and economic activity by 2020, with the focus on tourism 
industry. This, together with unresolved improvements in infrastructure, is expected to result in big 
pressure on water quality in the lake basin. 
 
Following the series government plans, the government of Jiangxi has been conducting six major 
ecological environment protection group projects: (a) Poyang Lake wetland and biodiversity 
protection projects; (b) Poyang Lake-rim green belt projects; (c) pollution prevention and control 
projects including wastewater, solid waste and non-point agricultural pollution control; (d) blue sky 
action demonstration projects; (e) circular economy, energy conservation, and emission reduction 
projects; and (f) ecological cultural projects. 
 
In 2013, the World Bank approved the Jiangxi Poyang Lake Basin and Ecological Economic Zone 
Small Town Development Project with the objective to improve key public services in participating 
small towns of Jiangxi Province through improvements to priority infrastructure. Though overall 
project implementation has been satisfactory, there are a number of challenges including the rapid 
urbanization rendering some of the sub-projects irrelevant/unviable, capacity constraints and issues 
related to O&M for wetland, solid waste and wastewater facilities. The proposed project would 
expand the coverage to include seven additional counties, particularly focusing on water 
environment management and solid waste management infrastructure while taking into account 

lessons from the Small Town Development Project and incorporating in its design best international 
practices.  
 
Note : Chinese surface water quality standards: Class I is good quality water which with simple 
purification is drinkable (DO>7.5mg/l; COD<15; BOD5<3; NH3-N<0.15; P<0.02); Class II is good 
quality water which is slightly contaminated, drinkable after normal purification (DO>6mg/l; 
COD<15; BOD5<3; NH3-N<0.5; P<0.1); Class III contaminated water which could be drinkable 
after treatment (DO>5mg/l; COD<20; BOD5<4; NH3-N<1; P<0.2); Class IV water is not drinkable 
(DO>3mg/l; COD<30; BOD5<6; NH3-N<1.5; P<0.3); and Class V is bad quality water (DO>2mg/
l; COD<40; BOD5<10; NH3-N<2; P<0.4).

Relationship to CAS
The project is aligned with the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for 2013-2016, specifically the 
objectives set under focus area I --"Supporting greener growth", including Enhancing Urban 
Environmental Services; Promoting Sustainable Agriculture Practices; and Demonstrating 
Sustainable Natural Resource Management. The project design is in line with the national strategic 
development plan of China, as envisioned in the Poyang Lake Ecological Economic Zone 
Development Plan (2009) and Jiangxi Province implementation plan for establishment of ecological 
and civilization demonstration areas (2014). The project is also in line with 12th Five-year Plans 
and draft 13th Five-year plan at Jiangxi provincial and county levels. 
  
The project is expected to contribute to both China??s national strategy on water security agenda 
and to the World Bank Group twin goals of ending extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity. 
Water security has become a high priority at highest for decision makers at all levels (central and 
local government). The strategy focuses on applying systematic treatment and combination of 
structural and non-structural measures in water sector to promote ecological safety, economic 
security and the safety of human health and lives. The project would contribute to, through 
integrated and participatory approaches, sustainable water/environment management, improvement 
of ecological condition, promotion of social and economic environment of Poyang Lake Basin, as 
one of the key areas of Chinese water system. 
 
For the contribution to the twin goals, as the poor are known to live relatively closer to degraded 
and polluted areas, and have less access to water and solid waste disposal infrastructure, they are 
expected to directly benefit from the project. The project will aim at addressing specific challenges 
that the poor, vulnerable and women face, as identified through social assessment. The project is 
also expected to boost shared prosperity, as improved water quality and local living conditions will 
likely result in such benefits as increase in land value, access to income earning opportunities etc.     
 
To achieve maximum impact and to address the higher strategic objectives indicated above, the 
project will incorporate an "integrated" approach in the design of the activities in selected counties, 
and focus on enhancement of ecological and institutional sustainability of water/environment and 
strengthening of domestic wastewater and solid waste management system. This will involve 
participation of communities during project preparation and implementation as well as in designing 
long-term operation & maintenance mechanisms to ensure sustainability of the investments. 
Ultimately, successful implementation of the project will help to facilitate the improvement and 
restoration of water quality and ecological environment of the Poyang Lake basin. It would also 
contribute towards the enhancement of water regime in the Yangtze River. 
 

Note :   "Integrated approach" refers to a mechanism whereby structural and non-structural 
measures are fully utilized, as well as whereby management of environmental protection is done in 
a collaborative and coordinated way throughout the project cycle involving all stakeholders (from 
different sectors and disciplines) and based on consensus building to ensure sustainability.

II. Proposed Development Objective(s)
Proposed Development Objective(s) (From PCN)
The project development objective is to reduce the pollutant discharge into key selected waterways 
in the Poyang Lake basin and to improve management of water environment.

Key Results (From PCN)
The proposed PDO level results indicators include: (a) Direct project beneficiaries (core sector 
indicator), of which female beneficiaries; (b) Nutrient load reduction (nitrogen (N) and Phosphorus 
(P)) achieved under the project (core sector indicator, tons/year); (c) Volume (mass) of COD 
pollution load reduction achieved under the project (core sector indicator, tons/year); (d) domestic 
solid waste reduced or recycled under the project (core sector indicator; tons/year); (e) Increased 
number of counties in full compliance with Provincial Water and Environmental Protection 
Guidelines . 
 
Note :   The guidelines broadly include elements such as citizen participatory engagement and 
institutional capacity to undertake regular water monitoring, reporting and enforcement.

III. Preliminary Description
Concept Description
a. Overview.  
 
The Jiangxi Provincial Government proposes to utilize the World Bank loan in managing the water 
environment in the key towns of Poyang Lake Basin. Seven counties - Duchang, Poyang, Yugan, 
Jishui, Fengxin, Jingan, Shangli, have been selected for project planning and implementation; total 
population of the seven counties are about 5 million. These seven counties represent a mixed pattern 
of geographic distribution across the basin: three sites are in close proximity to the main Lake, one 
site along the mid-stream of a main river draining into the Lake, two sites adjacent to the tributary 
streams of a main river, and one site at the remotest distance from the Lake. The water quality of 
Poyang Lake is closely associated with the quality and environment of the water and land bodies in 
these contributing catchments, and vice versa.  
 
The project is designed to integrate different ways of environmental protection to improve the water 
quality of Poyang Lake basin, including by means of wastewater treatment and solid waste 
management, as well non-structural measures. As such, the project will focus not only on 
engineering aspects but also on enhancing institutional mechanisms, improving operation and 
maintenance (O&M) and monitoring systems to help the selected counties in Jiangxi Province to 
enhance water environmental services, including wastewater collection and treatment systems, 
urban storm water management, river and lake environment restoration, solid waste collection and 
transportation system, and participatory integrated environment management system.  
 
b. Proposed Project components.  
 


The proposed project activities consist of four main components as below:  
 
Component 1: Strengthening Institutional Capacity for Managing Water Environment in Poyang 
Lake Basin (US$15 million): This component will finance capacity building and awareness raising 
activities to improve participatory wastewater and solid waste management, enforcement of 
environmental regulations and creating pre-conditions for sustainability of project results. The 
component will be structured in two key sub-components: (a) institutional capacity building and 
enforcement and (b) sustainable Poyang Lake basin management.  
 
Sub-component 1.1: Institutional Capacity Building and Enforcement (USD11 million): This sub-
component will finance activities related to: (a) strengthening of the current integrated Poyang Lake 
Basin management institutional architecture (River manager as leader of the party - River 
implementer as the mayor of the county - high level leading group for strategic orientation and 
guidance, and Poyang Lake water/environment financial and investment mechanism study; (b) 
strengthen Basin-wide water/environment management planning: (i) support an integrated 
vulnerability and sensitivity assessment of Poyang Lake (water quality improvement and protection- 
water quantity control - land uses change -biodiversity conservation- urbanization and demographic 
changes- tourism impact and industrialization-basin pollution, and providing comments on 
integrated action plan leading to series of projects with implementation sequencing and synergies in 
line with the long-term commitment) along with resilience and adaptation measures; (ii) promotion 
of integrated basin plans for the five tributaries of the Poyang Lake; (c) strengthening knowledge 
sharing of integrated lake management and establish Lake management advisory platform - with the 
continuous pressure on water resources, the lakes under environmental stress are evidenced across 
China; and (d) strengthening the water/environment monitoring system through upgrade/newly 
installation of water/environment monitoring facilities, enhancement of the integrated monitoring 
information system, early warning system, real-time data disclosure etc. 
 
Sub-component 1.2: Sustainable Poyang Lake Basin Management (USD4 million): This sub-
component will finance activities related to enhancing conditions for lake basin environmental 
management sustainability, including: (a) enhancement of citizen participation and information 
disclosure - translating the high level ownership of the Poyang protection to grassroots level could 
contribute to the rapid and broader success of the Poyang Lake conservation. Building on the 
institutional structure and ecological compensation mechanism, the citizen participation could 
involve labor corporations (fishermen, farmers, factory workers and industries etc.) in having a 
voice in Poyang Lake protection; and (b) ensuring soundness of infrastructure design and its O&M 
sustainability¡ª the project will aim to increment the quality of innovation and appropriate 
technology with the economics of their financing for sustainable operation and maintenance 
implementation; and strengthening of incentive mechanisms, i.e., the compensation scheme for 
ecological protection of the Poyang Lake that could be further strengthened building on proven 
incentive mechanisms; 
 
Component 2: Improvement of Lake and River Environmental Restoration and Enhancement of 
Domestic Wastewater Management System (US$ 140 million). This component will finance 
activities related to protection and restoration of the water environment of selected rural and urban 
water environments in Poyang Lake basin through collection and treatment of urban and rural 
wastewater; collection and safe disposal of stormwater from both rural and urban watersheds; and 
implementation of integrated engineering and biological as well as Low Impact Development (LID) 
interventions in selected rural and urban waterways.  The aim of the component is to demonstrate an 


Integrated water
shed management approach by focusing on key areas for protection, improving 
water quality and environmental protection caused by the municipal wastewater and aquaculture 
sources, and establishing ecological pollution-control zones along the course of pollutant movement.
 
Sub-component 2.1: Improvement of Lake and River Environmental Restoration (USD66 million): 
This sub-component will finance implementation of integrated engineering and biological 
mitigation measures and Low Impact Development (LID) in selected small lakes, rivers, and 
catchments in Poyang Lake basin. This will include restoration of water environment in Zhuhu Lake 
in Poyang county, Pipa Lake (river) in Yugan county, and ecological restoration of stream corridor 
of Zoujiazui River in Duchang county. Key activities will include construction of stormwater 
collection and diversion systems from upland watersheds, rural wastewater treatment facilities, 
distributed wastewater collection along lake banks, introduction of good aquaculture practices (for 
fishing farming and pearl culture) and water environment monitoring system.  
 
Sub-component 2.2: Enhancement of Domestic Wastewater Management System (USD74 million): 
This sub-component will finance rehabilitation and expansion of urban wastewater collection and 
treatment systems to improve capacity of wastewater collection and treatment of selected counties. 
Main project activities include: construction of wastewater collection networks (including 
household connections); and construction and/or rehabilitation of wastewater treatment plants in 
Duchang, Jiang'an, and Jishui counties.  
 
Component 3: Construction of solid waste collection and transportation system (USD75 million): 
This component is to improve solid waste collection and transportation system in rural and urban 
areas to reduce solid waste disposal to river system of Poyang Lak Basin. This component will 
finance setting up solid waste separation system, construction of solid waste collection stations and 
transportation stations, and establishment of sustainable solid waste collection and transportation 
system, and establishment of monitoring and management systems in Shangli, Duchang, Poyang, 
Yugan, and Jing'an Counties. 
 
Component 4: Project Implementation Support (USD15 million). This component is to support the 
effective and efficient implementation of the project activities. This component will finance project 
management, project implementation supervision, project social, resettlement and environmental 
monitoring, domestic and international training and study tours, and relevant project management 
equipment and facilities. Main project activities will include procurement of office equipment, 
domestic and international training and study tours, procurement of project implementation 
supervisors, procurement of social and resettlement and environmental monitoring services, etc. 
 
d. Gender. 
 
There is strong evidence that gender inequalities contribute to poverty and reduce human well-
being, and that gender issues are an important dimension of the fight against poverty. In water 
supply operations specifically, there has long been an understanding of importance of incorporating 
a gender perspective, because women and girls are most often the primary users, providers and 
managers of water in their households and are the guardians of household hygiene. Limited access 
to water and poor water quality have direct impact on household welfare and health. If a water 
system falls into disrepair, women are the ones forced to travel long distances over many hours to 
meet their families' water needs. Therefore, women and girls benefit most when services are 
improved. Given women's household roles and responsibilities, they are also more likely to impact 


decisions related to ways to collect and dispose the domestic waste. Finally, women can greatly 
contribute to oversight of a well-functioning community enforcement of environmental reg  ulations 
and also such aspects as decisions related to water and solid waste collection fee levels.  
 
Worldwide good performance on gender mainstreaming in projects requires: (a) carrying out a 
gender analysis as part of the project's social assessment; (b) introducing relevant design elements; 
and (c) tracking project performance through the inclusion of gender disaggregated indicators. The 
project will conduct a standalone social assessment, in which a close attention to gender aspects will 
be paid. This will include investigating on and consulting with female beneficiaries in the project 
areas in order to clearly identify their needs and concerns, as well as possible project impacts, and 
explore both mitigation measures of such impacts and opportunities for women targeted activities to 
achieve project objectives. The project design will particularly emphasize female participation in 
project activities, capacity building and M&E activities. Specific indicator(s) related to women's 
participation will be included in the Results Framework and will be closely monitored during 
project implementation. 
 
e. Lessons learned from Jiangxi Poyang Lake Basin and Ecological Economic Zone Small 
Town Project 
 
There are valuable lessons of Jiangxi Poyang Lake Basin and Ecological Zone Small Town Project 
implementation that will be taken into account during further design of the proposed project. The 
on-going project faces challenges in terms of institutional capacity and inter-departmental 
coordination, issue that is also observed in other provinces in China. Collaboration in controlling 
and reducing substances at their source is the most effective way of keeping pollutants out of the 
lake. This requires clarity of responsibilities of each authority, as well as full collaboration to meet 
the joint objective. While industrial pollution control is under the responsibility of provincial 
Environmental Protection Department (EPD), agricultural land and aquaculture pollution control is 
managed by the provincial Agriculture Department (AD).   
 
To address these problems, it is critical that county Government maintains ownership of the 
proposed sub-projects, even with the change of the county leadership to ensure continued focus on 
initially agreed project activities and development objectives. Similarly, continuity and retention of 
project staff at the county level (including PMOs, PLGs and Expert Groups) is important to ensure 
good capacity developed under the project is maintained. Finally, the project will also raise 
awareness among communities and farmers.  
 
Equally important is to considerably strengthen institutional coordination mechanisms, not just for 
project purposes, but also for future management of the Lake. It would be important to assign a 
function of responsibility to review development proposals in the basin with a view on their 
implications on the Lake water quality to one of the institutions that is currently managing Poyang 
Lake, or to establish a Poyang Lake Management Commission. The institution would also be 
responsible to spearhead the improvement/ restoration of the Lake water quality over the long run. 
This entity could include representatives of relevant provincial and county governments, as well as 
concerned citizens and academic or research agencies.  
 
f. Global Lessons Learned and World Bank's Value Added 
 
World Bank participation has the added benefit of introducing and replicating, where possible, 


international best practices in the management of water body pollution control and environmental/
ecological improvement. Lessons learned from World Bank-financed pollution control and 
ecological restoration projects (such as Danube Water Program; Iran Northern Cities Water Supply 
and Sanitation Project to reduce pollutant loads to the Caspian Sea; Lake Victoria Environmental 
Protection Project; Aral Sea Restoration Project; Integrated Water Management in Metropolitan Sao 
Paulo Project) as well as lessons from other countries' experiences (such as the Great Lakes and 
Chesapeake Bay restoration programs in the US) are being used to inform the key concept of the 
project, and include: (a) investments in infrastructure upgrading needs to be matched consistently 
with required institutional support for appropriate maintenance and management competencies, to 
ensure sustainability of investment; (b) the needs within the basin exceed the current scale of 
investments and therefore (i) investments need to be modelled, targeted and monitored to establish 
the most cost-effective interventions to improve basin health and green resilient growth that 
supports livelihood and maintains the sustainability of economic development; (ii) capacity and 
investments need to be leveraged from a variety of public and private partners; (c) problems related 
to water quality management, pollution control and urban upgrading are complex and require multi-
sectoral and integrated approaches; (d) both the institutional and environmental objectives 
associated with addressing such complex issues should be treated as long-term program goals rather 
than short-to medium-term project objectives; (e) integrated approaches to water quality 
management can enhance additional benefits and contribute to poverty alleviation; (f) participatory 
approach, though time-consuming, is essential for sustainability of project results as it ensures 
consensus building between all stakeholders in reaching agreement on project design and achieving 
institutional and policy reform and public support; and (g) ex-post monitoring of activities to collect 
evidence of costs and benefits help to enhance chances for successful replication. 
 
Specific best practices that will be examined for application of proposed project activities include: 
(a) strengthening of the current institutional architecture - River manager as leader of the party - 
River implementer as the mayor of the county - high level leading group for strategic orientation 
and guidance (the Great Lakes National Program Office (GLNPO in the USA); the Office of the 
Prime Minister Program for the Lake Balaton (Hungary); and the creation of the Commission and 
Secretariat of the Lake Balaton from above mentioned office); (b) strengthening of incentive 
mechanisms (direct and indirect payment fee mechanism in Biwa Lake (Japan); environmental fee 
on net revenue from chemical factories around Lake Toba (Indonesia); fee grid for water 
consumption in Lake Constance (Germany-Switzerland and Austria) and; the revolving polluter-
payer fee/subsidy mechanism of the Seine Normandy River Basin Agency (France)); (c) citizen 
participation and information disclosure - (Women Association for the Lake Balaton which 
pioneered the lake's protection in earlier 1990; the Lake Naivasha (home of Kenya??s flowers 
export) Riparian Association (LNRA) and Lake Naivasha Growers Group (LNGG)); (d) ensuring 
soundness of infrastructure design and its O&M sustainability (the Chesapeake Bay restoration 
program (USA); Lake Champlain basin program (USA/Canada); the Lake Balaton water quality and 
tourism program; and Danube Water Program); (e) integrated action plan to maximize impact of 
interventions (the Great Lakes restoration program; the lake Ponchartrain restoration plan 
(Louisiana); the Lake Balaton program). 
 
Note:   Proposed project activities have been selected based on the following criteria: (a) cost 
effectiveness - each sub-project should have economic/financial return; (b) sub-projects should not 
cause any negative social and environmental impacts that cannot be mitigated through proper design 
and contract execution; (c) sub-projects must be in compliance with government development plans; 
(d) all land used for construction purposes shall conform to general land utilization plans of the 


cities and / or townships and their annual land use plans; (e) proposed interventions should solve 
existing problems systematically rather than only solve part of the problem; and (f) sub-projects 
should have demonstration value.

IV. Safeguard Policies that might apply
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No TBD
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖

V. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 263.80 Total Bank Financing: 150.00
Financing Gap: 0.00
Financing Source Amount
 Borrower 113.80
 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 150.00
 Total 263.80
