














































World Bank Document

PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
CONCEPT STAGE

Report No.: PIDC974

Project Name Poverty Alleviation and Agriculture Development Demonstration in Poor 
Areas Project (P133326)

Region EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC
Country China
Sector(s) Crops (30%), Irrigation and drainage (20%), Animal production (20%), 

Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (20%), Agricultural extensi on and 
research (10%)

Theme(s) Rural markets (40%), Rural services and infrastructure (40%), Rural 
policies and institutions (20%)

Lending Instrument Specific Investment Loan
Project ID P133326
Borrower(s) International Department, Ministry of Finance
Implementing Agency State Council's Leading Group for Poverty Reduction(LGPR), Foreign 

Capital Project Management Center
Environmental 
Category

B-Partial Assessment

Date PID Prepared/
Updated

28-May-2013

Date PID Approved/
Disclosed

28-May-2013

Estimated Date of 
Appraisal Completion

20-Feb-2014

Estimated Date of 
Board Approval

20-Aug-2014

Concept Review 
Decision

Track II - The review did authorize the preparation to continue

I. Introduction and Context
Country Context
The Chinese Government has always made poverty reduction an important goal and task of national 
development and China’s success in reducing poverty has been remarkable, an achievement that is 
acknowledged worldwide.  In the mid-1980s, the Government started the development-oriented 
poverty reduction programs in rural areas. Subsequently, the Government formulated and 
implemented the Seven-year Priority Poverty Reduction Program (1994-2000) and the Outline for 
Poverty Reduction and Development of China’s Rural Areas (2001-2010). After three decades of 
successful poverty alleviation and strong economic growth that has lifted some 600 million people 
out of poverty, the rate of poverty reduction, however, is beginning to show signs of becoming less 

responsive to broad-based growth. In addition, with increasing rural-urban disparities and diverging 
living standards, the Government recognized that the number of remaining rural poor was likely to 
be underestimated and adjustments to the previous poverty reduction policy were needed to better 
understand the patters of the remaining rural poverty and to integrate traditional rural poverty 
reduction with rural-urban transformation and urbanization policies.  
 
Consequently, in 2011, the Government revised the rural poverty line from CNY1,196 (2009) to 
CNY2,300 (US$361) which increased the number of rural poor from 27 million in 2010 to 128 
million in 2011. In addition, the State Council’s Leading Group for Poverty Reduction and 
Development released the Outline for Development-oriented Poverty Reduction for China’s Rural 
Areas (2011-2020) to provide a new strategic direction for addressing rural poverty. The strategy 
complements the traditional geographical targeting of designated poverty counties with the concept 
of adjacent destitute mountain areas of which 14 are prioritized for comprehensive regional 
development investments. The new strategy aims to eliminate hunger and elementary needs by 
2020, achieve a growth rate in rural per-capita income in poor areas that is above the national 
average, and promote the convergence of human development indicators and public services 
coverage across rural and urban areas. To narrow the rural-urban gap, the strategy lays out a broad 
approach that includes rural industrialization based on comparative advantage, infrastructure 
development, relocation and village consolidation, rural-urban integration, comprehensive public 
service provision and expansion of household-based social protection programs, such as the 
minimum living allowance (dibao), rural pension, and healthcare, and education, family planning, 
and environmental management.

Sectoral and Institutional Context
The project is proposed to be implemented in Gansu, Sichuan, and Guizhou provinces.  The three 
provinces face the common challenge of persistent rural poverty in remote rural areas.  Many of the 
project areas are traditional semi-subsistence areas where the poverty rate ranges between 30 to 50 
percent.  Agriculture remains an important source of local employment and income but geographic 
and climatic conditions, labor migration, underinvestment, and underdeveloped infrastructure pose 
challenges to future agricultural development.  In all three provinces, a gradual restructuring of the 
agricultural sector is needed to allow productivity and farm income to increase and to overcome 
constraints to agriculture modernization.  
 
Gansu Province.  Project counties are situated in the Liupan Mountains of Gansu in northwestern 
China.  Project areas have comparative advantages in horticulture, and several counties have 
successfully developed advanced production and marketing bases for apple, pear, grapes, medicinal 
herbs, and potato.  Still, rural poverty is high, often above 40 percent.  Poverty appears not so much 
rooted in poor production potential but more in the dominance of enterprises in the horticulture 
sector which appear to capture a considerable share of revenue in the value-chain while relatively 
little value is reaching the household or farm level.  One of the challenges in Gansu under this 
project is to strengthen the institutional environment for smallholders through the promotion of 
effective farmer cooperative arrangements that allow farmers to participate effectively in the 
modernization of the sector and to benefit from the high-value agricultural production chains. 
 
Sichuan Province.  Project areas are located in the Wumeng and Wuliang Mountains of southern 
Sichuan.  They are characterized by high mountains, narrow and steep valleys, and very limited flat 
or terraced land for farming.  Per capita farmland is often less than half a mu or about 0.03 hectares.  
Altitudes within one county range from several hundred to over 4,000 meters above sea level and 


agro-climatic conditions vary widely.  Alpine meadows and shrublands are generally used of 
livestock grazing, often in unsustainable ways with visible degradation of vegetation and soils. At 
lower elevations, steep slopes and narrow valleys are used for cropping and erosion risk is high. 
 
Local communities belong nearly exclusively to the Yi Minority.  Yi language is used widely while 
only few people speak Mandarin Chinese in rural areas. Due to the remoteness of these areas, the 
unique cultural background of the population, as well as low education levels, communities are not 
well integrated into the mainstream society and labor mobility is limited as compared to other areas. 
Development opportunities are limited as well; and investments in public service expansion appear 
to be prohibitively expensive in many remote locations.   The development challenge in Sichuan is 
to identify and focus on those project areas with long-term development potential and to promote 
agricultural production systems that can generate income and are environmentally sustainable. 
Opportunities exist for producing and primary processing of higher value and niche-market 
products, such as walnuts, medicinal herbs, and fruits, and for restructuring the high altitude 
livestock sector to become environmentally and economically sustainable.  
 
Guizhou Province.  Guizhou Province is located in southwest China. Out of Guizhou’s total 
population of 40 million, 11.5 million live below the national poverty line. About 80 percent of the 
province belongs to the limestone and karst areas of the Wuling and Wumeng Mountains in which 
sixty-five poor counties and 85 percent of Guizhou’s poor are located.  These areas are 
characterized by relatively fertile but often shallow soils and are subject to severe water and soil 
erosion and management problems.  The unique geographic conditions and the limited availability 
of productive farmland, combined with inaccessibility and underdeveloped infrastructure, represent 
significant challenges to agricultural development.  Recent improvements in transportation 
infrastructure, both highways and village access roads, however, are providing potential 
opportunities to reach large urban markets in Chongqing and Guiyang.  These remain un-tapped to 
date because of the limited investment into the agricultural sector itself. For the future, modern 
agricultural production systems that build on: (a) more sustainable land use; (b) improvements of 
the organizational level of farmers, and (c) carefully designed land consolidation programs offer 
promising ways to overcome technology constraints, attract investment, and link agricultural value 
chains to urban markets.

Relationship to CAS
The project would support the CPS’ strategic theme two: promoting more inclusive development, 
by geographically focusing on lagging regions and small towns and by supporting policies and 
demonstration projects that address inequalities. It would contribute to the CPS outcome 2.3: 
enhancing opportunities in rural areas and small towns, by piloting new ways to boost rural incomes 
and reduce poverty under the umbrella of the new Poverty Reduction for China’s Rural Areas 
Strategy (2011-2020) and by promoting inclusive innovation to decrease disparities.

II. Proposed Development Objective(s)

Key Results (From PCN)
The achievement of the Project Development Objective would be measured through the following 
key performance indicators, namely the:  
 
a)       The generation of incremental net value of agricultural production through project 
investments;  
b) The fair and equitable distribution of the net production value among the various  
stakeholders in the value chain; 
c)  Additional private sector investment leveraged through project investments; and  
d) Viability and sustainability of the project models and potential for up-scaling.  
 
Additional component-specific performance indicators as well as sector core indicators will be 
formulated and included into the results framework during project preparation

III. Preliminary Description
Concept Description
The proposed project seeks to assist the Government in developing models to advance the rural-
urban integration and rural sector modernization agenda in representative destitute rural and 
mountain areas.  The focus of the project would be on demonstrating approaches to rural income 
generation that are based on the modernization of selected agricultural sub-sectors and value-chain 
development, institutional farmer cooperative development, the provision of grant funds for poor 
farmer households and cooperatives to support their participation in agricultural value chains, and 
capacity building for rural households, cooperatives, enterprises, and local governments.   
 
The project would seek to achieve the development objective through the implementation of the 
following components and activities: 
 
Component 1: Integrated Value Chain Development.  The objective of this component would be to 
develop more efficient agricultural value chains focusing on 2 to 4 agricultural or rural pillar 
industries in each project county.  This would be achieved through the restructuring and 
modernization of the current production patterns and by supporting the enabling institutions in each 
pillar industry.  The modernization would aim at creating or supporting larger, economically more 
viable and long-term sustainable production arrangements, for example cooperatives, household 
groups, or enterprises, which are capable to use better technologies and can capture value added in 
the up-stream processing and marketing value chains.  The component would also support the 
establishment of socially acceptable models of cooperatives, household groups, company-farmer 
household, and company-farmer household-cooperative organizations through a business and 
market-based approach. 
 
Component 2: Public infrastructure and services support.  The objective of this component would be 
to improve public infrastructure and public services in order to enable and facilitate restructuring of 
the agricultural sub-sectors under Component 1.  The component would support investments in: (a) 
production road infrastructure; (b) irrigation and drainage, terracing, etc. (c) communications and 
information and telecommunications (ICT) infrastructure and equipment; and (d) public market 
facilities, electricity supply and other infrastructure necessary to facilitate and complement farmer 
and private investments.  In addition, the component would provide investment in other supporting 
public services, such as food safety testing and control, public extension and training services, 
marketing systems and agriculture research and technology transfer. 
 
Component 3: Rural and Agricultural Business Development Support.  The objective of this 
component would be to provide business development services to farmer households and 


cooperatives in support of the agriculture-value chain development under omponent 1.  Specific 
investments would include:  (a) a conditional grant program to poor households and households 
groups to encourage the self-organization of households and provide means for the purchasing of 
agricultural and other inputs to allow them to participate in new production arrangements; (b) 
training and mentoring for new and existing enterprises and cooperatives and for community-based 
economic groups in ethnic minority areas; (c) training for government officials on the roles of 
government and private sector and on how to built public-private partnership arrangements; in 
addition, training on appraisal guidelines for public sector support in rural areas; (d) technical 
assistance to value-chain operators; (e) policy studies on how to improve investment climate, good 
governance, and fair benefit-sharing in cooperative-enterprise arrangements; and (f) marketing 
studies for selected products, analytical studies related to poverty reduction and agricultural sector 
development, policy guidelines, and the development of appraisal guidelines for public sector 
support in rural areas.  
 
Component 4: Project management, monitoring and evaluation (M&E).  The component would 
establish the project management and M&E system of the project and provide office equipment, 
transportation and technical assistance services. It would support the coordination between 
implementation agencies at all levels and with other government programs and institutions and the 
capture of implementation lessons from value chain development.  It would also include support to 
establishing and operatingthe project’s progress and impact M&E system.

IV. Safeguard Policies that might apply
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No TBD
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖

V. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost:  300.00 Total Bank Financing:  150.00
Total Cofinancing:  Financing Gap:  0.00
Financing Source Amount
 Borrower 150.00
 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 150.00
 Total 300.00
