














































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Responding to COVID-19: Modern and Resilient Agri-food Value Chains (P173480) 

 
 

  
Jun 01, 2020 Page 1 of 10  

     

 
 
 
      

 

Project Information Document (PID) 
 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 09-Jun-2020 | Report No: PIDA29373 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Guatemala P173480 Responding to COVID-19: 
Modern and Resilient 
Agri-food Value Chains 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

LATIN AMERICA AND CARIBBEAN 09-Jun-2020 20-Aug-2020 Agriculture and Food 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Finance 
Guatemala (MINFIN) 

Ministry of Economy 
Guatemala (MINECO) 

 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
The PDO is to contribute to reducing food losses, increasing adoption of climate resilient technologies and providing 
emergency response to COVID-19 to beneficiaries in select value chains 

 
Components 

Component 1: Emergency Response to COVID-19 impacts on agro-industrial economic activities 
Component 2: Investments to Enhance MSMEs Efficiency and Resiliency 
Component 3: Institutional strengthening in support of Guatemala’s agri-food system 
Component 4. Monitoring, Evaluation and Project Management 
Component 5: Contingency Emergency Response (CERC) 

 
OPS_TABLE_FCC The processing of this project is applying the policy requirements exceptions for situations of urgent need of 
assistance or capacity constraints that are outlined in OP 10.00, paragraph 12.     
Yes 

 

PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
   

SUMMARY-NewFin1  
 

Total Project Cost 211.00 

Total Financing 211.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 150.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 

 
   
DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 
nk Group Financing 

     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) 150.00 

Non-World Bank Group Financing 

     Counterpart Funding 50.00 

          Local Beneficiaries 50.00 

     Other Sources 11.00 

          International Fund for Agriculture Development 11.00 

    

Environmental and Social Risk Classification 

Substantial 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate     
 



 

The World Bank  
Responding to COVID-19: Modern and Resilient Agri-food Value Chains (P173480) 

 

 

  
Jun 01, 2020 Page 4 of 10  

 

B. Introduction and Context 
Country Context 
 
1. Despite a stable macroeconomic framework, Guatemala struggles with low rates of economic growth and 
high poverty compared to its neighbors. Measured by per capita Gross Domestic Product (GDP), Guatemala is the fifth 
poorest economy of Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC) and remains one of the region’s countries with the highest 
rates of social and economic exclusion. GDP growth averaged only 3.3 percent over 2015-2018, with real GDP per 
capita growth stagnating and falling behind its Central America peers over the same period. Guatemala’s ability to 
provide basic public services and respond to changing conditions and demands is hampered by low collection of taxes 
by the Central Government (tax revenues are close to 10 percent of GDP) and highly rigid expenditures, as well as 
significant gaps in knowledge and job skills. For example, around two-thirds of Guatemalan children at late primary age 
today do not possess basic literacy skills.  
 
2. Poverty, inequality, and rurality are high and persistent.  Guatemala has one of the highest poverty rates in 
LAC, and deep inequality persist across various dimensions. In 2014, an estimated 60 percent of the total population 
of 17 million was estimated to live in poverty, up from 55 percent in 2000. Almost 80 percent of Indigenous people  
live in poverty (2014), and 50 percent live in extreme poverty. Income inequality is high, and the Gini coefficient rating 
stood at 0.49 in 2014. Vulnerability is particularly high among the Indigenous peoples, with almost 80 percent living in 
poverty in 2014, and half in extreme poverty. In 2017, about 48 percent of the total population was estimated to live 
in rural areas, where poverty is significantly higher (76 percent) than in urban areas (42 percent). Assessing more recent 
changes in poverty and inequality is difficult, due to the scarce availability of socio-economic data (Guatemala has had 
the second-lowest number of household surveys available in the region (after Haiti), in the period since 2000). 
However, qualitative evidence, available data and recent developments, do not point to progress on these metrics.  
 
3. Guatemala is among the highest rates in the Gender Inequality Index and has the lowest rate of female labor 
force participation in Latin America and the Caribbean. Many indicators of women’s economic opportunities have not 
improved since 2000 and are worse than the average in LAC and similar countries. Only 4 out of 10 women are in the 
labor force, less than half the corresponding rate of men. Similarly, female youth unemployment is almost twice that 
of men. Women are at a disadvantage with respect to their male counterparts also in terms of technical and soft skills, 
as well as business opportunities and access to information, technology, and markets for inputs and outputs – all of 
which translate into lower income levels. In terms of Gender-Based Violence (GBV), Guatemala registers one of the 
highest rates of violent deaths among women in the world: 6.4 in 100,000 in 2018, almost 5 times the global rate. An 
estimated 628 women lost their lives to violence in 2018, almost two deaths per day. Lack of education, inclusion, and 
gender inequality are among the most relevant triggers of GBV.  

 
4. Guatemala has the sixth highest rate of chronic malnutrition in the world and the highest in LAC, with 
Indigenous and rural populations disproportionately affected. In 2019, Guatemala ranked 68th in food security out of 
113 countries, with only 40 percent of Guatemalan families enjoying food security. Some 77 percent of families have a 
poor or inadequate diet, characterized by high consumption of cereals (maize) and low consumption of foods of animal 
origin, fruits, and vegetables. Chronic child malnutrition (stunting) is very high according to the World Health 
Organization (WHO), affecting 47 percent of all Guatemalan children under five, 58 percent of Indigenous children, and 
66 percent of children in the lowest income quintile. On the opposite side of the spectrum, overweight and obesity are 
on the rise, affecting over 50 percent of the adult population. 

 
5. Guatemala is extremely affected by climate and weather events and its poorer populations are particularly 
vulnerable. Guatemala is the ninth most at risk country worldwide from climate change. By 2050, economic losses 



from drought, flooding, and other extreme weather events are projected to reduce GDP by between 1.3 percent and 
3.7 percent. On the other hand, Guatemala's contribution to global Green House Gas (GHG) emissions is low compared 
to other countries: in 2011 the country emitted 3.4 tCO2e/capita (half of the average per capita emissions of LAC).  
Agriculture is one of the strategic sectors for climate change mitigation and adaptation goals under Guatemala’s 
Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCC). 

 
6. On March 11, 2020, the WHO declared the novel coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak a pandemic. and the 
impacts on Guatemala are expected to be severe. The economic impacts of the disease outbreak are envisaged to 
lead to a significant decline in GDP in 2020, and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) has revised the country’s 
economic growth projections for 2020 to negative 2 percent.  Impacts are starting to be felt mainly through reductions 
in exports and tourism, and through reduced remittances (12 percent of GDP in 2018). The COVID-19 outbreak will 
have significant effects on the external accounts, inflation, and government balances, with expected higher financing 
needs and public deficit. On March 18, 2020, in preparation for the spread of COVID-19 in Guatemala, the Government 
launched the “National Program for Emergency and Economic Recovery” to respond to the crisis. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 

7. Agriculture plays a significant role in Guatemala’s economic performance and employment. Primary agriculture 
accounts for about 10 percent of the country’s GDP with a significant multiplier when accounting for the full backward 
and forward linkages in the agri-food system and employs around 30 percent of the population. In 2015, the broader 
food sector represented 45 percent of the country’s total merchandise exports. Secondary processing activities also 
create opportunities for job creation and diversification of local production. Market-linkage programs in the sub-sectors 
of vegetable and fruit preparation for exports have in some cases, proven particularly beneficial for small-scale 
organized producers. 
 
8. Limited market access and inefficient value addition/preservation capacity and lack of market information 
result in low productivity and variable sales and incomes, for Guatemala’s micro, small and medium agro-industrial 
enterprises and small producers.  Within the domestic markets, smaller producers and SME agribusinesses face a 
number of challenges. Limited market transparency, lack of investment in on-farm and post-harvest technologies and 
other logistical market-access barriers lead to an abundance of middlemen, who capture a large portion of the value 
of any transaction. In addition, the quality of infrastructure varies greatly across Guatemala, which exacerbates regional 
income inequality, particularly between urban and rural areas. This also has severe impacts on access to agricultural 
markets, including contributing to high food losses (on-farm and throughout the VC and affecting food quality and 
safety.  

 

9. In particular, the Guatemalan agri-food sector faces the challenge of substantial post-harvest food losses, due 
to insufficient investment in storage facilities, limited market information and low uptake of good post-harvest 
practices.  According to the United Nations Environment Programme, 52,000 tons of post-harvest food is lost or wasted 
annually in Guatemala. More than 35 percent of beans and maize are spoiled due to poor harvest management, pests 
and animals, salmonella and aflatoxins. In addition, lack of information about market location and prices leads to high 
levels of food loss at the farm level and additional upstream loss in the value chain. Food Loss and Waste (FLW) also 
significantly contributes to GHG emissions 

 

10. To build toward its anti-poverty and growth potential as part of the new Government’s “economic wall of 
opportunities,” the agri-food system must improve significantly its productive and post-harvest efficiency while 
mitigating the deleterious impacts of the recent COVID-19 pandemic. COVID-19 is expected to impact in 



unprecedented ways the productivity and food security of producers and consumers within Guatemala’s food systems, 
as well as agri-food exports. While the sector has clear potential for continued expansion and diversification in export 
and domestic markets, the urgent challenge related to COVID-19 threatens producers, agribusiness micro-, small- and 
medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs), other supply chain actors, markets, and domestic and international demand. To 
improve access to markets and build resilience in the system, especially given the current dual health and economic 
emergencies, the proposed Project offers an opportunity to make investments that contribute to strengthening and 
improving efficiency in productive and post-harvest capacity, and to promoting food safety, food quality, 
competitiveness and broader resilience considerations. 

 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
Development Objective(s) (From PAD)  
The project development objective (PDO) is to contribute to reducing food losses, increasing adoption of climate resilient 
technologies and providing emergency response to COVID-19 to beneficiaries in select value chains 
 

Key Results 

 

Reducing Food Losses 
• Reduction of food losses in selected value chains (as a percentage of total production)   

• Reduction of products rejected due to food safety received by buyers in selected value chains (as a 
percentage share of baseline).   

Increasing adoption of climate 
resilient technologies  

• Beneficiaries adopting improved agricultural technologies promoted by the Project to enhance climate 
resiliency, disaggregated by gender and ethnicity (number)  

• Beneficiaries demonstrating an improvement in empowerment  disaggregated by gender (IFAD core 
indicator) (percentage)1 

Providing emergency response 
to the Covid-19 pandemic 

• MSMES supported under MINECO’s COVID-19 emergency response fund, disaggregated by gender - 
(number) 

• Number of PFIs that use the guarantee fund (number)  

 
 
D. Project Description  
 

11. The proposed Project will prioritize investments in select, strategic Value Chains (VCs) pre-identified by 
the Ministry of Economy (MINECO).  Project-supported beneficiaries will be eligible micro, small and medium 
agribusinesses and agro-industry, producers’ associations, and producers’ groups (hereinafter referred to as 
MSMEs).  

12. Component 1: Emergency Response to COVID-19 Impacts on Agro-industrial Economic Activities. This 
component will invest in two strategic priority areas (i) Emergency relief to MSMEs through a MINECO partial 
guarantee fund, and (ii) Skills development for greater employability through training and an on-line labor-

 
1 This is a survey-based index for measuring empowerment, agency, and inclusion of women in the agriculture sector. Developed jointly by the 
International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI), the Oxford Poverty and Human Development Initiative (OPHI), and thirteen partner projects 
in IFPRI’s GAAP2 portfolio, Pro-WEAI is composed of twelve indicators of women’s empowerment in agriculture: autonomy in income, self-
efficacy, attitudes about domestic violence, input in productive decisions, ownership of land and other assets, access to and decisions on credit, 
control over use of income, work balance, visiting important locations, group membership, membership in influential groups, and respect among 
household members. 

matching platform. 

13. Component 2: Investments to Enhance MSMEs Efficiency and Resiliency. This component will operate 
at a national level, focusing on subprojects in select, strategic VCs. Eligible beneficiary MSMEs will receive 
financial support based on approved business plans to improve the quality of their productive processes through 
investments in post-harvest practices, including activities such as storage, agro-logistics, aggregation, and 
transformation of harvested products along the selected VCs. The Project will provide grants and beneficiaries 
will be expected to provide contributions.  The grants will be provided by MINECO with both IFAD and World 
Bank resources.  

14. Component 3: Institutional strengthening in support of Guatemala’s agri-food system.  The objective of 
this component is to strengthen public sector institutions that are considered strategic in supporting the 
efficiency of the country’s agri-food system.  It is divided into two sub-components: (i) improving public 
infrastructure to enhance SPS standards, food safety, food quality and traceability and (ii) institutional 
strengthening of key public sector institutions, including MINECO, MAGA, and National Quality System and INE.  

15. Component 4. Monitoring, Evaluation and Project Management. This Component will finance the overall 
project management, monitoring, and implementation of Components 1 to 3.  

16. Component 5. Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC). The objective of this component is 
to support the Government’s emergency response to disasters. This will be activated upon request of the 
Borrower, upon the official declaration of a national emergency.  

.

.  
Legal Operational Policies 

            Triggered? 

Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50             Yes  

Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60             No  

 

Summary of Assessment of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts 
. 

 
17. Whereas the environmental risk rating is assessed as moderate, the combined Environmental and Social risk 
rating is considered SUBSTANTIAL, particularly driven by contextual social factors and borrower’s capacity: (i) the 
inherent challenges of implementing projects with multiple and diverse Indigenous groups with their own governance 
structures, languages and socio-cultural characteristics dispersed nationally; (ii) potential implementation of 
subprojects in remote and difficult to access areas due to inadequate and limited infrastructure, particularly during 
the rainy season, as well as potential overlapping with high crime and violence areas, creating challenges for providing 
technical support and effective monitoring; (iii) use of a guarantee scheme that triggers participation of financial 
intermediaries with no previous experience working with the World Bank; and, (iv) no existing institutional capacity in 
MINECO to develop and monitor Environmental and Social (E&S) instruments and no previous experience with the 
new areas covered by the Environmental and Social Framework. 
 
18. Given that the exact scope and location of subprojects will be defined only during project implementation, 
based on demand and subject to the specific eligibility criteria, and because specific risks are unknown, the project has 
adopted a framework approach to environmental and social management. The framework approach and phased 



preparation of E&S instruments is also required to accommodate project preparation with condensed procedures 
under paragraph 12 of the Investment Project Financing policy in response to the Covid-19 pandemic. The E&S 
instruments will be developed in two phases. The Government of Guatemala (GoG) will develop, consult with key 
stakeholders, and disclose prior to appraisal a draft Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP), including a project-level 
Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) and an Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP). Consultations for 
these instruments took place in the context of country-wide quarantine with strong mobility restrictions, following the 
recommendations set forth in the WB’s Technical Note, avoiding in-person gatherings, and using virtual interactive 
meetings, emails, online surveys, WhatsApp and traditional telephone calls, when stakeholders did not have access to 
online channels or were not used to them. The results of these consultations have been documented in the draft SEP 
and integrated into the design of the project and the SEP. 
 
19. The Borrower will also develop, consult with stakeholders and disclose within 30 days of effectiveness: an (i) 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF); (ii) Labor Management Procedures with a dedicated GRM 
for project workers; (iii) an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF); and, (vi) a final SEP, including a project-
level GRM. The ESCP reflects the GoG’s requirements to implement the above-mentioned instruments at the site-
specific level and to complete periodic reporting to the Bank on its compliance. During implementation, as business 
plans are approved, Environmental and Social screenings will be carried out for each subproject. Environmental and 
Social Management Plans (ESMPs) covering environmental, social, health and safety (ESHS) issues, as well as 
Indigenous Peoples Plans (IPPs), will also be developed when applicable. All required construction phase mitigation, 
management and monitoring measures identified in the ESMF will be reflected in bidding and contracting documents. 

 

20. The PIU will include dedicated environmental, social and gender specialists and will be responsible for 
complying with environmental and social commitments, supervising firms and contractors to ensure application of 
mitigation measures, monitoring implementation and reporting to the Bank and relevant national authorities. MINECO 
will submit semiannual implementation reports to the Bank, including a dedicated section on compliance with the 
environmental and social requirements set forth in the ESCP and specified in each of the E&S instruments developed 
for this Project. 

 
E. Implementation 

 
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements  

21. The Project will be implemented by MINECO. MINECO is the entity in charge of formulating and executing 
consumer protection and competition promotion policies. Specifically, it formulates and executes policies for 
national and foreign investment, promotion of competitiveness, industrial and commercial development. In 
addition, by delegation of the President of the Republic, it is the entity in charge of carrying out the negotiations 
of bilateral and multilateral international trade agreements and treaties. It also proposes, in coordination with 
the other ministries and State agencies, the specifications and technical and quality standards of national 
production; and facilitates the competitive development of micro, MSMEs through the provision of financial 
services and business development. The Project will be headed by the Vice Ministry of Investment and 
Competition of MINECO and the National Program on Competitiveness (PRONACOM).  
 
22. As part of the support to the agriculture sector, MINECO will provide technical support and capacity 
building for the other key institution in the sector - the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Food (MAGA). 
Among its functions, MAGA is in charge of implementing the food and nutrition security policy, as well as 
promoting community organization through productive agricultural projects by means of extension services, 


training, and technical assistance. In addition, it is responsible for generating, processing and disseminating 
geographic, cartographic, food security and risk management information to prevent and mitigate the effects 
caused by natural disasters. MAGA will receive technical support and capacity building through project activities.  

 . 
   