














































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Malawi Resilient Productive Landscapes Project (P167860) 

 
 

  
Nov 27, 2018 Page 1 of 12  

     

 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document (PID) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 05-Dec-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSC25413 


BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Malawi P167860  Malawi Resilient 
Productive Landscapes 
Project (P167860) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA Jun 17, 2019 Sep 25, 2019 Water 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Republic of Malawi Minstry of Agriculture, 
Irrigation and Water 
Development 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
Increase adoption of resilience-enhancing landscape management practices in targeted watersheds and strengthen 
capacity for improved water resources management 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 125.00 

Total Financing 125.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 120.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 120.00 

          IDA Credit 120.00 

Non-World Bank Group Financing 

     Trust Funds 5.00 

          Global Environment Facility (GEF) 5.00 

  



 

Environmental and Social Risk Classification Concept Review Decision 

Substantial  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

 
1. Malawi is a small, peaceful and democratic country, with a population of about 17 million people. Most of the 
population (85 percent) lives in rural areas. Population growth rate is estimated at 2.8 percent per annum. At this growth 
rate, Malawi’s population is expected to reach 23 million by 2025. The country is land-locked and is highly vulnerable to 
climatic shocks. Despite a recent difficult economic period, Malawi has a stable democratic political system and has 
initiated economic and political reforms. The country remains one of the world’s poorest, with over half of its population 
living in poverty.  

2. Malawi has a narrow export base consisting mostly of tobacco, with high dependence on imports and external 
aid flows. Investment climate constraints hinder private investment. The 2018 Doing Business report ranks Malawi 111 
out of 190 on the ease of doing business.  The main obstacles to doing business include poor infrastructure and services 
such as electricity, water, transport, an uncertain economic environment, poor legal and regulatory framework, lack of 
access to long-term finance and a limited skills base. Business confidence remains subdued following two years of 
drought conditions and weak economic growth. 

3. Poverty levels in Malawi are high. In 2017, poverty headcount at US$1.9/day (2011 PPP) remained stubbornly 
high at 70 percent of the population1. Gross National Income (GNI) per capita2 was estimated at US$320 in 2017. Malawi 
is ranked 170 out of 188 countries on the United Nations Human Development Index, and 125 out of 157 on the World 
Bank’s Human Capital Index. Almost half (47 percent) of the children under age five in Malawi are short for their age 
due to long-term effects of malnutrition and 20 percent are severely stunted.   Malawi’s economic growth rates have 
fallen below the average of 2.8 percent in non-resource rich African economies during the last twenty years.  Real per 
capita Gross Domestic Product (GDP) has grown at an average of just above 1.5 percent per year between 1995 and 
2014.  With these persistent low growth rates, successive governments in Malawi have struggled to lift people out of 
poverty.   Wealth accounting data3 shows that more than half of Malawi’s wealth (estimated at US$10,442 per capita in 
2014) is renewable natural capital, mainly cropland with smaller shares contributed by pastureland, forests and 
protected areas. The natural capital base however is under extreme pressure due population growth, agricultural 
expansion and climate change. There is also a strong correlation between areas with highly degraded land and those 
with a high incidence of poverty, although there is currently insufficient evidence to point to a causal link4.   


4. Natural resources underpin Malawi’s productive sectors and are the main source of livelihood for over 80 
percent of the population.  For instance, the agriculture sector contributes 28 percent of Malawi’s GDP and 78 percent 
of export earnings, and employs 64 percent of the workforce, which consists mainly of subsistence farmers. Smallholders 
account for 80 percent of agricultural production and 70 percent of agricultural GDP.  The forestry sector contributes 
6.2 percent to the GDP (and this does not account for the value of non-wood forest products, processed timber or the 
enormous informal trade in wood fuel and charcoal). Some 33,000 jobs are heavily dependent on the existence of 
Malawi's forests.  Forests provide a range of environmental services, such as GHG mitigation, watershed regulation, 
climate regulation, soil and water conservation, biodiversity support and nutrient cycling. The nine protected areas in 
the Shire river basin store an estimated 80 million tons of CO2e5.  Malawi is also heavily dependent on hydropower for 
its energy needs, with about 98 percent of current electricity generation coming from run-of-river6 hydropower plants 
on the Shire River. 

5. Agriculture remains the lifeblood of Malawi’s economy, and growth in GDP has historically followed growth in 
agriculture.  However, most of the population is engaged in smallholder, low-productivity rain-fed agriculture which 
regularly suffers exogenous climate-induced shocks with significant negative impacts on overall growth and poverty 
reduction. In recent years, weak fiscal policy, low investor confidence, significant weather shocks and land degradation 
have had detrimental effects on agricultural output and food security.  Malawi regularly suffers from droughts and 
floods, and its economic growth is closely correlated with hydrological variability. In recent years, the country has 
suffered from weather shocks with increasing frequency, including both floods and droughts in early 2015, followed by 
another major drought in 2016. Irrigation potential has not been fully developed. Only about four percent of crop land 
is currently irrigated, severely constraining agricultural intensification and commercialization. 

6. Medium-term economic prospects however appear positive as the country recovers from the recent weather-
induced shocks in 2016. Real GDP growth after two consecutive years of drought, fell below three percent in 2016 but 
is projected to pick up in the range of four to five percent over the next two years. Increased output is expected to be 
driven by a rebound in the agriculture sector, although this outlook is susceptible to downward risks such as a potential 
El Niño-induced weather shocks.  The continued vulnerability of Malawi’s agricultural sector and spillovers to other 
sectors point to the critical need to promote measures that improve resilience.  The Government of Malawi (GoM) has 
recently developed a medium-term strategy7, looking beyond the recent crisis, to establish strong foundations for a 
productive, competitive and resilient nation. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
7. Malawi’s water resources are under threat from severe land degradation and loss of forest cover.  Critical 
watersheds are becoming degraded leading to reduced water availability, deteriorating water quality, increased 
vulnerability to droughts and floods, reduced energy security and reduced agricultural productivity. Malawi has a large 
network of surface waterbodies covering about 21 percent of the country’s total area; about 20 percent of this area is 
Lake Malawi itself.  Malawi’s drainage system is divided into 17 Water Resources Areas (WRAs)8. Major river systems 
include Shire (WRA 1), Ruo (WRA 14), Linthipe (WRA 4), Bua (WRA 5), Dwangwa (WRA 6), South Rukuru (WRA 7), North 
Rukuru (WRA 8) and Songwe (WRA 9).  Most of the rivers are subject to natural seasonal flows but maintain at least 
some base flow (at least in their lower reaches) throughout the dry season. The total renewable water resource available 
in Malawi is estimated at 17.3 km3/year, or 1,027 m3/capita/year.  While availability of water resources in the aggregate 

                                            
5 Bayliss (2015). Carbon Storage Analysis of select Protected Areas under the SRBMP.   Report to Government of Malawi 
6 ‘Run-of-river’ means that there is little or no storage capacity upstream of the power plant except small pondage for peaking. The amount of 
electricity that can be produced depends on the daily flow of the river.  
7 Malawi Growth and Development Strategy (2017-2022) 
8 A Water Resources Area is essentially a single large, or in some cases a collection of smaller, hydrological catchments. 



     

is considered satisfactory, per capita water availability has been declining at a rapid rate.  Malawi is now dangerously 
close to becoming water scarce9. Further, water resources in Malawi are highly variable between wet and dry seasons 
and from year to year, and the country’s stock of water storage infrastructure is one of the lowest in the region. GoM’s 
Water Resources Investment Strategy (WRIS, 2011) identifies poor catchment conditions and deteriorating water quality 
as significant risks to water resources and associated infrastructure (dams, hydropower plants, irrigation systems), and 
recommends investments in catchment management in strategically important WRAs.     

8. Land degradation10 in Malawi’s most important watersheds has reached alarming levels, with major impacts on 
water security, agricultural productivity, and hydropower generation.  Recent studies suggest that land degradation 
hotspots cover about half (41 percent) of the land area in the country11. Soil erosion and nutrient depletion are major 
forms of land degradation that are reported to affect more than 60 percent of the entire land area. The average annual 
national soil loss rates in 2014 was 29 tons per hectare12. Chemical land degradation, including soil pollution and 
salinization/alkalization, has led to 15 percent loss in the arable land in Malawi in the last decade alone. Projections for 
future land degradation and soil loss under different climate and population growth rate scenarios suggest that land 
degradation will become increasingly severe, with one study suggesting that overall rates of soil loss will increase by 
between three and four times 2010 baseline levels13. The Shire River Basin (WRA 1) remains the most prominent hotspot 
of land degradation. High loads of sediment are deposited in river beds, reservoirs and floodplain wetlands, affecting 
irrigation canals, fisheries and hydropower generation.  Existing hydropower plants on the Shire River are often unable 
to meet peak demand, partly due to low flows and sediments in the river caused by degradation of catchments upstream 
of the plants14.  

9. Forest degradation is a major contributor to land and water resources degradation.  Over the last 40 years, more 
than half of Malawi’s forests and woodlands have vanished and those that remain are being ‘thinned’ through over-
extraction and more frequent forest fires. Yet, forests make a substantial contribution to livelihoods and the economy 
and are needed to protect vital ecosystem services. They also provide the bulk of Malawi’s energy supply in the form of 
charcoal and firewood.  Wood fuels dominate Malawi’s energy sector and are used by 98 percent of the population. The 
industry provides large numbers of jobs and is worth nearly US$295 million per annum – equivalent to four percent of 
GDP15.  Forests and woodlands also play a key role in protecting watersheds from erosion, sustain the biodiversity that 
underpins a large proportion of Malawi’s tourism sector and make an important contribution to mitigating carbon 
emissions.   

10. The underlying drivers of land degradation in Malawi are well known. These include a growing demand for 
agricultural land due to increased population pressure and reduced agricultural productivity; insecure land tenure which 
reduces incentives to invest in soil and water conservation measures; and limited access to markets and rural finance. 
The proximate causes of land degradation include a wide range of biophysical factors and poor land management 

                                            
9 Under the Falkenmark definitions of water scarcity, a country with a total renewable water resource of less than 1000 m3/capita/year is 
considered water scarce 
10 Defined here as: “the reduction or loss of the biological or economic productivity and complexity of rainfed cropland, irrigated cropland, or range, 
pasture, forest or woodlands resulting from natural processes, land uses or other human activities and habitation patterns such as land 
contamination, soil erosion and the destruction of the vegetation cover” 
11 MoNREM (2017). Forest Landscape Restoration Opportunities Assessment of Malawi. Lilongwe, Ministry of Natural Resources, Energy and 
Mining, Government of Malawi.  
12 Vargus R. and Omuto, C. (2016). Soil Loss Assessment in Malawi. FAO, UNEP and UNDP and MoAIWD.  Available at 
http://unpei.org/sites/default/files/Soil_Loss_Assessment_in%20Malawi.pdf [accessed on November 20, 2018] 
13 LTS (2013). Integrated Assessment of Land Use Options in Malawi.  Report to the World Bank and Government of Malawi 
14 In 2017, Malawi’s power generation utility (EGENCO) spent around US$150,000 per ton on sediment management to enable operation of the 
hydropower facilities. 
15 World Bank (2018). Malawi Country Environmental Analysis. World Bank, October 2018 

     

practices. Important biophysical factors that affect land degradation include topography, land cover, climate and soil 
erodibility.  

11. Efforts to address land degradation are hampered by a multitude of factors.  The major challenge is the weak 
institutional capacity for natural resource management at both national and local levels and the severe lack of funding 
for these activities in local government budgets. With insufficient resources, weak capacity and incentives, local 
governments are generally unable to play an effective role in addressing land degradation at the local level. In addition, 
changes to climate and weather patterns exacerbate the impacts of natural resources degradation, making it harder to 
address the problem.  Future climate change scenarios suggest that Malawi will see increasing climatic variability, higher 
temperatures, longer dry periods, and more erratic and intense rainfall events16. More intense flood events will cause 
greater soil erosion and land degradation. Hotter and drier periods will contribute to forest fire risks. Droughts will 
continue to negatively impact food production, causing food insecurity and increased poverty. Increased poverty results 
in greater demand for agricultural land, thus exerting more pressure on the natural resources base.  Yet, Malawi remains 
unprepared to anticipate, respond to and recover from the effects of climate change.  The country lacks reliable hydro-
meteorological information that is needed for building climate resilience.  For example, out of the 140 hydrological 
monitoring stations in Malawi that are considered a priority, 70 percent are not operational.  Systems for data storage 
and quick relay to modelling and forecasting systems are either non-existent or not integrated across agencies. Building 
a national and more integrated hydrometeorological service is key to building climate resilience across productive 
sectors and reducing pressure on the natural resources base.  

12. Reversing the rate of land degradation remains a government priority. The Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and 
Water Development (MoAIWD) and the Ministry of Natural Resources, Energy and Mining (MoNREM) recognize the 
interdependence between natural resource management, agricultural production, water and energy security. Sound 
policies and institutional frameworks for natural resources management exist. A new Environmental Management Act 
2017 has been enacted to strengthen environmental management and protection, while the Water Resources Act of 
2013 provides for the management, conservation, use and control of water resources, including management of 
watersheds.  

13. The recent establishment of the National Water Resources Authority (NWRA)17 is expected to help strengthen 
multi-sectoral planning and management of water resources in the country, and pave way for establishment of 
sustainable watershed management institutions at the community level. Land reforms introduced in 2016 are 
expected to improve land tenure security and strengthen incentives for small-holder farmers and businesses to invest 
in sustainable land and water management practices. Further, a new National Charcoal Strategy has been approved, 
which for the first time, provides an opportunity to legalize the charcoal value chain and move towards more sustainable 
charcoal production, and thus reducing pressure on forests and community woodlands. However, the ability to 
implement policy and legislation, both nationally and locally, remains weak.  Monitoring is often limited and ineffective, 
compliance is low and the structures necessary for providing guidance and procedures are not in place. Weak 
institutional capacity is particularly acute at district and local levels, partly because of the slow pace of decentralization 
and severe under-funding18 which constrains the effective functioning of institutions at district and local level, limiting 
their ability to implement policy. 

14. To reverse landscape degradation and protect watersheds, Malawi needs to invest at scale in the protection of 
renewable natural resources and their restoration where appropriate and cost-effective, using a broad suite of 

                                            
16 Government of Malawi (2017). Strategic Program for Climate Resilience: Pilot Program on Climate Resilience (PPCR).   
17 GoM recently appointed the governing board for NWRA – a move that is seen as an important milestone in operationalizing the institutional 
framework for water resources management as laid out in the Water Resources Act of 2013.  
18 For instance, the share of agricultural spending on extension support – a critical service for promoting the uptake of SLM practices –reduced 
from 25 percent in 2005 to just 5 percent in 2012.  


interventions. These will include sustainable forest management and restoration interventions, development of water 
management infrastructure, scaling-up of climate smart agriculture and resilient livelihoods. At the same time, GoM 
needs to invest in strengthening institutions and improving the monitoring, management and use of hydro-
meteorological information.  GoM’s National Forest and Landscape Restoration Strategy (NFLRS), published in July 2017, 
proposed that land restoration should be elevated to a higher national priority level, backed by financial investment to 
implement a large scale national program for land restoration. In this regard, GoM has committed to restore 4.5 million 
hectares19 of landscape by 2030, through a combination of interventions, including soil and water conservation, river 
and stream bank restoration, conservation agriculture, farmer-managed natural regeneration and agroforestry; natural 
forest management; community forests and private woodlots. The total cost of achieving this target is estimated at 
US$385 million (or US$86 per hectare). GoM is currently in the process of mobilizing finance from development partners 
to support implementation of the strategy, either through a new large scale national program or a series of separate 
programs targeting major river basins 20.    

15. One such program which GoM has been implementing since 2012 with World Bank support is the Shire River 
Basin Management Program (SRBMP) 21. Part of the investment under SRBMP targets degraded hotspots in the basin 
covering a total area of 129,500 ha (about 5 percent of the basin land area). These catchments have been undergoing 
rehabilitation over the past two years with promising results.  Available data shows that a total of 35,385 ha (i.e. 27 
percent of the targeted catchment area and 1.3 percent of the entire basin) has been rehabilitated, including 10,173ha 
of previously degraded community forests which have been regenerated. Vegetative protection measures have been 
implemented on 4,000km of water courses (rivers and streams) in the targeted catchments. Various infrastructure 
packages–rural feeder roads (80km), bridges (11) and markets (13)–designed to support alternative livelihoods and 
improve market access have been completed and commissioned. A total of 366 Common Interest Groups (CIGs) have 
been established, trained and provided with start-up capital for various non-farm business enterprises.  Finally, a total 
of 80 Farmer Field Schools (FFS) are now promoting conservation agriculture and improved farming practices using a 
farmer-to-farmer extension approach. To date, about 77 percent of households within the targeted catchments are 
reported to be engaged in sustainable land and water management.  These results, although achieved at a small scale, 
have demonstrated that it is possible to restore degraded landscapes through an integrated package of interventions 
involving land and water management, forestry management and livelihood support.  GoM would like to scale up these 
interventions in other degraded hotspots in the Shire River Basin and elsewhere in line with the national landscape 
restoration strategy. The proposed Resilient Productive Landscapes Project (RPLP) has been conceived in response to 
GoM’s letter of request for World Bank support dated June 28, 2017. 

 
Relationship to CPF 

 
16. The project is aligned with the new growth-oriented Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Malawi which is 
currently under preparation. The CPF focus on four themes which emerged from the Systematic Country Diagnostic 
(SCD).  These are: (i) human capital; (ii) governance and macroeconomy; (iii) energy and infrastructure; and (iv) 
environment and rural resilience.  The project contributes to the environment and rural resilience theme by addressing 
land degradation, improving natural resources management and boosting agricultural productivity.  Addressing these 
issues will contribute to protecting critical watersheds and securing water resources for existing and proposed 
hydropower plants on the Shire river as well as the large-scale irrigation scheme currently under implementation as part 
of the Shire Valley Transformation Program.   

                                            
19 This represents about half of the entire land area in Malawi 
20 So far, GoM has developed and is implementing two river basin management programs – Shire River Basin Management Program supported by 
the World Bank and the Songwe River Basin Management Program – supported by African Development Bank 
21 Current World Bank support to SRBMP ends on January 31, 2019 



 
The World Bank  
Malawi Resilient Productive Landscapes Project (P167860) 

 
 

  
Nov 27, 2018 Page 8 of 12  

     

17. The project is also expected to contribute to the human capital agenda in Malawi. A recent study22 found that 
upstream watershed conditions were a strong predictor children’s health across 35 developing countries, including 
Malawi.  Specifically, the study found that in areas with no access to improved water sources, higher upstream tree 
cover is associated with lower probability of diarrheal diseases downstream, even after controlling for socio-economic 
and climate factors23. This suggests that improving watershed management is not only an investment in environmental 
resilience, it is also an investment in public health. 

18. The project responds directly to GoM’s priorities as laid out in the Malawi Growth and Development Strategy 
(MGDS III) 2017-2022.  The objective of the strategy is to move Malawi to a productive, competitive and resilient nation 
through sustainable agriculture and economic growth, energy, industrial and infrastructure development while 
addressing water, climate change, environmental management and population challenges.  The project contributes 
directly to the MGDS III priority areas of agriculture, water development and climate change management by supporting 
investments that address land degradation and its impacts on water resources, agricultural productivity and rural 
resilience.  Given the critical role water plays in Malawi’s economy, and given that the country’s wealth is still largely 
dominated by natural resources (largely cropland), future growth will depend on reversing land degradation to improve 
productivity, and sustainable management of natural capital (especially forests) to protect water security.     

19. The project also contributes to the WBG’s twin goals of ending extreme poverty and promoting shared 
prosperity. The project area targets the poorest region of Malawi, where rural poverty rates are above 80 percent.  A 
recent study24 shows a strong correlation between areas with highly degraded land and those with a high incidence of 
poverty, implying that increasing levels of land degradation may be contributing to the poverty of millions of Malawians. 
The project will contribute to reversing this trend. 

 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
20. The proposed Project Development Objectove (PDO) is to increase adoption of resilience-enhancing landscape 
management practices in targeted watersheds and strengthen capacity for improved water resources management. 

 
Key Results (From PCN) 
 
21. The following PDO results indicators will be used to measure achievement of the PDO: 

1. Land area under resilience-enhancing landscape management practices (ha) 

a. Agricultural land area with productivity enhancing practices applied (ha) 

b. Forest land area restored, reforested or under improved management (ha) 

2. Proportion (%) of targeted watershed area showing: 

a. an increase in Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI)25 correcting for climate effects; 

b. an increase in Land Surface Water Index (LSWI)26 correcting for climate effects (percent); 

3. Number of farmers (disaggregated by gender) adopting improved agricultural technologies; and  

                                            
22 Herrera, D. et al (2016). Upstream watershed condition predicts rural children’s health across 35 developing countries. Nature communications, 
Vol 8, 811 (2017).  
23 This finding is consistent with other literature on the role of forests in regulating water quality.   
24 World Bank (2018). Malawi Country Environmental Analysis. October 2018 (under preparation) 
25 NDVI uses the visible and near-infrared bands of the electromagnetic spectrum to analyze remote sensing measurements (based on satellite 
imagery data) to determine the extent to which a target contains live green vegetation. 
26 LSWI uses the shortwave infrared and near-infrared bands of the electromagnetic spectrum to analyze remote sensing measurements (based on 
satellite imagery data) to determine the amount of water in vegetation and soil. 


     

4. Number of people (disaggregated by gender) adopting alternative livelihood activities supported by the 
project. 

5. Operationalization of the National Water Resources Authority 

 
D. Concept Description 

 
22. The proposed project responds to Malawi’s most pressing environmental challenge – severe degradation of the 
renewable natural resources base (land, forests and water resources) that underpins the productive sectors of the 
economy.  The project’s central thesis is that degradation of the renewable natural resources base and high exposure 
and vulnerability to climate change have adversely affected energy and water security, agricultural productivity and 
livelihoods.  The project will contribute to breaking the cycle of degradation in selected watersheds and reducing climate 
vulnerability by (i) strengthening the institutional enabling environment for landscape management at the national, 
local and community level; (ii) investing in productive landscape management and livelihoods in targeted watersheds; 
and (iii) improving hydrometeorological information and services for resilience.  Intervention in these three areas is 
expected to result in increased adoption of resilience-enhancing landscape management practices, which would 
ultimately contribute to improving water and energy security, agricultural productivity and livelihoods.   

23. The proposed project will support GoM’s National Forest and Landscape Restoration Strategy (NFLRS). The 
overall objective of the NFLRS is to restore degraded landscapes for improved water and energy security, agricultural 
productivity and livelihoods. The project will contribute to achieving this objective by investing in restoration activities 
in selected priority watersheds, while at the same strengthening institutions and information for resilience and 
sustainability. Proposed project activities will be organized under five components as outlined in the following 
paragraphs.  

24. Component 1 – Institutional capacity strengthening.  This national level component will finance a package of 
activities designed to strengthen the institutional and policy framework for integrated landscape and water resources 
management at national, district and local levels and will also support the development and piloting of a Payments for 
Ecosystem Services (PES) mechanism for the Shire river basin that could deliver longer-term financing for efforts to 
address land degradation and protect natural resources that generate ecosystem services.    

25. Component 2 – Landscape management and livelihoods support. This component will finance an integrated 
package of interventions designed to protect environmental services and restore degraded landscapes in selected 
watersheds in ways that will also build resilient livelihoods. The component will support: 

• Sustainable land and water management (SLWM) interventions that will focus on catchment planning, river 
and streambank management; and soil and water conservation.  The approach will be based on the successful 
participatory approach tested under SRBMP and codified in the new national guidelines on integrated 
catchment management; 

• Agriculture and resilient livelihoods interventions that will support climate smart agriculture practices to 
increase the resilience of both farmers and landscapes. Support for livelihood diversification through stronger 
engagement with the private sector will also be encouraged; 

• Forestry and protected areas interventions that will be delivered in the context of the NFLRS and will focus on 
strengthening the management and productive contribution of existing natural forests in both state-managed 
forest reserves and on customary land, and protected areas. Forest reserves and protected areas comprise a 
large proportion of the upper part of the landscape, play a key role in protecting ecosystem services and offer 
cost-effective opportunities for avoid the need for costly restoration of natural resources; and  



 
The World Bank  
Malawi Resilient Productive Landscapes Project (P167860) 

 
 

  
Nov 27, 2018 Page 10 of 12  

     

• Development of water management infrastructure will focus on small-scale investments for harvesting, 
storing, and delivering water for people, livestock and agriculture. The menu of water infrastructure 
investments will include small-to-medium dams, small sand and sub-surface dams in dry river beds, area 
infiltration interventions such as semi-circular bunds or soil bunds, and rock catchments. The component 
could also support rehabilitation and/or construction of boreholes for groundwater extraction. Diversification 
of water sources in each target watershed will increase the supply of water for multiple use and therefore 
mitigate against the risk of droughts. 

 
26. Component 3- Hydro-meteorological monitoring and climate services improvement.  This component will invest 
in the expansion and modernization of Malawi’s hydrometeorological monitoring network and associated data 
management and decision-support systems. It will also support the integration, efficiency and scaling up of climate 
information services.  It will support Malawi’s efforts to establish a National Framework for Climate Services (NFCS) 
through investments in the entire value-chain of climate products and services. This component will complement an 
ongoing Green Climate Fund-supported initiative by extending geographical focus to cover southern Malawi and by 
strengthening development of digital solutions.  

27. Component 4–Project management support. This component will finance a package of project management 
support activities to ensure cost-efficient, timely and quality delivery of project activities and results, and will include: 
(i) establishment of a project management support unit with specialized project management professionals to provide 
support to the lead implementing ministry/department and the multi-sectoral technical team; (ii) incremental 
operating costs for day-to-day management of project activities at the national and district levels; and (iii) support to 
multi-sectoral coordination and implementation at the district and local levels.   

28. Component 5 –Contingency Emergency Response. A Contingency Emergency Response Component (CERC) with 
zero allocation will be created and made implementation-ready to allow the GoM to respond quickly in case of an 
eligible emergency. The CERC will complement those in place already under agriculture and nutrition projects and the 
forthcoming Malawi CAT DDO.   The mechanism will be defined in a specific CERC Operational Manual that will clearly 
outline the triggers, eligible expenditures, procurement thresholds, and procedures for using part of IDA resources of 
the project to respond quickly in the event of an eligible emergency. 

29. The project will use, where appropriate, community‐led landscape approaches—that is, an integrated approach 
to sustainably manage natural resources for multiple purposes and functions. Managing natural resources in an 
integrated way across different land uses and connecting them at the landscape level provides the basis for addressing 
trade‐offs and enhancing people’s livelihoods and resilience to climate variability and change.  In the context of the 
project, the operational boundaries of the landscapes are those of the watersheds or micro-watersheds targeted by 
the project.  The project area will include a total of 500 micro-watersheds located in the degradation hotspot areas of 
the Shire River Basin (upper and middle Shire), averaging approximately 500 hectares each.  This includes a total of 305 
micro-watersheds supported under SRBMP and a total of 195 new micro-watersheds to be selected in the upper and 
middle reaches of the Shire river basin, upstream of existing and proposed hydropower plants.  The watersheds 
supported under SRBMP will continue to receive support to allow for full implementation of the watershed 
management plans (or Village-Level Action Plans).  These watersheds will also receive technical assistance to graduate 
from project-based support, including establishment of catchment management committees, in accordance with the 
Water Resources Act 2013.   

30. The estimated cost of the proposed project is US$125 million.  It is proposed to finance this cost through an IDA 
credit of US$120 million and a GEF grant of US$5 million. The final project financing structure will be decided in 
consultation with MoFEPD. 

 

 
Legal Operational Policies                                  Triggered? 

Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50 Yes 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60 No 

 
Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts 

Project subprojects have not been identified, however screening of potential environmental and social 
impacts has been undertaken on similar subprojects. Possible risks and impacts that are likely to arise from 
some of the proposed subprojects include construction related health and safety risks to both labour and 
local communities; possible influx of populations and the social risks associated with that such as disease 
transmission and spread of HIV, potential for Gender Based Violence; and land acquisition leading to 
temporary or permanent physical displacement and loss of assets, land and livelihoods. Environmental risks 
include those related to civil works construction (controlling on-site erosion and pollution), localized changes 
in water use and distribution. unregulated wood cutting in areas with improved road access (absent adequate 
control measures), potential damage to patches of natural habitat (such as miombo woodland or dambos), 
and possibly increased agro-chemical use. 

 