














































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Uganda Irrigation Modernisation Project (P163836) 

 
 

  
Nov 27, 2017 Page 1 of 18  

     

 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 03-Apr-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSC23380 


BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Uganda P163836  Uganda irrigation 
development and 
climate resilience 
project (P163836) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA Jan 15, 2019 May 30, 2019 Water 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Finance, Planning 
and Economic Development 

Ministry of Water and 
Environment 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
To provide irrigation and drainage services, and develop institutional capacity for irrigated agriculture production in the 
project areas. 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-NewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 200.00 

Total Financing 200.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 195.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 195.00 

          IDA Credit 195.00 

Non-World Bank Group Financing 

     Counterpart Funding 5.00 

          Borrower 5.00 
   
 

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

A-Full Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 
 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

 

1. Uganda has made significant progress in economic growth and poverty reduction over the last 30 years, 

rural poverty remains a major challenge. Following policy reforms that allowed market liberalization and led to 

political stability, Uganda registered high economic growth between 1987 and 2010, with Gross Domestic 

Product (GDP) averaging 5.1 percent1 in the last five years. The structure of the Ugandan economy has also 

undergone a major transformation during the same period, with a notable shift from a primarily agriculture-based 

economy to one dominated by services and industry. In 20152, the service sector became the largest contributor 

to GDP (52.8 percent), followed by agriculture (25.8 percent) and industry (21.4 percent), respectively. In line 

with its economic growth, the country achieved remarkable results in poverty reduction, cutting extreme poverty 

by half, between 1993 and 20063. The recent National Household Survey has however showed an increase in 

poverty from 19.7% in 2012/13 to 27% in 2016/17. The main poverty challenges are food insecurity, low 

agricultural productivity, a degrading natural resource base, inadequate planning for the rapid urbanization and 

low access to basic infrastructure and services.  

 

2. Agriculture has been a key driver of economic growth and poverty reduction in Uganda, irrigation 

development is essential for food security and agriculture transformation. As Uganda’s largest single economic 

sector, generating about one quarter of GDP and employing 70 percent of the labor force, agriculture plays a 

critical role for income generation, employment and livelihoods, particularly for the bottom 40% of the 

population, as well as overall economic development. In spite of the gradual decline in its GDP contribution, 

typical of transforming economies, agriculture remains the key source of exports contributing 80% of total 

exports. The agriculture sector supports over 80% of the poorest of the population, the rural areas account for 

94% of the poor, and 85% of the population. This demonstrates the high potential multiplier effect of agricultural 

growth on the socio-economic development of the country. Irrigation development which is now very limited in 

the Uganda is essential to increase agricultural productivity, manage the increasing climate risks and enable 

 
1 World Bank Data: Uganda Economic Overview (2017) 
2 World Development Indicators (2015)  
3 Uganda Poverty Assessment Report (2013): Ugandan poverty line USD 0.94 and 1.07 per day depending on the region and area). 



commercial cultivation in the country. In recognizing the critical roles of irrigation, the government in the Vision 

2040 and NDP II (2016-2020) lists irrigation investment as a high priority along with agricultural value-chain 

development. The goal is to transform the small-holder subsistence cultivation into modern commercial farming 

to increase production, productivity and farm income.  
 

Sectoral and Institutional Context 

 

3. The regulatory framework for irrigation in Uganda is generally aligned with international good 

practice although detailed implementation regulations and management institutions require strengthening.   

The Water Act (1995) provides the institutional framework and legislation for water resources management, 

irrigation, water supply and sanitation. The National Water Policy defines the responsibilities of different entities 

in water resource development, promotes water resource assessment and planning for irrigation, and calls for 

increasing the capacity of the farmers to access and use water for crop, fishery and livestock production. The 

Water Resources Management Reform Strategy (2005) provides for decentralized water resources management 

at the zone and basin levels. On the agricultural side, the 2010 National Agricultural Policy (NAP) stipulates the 

sectoral approach to the National Development Plan, emphasizes the need for rehabilitating government irrigation 

schemes, transferring the management responsibility of irrigation schemes to lowest appropriate levels, 

establishing new irrigation schemes, and increasing water storage for livestock and wildlife. The Agriculture 

Sector Strategic Plan (2015/16-2019/20) includes strategic interventions to increase access to water for 

agricultural production. The National Irrigation Policy (2017) lays out the guiding principles and general 

institutional arrangement for irrigation development and management, including coordinated planning, 

implementation, and service delivery, as well as cost recovery and beneficiary participation through water user 

associations (WUAs). The policy recognizes the role of farmers managing small-scale schemes, and encourages 

a community-based irrigation management approach. The National Irrigation Master plan (MWE 2011-2035) 

stipulates the priority irrigation development areas and schemes over short, medium and long terms.  

 

4. Irrigation, also called water for agricultural production (WfAP), is a shared responsibility between the 

Ministry of Water and Environment (MWE) and the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries 

(MAAIF). MWE takes overall responsibility for irrigation and off-farm irrigation development while MAAIF for 

water use and management of on-farm agricultural water facilities. Horizontal and vertical coordination is often 

lacking. Overall policy guidance to the water subsector is provided by the Water Policy Committee, comprising 

members from relevant sectors. Technical guidance to the sector is provided by the cross-sectoral Water and 

Environment Sector Working Group (WESWG), which includes recommendations of budget and programs, and 

sector performance assessment.   

 

5. Agriculture and irrigation are performing well below their potentials.    Uganda has a diverse agricultural 

production system primarily based on small-scale manual subsistence farming, and comprising a system of mixed 

agriculture with perennial and annual crops in most of the seven agro-ecological zones. The main crops are cereals 

(maize, sorghum, millet, rice) on some 1.7 million ha for the two cropping cycles out of the total 14.4 million ha 

agricultural area: root crops (25%), banana (17%), as well as pulses, oil seeds, coffee, vegetables and fruits. Export 

crops include coffee, tea, tobacco, cotton, cut flowers, and cocoa. Food crop production dominates the agriculture 

sector, contributing over 55% of the agricultural GDP, while cash crops contribute 17% and livestock 15%. 

Despite the dominance of food crop production, one third is marketed with export being less than 7%. The sector 

is seeing a trend of moving towards higher-value crops (perennial and seasonal) such as Tea, Cocoa, fruits etc., 


with more clear commercial and export orientation.  

 

6. Agriculture is mainly rain-fed with only 1.3% of total cultivated land under irrigation over a potential of 

1.1million ha (AICD/IFPRI, 2010) and 3.0 million ha (NBI 2012). Therefore, the sector is very vulnerable to 

climate change and variability. According to the 2017 National Food Security Assessment and IPC, around 31 

percent of the population was food insecure (in January 2017) and this deterioration was partly due to the drought 

conditions caused by the 2016/17 El Niño and La Niña climatic events. This highlights the inadequate climate 

resilience of agricultural production and farming communities. The crop yield and productivity in the country are 

well below their potentials, for example, the yield of maize in the country is around 2.4 tons/ha while in some 

parts of world farmers could easily produce with irrigation, 10-15 ton/ha of maize. The main contributing factors 

found by different studies are lack of reliable water supply (irrigation), quality of production inputs, poor 

extension services and little value-chain development. As a result, food insecurity and malnutrition as well as 

very low agricultural income are still major challenges for the country. Many households suffer from food 

insecurity and high levels of malnutrition, with 34% of children under 5 years being stunted. The most food-

insecure region is the North, followed by the East, in terms of dietary energy consumption. In the North, 59% of 

households consume only one meal per day. The number of food-insecure people in Uganda is projected to rise 

from 7 million in 2015 to 30 million by 2025. 

 

7. Irrigation development is still at preliminary stage in the country. To date, a total of some 15,000 ha of 

public small scale irrigation schemes (largest 600-800 ha) has been developed, mostly in the form of valley tanks 

and river diversion schemes. The government ministries are responsible for scheme construction, and once the 

schemes are completed farmers operate the schemes. There is no dedicated irrigation management authority and 

the irrigation service concept is not fully developed. Irrigation water charge is being exercised in some places. 

Operation and maintenance of irrigation schemes have been essentially informal until in the past few years when 

farmer-based irrigation management through WUAs and farmer cooperative societies were piloted under AfDB 

funded irrigation rehabilitation project, which has mixed results. Negligence and deferred maintenance are 

common phenomena, management capacity at national, district and scheme levels is rather limited, sustainability 

of the existing schemes are questionable. 

8. The Government has developed a strategy for irrigation development and management.     The NDP II 

(2016-2020) and the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) both recognize investment in irrigation as one of the 

keys to the country’s transformation. The NDP II Objectives related to irrigation include: increasing production 

and productivity along the value chain; addressing challenges in selected thematic technical areas including 

critical farm inputs, mechanization and irrigation; improving agricultural markets and institutional strengthening 

for agricultural development. Institutional strengthening is crucial, alongside investments in rural infrastructure 

and markets, farmer aggregation in producer associations and agricultural extension systems, to support the shift 

to higher-value agricultural production. The government has committed itself to increasing agricultural growth to 

6 percent per year and allocate at least 10 percent of the budget to the agricultural sector. In order to address the 

irrigation development and management challenges, the government has formulated an irrigation development 

strategy. The strategy includes the following key elements: (a) boosting irrigation infrastructure development 

investment through difference sources; (b) promoting integrated planning and coordinated implementation among 

irrigation, agriculture and related sectors; (c) rolling out the National Irrigation Policy and detailed 

implementation regulations; (d) developing  irrigation management institutions and farmer water user groups 

(WUAs) as well as service charge based cost recovery mechanisms for sustainable irrigation service delivery; and 

(e) strengthening agricultural support services through different pathways, including public service delivery, 


farmer-based cooperatives/enterprises and partnership with the private sector. The 2017 National Irrigation 

Policy sets an ambitious target of total irrigated area of 400,000 ha by 2040, with the objectives of achieving 

national food security, transforming the agriculture sector and significantly increasing agricultural income, 

through increasing production and productivity, improving drought-resilience of farming communities, and 

investing in agricultural value-chain development. To implement the above strategy, the government requested 

the World Bank to support its irrigation development agenda with focus on irrigation infrastructure development, 

irrigation management institution development and value-chain development.  

 
Relationship to CPF 

 

9. The CPF of the World Bank Group for the Republic of Uganda for the period of FY16-21 responds to the 

Government of Uganda vision of a transformed society from a peasant economy to a modern and prosperous 

country by 2040, and its interim goal to attain middle income status by 2020 as described in the second National 

Development Plan (NDP II). The CPF is designed to contribute directly to achieving the Sustainable Development 

Goals, focusing on three strategic areas: (a) strengthening governance, accountability and service delivery; (b) 

Raising incomes in rural areas; and (c) boosting inclusive growth in urban areas. 

 

10. The proposed project, marked as an FY19 lending operation, directly supports the Strategic Focus Area B 

of the CPF: Raising incomes in rural areas, by increasing agricultural productivity, improving the climate 

resilience of the poor and vulnerable farming communities. The project aims to modernize both the physical 

infrastructure system (including technology) and management and service institutions, required for sustainable 

irrigation services and agricultural transformation. This is well aligned with the GoU’s Vision 2040 and 

agricultural development strategy.  
 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 

11. Program Development Objective:   The proposed program development objectives are to improve 

financially sustainable irrigation and drainage services, and increase farmers’ agricultural revenue in the project 

areas. The objective will be achieved through a phased investment program to be implemented over 10-12 years, 
with each phase focusing on one or two priority region(s). 

 

12. Proposed (Phase 1) Project Development Objectives:   The development objectives of the project are 

to develop irrigation and drainage infrastructure and services, and institutional capacity for irrigated agricultural 

production in the project areas. The schemes under Phase 1 will focus in one or two regions such as southwestern 

and northern regions. 

Key Results (From PCN) 

 

13. The key results (PDO) indicators for Phase 1 Project would likely include the following: (a) Farmers/Area 

provided with new/improved irrigation and drainage infrastructure services (no./ha); (b) Operational WUAs 

established or strengthened (number); (c) farmer cooperatives or organizations established or strengthened 

(number); (d) Change in crop intensity; and (e) Irrigation service fee established.  


D. Concept Description 
 

14. Project concept and overall approach:    The proposed project will adopt a programmatic approach, 

based on the strategic vision that sustainable irrigation infrastructure operation and services depend upon 

helping farmers turn agriculture into a profitable business. The overall thinking is that reliable and affordable 

irrigation infrastructure and services enable high agricultural production and productivity leading to increase in 

farmer household income, that will enable farmers to pay for the irrigation and associated support services, and 

invest in high-value cultivation including value-chain development; and such investments demand high quality 

services to achieve the expected returns and foster a virtuous cycle of irrigated agriculture development. In view 

of the time required to complete the above development cycle, a three bite-sized program through a series of 

projects (SOP) is conceived for the proposed operation.  

 

15. The Program would be implemented over a period of 10-12 years. It targets a total irrigated area of some 

25,000-35,000 ha at a cost of US$400-500 million directly benefiting some 200,000 small and medium sized 

farmers (tentative, assuming an average 1 ha landholding for a household of six) in the water stressed areas with 

high development potential and/or where there is significant food insecurity issues. Phase 1 project will lay the 

foundation for the subsequent phases. Each phase will have different focus on infrastructure, institutions and 

productivity/income. Each phase prepares follow-up investments for the next phase, while every phase aims to 

bring the project objectives of the previous phase to a new level. Funding sources of the Program beyond Phase 

1 would be more diverse including possible private sector investments. The program focus, phasing, and coverage 

are shown in the Annex. 

 

16. Project Design Guiding Principles and Scheme Selection Criteria:  The project design will follow the 

guiding principles below: (a) integrated investment planning and joint preparation; (b) complementarity and 

synergy with related (agricultural) investment programs; (c) institutional design to ensure sustainability of project 

facilities and service delivery, with adequate arrangements, capacity building for cost recovery and user/private 

sector involvement; and (d) simple project design with adequate implementation readiness before approval.  

 

17. Project Composition:    The proposed Phase 1 Project at an initially estimated cost of US$150-200 

million, will have three components, i.e. irrigation infrastructure development, essential support services for 

agricultural production and value-chain development, and institutional strengthening including implementation 

support. At this stage, the project is estimated to develop some 10,000 ha of new irrigated area, directly benefiting 

around 60,000 poor small to medium farmers. The component description and indicative costs are as follows:   

Component 1.  Irrigation infrastructure development (US$175 million):   The objective of this component is to 

develop the irrigation and drainage infrastructure primarily for supplemental gravity irrigation services. It will 

finance construction and equipment for the water source works (storage reservoirs, river diversion weirs and 

pumping stations), related catchment management interventions, and three to five irrigation systems (including 

main canal and drainage system, cross structures, on-farm works, and operation and maintenance (O&M) 

facilities), associated resettlement and environmental management costs. It will also finance consultancies for 

scheme feasibility studies, designs and safeguards assessments including for the follow-up investments. The 

schemes are likely to concentrate on southwestern and northern regions. This is in view of the promising 

commercial production prospect (southwestern) and high drought-vulnerability and severe food insecurity 

(northern), and very importantly implementation readiness for a successful first phase. Scheme selection will be 

guided by the GoU irrigation master plan and groundwater option considered where adequate studies exist. 
     

Component 2.  Essential support services for agricultural production and value-chain development (US$15 

million):   This component aims at filling critical gaps in provision of essential support services for crop 

production and value-chain development.  It will include strengthening farmer groups/cooperatives for better 

access to quality inputs and appropriate technologies or practices with the aim of improving production and 

productivity. It will also support value chain development and market linkages to increase the value of traded 

items for better economic gains to the target population. The interventions will largely involve retaining experts 

for diagnostic assessments and for imparting knowledge and skills to the beneficiary communities; and provide 

financial support in form of credit or matching grants towards investment in produce storage facilities and value 

addition technologies. Interventions under this component will be complementary to the ongoing agricultural 

development operations by the government and other development partners, such as the Bank-financed 

Agricultural Cluster Development Project (ACDP), the Millennium Village Project (MVP), and the EU-funded 

Common Market for East and Southern Africa (COMESA) initiative. The approach to be adopted for this 

component would be consistent with that followed by the ACDP for improving farmer access to quality 

agricultural inputs and post-harvest handling.  

Component 3.  Institutional Strengthening and Implementation Support (US$8 million):  This component is 

intended to strengthen irrigation management institutions through technical assistance and capacity building and 

implementation support. The institutional strengthening will finance: (a) consultancies for irrigation regulations 

and guidelines development, and necessary supporting studies (e.g. irrigation water tariff) for implementing the 

national irrigation policy; (b) consultancies and training for formulation and capacity building of irrigation 

management organizations for irrigation service delivery and system O&M , including management entities and 

farmer irrigation water users associations (WUAs); and (c) training and consultancies for skills development for 

staff at national, district and scheme levels including beneficiary communities and farmers, in irrigation policy 

and regulations, irrigation technology and management, and agricultural water management. Implementation 

support will include technical and project management consultancies, necessary facilities (goods) and incremental 

operating costs for project implementation management.  

18. Lessons learned and considered in the project design:  The lessons learned from irrigation and irrigated 

agriculture operations supported by the Bank and other development partners in Uganda and elsewhere, which 

will be incorporated in the project design include the following: 

(a) Sustainable irrigation investments require development at adequate scale and support over a sufficiently 
long period to break the vicious cycle of irrigation (or irrigated agriculture) development; 

(b) Project design (complexity) should be compatible with the client capacity and development stage in the 
sector. The general implementation performance of Bank-financed agricultural operations in Uganda has 

been significantly below expectation, and therefore warranting a simple and realistic project design;  

(c) Integrated irrigation and agricultural investment planning, preparation, implementation and operational 
management are crucial prerequisite to successful irrigation projects;  

(d) Institutional design for irrigation operations should cover the entire project cycle. Participation of 
beneficiary communities through water user groups in irrigation system O&M and service delivery is 

essential for sustainable operation. Private sector involvements in irrigation and agricultural supporting 

services can enhance service delivery efficiency and performance;  

(e) Farmer-based irrigation scheme management arrangements have limitations particularly for larger 
schemes as reflected under the Uganda’s irrigation rehabilitation projects and other management models 

(options) need to be explored for managing the project schemes;  



(f) The project related social and environmental risks are adequately assessed and used to inform and 
influence the project design, and a robust institutional mechanism put in place for resettlement and 

safeguards risk management during implementation; and 

(g) Project implementation readiness at appraisal is critical for smooth implementation and timely completion 

19.    The proposed project will be implemented by the Ministry of Water and Environment (MWE). The 

Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fishery (MAAIF) will be involved in implementation of Component 

2. The district local governments (DLGs) and local communities at the locations of the project schemes will 

participate in implementation of different components. A project steering committee (PSC) chaired by the 

permanent secretary for water, and comprising senior officials from MAAIF and related ministries and districts, 

will be established to provide strategic directions, policy guidance, and high-level coordination. The existing 

project management unit (PMU) of MWE with experienced project management, procurement and safeguards 

staff, will function as the PMU for overall project management and coordination, and the secretariat to the PSC. 

An integrated implementation team comprising technical, agricultural and institutional staff from national and 

local government will be established at each location for execution of scheme-specific activities.    

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
The schemes are likely to concentrate on southwestern and northern regions. This is in view of the promising commercial 

production prospect (southwestern) and high drought-vulnerability and severe food insecurity (northern), and very 
importantly implementation readiness for a successful first phase. Scheme selection will be guided by the Government of 
Uganda (GoU) irrigation master plan and agreed selection criteria and process. Groundwater option shall be considered 
where adequate studies exist. As described in the project concept note, the project will finance construction of 20-30 m 
high storage dams on rivers and other water source works, several large scale new irrigation and drainage canal systems 
each with 1,000-4,000 ha of command area, as well as catchment management and agricultural water management and 
essential supporting services. Significant resettlement and labor influx are anticipated at some project schemes although 
land redistribution is not required. The project is expected to boost agricultural productivity through crop intensification 
and diversifications as well as value chain development. 
 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
Although the ministry of water and environment (MWE) as the implementing agency for the project has substantial 

experience in implementing World Bank funded projects and have overall social and environmental safeguards capacity, 
the envisaged project implementation unit (Directorate of Water Development, DWD) may require capacity 
enhancement. As such, a project management unit (PMU) will be established in the ministry's liaison department which 
has long years of experiences in managing water infrastructure projects financed by the Bank, to augment DWD’s capacity 
to manage the project. At District/Local Government level, there are District and Community Development Officers whose 
Safeguards Capacity will be enhanced as appropriate. A comprehensive safeguards capacity assessment of the project 
implementers will be carried out as part of the formulation of safeguards instruments and where necessary, 
enhancement measures will be proposed and implemented before project activities start. 
 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 
Herbert Oule, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 


Boyenge Isasi Dieng, Social Safeguards Specialist 
 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The project involves a number of interventions and 
investments such as large-scale irrigation 
infrastructure. Typically the irrigation infrastructure 
works will occur over a large area of some 10,000 
hectares in Phase 1 (25,000 – 35,000 hectares over 3 
phases) and may lead to large scale environmental and 
social impacts, affecting a wider area, and resulting in 
significant health and safety impacts, including labor 
influx and associated socio-economic aspects. Because 
of this, the project has been assigned EA Category A. 
This Category A project is preparing two independent 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs) 
for the planned Nyimur (North East) and Kabuyanda 
(South West) schemes, which will respectively cover 
approximately 2,741 and 3,663 hectares, under Phase 
1 project. Civil works will include construction of dams 
20-30 meters high and associated reservoirs, and 
establishement of irrigation systems in the command 
areas. The studies will also include Environmental and 
Social Management Plans (ESMP), Pest Management 
Plans (PMP) for the priority schemes. During 
preparation of ESIAs for the individual sub-projects 
sites, Cumulative Impact Assessment will be part of 
the assessment and appropriate mitigation measures 
captured in the ESMPs for implementation. The ESIAs’ 
preparation has included extensive stakeholder 
consultations, which will continue after the ESIA 
reports are publicly disclosed and during project 
implementation. Since these two ESIAs are 
deliberative, their findings (including impacts) shall be 
included in the Appraisal ISDS after clearance by the 
RSA and disclosure by both the Bank and GoU. Since at 
this stage only two irrigation schemes shall be 
subjected to ESIAs and RAPs, Environmental and Social 
Management Frameworks (ESMFs) will be drafted to 
guide the mitigation of impacts for schemes whose 
detailed designs are to be completed during 
implementation stage. They will include an annex with 
an Environmental and Social Screening form for sub-
project activities under component 1.. The 
Frameworks will also cover auxiliary facilities which 


are normally not covered under the first set of 
ESIAs/RAPs, and these shall include guidance on 
acquisition, operation and management of facilities 
such as workers’ camps, equipment storage areas, 
material sites, waste management sites, etc. The 
ESMPs will include environmental rules for contractors 
that cover site-specific technical specifications, Labor 
Influx Management Plans, Labor Camp Management 
Plans, Code of Conducts for all construction personnel, 
and recommended penalties for non-compliance. 
These ESIAs and ESMPs will demonstrate how the 
project would comply with all applicable rules and 
guidelines, including: (i) all triggered World Bank 
Safeguard Policies; (ii) relevant World Bank Group 
Environmental, Health and Safety Guidelines; (iii) 
World Bank guidance on Managing the Risks of 
Adverse Impacts on Communities from Temporary 
Project Induced Labor Influx; (iv) Guidelines on the 
establishment of a functioning Grievance Redress 
Mechanism (GRM); (v) World Bank Africa Region’s 
Interim Guidelines for Safeguards Application in 
Agricultural Water Management Projects; and (vi) 
Uganda National Environment Management 
Authority’s (NEMA) Guidelines for Environmental 
Impact Assessment and Environmental Auditing for 
Irrigation and Drainage Operations. In addition, a 
Stakeholder Engagement/Communication Plan will be 
drafted during project preparation to ensure that two 
levels of consultations are carried out  with adequate 
involvement of all stakeholders, including women and 
members of vulnerable groups. These Plans will serve 
as a tool for having an open and continuous 
communication with the affected communities. The 
communications strategy will be updated to include 
measures to address specific issues related to labor 
influx that will be explored by the social assessments, 
such as child labor, harassment of any sort, safety and 
security, gender-based violence (GBV), Sexual 
Exploitation and Abuse (SEA), HIV/AIDS and so on. 
 
The ESIAs and RAPs, including ESMPs and PMPs for the 
priority schemes and the framework instruments 
(ESMF and RPF) will be cleared and disclosed in-
country and on the World Bank’s external website by 
project’s appraisal.  


Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

  

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

The project is designed to minimize any adverse 
impacts on natural habitats as a result of irrigation 
development, while strengthening the management of 
vulnerable catchment areas. This policy is triggered 
because irrigation development will take place in 
wetlands and river areas and may have an impact on 
the remnants of natural habitats, both downstream of 
the command area, and in the catchments where 
deforestation and land clearing activities may be 
carried out. It is, however, expected that no 
environmentally sensitive habitats will be significantly 
converted under this project, rather environmental 
conservation will be encouraged at the project sites. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes 

The policy is triggered because of envisaged potential 
impacts on forest habitats as a result of dam 
construction and water collection/harvesting and 
delivery systems. Detailed information on site specific 
impacts on forests will be provided in the ESIAs to be 
prepared for the different project sites and 
appropriate mitigation actions included in the 
respective ESMPs. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The policy is triggered due to potential expansion, 
intensification of agricultural activities, and 
diversification into new crops that often require more 
frequent usage of combinations of agro-chemicals. A 
generic Pest Management Plan (PMP) will be prepared 
as part of the ESMF and disclosed by appraisal. Where 
use of pesticides will be anticipated, site specific PMPs 
will be included in the respective ESIAs. The PMPs will 
be adopted and included in the project 
implementation manual to address pest management 
issues that may arise in project sites due to both area 
expansion under irrigation and expected increase in 
pesticide use associated with productivity 
improvement. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 

The policy is triggered as construction activities may 
lead to opportunistic finds of archaeological artifacts 
and/or may have an impact on graves and other 
cultural sites. Chance find provisions will therefore, be 
included in construction contracts while potential 
impacts on other identified physical cultural resources 
will be addressed by site-specific environmental 
management plans (EMPs). 


     

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 

This policy is not triggered because none of the people 
within the planned project area meet the specific 
criteria under which indigenous peoples are defined in 
OP 4.10. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

This policy is triggered because of anticipated impacts 
under component 1, which objective is to develop the 
irrigation and drainage infrastructure (primarily for 
supplemental gravity irrigation services) and finance 
construction and equipment for the water source 
works (storage reservoirs, river diversion weirs and 
pumping stations), related catchment management 
interventions, and three to five irrigation systems 
(including main canal and drainage system, cross 
structures, on-farm works, and operation and 
maintenance (O&M) facilities), associated 
resettlement and environmental management costs. 
These activities may trigger land acquisition and 
involuntary resettlement as land requirements for 
purposes of construction of any of these facilities may 
permanently or temporarily limit access to both public 
or private land and other assets by local communities. 
The areas envisaged to be used as reservoirs for both 
priority schemes are currently used by a few PAPs for 
residence and farming while the rest is utilized by 
community members for growing perennial crops, 
hunting, gathering, apiary and fishing. 
 
Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) are being prepared 
for the two priority schemes and will be disclosed by 
project appraisal. For those where the scope and other 
details of works, including the exact locations of the 
infrastructure within each project site are not yet 
determined, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) 
will be prepared and disclosed both in country and on 
the World Bank’s external website before project 
appraisal. 
 
In addition, some land consolidation might be required 
for some of the irrigation schemes and particular 
attention will be given to the process through 
extensive and inclusive consultations with affected 
communities to ensure that potential changes in 
ownership and land tenure are adequately addressed;  
All RAPs will be required to explicitly describe the 
modalities of these processes. 



Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 Yes 

The policy is triggered because of the project will 
finance construction of dams. In compliance with the 
triggered OP 4.37, a Dam safety panel is being 
constituted to provide the necessary oversight. The 
irrigation dams will be designed by qualified 
engineers, and dam safety measures will be 
incorporated in dam operations. Dam Safety plans for 
the proposed large dams (including an Emergency 
Preparedness Plan (EPP)) will be drafted, reviewed, 
endorsed and disclosed. For small dam construction, 
rehabilitation, and maintenance relevant oversight 
procedures will be included in the Project 
Implementation Manual. Kabuyanda scheme will 
iinclude construction of a 25m high dam, while the 
total number of dams to be constructed under each 
phase of the Program is not yet known at this stage. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

Yes 

This policy is triggered by the Project as it will 
contribute to building infrastructure and enhancing 
the environment for irrigated agriculture in selected 
high potential sites across the country during project 
implementation that may have an impact on riparian 
water sources. Irrigation schemes under the proposed 
project may be located on rivers which are tributaries 
to international waterways such as the River Nile. The 
relevant notifications per the requirements will be 
sent to Riparian countries before appraisal. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
All of the territory within the program undisputedly 
falls within Ugandan territory. Therefore this policy is 
not triggered. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Jan 31, 2019 
 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Safeguards related studies (ESIAs, RAPs, and PMPs) for two priority schemes (Kabuyanda and Possibly Nyimur schemes) 

and the safeguards policy framework (ESMF and RPF) will be completed by Project Appraisal in August, 2018; Other 
scheme-specific ESIAs, RAPs, PMPs and the Cumulative Impact Assesment will be completed during early stage of project 
implementation. 
 
 



 