













































World Bank Document


 

The World Bank  
AP Integrated Irrigation& Agriculture Transformation Project (P160463) 

 

 

  
Feb14, 2017 Page 1 of 17 

 

Project Information Document/ 
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 11-Nov-2016 | Report No: PIDISDSC19733 


  BASIC INFORMATION 
   

  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

India P160463  AP Integrated Irrigation 
& Agriculture 
Transformation Project 
(P160463) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

SOUTH ASIA March 1, 2018 Jul 26, 2018 Agriculture 

Lending Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Department of Economic 
Affairs 

Government of Andhra 
Pradesh 

 

 

 Financing (in USD Million) 

 

Financing Source Amount  

Borrower   68.08  

International Bank for Reconstruction and Development  170.00  

Total Project Cost  238.08  

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B-Partial Assessment  
  

Have the Safeguards oversight and clearance functions been transferred to the Practice Manager? (Will not be 
disclosed) 
No 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 

Type here to enter text 
 
B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
 
1. India has sustained economic growth during last decade: India’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP) for 2016-17 is 
estimated at 7.6 percent, higher than the 7.2 percent for the preceding year, but lower than the projected 8.1-8.5 
percent for this year

1
. Sustained economic growth during the last decade, however, has contributed to annual decline in 

poverty by 1.5 percent, but income inequality has continued to persist. Emerging as one of the fastest growing 
economies, there has been significant upturn in key development indicators. Life expectancy at birth increased to 68 

                                            
1
Economic Survey 2016-17 



 
Years in 2014 from a low of 54 in 1980. India's per capita gross national income increased by about 338 percent between 
1980 and 2014, from $1,255 in 1980 to $5,497 in 2014. As a result, India has climbed five notches to 130th rank in 
Human Development Index among 188 countries in 2014

2
.  

2. Reducing poverty and creating jobs can fuel economy: Sustained economic growth notwithstanding, India 
remains home to 263 million poor people (80% of whom reside in rural areas) living on less than US$1.90/day. Expansion 
of the economy in recent decades has largely resulted in jobless growth. For addressing these issues, Govt. of A.P has set 
an ambitious goal of achieving an annual growth rate of 8.2 percent, reducing poverty by 10 percent (poverty in the 
State is on a decline and currently stands at 9.2%, as per Socio-Economic Survey 2016-17), and creating 50 million new 
jobs.. It has been argued that adequate attention to agriculture could fuel growth, create  jobs and reduce poverty. In 
the wake of consecutive low monsoon rainfall and consequent decline in farm productivity, agriculture has served a 
wake-up call, demanding attention from policy makers. 

3. Agriculture sector continues to lag behind: The issues of inclusive growth and gainful employment are major 
challenges in rural areas where two-thirds of the workforce resides. About 66 percent of the labor force is employed in 
agriculture sector which accounts for 14 percent of GDP, and is saddled with problems of uncertain growth. Per capita 
land and water availability is decreasing while high intensity rainfall events and dry spells are increasing. Land and labor 
productivity continues to be low. 

4. Agriculture growth is essential in achieving India’s development goals: During the last 25 years, agriculture 
sector has not achieved the envisaged growth targets. In 1990s and 2000s, the annual agriculture growth rate was 
around 3-3.5 percent and declined to less than 1 percent in the last two years (2014-16) due to technology fatigue, 
degradation of land and water resources, growing water scarcity, exacerbated by two consecutive droughts, floods, 
cyclones, heat waves, and declining international commodity prices. The growth in agriculture sector in 2015-16 has 
continued to be lower than the average of the last decade, mainly due to a second successive year of lower-than-normal 
monsoon. Report from the Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare for 2015-16 indicates that the 
production of food-grains and oil-seeds is likely to decrease by 0.5 and 4.1 percent respectively, while that of fruits and 
vegetables is likely to witness a marginal increase. 

5. To fuel the agrarian economy, strategic shifts in agriculture would  be aimed  (based on the Socio-economic 
Survey 2016-17 projections) at: (i) towards high value vegetables, fruits, livestock and fish products; (ii) towards value 
addition in post-harvest segments; (iii) towards diversification and resilience of farming systems to address climate 
change effects; (iv) towards nutrition sensitive agriculture; and (v) finally a shift towards improved water use efficiency. 

6. Many new schemes have been launched to effect the proposed shifts in agriculture: Pradhan Mantri Krishi 
Sinchai Yojana will fast track irrigation coverage and improve water use efficiency in rural areas; Parmparagat Krishi 
Vikas Yojana aims to reduce input costs by promoting organic farming; Pashudhan Sanjivani, Nakul Swasthya Patra, and 
E-Pashudhan Haat have been proposed to improve livestock productivity. There is an enormous potential for harvesting 
gains from transformation of irrigated agriculture as production, consumption and agribusiness shift from traditional 
cereal crops to horticulture, livestock and fish production. India has a comparative advantage in having a very large and 
largely untapped domestic market, which reduces reliance on exports as the principal driver and consumer of agriculture 
growth. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
7. Andhra Pradesh is a leading reforming economy: Bifurcated on June 2, 2014, the present state of Andhra 
Pradesh (AP) is a middle income state with an average per capita annual income of INR 107,532 which is 15 percent 
higher than the national average. The state accounts for 4.95 percent of India’s land mass, 4.09 percent of its population 
and 4.44 percent of its GDP. AP is predominantly a rural state with 70.4 percent population living in villages and 
dependent on agriculture as the main source of livelihood. Despite severe challenges following the division of AP into 
two states in 2014 (AP and Telangana), the state has recorded appreciable progress in terms of the objective of 
achieving inclusive growth with noteworthy performance in both development and welfare sectors. In 2015-16, the 
Gross State Domestic Product (GSDP) grew at the rate of 10.99 percent, compared to corresponding growth rate of 7.2 
percent for the country. 

8. The sector-wise growth rate is equally impressive. At 2011-12 constant prices, agriculture grew by 8.4 percent, 
compared to industry by 11.13 percent and services sector by 11.39 percent. The per capita income of AP at current 
prices registered a growth of 12.38 percent over 2014-15. This has led to decline in the incidence of poverty from 45 
percent in 1993-94 to 9.2 percent in 2015-16

3
. AP is recognized as one of India’s leading reforming states and in the last 

two decades has achieved significant development outcomes through sustained policy and institutional reform 
programs in which the World Bank has been an important development partner. Rich in natural and human resources, 
the state is keen to leverage its strengths through specific growth strategies tailored to achieve double digit growth. 

9. Agriculture sector has performed below capacity: The performance of the state agriculture sector, which 
accounts for 27.6 percent of the state GDP and employs 62 percent of the work force, has been a cause of concern. 
Between 1999-00 and 2013-14 agriculture grew at around 2.1 percent per annum with most of this growth coming from 
livestock, horticulture and fisheries sub-sectors. In 2015-16 these sub-sectors respectively contributed 26, 25 and 15 
percent to the Agriculture State Domestic Product (AgSDP). Land use pattern is critical for agriculture growth, only 38.31 
percent of the state’s geographical area is net sown (6.23 million hectares). Majority of the farmers are small and 
marginal with average landholdings of 1.06 hectare (ha). The main crops are rice, groundnut, sugarcane, cotton, maize 
and Bengal gram. Due to seasonality and scarcity of water supply, cultivation is mostly limited to only one crop per plot 
per year, with a cropping intensity of 126 percent.  

10. The productivity of major crops has remained largely stagnant: The reason for low productivity is because AP is 
one of the severely water stressed states of India with an average annual rainfall of 966 millimeters, and a coastline of 
974 kilometers that is vulnerable to cyclones. Agriculture in AP is highly exposed to extreme weather events like 
droughts, untimely and high intensity rains, floods, cyclones and hailstorms. Increasing erratic weather aberrations and 
climate change are likely to exacerbate vulnerability of agricultural sector. Of the net sown area of 6.23 million ha in the 
state, 3.15 million ha is presently irrigated through a combination of canals, wells, tanks, ponds and other sources. 
Although 40,817 tanks cover a command area of 2.56 million ha, the actual area irrigated by tanks has declined 
significantly from about 1 million ha in 1990 (24% of irrigated area at that time) to 0.26 million ha in 2015 (8.4% of 
irrigated area).  

11. Irrigation is the key to revival of the agriculture sector: Due to deficient maintenance and management of the 
tank systems, as a result of which most tanks are performing well below the capacity, the actual area irrigated to 
potential created varies between 35-55 percent depending on rainfall. Some 35,376 tanks having a command area of 
0.32 million ha have been transferred from Panchayat Raj Department to Minor Irrigation Department. The rapid spread 
of groundwater irrigation has been an additional contributing factor to the decline in tank irrigation, and has also led to 
a serious depletion of groundwater resources across large parts of the state. Since most of the tanks are in rainfed areas 

                                        
 

with limited possibilities of providing other systems of surface irrigation, their decline poses a serious threat to the 
fragile agricultural economy of these areas.  

12. Poorer farmers, often found at the tail-end of dilapidated tank/pond systems (Small Scale Community Based 
Irrigation Systems- SSCBI Systems) and lacking resources to access groundwater irrigation amidst low and falling water 
tables, are particularly affected. In response to the difficulties being faced by the agriculture sector, the State 
Government has substantially expanded capital investments for modernizing irrigation infrastructure since 2006-07.  The 
Government has also taken steps to strengthen participatory irrigation management and AP was the first state in the 
country to adopt participatory irrigation management (PIM) following enactment of the Andhra Pradesh Farmers 
Management of Irrigation Systems (APFMIS) Act in 1997.  About 6,400 Water User Associations (WUAs) were formed 
which collect water taxes for meeting operation and maintenance (O&M) costs of tanks.  

13. Institutional development through capacity building has contributed to the success of PIM, a process that has 
been significantly supported by externally funded projects. The Bank-supported AP Community Based Tank 
Management Project (APCBTMP), which concluded in July 2016, has made significant development impacts in the state 
by rehabilitating 2,157 tanks, which resulted in 32 percent increase in tank command area and contributed to increase in 
paddy, maize and groundnut productivity by 36, 72 and 97 percent, respectively. In addition, tank rehabilitation resulted 
in 388 percent increase in fish productivity. 

14. Agriculture sector is in need of a paradigm shift: The negative consequences of low agriculture yields extend 
from precarious incomes of farmers to large tracts of land locked in low value agriculture, despite growing demands for 
high value products such as fruits, vegetables, and livestock products. According to NSS data4, the average annual 
income of the median farmer net of production costs (of 1 hectare) from cultivation is less than INR 20,000 in 17 states, 
including Andhra Pradesh. Add high cost of cultivation, growing indebtedness, climate uncertainty, ineffective 
procurement, insufficient storage space and market linkages, and it makes agriculture an increasingly uneconomical 
activity.5 The crisis in agriculture sector is evidenced by the ‘Crop holiday’ (farmers abstained from farming) observed by 
farmers of East Godavari district in an area of 85,050 acres in Kharif 2011, which is further reflected in continuing 
suicides by farmers in the state. During 2015, 516 suicides by farmers were recorded in AP

6
. 

15. Primary Sector Mission seeks institutional convergence for maximizing profitability: To pull agriculture from its 
current abysmal condition, AP requires a new paradigm with the following components: increasing productivity by 
getting “more from less” especially in relation to water; prioritizing the cultivation of less water-intensive crops, 
especially pulses and oil-seeds, supported by a favorable price regime that incorporates the full social benefits of 
producing such crops, and backed by a market-linked value chain. To effect a paradigm shift, GoAP has proposed the 
Primary Sector Mission to converge independently operating sub-sectors viz., agriculture, horticulture, fishery, and 
agribusiness into an integrated farming system for maximizing profitability of small and marginal farmers from a unit of 
arable land. The proposed project will showcase an alternate approach for leveraging capacities of relevant departments 
to improve farm incomes, and make agriculture resilient to climate change.  For a clear understanding at the highest 
level of authority in the state to prevent further deterioration of the socio-economic fabric in rural areas (exodus, farmer 
suicides), a more comprehensive, longer term approach based around adaptive management in agriculture is required – 
particularly given the climate projections and their impact on the agriculture and water sectors in AP. The GoAP has 
evaluated the results of different initiatives taken during the previous years to develop a comprehensive long term 
strategy aimed at making agriculture in the state productive, profitable, sustainable and climate resilient. The state has 

also realized that a mono-cropping production system based on capital intensive irrigation infrastructure and 
technologies has its limitations under the present circumstances with climate variables.    

16. To unlock the full potential of agriculture sector growth, AP has stressed a strong need for policies and programs 
to focus on: (i) improvement of water use efficiency; (ii) intensification of cropping systems and diversification to high 
value crops and commodities; (iii) enhancement of post-harvest management and value addition; and (iv) improvement 
of the resilience of agriculture system in order to deal with increasing threats of climate change. By reorganizing PIM 
with regular administrative systems, AP envisions realizing the full potential of its water sector reforms by achieving a 20 
percent increase in water use efficiency over the next five years. 

Relationship to CPF 
 
17. The proposed project is fully consistent with the India Country Partnership Strategy (CPS): The proposed 
project is fully consistent with the India Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for FY 2013–17 to support poverty reduction 
and shared prosperity in India. The proposed project is aligned with two key pillars of CPS – ‘transformation’ and 
‘inclusion’. In line with ‘transformation’, the project aims to promote inclusive rural growth, development and 
dissemination of new agricultural and water management technologies, climate-resilient agriculture, enhanced market 
linkages for small and marginal farmers, and improved water and natural resource management (CPS Outcome 2.4). The 
proposed project will have positive impact in terms of environmental protection, and reduced greenhouse gas emissions 
by disseminating high efficiency irrigation systems, and promoting diversification to pulses and high value crops, which 
significantly reduce water and carbon footprint of agriculture (CPS Outcomes 2.5/2.6). 

18. The project is aligned with the Bank’s transformative and inclusive criteria:  With respect to ‘inclusion’, the 
project aims to enhance the livelihoods of small and marginal farmers through crop diversification, enhanced market 
access (CPS Outcome 3.6), and also by improving disaster management abilities of GoAP and local communities through 
enhanced design and restoration of smallholder irrigation infrastructure with better drought proofing and flood 
protection features (CPS Outcome 3.8).  

19. The proposed project will directly contribute to the achievement of 5 out of 17 United Nations’ Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDG), namely:  

Goal 2 – End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition and ote sustainable agriculture, by enhancing 
income, food security, and nutrition of large number of rural population, where majority of AP’s poor reside. 

Goal 6 – Ensure availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all by investing in irrigation 
infrastructure, promoting a whole range of water saving technologies for irrigated agriculture, which uses 
about 75 percent of all water in the state. 

Goal 8 – Promote sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic growth, full and productive employment and decent 
work for all by promoting a broad-based agriculture growth and employment in rural areas, where more than 
two-third of country’s population are employed. 

Goal 9 – Build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization and foster innovation by 
rehabilitating and modernizing irrigation infrastructure (supply canals, water tanks) with enhanced resilience 
features of flood protection in about 1,211 tanks. 

Goal 13 – Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts and reduce GHG effects of agriculture production 
by promoting a wide range of water saving technologies and agricultural practices (SRI, micro-irrigation), 
expanding areas under pulses and high value crops, which consume less water, and also by enhancing 
awareness-raising, human and institutional capacity on climate change mitigation, adaptation, and impact 
reduction. 

 
20. The project will also coordinate with other Bank-supported projects in Andhra Pradesh and at national level 
including Assam Agriculture project, Maharashtra Agricultural Competitiveness Project, Andhra Pradesh-Telangana 
Water Sector Improvement Project, National Hydrology Project, and National Groundwater Improvement Project to 
ensure synergy and enhance long-term project impact. 

 

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)     
 

The Project Development Objective is to enhance agricultural productivity, profitability and resilience of Small Scale 
Community Based Irrigation Systems (SSCBI Systems)

7
in selected districts of Andhra Pradesh.  

 
21. The project beneficiaries will include small and marginal farmers, water users associations, farmer producer 
organizations, and other agro-entrepreneurs. During project preparation, specific target areas will be identified and 
specific interventions will be designed to benefit women and other vulnerable groups.  

 
 

Key Results (From PCN) 
 

22.  The following 5 Key Performance Indicators (KPI) are proposed to measure key outcomes of the project: 

(i) KP#1: Number of Farmers / farmer groups adopting resilient technologies and practices –(such as  Agriculture Technology,  

water  productivity/efficiency)  (Corporate Result Indicator) 

(ii) KP#2: Percentage increase in irrigation supply in the project area / selected tank command area  

(iii) KP#3: Percentage increase in productivity (for selected crops, vegetables and fisheries), and  percentage increase in 

returns from two selected agriculture commodities over the baseline value through development of supply chain 

(iv) KP#4: Number of farmers benefitted through increased access to agricultural assets and services – disaggregated by 

gender   

(v) KP#5: GHG: Change in incremental value to various Carbon stock assessments in selected plots (Corporate Result 

Indicator) 

D. Concept Description 
 

. Description 
 
23. Project Rationale: The proposed project is seized of GoAP initiatives in ameliorating the current distress in the 
state farm sector. The biggest challenge for the state is to pull farmers out of the current crises. To achieve food and 
nutritional security, the issues related to growing water scarcity, degrading land resources, high cost of cultivation, 
stagnant farm productivity, and the impacts of climate change need to be systematically addressed. AP with 13 districts 
and 6 agro-climate zones has great potential for growth and profitability in agriculture and allied sectors (fisheries & 
horticulture). This is what the project seeks to realize by providing transformative direction to the agriculture sector by 
packaging and up-scaling relevant technologies and appropriate practices, and by supporting reforms (Primary Sector 
Mission) that could support more effective policies and management practices to improve the productivity of 
agriculture, animal husbandry, and fisheries to increase net benefits, and improve equity and livelihoods 

24. Alternative considered:  

25. In line with the Government of India’s policy imperative on getting ‘more from less’, especially in relation to 
water, the project proposes to improve SSCBI for realizing underutilized potential of decentralised irrigation system for 
benefitting small and marginal farmers for producing less water-intensive crops, especially pulses and oil-seeds, and 
creating a favorable procurement ecosystem towards improved profitability under emerging specter of climate change. 
 

 
 

 
26. Innovative design: The project design is consequently built on the key lessons learnt from the APCBTMP 
and from similar projects in other States (Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Maharashtra), clubbed with the emerging need of 
integrating with climate variables, and value addition to the SSCBI Systems for reducing farm-level water footprints, 
and for enhancing carbon stock in farmers’ fields in providing a strategic direction to develop climate-resilient 
sustainable production systems. The innovative aspects will include improved designs of smallholder irrigation 
infrastructure for efficient capture, storage and delivery of rain water, strong focus on improving water-use 
efficiency, recent advances in intensification and diversification of agriculture, agri-entrepreneurship, and 
movement toward climate resilient agriculture with relevant agriculture-water related investments and substantial 
improvements of participatory irrigation management practices.  
 
27. Improved resilience of agriculture production systems is expected to be achieved under the project 
through improving soil organic carbon, higher water use efficiency, reducing crop water footprints through 
diversification, and increased adoption of technologies and practices for optimizing and sustaining productivity. 
Project activities will be complimented by the use of innovative information and communication technology (ICT) for 
enhanced efficiencies and faster turnaround time for delivering services to project beneficiaries, and new media 
technologies for real time reporting and data sharing among project teams working at different levels. 
 
28. The total project cost is expected to be around US$ 238 million, of which the World Bank will finance US$ 
170 million (70 percent of total project cost) and the GoAP will finance US$ 68 million (30 percent of total project 
cost). The project activities will cover the entire state of Andhra Pradesh (its individual components will cover 
different geographic areas) and will be implemented over a six-year period. The project activities would be grouped 
into four main components: (i) Improving Irrigated Agriculture Efficiency at Farm Level; (ii) Promoting Adaptive 
Sustainable Agriculture Practices; (iii) Post-harvest Management, Market and Agribusiness Promotion; and (iv) 
Project Management and Capacity Building. The individual components have been detailed below.  

 
Component A: Improving Irrigated Agriculture Efficiency at Farm level  (approx. US$ 110 million) 

 
29. This component would improve SSCBI systems to strengthen the integrated farming system (in which 
growing crops, agro-forestry and rearing of livestock co-exist) with reduced water footprints. It will consist of four 
inter-related sub-components: (i) institutional strengthening and capacity building (ii) improving Small Scale 
Community Based Irrigation System (SSCBI System) performance and resilience; (iii) improving water productivity 
and efficiency; and (iv) building synergy with the Primary Sector Mission (on agriculture, fishery, horticulture, 
livestock and irrigation). 

 
Sub-component A.1: Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building 

 
30. The sub-component would focus on engaging communities through water users’ associations (WUAs) in 
social engineering of project interventions. The Participatory Irrigation Management (PIM) will follow a distinct 
approach where better operation and maintenance (O&M) of rehabilitated smallholder tank systems will be 
dovetailed with irrigation outreach based on reduced water footprints through adaptive agriculture practices 
(Component B) at the farm level.This sub-component will also sensitize water users and ensure that a desired level 
of greenhouse gas (GHG) emission is managed at the tank level. Water use efficiency will be the leitmotif for 
creating a culture for ‘more crops, per drop’ through community based institutions for assuming greater 
responsibility towards making water-conserving crop choices for water conservation and management. The sub-
component will support in strengthening the existing WUAs and establish new WUAs for effectively developing all 
aspects related to efficient in situ water conservation and management practices. The component would enhance 

WUA capacity in grounding the concept at the farm level. 
 
31. In addition, the sub-component would relate to mobilizing water users for collective action through the 
vehicle of WUAs for ensuring local level participation in planning, implementing and managing the SSCBI facilities as 
well as establishing backward and forward farm-linkages with the external government, private sector and non-
government agencies. The proposed project would expand the scope of ‘SSCBI” beyond the ‘crop irrigation’ into 
others - fisheries, animal husbandry and domestic users. The spheres of intervention would include: (i) Policy and 
Governance - educating and enabling enactment of the existing legislative provisions and  exploring new vistas for 
establishing relation between different sets of water users; (ii) Physical and Engineering- creation of assets, 
including capacity building support for designing and implementing construction, as well as managing procurement, 
finance and quality control; (iii) Operation and Maintenance (O&M) involving physical sustainability and improved 
irrigation performance leading to enhanced production/productivity, incomes and food security; (iv) Social 
mobilisation - local level organizational development including leadership building and problem solving approaches, 
empowerment of poor and vulnerable sections such as women, Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes etc., and 
provision of capacity support and capacity building including observation and study tours; and (v) Economic - fixing 
and collection of water tariff and building of a corpus to enable further modernization and diversification, market 
penetration to enable establishing backward and forward linkages; and the related book keeping.  

 
Sub-component A.2: Improving  Small Scale Community Based Irrigation (SSCBI) System Performance and 
Resilience 

 
32. This sub-component will modernize irrigation infrastructure, including SSCBI systems and irrigation canals 
within a defined catchment and also use a cascading management approach. The modernization of irrigation 
infrastructure will focus on improving the bulk water delivery to irrigation systems through rehabilitation and 
modernization of approximately 1,211 smallholder irrigation structures. The expected works will include 
modernization of control structures (diversion weirs), supply channels, cross-masonry structures, de-silting

8
 of 

feeder and supply channels, construction of recharge well structures and strengthening and up-gradation of tank 
bunds, installation of flow measurement devices, up-gradation of distribution systems, improvements of irrigation 
and drainage canals, and introduction of modern quality testing devices to determine soil compaction parameters, 
as well as modern quality testing devices for meticulously maintaining specified cover to reinforcement steel in the 
construction of reinforced concrete structures for long term durability.In addition, relevant catchment treatment 
approaches will be considered for reduced siltation, reliable and dependable flow to cascade SSCBI systems. 

 
Sub-component A.3: Improving Water Productivity and Efficiency 
 
33. The objective of this sub-component will be to promote water saving technologies such as drip and 
sprinkler systems, and for implementing Participatory Groundwater Management (PGM) at assessment unit level. 
The investments will include catchment and command area treatment of SSCBI systems, including construction of 
group based mini-irrigation schemes (dug wells, shallow tube wells, water harvesting and groundwater recharging 
systems).For drought proofing and capturing flood waters, cascades will be linked. Robust automation systems will 
be demonstrated, which will enable spatial homogeneity in water delivery in these systems.  
34. Conjunctive use of surface and groundwater will be coordinated with crop planning and water budgeting. 

                                            
8
Considering economic and environmental perspectives, desilting of the tank will be limited only to remove silt from the tank bed to 

use for raising and strengthening tank bund during the rehabilitation of tank bund in such a way that sufficient area upstream of 

sluices is de-silted on priority to ensure free flow of water towards the sluices. 


Water sharing by groundwater users (with surplus water) with those without irrigation source will be promoted; and 
pipelines provided for efficient water distribution (as implemented in APCBTMP). Consolidation and linking of 
groundwater sources piloted in Anantapur district under the World Bank supported AP Drought Adaptation 
Initiative will be encouraged. All development and improvement activities will be included in an Integrated Water 
Resource Conservation and Management Plan (IWRCMP). A basin level ridge to valley treatment for water 
conservation and management in convergence with the activities of all the primary stakeholders and implementing 
departments will be undertaken. 

 
Sub-component A.4: Building Synergy with Primary Sector Mission 

 
35. For effective service delivery to farmers, various departments and entities involved in water, agriculture 
and related sub-sectors need to collaborate. For achieving this GoAP is working towards forming a consortium of 
knowledge stakeholders, including relevant state line departments, knowledge institutions, civil society 
organizations and other relevant national and international organizations to support planning, implementation and 
monitoring the activities of the Primary Sector Mission. The project will provide support to policy and institutional 
reforms for enhancing institutional capacities of relevant departments. The sub-component will provide incentives 
for capital investments, including through unlocking opportunities for crowding-in private sector investments. 
Support will also be provided for guiding, designing and implementing holistic strategy for the Primary Sector 
Mission.  
 

36. As an innovative design feature, the project will use information and communication technology (ICT) 
tools, sensors and remote sensing in two ways – (i) leveraging Internet of Things (IoT) technologies combined with 
sensors to remotely capture data and information on various aspects pertaining to minor irrigation systems such as 
water flows, water quality and (ii) use ICT and remote sensing products for monitoring and evaluation (M&E). 
 
Component B: Promoting Adaptive Sustainable Agriculture Practices (approx. US$ 79 million) 
 
37. This component aims to improve productivity of the tank systems and enhance resilience of agriculture 
production systems for increasing production and managing risks associated with climate variables. This would be 
achieved by diversification of farm production, introduction of climate resilient solutions, improving value 
realization at the farm level through improved post-harvest management, and strengthening farmer-market 
linkages. The component will provide incentives for capital investments by unlocking opportunities for crowding-in 
private sector investments. This component will have three sub-components: (i) Promoting climate smart 
diversified agriculture production systems; (ii) Innovation and technology transfer for fishery production; and (iii) 
Post-harvest management, marketing and agribusiness promotion.  
 
Subcomponent B.1: Climate Smart Diversified Agriculture Production Systems  
 
38. Sustainable intensification and diversification of crop and horticulture production systems will be achieved 
by awareness creation, on-farm demonstrations on new seeds and promising technologies, capacity building and 
training activities; and by leveraging private sector investments in water management and farm mechanization. 
Climate risk resilience will be built in agriculture production systems by promoting crop diversification from rice to 
low water requiring pulses, maize, oilseeds, millets, vegetables and fruits; cultivation of high yielding, short 
duration, drought-, pest- and disease-tolerant crop varieties/hybrids; complementary agronomic practices; and 
building ability to withstand biotic and abiotic stress through a large scale program of demonstrations, and training 
activities as well as investments in farm implements and resource saving technologies like micro irrigation systems 



to enhance water use efficiency and land productivity.  Component interventions will focus on irrigated command 
areas of the project, and   will also cover the rain fed areas in the project villages and cascades. The project will 
support operationalization of web-based integrated weather forecasting and water management system to 
provide real time crop advisories, including water, pest and disease stress, and implementation of mitigation 
measures and contingency plans. A baseline of Green House Gas (GHG) emissions from agriculture production 
systems will be established and would be regularly monitored for changes during the project period.  
 
39. The project will focus on increasing farm productivity by reducing ‘input’ costs and enhancing ‘output’ 
from farming systems on a sustainable basis. This will be achieved by (a) adopting diversified cropping system on 
‘navdanya’

9
 pattern to buffer weather anomalies; (b) promoting comprehensive, crop specific sustainable 

agricultural package of practices; (c) installation of integrated weather forecasting systems to provide weather-
based crop advisories in selected smallholder irrigation cluster areas; and (d) developing a mechanism to quantify 
crop resilience to climate variability, and creating a baseline for quantifying soil organic carbon and GHG emission 
from crop production systems. 
  
Subcomponent B.2: Innovation and Technology Transfer for Fishery Production 
 
40. Fish production has registered an average annual growth rate of 9.92 per cent in AP. Building on this, the 
component aims at improving fish productivity and profitability in the project tanks and ponds which offer high 
economic opportunities and benefits. The GoAP accords top priority to fisheries development in the state, and has 
released the Fisheries Policy and Plan for 2015-2020. Under this policy, the government has approved the fiscal 
benefits covering several sections of the industry, including production, processing, marketing and disease 
management for stimulating development of the fishery sector. 
 
41. The subcomponent will focus on strengthening research-extension linkages in order to improve farmers’ 
access to technology, and support participation of fish farmers in value chains. Project aims to promote innovative, 
climate resilient, and modern technology packages in production, post-harvest management and marketing. The 
project will (i) support multiplication of improved germplasm for quality seed production, (ii) introduce suitably 
formulated fish feed using locally available ingredients; (iii) demonstrate semi-intensive and intensive production 
models at appropriate locations in ponds; (iv) promote improved fish production techniques in irrigation tanks 
including innovative technologies such as cage culture in an environmentally sustainable manner; and build 
institutional capacity of the fishery sector. The project will facilitate suitable linkages for better access to markets, 
and support measures for maintaining hygienic conditions throughout the fish value chain. 
 
Component C: Post-harvest Management, Market and Agribusiness Promotion (approx. US$ 32 million) 
 
42. This subcomponent will enhance farmers’ linkages to markets by providing alternate marketing channels 
and promoting farm level aggregation, post-harvest management and value addition. The project will support 
organizing producers into farmer producer organizations (FPOs) and companies (FPCs); develop their capacity and 
skills for accessing wider input and output markets; and investment support to the FPOs for establishing common 
service centers for aggregating grains and horticulture produce. The expected benefits to the FPO members are 
higher prices through a combination of larger critical mass of saleable produce, thereby providing economies of 
scale, savings in transaction costs, and strengthened negotiation positions, coupled with the added value achieved 

                                            
9
‘Navdanya’ means nine seeds (a traditional diversified cropping system which includes cereals, millets, and pulses), a system of 

farming that produces food while enhancing biodiversity, building soil fertility and conserving water. 



through primary grading and packing. The project will support integration of producer organizations in commercial 
value chains of agricultural commodities, and facilitate public-private partnerships to enable direct buying 
arrangements.  Key strategy will be market oriented agricultural production through collective marketing by 
farmer producer organizations. 
 
43. For mitigating price risks the project will support operationalization of Negotiable Warehouse Receipts in 
AP. For promoting agri-business ecosystem in the state, an Agri-Business Promotion Facility (ABPF) will be 
established. The ABPF activities will include conducting market and value chain studies on the identified 
commodities; establishing and operating mentorship programs; scouting new technologies (including climate 
resilient technologies); assisting small and medium private entrepreneurs to prepare business and financial 
proposals; and providing business planning and incubation services to emerging agri-entrepreneurs.  
 
44. The value chain for selected commodities will help to increase the share of farmers in wholesale and retail 
prices of the commodity. Some of the measures to achieve this include farmers’ participation in commodity 
exchanges, establishing storage infrastructure starting from primary, intermediate and transit warehouses for 
value addition. For high value crops, emphasis would be laid on demand based production, post-harvest 
processing, and creating forward linkages for direct marketing. Such a production and marketing system would be 
aimed at encouraging farmers to diversify into high value crops for additional income. 
 

Component D: Project Management and Capacity Building (approx. US$ 16 million) 
 
45. The objective of this component is to ensure smooth implementation of project activities, as well as 
monitoring of, and learning from project processes and outputs. Activities to be financed include: (i) setting up, 
supporting and capacity building of project management unit (PMU) to align with the project components at the 
state and district level; (ii) project monitoring, evaluation and promotion of learning culture at the PMU level; (iii) 
documentation of project processes and experience on a rolling basis, and its dissemination to the wider 
development community for cross-learning and sharing; (iv) hiring services of an external M&E agency as 
consultants for the duration of the project for creating a feed-back loop for improving project thrust and 
implementation; and (v) providing support for emerging needs and innovations during implementation; and 
networking with partner organizations, external professional agencies and the World Bank. 
 

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)     

 
Andhra Pradesh is located on the east coast in peninsular India facing the Bay of Bengal. The State has three 
physiographic zones, the hilly region (having Nallamalai, Erramalai hills and the Eastern Ghats having an altitude of 500 
to 1400 m); the plateau (having an altitude of 100 m to 1000 m) and the deltas of rivers (between the Eastern Ghats 
and the Sea Coast).  It has a coast line of 974 km and its major rivers are   Krishna, Godavari, Tungabhadra. It has about 
21% of the geographical area under forest cover with 6 National Parks and 21 Wildlife Sanctuaries. It has an ancient 
religious/cultural heritage and Tirupati is one of the most popular temples in the country. 
 
The state is drained by three major perennial rivers viz. Godavari, Krishna and Pennar, several other medium and small 
rivers. In total 40 rivers drain into the sea. Rainfall varies from 560 mm in the Rayalaseema region to about 1200 mm in 
the northeastern coastal part of the state. The State receives about 66% of rainfall from south-west monsoon (June-


\and about 25% from north-east monsoon (October-December). The stage of ground water development is 
around 70%. Six Agro-Climatic Zones are recognized – Scarce Rainfall Zone, Southern Zone, North Coastal Zone, 
Godavari Zone, Krishna Zone and High Altitude Zone. The state experiences frequent storms, floods particularly in 
coastal areas and drought in the Rayalseema region 
 
The project activities will involve investing on repair and rehabilitation of about   1200 tanks spread across the  state.  
The interventions will include: improving water assets, modernizing irrigation infrastructure, improving water 
productivity, promoting adaptive sustainable agricultural practices, enhancing fisheries production and climate friendly 
agri business promotion.  Andhra Pradesh (erstwhile undivided) is known to be a leading consumer of agrochemicals in 
the country with 24% share and 21% share in pesticides alone. 

 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies     

 
Safeguard issues revolve around augmenting and/ or re-engineering the existing minor irrigation tanks along with 
water conveyance system and other associated activities related to enhancing production, productivity and incomes in 
the spheres of agriculture and fisheries.  The key intervention relates ensuring bridging of the gaps between designed 
and actual irrigable area with participation by the local water using communities.  Major challenge thus lies in 
mobilizing the local tank based community towards group action and establishing linkages with other public and 
private sector institutions. This has been addressed successfully under the first project (Andhra Pradesh Community 
Managed Tank Project) with the help of an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF). The proposed 
project would build on the same, but taking into account the latest legislative developments and expanded scope of 
the interventions, into agriculture and fisheries. Environment Management Plans (EMP) will be prepared for tanks that 
are known to be rehabilitated by appraisal. In addition, the project will develop a Pest Management Plan (PMP). All this 
points to adequate capacity for safeguards management with the borrower.  
 
The previous project has put in place a robust systems   in place and capacities are developed for managing the social 
and environmental impacts. Adequate number of experienced professionals too have been deployed for managing the 
ESMF.  However, as the follow on project’s scope is enhanced both in terms of the number of tanks and the 
interventions, GOAP has already initiated efforts towards re-visiting the ESMF. The learnings drawn the 
implementation experiences of the first project will be fed into this revision.  

 
D. Policies that might apply     

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The physical investments under the project would be 
largely on rehabilitation of existing water assets 
where improper construction could result in adverse 
impacts. The investments under productivity 
enhancement through sustainable agriculture 
practices could result in positive impacts with 
effective planning an implementation. 


An Environmental and Social Assessment will be 
undertaken and a Social and Environmental 
Management Framework will be developed for 
managing risks and maximizing the environmental 
and social opportunities. These will take into account 
experiences and learnings from the previous phase.  
 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 TBD 
The rehabilitation of tanks may impact natural 
habitats such wetlands, which will be determined 
during EA. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No 
The project interventions are not expected to impact 
the forest areas. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The project will not directly finance pesticides but the 
improved irrigation and crop diversification may 
result in increased use of pesticides. The project will 
work in synergy with the state primary sector mission 
and focus on climate smart agriculture production 
system which will promote the non-chemical package 
of practices. A Pest Management Plan (PMP) will be 
prepared for the project. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No 

No significant adverse impacts on cultural property 
expected, but this issue will be examined during the 
ESA and appropriate measures will be put in place to 
deal with any chance findings. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 Yes 

AP state has a tribal population of 2.7 million 
amounting to 5.5% of the total population. A few 
pockets in three districts are predominantly inhabited 
by tribals and are covered under the Fifth Schedule of 
the Indian Constitution. So, project areas is likely to 
have tribal population. However,   investment plans 
are currently not known. Hence, to address such 
situations wherein the project is likely to be taken up 
in tribal areas, a Tribal Peoples Planning Framework 
(TPPF) will be prepared. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

The project will not and need not resort to 
involuntary acquisition of lands as the existing 
irrigation tanks will focus of repair and rehabilitation. 
However, cases of encroachers on /within the Tanks 
cannot be ruled out. To address this, a Resettlement 
Policy Framework will be prepared. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 Yes 

Some of the tanks could be large with high 
embankments above 10 m. The heights of the 
embankments will be known by appraisal for 
ensuring that appropriate mitigation measures are 
put in place for addressing any potential adverse 
environmental impact. This policy was also triggered 



 

during the previous phase and arrangements were 
put in place.  Already, a robust mechanism exist in 
the state, which will be further strengthened. Three 
region-wise Dam Safety Panels (DSPs) were 
constituted by the Government to function with 
technical guidance from the Chief Engineer, Central 
Designs Organization. 
The project will seek better coordination with the 
Dam Safety Panel and processes. The project will also 
support safety enhancement of tank systems as part 
of tank rehabilitation. 
 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
The project does not fall on any international 
waterways. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No The project is not in any disputed areas. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan      

 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 

May 31, 2017 
 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
GoAP will undertake social and environmental assessment so as to revise the existing environmental and social 
management frameworks (ESMF), in conformity with applicable Bank policies as well as the national and state legal 
stipulations. EMPs will be prepared for tanks that are known to be rehabilitated by appraisal. Apart from the 
comprehensive ESMF, the following independent documents-- Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and Tribal People 
Plan Framework (TPPF) – will also be prepared. These are expected to be completed by end August 2017. 

 