














































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Additional Financing for MCRP (P173104) 

 
 

  
Jan 30, 2020 Page 1 of 16  

     

 

 
 
      

 

Combined Project Information Documents /  
Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (PID/ISDS) 

 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 22-Apr-2020 | Report No: PIDISDSA28417 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Nigeria P173104 Additional Financing for 
MCRP 

P157891 

Parent Project Name Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date 

Multi-Sectoral Crisis Recovery 
Project for North Eastern Nigeria 

AFRICA 22-Apr-2020 26-May-2020 

Practice Area (Lead) Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency 

Urban, Resilience and Land Investment Project 
Financing 

Federal Ministry of 
Finance 

State Governments of 
Borno, Adamawa and 
Yobe, North East 
Development Commission 
(NEDC) 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) Parent 
 
The objectives of the Project are to: (a) support the Government of Nigeria towards rehabilitating and improving 
critical service delivery infrastructure, improve the livelihood opportunities of conflict and displacement-affected 
communities, and strengthen social cohesion in the North East Participating States of Borno, Yobe and Adamawa; and 
(b) in the event of an Eligible Crisis or Emergency, to provide immediate and effective response to said Eligible Crisis or 
Emergency 
 
Proposed Development Objective(s) Additional Financing 
 
To improve access to basic services and  livelihood opportunities for the crisis-affected communities of Adamawa, 
Borno, and Yobe States, and enhance coordination among these States and other Lake Chad countries 

 
Components 

Peace Building and Strengthening Social Cohesion and Livelihoods 
Infrastructure Rehabilitation and Service Delivery Restoration & Improvement 
Technical Assistance and Program Management Support 
Contingent Emergency Response 

 

PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
  

SUMMARY-NewFin1  
 

Total Project Cost 176.00 

Total Financing 176.00 



of which IBRD/IDA 176.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
  
DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 176.00 

          IDA Credit 176.00 

    

Environmental Assessment Category 

B-Partial Assessment 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate     
 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
B. Introduction and Context 

 
Country Context 

The complex challenges in the North-East (NE) and the broader Lake Chad region are among the most 

pressing issues facing the Federal and NE State administrations in Nigeria.   

Recent resurgence in conflict exacerbates the humanitarian crisis 

1. Following the election of President Buhari in 2015, the Nigerian Government took steps to address 
the insurgency in the NE, with support from neighboring countries and the African Union through 
the Multinational Joint Task Force (MNJTF). They appointed new military leadership, created a 
Theatre Headquarters in Maiduguri and increased resources committed to NE activities. Significant 
territory formerly controlled by Boko Haram (BH) was reclaimed and relative peace restored, allowing 
for the return of at least 1.6 million internally displaced people (IDPs) to their homes or nearby, more 
than 750,000 of these in Adamawa State and over 650,000 in Borno. Large-scale international 
humanitarian aid averted famine in 2017.   

2. However, security in the NE has deteriorated sharply since 2018. Attacks have increased in Borno 
State, as well as nearby areas of Adamawa and Yobe (together the ‘BAY’ states). Islamic State West 
Africa Province (ISWAP), which split from BH in 2016, has developed into the more potent threat, 
employing more sophisticated military tactics and dominating swathes of northern Borno around its 
strongholds on Lake Chad. Major attacks, including those on Baga, Monguno and Rann in December 
2018 and January 2019, have triggered renewed large-scale displacement of people. Meanwhile, BH 
continues attacks on the population in south-east Borno and northern Adamawa, absorbing military 
attention and preventing a stronger response further north. 



 

The World Bank  
Additional Financing for MCRP (P173104) 

 

 

  
Jan 30, 2020 Page 4 of 16  

 

3. Around 7.1 million of the BAY states’ total population of 13.4 million need humanitarian assistance 
in 2019, according to the 2019-21 Nigeria Humanitarian Response Strategyi, which seeks to reach 
6.2 million people. Around 1.7 million face food insecurity (CH3-5). Some two million people are 
internally displaced across the BAY states, a net increase of more than 100,000 since December 2018. 
Around 230,000 Nigerian refugees are in neighboring Cameroon, Chad and Niger. Within Nigeria, 
around one million people are now estimated to live in areas, mainly in the far north of Borno, that 
are inaccessible to humanitarian actors. Approximately 60 percent of the total number of IDPs live in 
host communities, while 20 percent reside in camps.  

4. The conflict has intensified the historical social, economic and development disadvantages of the 
NE. The NE poverty rate was the second highest in the country in 2013, after only the North-West, at 
nearly 48 percent against 33 percent nationallyii. The NE literacy rate in 2013 stood at just 22 percent 
for women and 40 percent for men. The NE has long suffered from poor access to health care and 
sanitation services, with under-five mortality of 160 per 1,000 live births, against 90 in South-West, 
the best performing region. The proportion of children age 12-23 months received all basic 
vaccinations was only 14 percent in the NE, compared with 52 percent for South-South.  

 

Government and partners have responded strongly, but unmet needs remain considerable 

5. The 2016 Recovery and Peace Building Assessment (RPBA) for NE Nigeriaiii estimated the economic 
impact of the crisis at nearly US$9 bn across the six affected states: Borno, Yobe, Adamawa, Taraba, 
Gombe and Bauchi. It put recovery and peacebuilding needs at US$6.7 bn, covering three strategic 
areas of intervention: US$150.5 m for peacebuilding, stability, and social cohesion; US$6.0 bn for 
rebuilding infrastructure and restoring social services; and US$473.5 m for economic recovery. The 
RPBA was prepared by the Federal Government, led by the Vice President’s Office, and the 
governments of the six affected states, with support from the European Union, the United Nations 
and the World Bank.  

6. In June 2016, the Federal Government released the Buhari Plan as the blueprint for humanitarian 
relief and socioeconomic stabilization of the NE, as well as durable solutions for displaced persons. 
The Buhari Plan incorporated the RPBA’s assessment of needs and established the scope and 
framework for targeted interventions, as well as defining the national vision and objectives for long-
term stability and economic redevelopment of the region. The Plan is built around 10 pillars, 
comprising safety and security, good governance, infrastructure, agriculture, health, education, 
entrepreneurship, women and youth empowerment, regional planning and strategic growth, 
environment, border security and international trade development, and solid minerals. 

7. Major programs are underway, but the considerable needs identified by the RPBA are far from 
being met, and much of the Buhari Plan remains to be implemented. NE recovery and peacebuilding 
efforts supported by the African Development Bank, the European Union, Germany, the United 
Kingdom, the United Nations system, the United States, the World Bank and other international 
partners total around US$1.6 bn. However, reliable data on total government or partner expenditures 
in the NE and overall implementation progress is not available. For the broader region, donors pledged 
US$ 2.13 bn for humanitarian and recovery activities for 2018 and beyond at the High-Level 
Conference on the Lake Chad Region in September 2018,iv of which US$985.5 m was for humanitarian 
activities. For NE Nigeria, the Humanitarian Response Plan seeks US$ 848 million, while the 2019-2020 
Nigeria Regional Refugee Response Planv aims to raise a further $135 million for 2019.  




8. In support of the RPBA and the Buhari Plan, the World Bank has approved US$775 million in IDA 
financing for the six NE States since 2016, the largest commitment among international 
development partners. The program addresses urgent needs, restores basic services and livelihoods 
and rebuilds infrastructure.  It has included additional financing for six existing projects for health, 
education, social protection and agriculture/food security, as well as a US$200 million Multi-Sectoral 
Crisis Recovery Project (MCRP) for North-East Nigeria.  

 
9. The MCRP has been effective since February 16, 2018 and has recently undergone its Mid-Term 

Review (MTR) in November 2019. Despite a 10-month gap from Board-approval to effectiveness, the 

Project has picked up significant pace over the last 18 months and its current implementation progress 

has been satisfactory, based on its financial progress and the current status of results achievement on 

the ground. The likelihood of achievement of the Project Development Objective (PDO) of the 

intended project outcomes and results is now rated as high. As at the Mid-Term, total project 

disbursements from the World Bank to the Government of Nigeria were at USD 95 million (of the 

USD200 million IDA Credit), representing 46% of the total project allocation amount. 

 
Rational for Additional Financing  

10. The Federal Government of Nigeria has requested that the country be included in the regional 
program supported by the proposed IDA Lake Chad Region Recovery and Development Project 
(PROLAC, P161706). PROLAC ($170 million) has been in preparation since FY18 for three of the four 
countries that border the Lake: Cameroon, Chad and Niger, slated for FY20 Board consideration. The 
participation of Nigeria, the fourth country, is important for the PROLAC program to have complete 
regional coverage, and because Nigeria is the largest country by far and the epicenter of the Boko 
Haram conflict, the impacts and drivers of which PROLAC seeks to address.  

 
11. PROLAC’s proposed development objective is to contribute to the recovery of the Lake Chad Region 

through supporting regional coordination and crisis monitoring, connectivity and agricultural 
livelihoods in selected provinces of the participating countries. It includes three main components: 
Component 1: Regional and National Coordination Platform and Local Capacity Building ($20 m) - This 
aims to reinforce regional dialogue and data collection and dissemination, institutional capacity 
building and knowledge sharing, including a Lake Chad Data and Knowledge Platform. Component 2: 
Restoring Rural Mobility and Connectivity ($75 m) aims to improve access of communities to markets, 
especially regional markets, and to provide beneficiaries with an opportunity for short-term 
employment, through civil works for rehabilitation of rural roads of regional importance. Component 
3: Agriculture Investments and Value-Chain Development ($60m) will promote public productive 
investments, value-chain development, citizen engagement and community participation activities in 
project areas.  

 
Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance 

12. An ‘Additional Financing for Restructuring’ is proposed for MCRP in the amount of $176 million, 
with the main purposes: (a) addressing the huge unmet needs of the three most affected states of 
Borno, Yobe and Adamawa (the originally estimated needs for NE recovery and stabilization were to 
the tune of US$6 billion, of which only about 1/3rds are estimated to have been financed through 



various government and development partner programs, and which will require the redesign of, and 
the addition of supplementary activities within, the existing project components ; (b) the MCRP 
implementation model has proven successful in putting the State Governments firmly in the 
leadership and implementation role for recovery and peace building, thus helping restore state-citizen 
trust, the erosion of which was a key structural driver of crisis; (c) the additional financing will serve 
the objective of bringing Nigeria into the Lake Chad regional program, which will also entail bringing 
in new components on agricultural value chain, rural access and regional connectivity. Given the 
consistency and complementarity of MCRP and PROLAC objectives and activities, and the need to 
bring Nigeria into the regional program quickly, the Country Management Unit and task teams 
consider that an Additional financing operation for MCRP, prepared in parallel with the finalization of 
PROLAC and presented to the Board as a single package with PROLAC, is the best mechanism for doing 
this. In the main PROLAC project, adjustments will be made to the regional elements, to promote the 
full inclusion of Nigeria. In addition to a regional focus, adapting MCRP to bring it into the program 
supported by PROLAC, will bring a more strategic focus on agricultural livelihoods and value chains 
and economic recovery, a natural evolution for MCRP.  

 
13. The restructuring will also be used to lay the groundwork for adapting MCRP to become an 

integrated central platform for the channeling of broader World Bank assistance to Borno, 
Adamawa and Yobe, the three states most affected by the Boko Haram crisis. Five additional 
financing operations, which were part of the Bank’s 2016-2017 $775 million Boko Haram response 
package along with MCRP, are set to close before the end of FY20. The restructuring will be used to 
further develop MCRP’s multi-sectoral approach, to allow it to absorb activities, and potentially 
unspent IDA funding from these five operations, which cover health and education service delivery, 
agriculture and food security, social protection and community development. This approach is also in 
line with the need for spatial sector consolidation of Bank projects towards increased impact and 
implementation arrangements streamlining. 

 

Sectoral and Institutional Context 
14. As foreseen in the MCRP PAD, the Presidential Committee for the Northeast Initiative (PCNI) has 

been replaced as federal apex institution for recovery in the northeast of Nigeria by the Northeast 
Development Commission (NEDC). As part of this, the NEDC has taken over from the PCNI as the main 
Federal counterpart for MCRP with responsibility for overall coordination. The NEDC is anchored in 
the newly created Ministry of Humanitarian Affairs, Disaster Management and Social Development, 
while PCNI had come under the Office of the Vice President. The NEDC is a statutory body (unlike the 
PCNI, which was mandated through a time-bound Presidential executive order) and is responsible for 
the oversight and coordination of all humanitarian, recovery and development work in the six states 
of northeast Nigeria.  In addition to the coordination of multilateral development bank programs, at 
the federal level it is expected to lead program coordination among federal government MDAs and 
development partners, and vertical coordination between regional, federal and state level institutions 
and planning processes. 

 

Each of the BAY States has developed different coordination arrangements. In Borno, the Ministry 
of Reconstruction, Rehabilitation and Resettlement (MRRR) has overall responsibility for recovery 
planning and coordination. In addition, a statutory coordination agency has been created, under the 
auspices of the MRRR; Adamawa has created its own MRRR and a multilateral coordination office has 



been formed within the State Government Secretariat. Meanwhile, Yobe has recently set up a state 
level Ministry of Humanitarian Affairs and Disaster Management.  

 
 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
Original PDO  
The objectives of the Project are to: (a) support the Government of Nigeria towards rehabilitating and improving critical 
service delivery infrastructure, improve the livelihood opportunities of conflict and displacement-affected communities, 
and strengthen social cohesion in the North East Participating States of Borno, Yobe and Adamawa; and (b) in the event 
of an Eligible Crisis or Emergency, to provide immediate and effective response to said Eligible Crisis or Emergency 
 
Current PDO  
To improve access to basic services and livelihood opportunities for the crisis-affected communities of Adamawa, Borno, 
and Yobe States, and enhance coordination among these States and other Lake Chad countries. 
 
Changes to the PDO are made to reflect the project’s regional dimension and removal of the aim to “strengthen social 
cohesion”. Selected targets have also been revised upwards, to accommodate some over-shooting to-date, with costs in 
some areas having proved lower than estimated originally. Additional sectoral indicators have been absorbed from the 
sectoral programs (AF operations) phasing out, while the indicators related to regional coordination are the same as the 
one under PROLAC.   
 

Key Results 
Achievement of the intended PDO will continue to be monitored by the following indicators: 
 

• Number of direct project beneficiaries (percentage of which are women) 

• Percentage of direct project beneficiaries who are female  

• Number of beneficiaries that have improved livelihood opportunities with project support (o/w 
female) 

• Number of beneficiaries with additional or improved access to service delivery infrastructure 
 
New PDO-level indicators include: 

• Increase in yield among farmers benefiting from agricultural benefits (percentage increase from 

baseline)   

• Number of peace groups that promote collective action  

• Number of government officials adopting new skills of peace building, conflict sensitivity and 
crisis recovery management 

• Number of school children benefiting from rehabilitated and re-equipped schools (o/w IDP 
children) 

• Number of women benefiting from improved health facilities 

• Joint statement and action plan agreed during an annual coordination meeting with 
participation of the four countries (two measurements: yes or no – measure every year; and 
from year two: % of agreed actions implemented) 

D. Project Description  
 

1. Strategic Shifts: From a broader strategic perspective, the AF is a natural evolution of MCRP from a 
program focused on urgent needs, early recovery interventions and reconstruction, to one that looks toward 
long-term recovery and development of livelihoods and the economy. Going forward, the expanded MCRP will 
have (a) a stronger focus on basic services, with the addition of health and education service provision activities; 
(b) greater emphasis on livelihoods and employment generation; (c) a new lens for transport support on 
enhancing connectivity, on the Lake Chad region, as well as locally, linking farms to markets and people to 
sources of employment; (d) continued strong support for peacebuilding and the strengthening of social 
cohesion; and (e) the fostering of regional stabilization  as a main priority.  

 

• Component 1:  
o The component name will be changed to: Peace building and strengthening social cohesion and 

livelihoods, to reflect a stronger emphasis on – and a more strategic approach to - supporting 
livelihoods, as well as a move from an emphasis on shorter term stability to longer term 
development  

o Consistent with this, a more strategic approach to support for livelihoods, including agricultural 
ones. For agricultural, this will involve moving on from MCRP’s current emphasis on distribution 
of seeds, small ruminants and basic tools to subsistence farmers, to a broader range of support 
with greater emphasis on sustainability.  

o A deepening of community engagement on planning, prioritization and oversight, through 
stronger community structures, potentially absorbing some of those created through the 
Community and Social Development (CSDP, P157898) and FADAMA (P131075) projects.  

o Inclusion of labor-intensive works (cash for work) activities, to be funded by community grants. 

• Component 2:  
o Complementary to the direct livelihoods support under Component 1, the inclusion of new 

activities for the restoration and strengthening of infrastructure and services related to 
agriculture, livestock and fisheries, including support for key stages of priority value chains and 
the development of Agricultural Clusters.  

o The inclusion of new activities for enhancing rural access/mobility and markets  
o Consolidation on Citizen’s engagements, Community Participation and Ownership Structures 

established by the  Community and Social Development Project (CSDP - P157898) 
o Addition of activities to strengthen service provision for health and education, absorbing 

activities underway through the Nigeria States Health Investment Project (NSHIP -P120798) and 
State Education Program Investment Project (SEPIP – P122124), possibly including  grants to 
school management committees and incentive payments to teachers - or introducing alternative 
mechanisms for improving service delivery that are closer to the original design of MCRP and 
achieve the same objectives of activities now under NSHIP and SEPIP.   

o Improving Operations and Maintenance (O&M) for existing and planned infrastructure 
subprojects under MCRP and the MCRP AF to enhance the sustainability of investments, such as 
for the water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) and transport sector, by introducing a system of 
performance-based grants or central resource pools in each state for O&M. 
 

2. Cross-cutting priorities of climate change adaptation and mitigation and labor-intensive public works: 
Where appropriate, project activities under both Component 1 & 2 will, from both a design and resource 


allocation perspective aim to increase climate sensitivity. Labor-intensive public works (LIPW/cash for work 
(CfW) will be used as a means of both delivering project outputs and creating local employment (with an 
emphasis on women and youth), through dedicated programs under Component 1 and as an approach that can 
be included in the design – and particularly in the maintenance strategies – for the larger infrastructure works 
included in Component Two. 

3. Component 3: Technical assistance and programme management support that focuses on the 
strengthening of institutional capacities for the coordination of recovery programming in the NE, and of MCRP 
implementation capacities. 

Proposed Changes:  

o Build capacity of Nigeria NE actors (including State governments, academia and teachers and 
students from research institutes other relevant stakeholders) to engage regionally through 
coordination, knowledge management, collaboration with the Lake Chad Basin Commission 
knowledge platform being supported under PROLAC.  

o Host thematic dialogues with academic and research institutions on the Lake Chad Region. 

 

E. Implementation 
 

Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 
4. Implementation of Components 1 and 2 remains broadly as described in the MCRP PAD. That is, Component 1 is 
implemented directly by the State PCUs through service delivery contractors with technical oversight from relevant 
MDAs, while Component 2 is implemented by state MDAs with PCU oversight. However, the North East Development 
Commission (NEDC) has provided a jointly agreed proposal on implementation arrangements with States, that 
maximizes flexibility that may need to be made across the States. The proposal provides a roadmap for the gradual 
transfer, harmonization and ultimate integration of existing institutional capacities into the implementation 
arrangements of the MCRP-AF. Further refining of the plan will be reflected in the Project Implementation Manual (PIM). 
Relevant capacities of the existing PCUs of the soon closing additional financing projects will be either merged or 
otherwise connected to the MCRP implementation arrangements.  
 

 
 .    
F. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 

Borno, Adamawa, Yobe 

 
 
G. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 
 

Amos Abu, Environmental Specialist 
Michael Gboyega Ilesanmi, Social Specialist 

 

SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 
SAFEGUARD_TBL 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes  

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No  

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes  

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No  

Pest Management OP 4.09 No  

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes  

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No  

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes  

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No  

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No  

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No  

 
 

KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 OPS_SAFEGUARD_SUMMARY_TBL 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The parent project  has recorded some implementation challenges and the task team has worked with the client to  
usually addresses as they arise. The following are the achievements recorded in the implementation of the safeguards 
instruments that have been cleared and disclosed: 1ESIA, 15 ESMPs have so far been prepared under the parent 
project and are at different stages of implementation. Also about 114 grievances have so far been recorded and 
satisfactorily  resolved across participating states under the parent project.  
 
Environmental and Social Safeguards Policies were strictly adhered to as at mid-term of the parent project. Safeguard 
Action plan was prepared and disclosed prior to implementation. The investment plan was screened and site-specific 
safeguards instruments were prepared, cleared and disclosed through the appropriate channels. A number of 
trainings were conducted to improve the capacity of ESSU (environmental and social safeguards units) of the PCUs. 
Several supervision missions were conducted to ensure implementation of the cleared and disclosed safeguards 
instruments.  
 
It is clarified by the task team that there are no new institutional arrangements per se, as per the transition plan 
proposed by the government for the “integration” of parts of existing staff resources and assets of NSHIP, SEPIP, CSDP 



and FADAMA into the MCRP institutional arrangements. The existing PCUs/PIUs of these projects will cease to exist 
and only relevant staff will be transferred to boost the capacity of MCRP. In addition, the reference projects were 
implemented in geographical zones that included that of MCRP and the envisaged risks of MCRP AF, are materially 
consistent with the risk ratings of the original projects (NSHIP, SEPIP, CSDP and FADAMA). Further, the letter and spirit 
of the proposed integration is that existing activities of these projects will be adjusted, molded and assimilated into 
the design and implementation arrangements of the MCRP, rather than their continuation in the present form, and 
hence such transition and eventual integration will be organic in nature and scope, rather than a simultaneous 
continuation of the existing projects parallel to MCRP. Where new activities are added on MCRP on account of such 
integration, these activities will be fine-tuned to fall within the objectives and implementation modus operandi of the 
MCRP, and such that these activities would be screened to ensure that they are of similar environmental and social 
risk.  The task team does agree that such new activities should continue to be governed by the safeguards instruments 
of their parent projects. 
 
In the above vein, it is submitted that new policies are not expected to be triggered on account of the integration of 
these projects into the MCRP, as the activities if redesigned will fall within the safeguards instruments of the MCRP, or 
if continued in their original form, will fall within the safeguards instruments of the parent projects. A clause could be 
included in the Financing Agreement to ensure that the continuation of the use of safeguards instruments of the 
parent projects for MCRP is given legal effect. To this end, the task team will remove any references in the Project 
Paper to triggering of new Safeguards policies. 
 
However, the key environmental and social risk management concerns of the ongoing project that might be relevant 
to the MCRP-AF include: (i) possible soil, water and air contamination, loss of vegetation,  and noise nuisance, 
vibration, traffic congestion due to the planned construction and rehabilitation activities, possible exposure to health 
care wastes, potential injuries from accidents, incidents and near misses, poor management of sludge; and (ii) 
potential adverse social impacts that might result from the need for land acquisition and/or the loss of access to 
economic assets and livelihoods due to planned rehabilitation and investment activities as well as GBV risks.  As part 
of the project preparation, the team has updated the Safeguards Action Plan for the Project. Immediately after Board 
Approval , the client will prepare ESMF and RPF which will outline steps to be  followed in preparing site specific 
safeguards instruments (ESIA, ESMP, RAP) when the locations of the project activities are determined during 
implementation, including mechanism for GBV prevention and response when necessary. 
 
In summary, there are no long-term impacts anticipated. The environmental and social impacts are expected to be 
site-specific and can be managed to an acceptable level. 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
Activities being planned under this project will have limited social and environmental impacts. In principle, MCRP does 
not envision to fund large-scale new infrastructure development projects (e.g. dams or power stations), but rather 
small to medium size rural infrastructural rehabilitation and reconstruction works in localized sites across the BAY 
areas. Much of the Project will focus on medium size rehabilitation and re-construction projects of schools, health 
centers, public buildings, water sources, roads and bridges. The anticipated scale of potential adverse environmental 
or social impacts on human populations are site-specific, few if any of them are irreversible and in most cases, 
mitigation measures could be designed to address the impacts. 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. 
The MCRP, in view of the fact that it is responding to an emergency situation, will not in principle fund large-scale new 
infrastructure development projects that could potentially have long-term and irreversible impacts. Instead, the 


proposed project focuses on small to medium size rehabilitation and re-construction projects that can be easily 
managed at the community level. A flexible and programmatic approach is being taken and will adapt to the evolving 
context and environment on the ground. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower 
capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Specifically, the project will be processed through IPF Policy paragraph 12 (a) that allows for the deferral of the 
preparation of social and environmental assessment documents till implementation. Immediately after Board 
Approval , the client will prepare ESMF and RPF which will outline steps to be  followed in preparing site specific 
safeguards instruments (ESIA, ESMP, PMP, RAP) when the locations of the project activities are determined during 
implementation. The instruments would be consulted upon and publicly disclosed. The Project, including the ESAP 
have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities for the implementation of measures related 
to safeguard policies. In addition, costs related to safeguard policy measures are being included in the project cost 
tables. 
 
Each site approved for support by the project will be eligible for financing only when an Environmental and Social 
Management Plan (ESMP) and RAP (if required) satisfactory to the Bank have been completed and disclosed. Under 
the parent project, the client has so far prepared and disclosed 1ESIA, 15 ESMPs have so far been prepared under the 
parent project and are at different stages of implementation 
 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, 
with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders include beneficiaries and local communities in the project’s areas, local NGOs working in the 
project area, the respective State Governments of Borno Adamawa and Yobe (BAY), and participating Ministries, 
Departments and Agencies (MDAs). 
 
Environmental and Social Safeguards preparation, review and approval procedure to be followed under this project 
shall be consistent with the requirements from the Federal Ministry of Environment of Nigeria as specified in the 
Environmental Assessment Act (Decree No. 86 of 1992, hereinafter the EIA Act), the World Bank’s OP 4.01.  
Compliance with this procedure will constitute part of the evaluation methodology for proposed subprojects prior to 
approval for MCRP support.  The steps in the process are project screening, environmental and social assessment and 
instrument preparation, EIA review and approval, and oversight of implementation.  Stakeholder consultation is an 
integral part of the preparation process, and public disclosure and comment are necessary prior to the decision to 
accept or reject a proposed subproject on the basis of environmental and social information. The procedure for 
consultations on subprojects should conform to OP 4.01 and the EIA Act.  OP 4.01 requires consultation with 
stakeholders. For MCRP, safeguards work on subprojects entails an initial consultation of affected populations and 
interested NGOs as well as relevant agencies of federal, state and local governments, to inform them about the 
proposed activity and solicit recommendations, questions and concerns to be addressed in environmental and social 
assessment.  Once drafts of safeguards documents are completed by the client, they must be cleared by the Bank and 
disclosed. Both Nigeria and the Bank require public disclosure of the safeguard instruments (ESIAs, ESMPs, PMPs, RAPs 
and Audits-as the case may be).  The Bank’s requirements are the most detailed and, to comply with them, safeguards 
documents for MCRP subprojects will be disclosed, at public locations in the area affected by the project as well as in 
appropriate State and Federal agencies, and on the Bank’s external website.  Following a time period adequate for the 
review of those documents, which for MCRP is defined as 30 calendar days for Category B.  It is a policy of the Bank 
that consultations and disclosure should be in form and language accessible to the stakeholders, and that consultation 
 

should continue throughout project implementation. This consultation that has started during project preparation will 
be continued during implementation. In addition, the MCRP has a robust Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) that 
enables project beneficiaries to log in complaints and receive swift and fair resolution in real time. 
 
Under the parent project, consultations have been held with stakeholders at different levels: (a) As part of 
environmental and social screening for sub projects; and (b) During the preparation of site-specific safeguards 
instruments. So far 16 safeguards instruments 1ESIA and 15 ESMPs have been prepared and disclosed by the project. 
 
 
  OPS_SAFEGUARD_DISCLOSURE_TBL 

B. Disclosure Requirements (N.B. The sections below appear only if corresponding safeguard policy is triggered) 

 
OPS_EA_DISCLOSURE_TABLE Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other  
OPS_EA_SG_DEFERRED_FCC_TABLE 

The review of this Safeguards has been Deferred.  
 
Comments 
The proposed project activities include the rehabilitation of existing infrastructure which could result in adverse 
environmental and social impacts thereby triggering OP/BP 4.01. However, considering the limited scale and 
magnitude of rehabilitation and improvement works as well as the confinement of activities to existing footprints, the 
proposed operation is classified as category ‘B’. At this point in time, the locations of the activities that will be financed 
by the project is not known in sufficient details. Site specific safeguards instruments such as ESIAs, stand-alone ESMPs, 
RAPs and Audits (when necessary) will be prepared, consulted upon and disclosed by the proponents prior to the 
commencement of civil works, and the relevant measures including E&S clauses clearly incorporated in contracts.   

OPS_RA_D ISCL OSURE_T ABLE  

 

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process  
OPS_RA_SG _DEFER RED_FC C_TAB LE  

 
The review of this Safeguards has been Deferred.  
 
Comments 
The need for involuntary resettlement or land acquisition in specific subproject areas will only be known during project 
implementation, when site-specific plans are available. Therefore, subprojects will be screened for applicability of the 
resettlement policy and in case any activity or subproject involves land acquisition, a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) or 
Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan (ARAP) will be prepared in compliance with the Bank policy and Nigerian laws 
prior to actual implementation of the activity or subproject. Several issues will increase the complexity of land 
acquisition. For example, the lack of reliable land record systems, and the inability of people losing land to either 
document ownership or be physically present to make their claims for eligibility. Such situations can increase due to 
the situation of forced displacement in the North East as well as the weakened local authorities who can mediate in 
land ownership conflicts Site- specific Resettlement Plans will, therefore, include procedures for identifying eligible 
project-affected people, calculating and delivering compensation, and mechanisms for land dispute grievance redress. 
 
        



OPS_COMPLIANCE_INDICATOR_TBL 

C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project 
decision meeting) (N.B. The sections below appear only if corresponding safeguard policy is triggered) 

 