














































World Bank Document


PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
CONCEPT STAGE

Report No.: PIDC18818

Project Name National Agricultural and Rural Inclusive Growth Project (P153349)
Region AFRICA
Country Kenya
Sector(s) General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (60%), Sub-national 

government administration (20%), Agro-industry, marketing, and trade 
(10%), Public administration- Other social services (10%)

Theme(s) Rural services and infrastructure (40%), Social Inclusion (30%), Micro, 
Small and Medium Enterprise support (30%)

Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P153349
Borrower(s) Ministry of Finance
Implementing Agency Ministry of Devolution and Planning
Environmental 
Category

B-Partial Assessment

Date PID Prepared/
Updated

02-Mar-2015

Date PID Approved/
Disclosed

04-Mar-2015

Estimated Date of 
Appraisal Completion

10-Nov-2015

Estimated Date of 
Board Approval

20-Jan-2016

Concept Review 
Decision

Track II - The review did authorize the preparation to continue

I. Introduction and Context
Country Context
Although poverty rates in Kenya seem to have fallen, formidable challenges at reducing poverty, in 
particular in rural areas, remain.  Kenya’s poverty reduction from 47 percent in 2005/6 to about 39 
percent based on best estimates in 2012/13 , has been driven by solid growth across most of the 
economy, but improvements in income are not evenly shared amongst people but also amongst 
regions and inequality appears to be rising .  The scale of consumption poverty in Kenya is 
staggering, and is concentrated in rural areas.  Based on the last national household budget survey, 
close to half of the population (nearly 17 million Kenyans) was poor in 2005, the vast majority of 
the poor lived in rural areas, and were more likely to depend on income and consumption from 
crops and livestock, as a source of livelihood. Revised poverty estimates indicate that nearly 4 in 10 
Kenyans continue to live in extreme poverty. Poverty levels are highest in arid and semi-arid areas, 

with roughly 70 percent the population living in the “small share” (about 12 percent) of the more 
agriculturally productive regions of the country (source: CPS FY2014-18). Tackling poverty must 
address the difficulties of low-income rural communities as well as the distinct problems of urban 
poverty that also encompass secondary cities.  
 
Income inequality levels are not likely to have decreased in recent years, and achieving inclusive 
growth remains Kenya’s key development objective. Kenya’s Gini coefficient of 47.7 is above that 
of neighboring comparators, including Ethiopia, Tanzania, and Uganda. The richest 10 percent of 
the population garner 40 percent of the nation’s income, whereas the poorest 10 percent receive 
only 2 percent of national income. While fostering income growth of the bottom 40 is not currently 
a target set explicitly by the national authorities, in practice it is currently equivalent to fostering 
income growth of the extreme poor. Significant investment and economic reform must be part of the 
effort to cut the poverty rate by 2 percentage points each year from now to 2030 if extreme poverty 
is to be ended in that timeframe (source: CPS, FY2014-18).

Sectoral and Institutional Context
Agriculture is the mainstay of Kenya’s economy, but is not reaching its potential to fully contribute 
to poverty reduction and shared prosperity. The sector directly accounts for 25 percent of GDP, and 
provides 62 percent of formal employment, and 45 percent of government revenue.  However, 
although specific high-value sub-sectors like horticulture and tea have performed well, small-scale 
agriculture – the main livelihood for most of Kenya’s poor – has performed very poorly.  Despite 
demographic changes and urbanization, the majority of the rural population still derives their 
livelihoods from agricultural and related activities, at low levels of productivity. There is therefore a 
very strong linkage between agriculture and the overall performance of the economy as well as the 
wellbeing of the Kenyans (both rural and urban). 
 
Vulnerable groups in rural areas bear the highest incidence of poverty depending on how well they 
have been prepositioned to face shocks.  Social exclusion creates vulnerability particularly among 
women and youth.  Lack of stable income, secure shelter, isolation from markets, jobs scarcity, lack 
of access to information and technologies and knowledge, education etc. all act as drivers to social 
exclusion and lack of prosperity that is being experienced by rural families. In agriculture, women 
comprise more than 70 percent of the labor force, yet they own only 1-5 percent of agricultural land 
titles. In terms of non-agricultural employment, only 29 percent of those earning a formal wage are 
women and female youths are twice as likely to be unemployed as adult females. 
 
Management of natural resources and water catchments is critical to the well-being of the most 
vulnerable and to improving prosperity of rural communities. Kenya's growth prospects and main 
economic activities, especially agriculture, hydro-power generation and water supply are strongly 
linked to the country's environment and natural resource base.  However, such catchment areas in 
Kenya have undergone intensive environmental degradation resulting in the siltation of rivers, 
reservoirs and irrigation canals, which in turn exacerbates flooding and vulnerability.  Kenya 
already is one of the most degraded areas in the region with about 70 percent of the population 
living in the 12 percent of total land area that is classified as being of medium to high potential for 
agriculture and livestock production. Further, Kenya is highly vulnerable to the impacts of climate 
change. Many of the economic activities and livelihoods rely on natural resources will be impacted 
by climate change related occurences, such erratic weather patterns, floods and droughts. Proper 
management and conservation of key catchment areas, as well as actions to respond to climate 
change (such as the adoption of climate-smart agriculture practices, or strengthening the adaptive 


capacity of communities through improved access to information and services) are key strategic 
requirements for increasing for increasing agricultural productivity, poverty reduction and economic 
growth. 
   
The 2010 Constitution gives hope in addressing some of the exclusion witnessed in the past.  
Devolution to 47 Counties paves way for a more equal distribution of resources and better service 
delivery. The Constitution Bill of Rights emphasizes the need to protect the vulnerable and 
marginalized members of Kenyan communities. Much needs to be done in practice to ensure that it 
rectifies the unequal distribution of investments and services and does not instead cause service 
delivery to deteriorate. The Constitution also recognizes improved governance, transparency and 
citizen participation as essential to realize Kenyan aspirations.  
 
The Constitution and the Government’s ambitious devolution process bring major new 
opportunities, as well as near-term challenges, for enhancing poverty reduction, citizen 
participation, agricultural productivity, as well as governance. Counties now play the primary on-
the-ground role in delivering agriculture services that previously were managed by the national 
government.  Key functions related to these services were transferred to the Counties in August 
2013, and the “Equitable Share” includes significant resources that had formerly been allocated to 
national ministries to carry out these services, with national government retaining a policy making 
role. There is a major need, and window of opportunity, to support Counties to put in place 
institutional structures, mechanisms and staffing to deliver on their mandates. Many Counties are 
looking for mechanisms, such as community-led development programs, that can help to mobilize 
their citizens to take an active role in delivery of services.  
 
Kenya has significant experience supporting community-led development, agriculture and citizen-
centered governance, specifically gained from the Western Kenya Community-Driven Development 
and Flood Mitigation (WKCDD/FM) Project and the Kenya Agricultural Productivity and 
Agribusiness Project (KAPAP) .  Both projects are delivering on their development objectives and 
have demonstrated new approaches to mobilizing communities and small-scale agriculturalists, 
while facing implementation and governance challenges that have afflicted multiple projects in the 
Bank’s Kenya portfolio. These types of operations have demonstrated results in mobilizing poor 
communities to undertake initiatives that improve local livelihoods, and have progressively sought 
to incorporate lessons learned from similar community-led initiatives in South Asia and other 
regions. Experience thus far suggests that unlike top-down approaches, effective community-level 
planning and execution encourages innovative development solutions that reflect local priorities.   
 
Rural transformation in an inclusive and sustainable manner is the long-term vision of the 
Government of Kenya (GoK).  To achieve this inclusive transformation, a series of multi-sector 
programs will be required over the next 5 to 15 years. The Bank, in response to the GoK’s request to 
scale up community-led and market-driven approaches in the agricultural sector as the first program 
in the series, proposes a Kenya National Agricultural and Rural Inclusive Growth Project (P153349) 
to be implemented over five years with an approximate IDA envelope of US$200 million.

Relationship to CAS
The Government, as well as the World Bank’s new Kenya Country Partnership Strategy (CPS/
FY2014-18), places a strong priority on supporting agriculture and the devolution process to 
enhance poverty reduction and shared prosperity. Enhancing the role of agriculture in generating 
shared prosperity and poverty reduction, as well as in supporting national and County governments 


to provide effective decentralized service delivery are key priorities.  The agricultural sector is 
identified as one of the key sectors of the economic pillar in the “Kenya Vision 2030” which is 
operationalized by the Second Medium Term Plan (2013-2017), as well as other key policies such 
as the Agriculture Sector Development Policy aiming to achieve 5 – 7 percent annual agriculture 
sector growth. The CPS identifies agriculture as the sector with the most potential to make a 
significant difference to Kenya’s rural poor, including women, who make up 70 percent of the rural 
labor force; and to deliver on national objectives for shared prosperity.   
 
Alignment with Country Partnership Strategy. The proposed program is fully aligned with the focus 
areas of the CPS and will contribute to its objectives through the Bank’s three key domains of 
engagement in Kenya.  First, under Domain 1 – “Competitiveness and sustainability: growth to 
eradicate poverty”, the proposed project would help achieve the high level objective of improving 
agriculture productivity and sustainability . Second, the proposed project would directly contribute 
to Domain 2 – “Protection and potential: delivering shared prosperity”, where the focus is to protect 
the vulnerable and help them develop their potential. The CPS recognizes that agriculture is one of 
the high priority areas interventions to target support for the poor that directly links with helping 
farmers in rural areas. Engaging communities and supporting especially women and youth are also 
recognized to be important. Third, the proposed project would also assist in achieving the two high 
level objectives of operationalizing the devolution framework for local decision making and smooth 
delivery of decentralized services under Domain 3 – “Consistency and equity: delivering a 
devolution dividend”.

II. Proposed Development Objective(s)
Proposed Development Objective(s) (From PCN)
The proposed development objective is to reduce vulnerabilities and promote inclusive agricultural 
and other livelihoods of the small-scale and marginal farmers in the targeted communities.

Key Results (From PCN)
Achievement of the PDO and key results are proposed to be measured by the following  indicators: 
(a) Direct project beneficiaries (number) of which female (percentage)- this core indicator will 
essentially measure the number of vulnerable and poor/small and marginal farmers (bottom 40 
percent, disaggregated by gender) benefitting from project interventions both in terms of 
infrastructure and livelihoods; (b) Communities and Counties, through their own institutions, 
implementing, operating, and managing their development activities (number); and (c) Increase of 
household incomes and assets of small and marginal farmers (less than 2 acres) (percentage).  A 
detailed results monitoring framework and indicators will be developed during the project 
preparation.

III. Preliminary Description
Concept Description
Project Approach and Scope: To promote inclusive and sustainable agricultural and livelihood 
development, the proposed project interventions will use a three-pronged approach along the key 
guiding principles of: participation, inclusion, poverty targeting, transparency, accountability, value-
for-money, and self-help. First, to address key aspects of rural development that cut across cultural, 
ecological, and socioeconomic areas , the project design will use a holistic, integrated landscape 
approach that looks at all resources (natural capital (land, water, and other natural resources), 
physical capital (infrastructure, etc.) and social capital (communities, institutions, etc.) to develop 


strong horizontal and vertical collaboration with stakeholders to managing competing demands. 
Second, to effectively identify and address distinct local needs, the project will use a community-led 
approach that has been successfully providing services to rural populations in Kenya. Participation 
of the beneficiary population and County governments in all stages of the process would be 
essential for ensuring ownership and sustainability of the investments. Third, the project will adopt 
a market-driven approach to ensure that agricultural development and livelihood promotion are 
linked to markets/private sector thereby contributing to increased economic transformation and 
improved livelihoods of the target population. With focused support, a sizeable group of small 
farmers and other vulnerable groups can be a source of much needed employment and growth in the 
rural areas. The project will also place a strong emphasis on sustainability – how to build and 
sustain community-led institutions and farmer-led market associations that can raise adequate 
revenues to sustain and expand operations, and are incentivized to deliver tangible benefits for poor 
and vulnerable populations.  
 
Project Area.  Selection of the proposed project area will be defined during preparation recognizing 
that some degree of geographical concentration will be needed in order to provide widely shared 
benefits.  Roughly, the project will cover about 10 to 15 counties, benefitting about 500,000 farm-
families, about 2. 5 million population . Selection of the project area will be in done following an 
overall holistic/landscape approach, ensuring close collaboration and coordination with proposed 
IDA-supported rural roads, rural energy and devolution projects currently under preparation. The 
selection criteria could include: (i) agricultural and livestock potential areas; (ii) number of poor 
people living in rural areas; (iii) human development indicators such as malnutrition, food 
insecurity, sanitation coverage, etc.; (iv) willingness of County governments and communities to 
commit to the program’s objectives/principles and provide cash/labore or in-kind support, and; (v) 
clustering approach – in terms of both physical/biological clustering as in case of watershed, and 
economic clustering.  
 
Project Components: The project will comprise 4 components:  
 
Component 1: Support to Farmer/Community Institutions and Agricultural/Rural Livelihoods 
(roughly US$100 million of IDA Credit): This component will provide support and resources to 
communities for building and strengthening their institutions (farmer/producer groups, cooperatives, 
etc), improving agriculture and rural livelihoods (extension, technology, irrigation, natural resource 
management, finance, etc), reducing vulnerabilities such as unemployment (especially youth), 
disability, food insecurity and malnutrition, and improving quality of life (small access roads/
bridges, water, etc). This component could provide support through two windows aimed at: (a) 
providing financing for public goods, and; (b) promoting agricultural and rural livelihoods as 
private goods. The funds will be released directly to the communities in tranches based on their 
performance, and will be managed at the community level. Investments would need to be made in 
land rehabilitation and land conservation measures also to arrest erosion-induced declining land 
productivity, and connecting the farmers as well as community to roads and markets.   
 
Component 2: Strengthening Inter-community/Producer Cooperatives and Investments for 
Agricultural Value Chains (roughly US$60 million of IDA Credit): This component will support the 
strengthening of higher level farmer institutions (cooperatives, producer federations, natural 
resource users associations, etc) that help farmers and communities work together to improve 
productivity and value-addition, and to achieve efficiency and economies of scale of local activities. 
The component will also support activities that require cooperation within and across multiple 


communities. Key activities proposed under this component include: (i) strengthening producer 
federations and cooperatives; (ii) developing value-chains and commercial agriculture; (iii) 
improving catchment management practices; (iv) promoting innovative technology, farming 
methods, and good agricultural practices that help target beneficiaries to improve efficiency and 
quality of their production; and (v) complementing existing subsistence strategies that promote 
climate resilience with new measures such as efficient irrigation, new crop varieties (e.g., drought 
and disease tolerant, quicker-growing), and erosion controls. These climate smart techniques and 
dissemination of climate information (e.g., seasonal forecasts and long-term trends) can address 
more intense rainfall events and water conservation measures. Component 2 will build synergies 
with other initiatives at the national level and in the project area such as feeder roads development, 
rural electrification and devolution, etc., in order to have a multiplier effect on achieving sustainable 
results.   
 
Component 3: Building Capacity of County Governments and Other Partners to Support 
Community-Led Development (roughly US$30 million of IDA Credit): This component will 
support County governments and other partners (including communities) to strengthen their roles 
and capacity as enablers of community-led initiatives for farmers and vulnerable populations. 
Proposed activities to be supported will include: (i) integrating community-led initiatives in County 
Integrated Development Planning and Budgeting processes; (ii) building County capacity including 
policies, staff, processes/systems, and monitoring; (iii) identifying and monitoring progress and 
needs of poor and marginalized communities, and; (iv) developing platforms to share information 
on ongoing initiatives, identifying and disseminating good practices, and enhancing coordination 
among different actors.   
 
Component 4: Coordination, Facilitation and Monitoring (roughly US$10 million of IDA Credit): 
This component will support overall national level coordination, facilitation, management, technical 
support, and monitoring, learning and evaluation.

IV. Safeguard Policies that might apply
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No TBD
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖

V. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 200.00 Total Bank Financing: 200.00
Financing Gap: 0.00
