









COMBINED PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENTS / INTEGRATED 
SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET (PID/ISDS)  

ADDITIONAL FINANCING
Report No.: PIDISDSA16622

Date Prepared/Updated: 17-Mar-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION

  A.  Basic Project Data

Country: Djibouti Project ID: P157282
Parent 
Project ID 
(if any):

P117355

Project Name: DJ- Second Additional Financing for the Rural Community Development and 
Water Mobilization Project (PRODERMO) (P157282)

Parent Project 
Name:

DJ-Rural Community Development and Water Mobilization Project 
(PRODERMO) (P117355)

Region: MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
Estimated 
Appraisal Date:

21-Mar-2016 Estimated 
Board Date:

31-May-2016

Practice Area
(Lead):

Agriculture Lending 
Instrument:

Investment Project Financing

Sector(s): Animal production (30%), Irrigation and drainage (30%), Agricultural extension 
and research (30%), Flood protection (10%)

Theme(s): Rural services and infrastructure (50%), Water resource management (30%), 
Climate change (20%)

Borrower(s): Ministry of Economy and Finance in Charge of Planning and Industry
Implementing 
Agency:

Ministry of Agriculture Water, Fisheries, Livestock and Halieutic Resources 
(MAEPERH)

Financing (in USD Million)
Financing Source Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT 0.50
International Development Association (IDA) 7.00
Total Project Cost 7.50

Environmental 
Category:

B - Partial Assessment

Appraisal 
Review 
Decision (from 
Decision Note):

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate

Other Decision:



Page 2 of 8

Is this a 
Repeater 
project?

No

B.   Introduction and Context

Country Context
Djibouti is extremely water scarce with conditions set to be exacerbated by population growth and 
climate change. As a consequence, access to safe drinking water is a daily challenge for the 
majority of the population, particularly for people living in rural areas. Poverty and food 
insecurity affect more or less the entire country and both are recognized to be highly correlated 
with water access issues. The extreme aspect of the geo-climatic profile leads to low erratic 
annual rainfall that averages hardly 150 mm, to the absence of perennial surface freshwater flow, 
and to the slow renewing of its aquifers. The current situation shows that more than 70 percent of 
the rural population and its herds do not have access to water within a reasonable distance. During 
the three-to four-month dry season, pastoral households are subject to the lack of access to water 
that represents a major constraint to human and livestock mobility, and to the proper use of the 
limited and sparsely distributed agro-pastoral resources.
Sectoral and institutional Context
Climate change impacts are projected to exacerbate these already precarious water resource 
challenges. Climate change is expected to induce an increase of the temperatures by 1.7-2.1 C by 
2050, while precipitation is set to decrease by 4-11 percent . This could lead to an increase of both 
severity of dry spells and intensity of wet extremes, thus accelerating land degradation, floods and 
erosion. Sea level rise is also projected to further exacerbate these impacts through saltwater 
intrusion of coastal aquifers. 
 
The Government of Djibouti (GoD) considers securing access to water and energy as the foremost 
major challenges that are prerequisites to reducing poverty and ensuring a nation-wide sustainable 
socio-economic development. To tackle the country’s structural gap in water resources demand 
and supply, the GoD is in quest of support from key partners for the development of non-
conventional water resources mobilization facilities including desalination plants, sewage water 
treatment plants and transboundary water transfer from Ethiopia.

C.  Proposed Development Objective(s)

Original Project Development Objective(s) - Parent
The objective of the Project is to increase access of rural communities to water and enhance their 
capacity to manage water and agro-pastoral resources in the project areas using a participatory 
approach to community-based development.

Key Results 
� Increase in the number of rural households with access to drinking water within a 
reasonable travel time (two hours round trip) in the project areas   
� Increase in the number of heads of livestock with access to water within a reasonable 
distance (20 km radius) in the project areas; 
� Increase in available grazing biomass  in the targeted rangelands in the project areas.  
� Communities in the project areas are organized in community-based structures (CPLs, 
CGEPs and women/fishermen associations) that actively prepare and implement SAAHPs 



Page 3 of 8

� Beneficiaries that feel project investments reflect their needs

D.  Project Description

The AF-2 investments will aim to upscale up activities under the parent project to surrounding 
naturally and socially linked pastoral areas, including (i) Community investments (water 
mobilization and soil conservation; agriculture, livestock and Fisheries development; and income-
generating activities), (ii) capacity building and technical assistance and (iii) Project management 
and coordination.

Component Name
Priority Community Investment Subprojects
Comments (optional)
The proposed AF-2 would finance US$4.0 million (57%), to scale-up existing activities, e.g. 
priority community investment sub-projects. The funding covers consultant services for carrying 
out the detailed design and supervision, as well as goods and civil works for the implementation 
and the operation of the community sub-projects. Community investments will be demand-driven 
and will comprise the following sub-projects: (i) water mobilization and soil conservation; (ii) 
agriculture, livestock and Fisheries; and (iii) income-generating activities.

Component Name
Capacity Building and  Provision of Technical Assistance
Comments (optional)
A total of US$1.6 million (23%) will be allocated to scale-up existing activities, e.g. capacity-
building activities and the provision of technical assistance. the AF-2 will finance capacity-
building activities for the PMU, the grassroots organizations such as Water Users Associations 
(WUA) and community groups to support the formulation and the implementation of 
participatory schemes, while improving local contingency planning to better face the impact and 
challenges in the aftermath of extreme events. The component will sensitize and mobilize 
beneficiary communities and other stakeholders to facilitate effective involvement in the planning 
and the project implementation process as well as their awareness on nutrition, sanitary and water 
quality issues. The use of ICT.

Component Name
Project Coordination and Management
Comments (optional)
A total of US$1.1 million (15.7%) will be allocated to further support project coordination and 
management activities. This component will support the PMU through the provision of goods, 
works, consultant services, training and incremental operating costs associated with project 
management, implementation, monitoring and evaluation, and audits. Incremental costs to be 
financed include incremental contractual staff costs, office rehabilitation works, equipment and 
operations, transportation equipment and operations, and domestic travel, to name a few.

E.  Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis (if known)

The geographic targeting principles of the proposed AF-2 area of interventions consist mainly in 
scaling-up the activities of the parent project in the neighbor pastoral areas and new fishing areas, 



Page 4 of 8

while consolidating current achievements in the already covered areas. The unit of project 
intervention is based on traditionally recognized local communal grazing areas or "parcours", 
shared by a particular group of localities and communities who possess traditional grazing rights 
over a common area of rangeland. In total, the project area will cover in addition to the 12 
"parcours" already covered by the parent project, six additional with the AF-2 financing: three in 
Obock, (Fididiss-Allaylou, Moulhoulé-Andoli, and Saday-Waddi), one in Tadjoura (Garabtissam-
Balho) and two in Dikhil (Kori-Gagadé and Dawdaya-Der Ela). Two additional fisheries sites will 
also be included in the project areas, e.g. Goubet and Arta-Plage. The extension of PRODERMO 
project activities to the socially linked neighbor pastoral routes  and new fishing areas through 
additional financing will not require additional environmental assessment beyond that which is 
already provided in the current Environmental and Social Impact Assessment Framework 
(ESIAF) prepared for PRODERMO. The existing Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF) will be updated to address issues related to agricultural inputs, to ensure 
proper management and minimize any adverse impacts.

F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

Fatou Fall (GSU05)
Ishanlosen Odiaua (GEN05)

II. Implementation
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
No changes are introduced to the institutional, implementation, procurement, or financial 
management arrangements. The Ministry of Agriculture, Water, Fisheries, Livestock and Halieutic 
Resources (MAEPERH) through its existing PMU will continue to be the implementing agency 
responsible for the AF-2 implementation. As indicated previously, the PMU’s Regional Office 
located in Obock, Tadjourah and Dikhil will be reinforced with Staff and vehicles in order to support 
the implementation of the AF-2 activities in the new and additional project area. The other entities 
involved in the AF-2 implementation include the beneficiary communities organized into 
Community Management Committees (CGEPs); the Local Development Committee (CPLs); and 
other community groups, as well as the existing National Steering Committee which was established 
under the original project.

III. Safeguard Policies that might apply

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment 
OP/BP 4.01

Yes The current ESMF was updated to include the 
extended areas supported by the PRODERMO-AF-2 
and to address issues related to agricultural inputs, 
ensure proper management, and minimize any 
adverse impacts.

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 No
Forests OP/BP 4.36 No
Pest Management OP 4.09 No Similarly to the parent project and the AF-1 

operations, PRODERMO-AF2 will not finance any 
activities which will require the procurement of 
pesticides.



Page 5 of 8

Physical Cultural Resources 
OP/BP 4.11

No

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 
4.10

No

Involuntary Resettlement OP/
BP 4.12

No The policy is not triggered. The project will not 
finance any activities requiring involuntary land 
acquisition resulting in: 
a. involuntary resettlement of people and/or 
loss of (or access to) assets, means of livelihoods or 
resources; and 
b. involuntary restriction of access to legally 
designated parks and protected areas resulting in 
adverse impacts on the livelihoods of the displaced 
persons. 
 
The choice and mobilization of land parcels for the 
purposes of the specific project activities requiring 
land use will be achieved in a participatory manner 
and documented.

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No
Projects on International 
Waterways OP/BP 7.50

No

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/
BP 7.60

No

IV. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify 

and describe any potential large scale,  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
While the project might not have significant or irreversible negative impacts, the main risks can be 
controlled by the design and the operation of sub-projects. Groundwater depletion through 
increased used of boreholes can be mitigated through close groundwater monitoring and strict 
adherence to defined recharge regimes.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities 
in the project area:
There are no expected long-term negative social impacts.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse 
impacts.
N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an 
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Under the parent project and the AF-1, the recipient has satisfactorily implemented the 
requirements of the existing ESMF. The project has designated focal points for the Environmental 
and Social Management Plan (ESMP) implementation in the regions where the project is being 



Page 6 of 8

implemented. Beneficiary communities have also received training on Environmental and Social 
requirements in order to ensure that implementation continues along the various levels of the 
project. Environmental and social screening is carried out regularly with the requisite 
documentation. The PMU prepares monthly reports on the implementation of the Environmental 
and Social Management Framework (ESMF) requirements and shares these with the Bank for 
review. 
 
The project triggers OP/BP 4.01. To meet the requirements of the policy, the recipient has 
prepared an ESMF. The ESMF outlines the screening procedures for the sub-projects, as well as 
the institutional implementation arrangements. 
The project does not trigger OP/BP 4.12. For the parent and the AF-1 operations, the recipient 
prepared documentation tools to ensure that choice and mobilization of land parcels are voluntary 
and participatory.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure 
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The revised ESMF was consulted upon in 18 localities, one for each pasture, including women.

B. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank 16-Mar-2016

Date of submission to InfoShop 16-Mar-2016
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors

"In country" Disclosure

Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
n/a



























































World Bank Document



PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
APPRAISAL STAGE

Report No.:  PIDA61676

Project Name Integrated Dairy Productivity Improvement Project (P155412)
Region EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
Country Kyrgyz Republic
Sector(s) Animal production (70%), General finance sector (20%), Agro-

industry, marketing, and trade (10%)
Theme(s) Rural services and infrastructure (25%), Rural policies and 

institutions (25%), Trade facilitation and market access (25%), 
Micro, S mall and Medium Enterprise support (15%), Climate 
change (10%)

Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P155412
Borrower(s) Kyrgyz Republic
Implementing Agency Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Agriculture and Melioration
Environmental Category B-Partial Assessment
Date PID Prepared/Updated 11-Apr-2016
Date PID Approved/Disclosed 11-Apr-2016
Estimated Date of Appraisal 
Completion

08-Apr-2016

Estimated Date of Board 
Approval

02-Jun-2016

Appraisal Review Decision 
(from Decision Note)

I. Project Context
Country Context
With GNI per capita of US$1,269 (2014), the Kyrgyz Republic is one of the low income economies 
of the Europe and Central Asia Region. In 2014, approximately 30.6% of the population lived 
below the poverty line, with the incidence of poverty slightly higher in rural area than in urban 
areas (32.6% vs. 26.9%). Economic growth in the country has been quite volatile. GDP growth was 
6% in 2011 but contracted to 0.9% in 2012, owing to a sharp drop in gold output. In 2013, the 
economy grew at a whopping 10.9%, but slowed to 3.6% in 2014 and remained at 3.5% at the end 
of 2015. The narrow export base is dominated by gold, with agricultural products representing on 
average 16% of total exports from 2009 to 2013. The economy is highly vulnerable to external 
shocks, in particular many households depend on remittances from the energy-based economies of 
Russia and Kazakhstan. It is partially dependent on wheat imports from Kazakhstan and the past 
global food price shocks quickly transmitted to the country. The official unemployment rate in the 
country has hovered below 10% for the past decade, however mostly on account of significant 
outmigration of labor force (predominantly men, a majority from rural areas) to Russia and 
Kazakhstan. The recent economic difficulties of Russia and the strong devaluation of the ruble have 
negatively affected the earnings of the migrants and their remittances to their families in 
Kyrgyzstan.

  

Sectoral and institutional Context
Agriculture is an important sector for the Kyrgyz Republic’s economy and livestock production is a 
major livelihood support system for rural people. Agriculture represents about 15% of GDP, and it 
is still a major employer, providing more than a third of jobs. The sector’s growth rate in 2015 was 
a relatively high 6.2%. Agriculture is a key priority for the government because of its contribution 
to poverty reduction and rural employment. Livestock production, which accounts for about 50% of 
the agricultural GDP, is dominated by household and small farm production. It is important for 
rural household food security, nutrition, regular income generation, and acts as a social safety net 
with animals sold in times of hardship and economic distress. The primary land use of the country 
is native pasture production (87% of the total land is under pastures), which provides an advantage 
for livestock-based livelihood and food security for the rural population.  
 
With the accession of the Kyrgyz Republic to the Eurasian Economic Union (EAEU), the country’s 
agriculture sector is facing new challenges, and also new opportunities. The Kyrgyz Republic 
became a full member of the EAEU in May 2015. The EAEU includes Russia and Kazakhstan, 
which are the Kyrgyz Republic’s main export markets. However, since 2012, a partial dairy export 
ban has been in force, limiting the number of dairy exporters to seven (more information in 
paragraph 7 below). The Kyrgyz dairy producers and processors may be unable to capitalize on new 
market opportunities due to their inability to meet the animal health, food safety and quality 
standards of the EAEU. However, Kyrgyz dairy products benefit from a reputation of better taste 
due to the production model based on natural pastures. Addressing current constraints in the Kyrgyz 
dairy sector would allow to capitalize on new market opportunities, as well as on the achievements 
and initiatives of the previous and ongoing projects in the agriculture sector.  
 
Market opportunities for Kyrgyz milk and dairy products. The demand for Kyrgyz dairy products, 
in particular in Kazakhstan, is significant. Even though the border is closed to most of the official 
dairy exports (only seven companies can export dairy products to Kazakhstan), informal trade is 
booming. While the official value of exports of milk/dairy products in 2012 was US$30 million 
(equivalent to 4% of the annual milk production volume), the unofficial export revenues were 
closer to US$ 100 million (14% of the milk production volume). Russia is also considered a 
potentially large export market for dairy products (in particular, cheese). Once milk quality is 
upgraded, exporting to other countries (such as China, Afghanistan and Pakistan) should be 
possible.  
 
The Kyrgyz dairy sector is primarily dependent on smallholder private dairy units with an average 
herd size of 3-5 heads of cattle. Around 60% of the rural population own livestock, but the average 
herd size tends to be small. Milk is an important part of the diet and around 90% of the population 
consume dairy products regularly. In value terms, milk is one of the top five agricultural products of 
the country. Per capita availability of milk is around 193 kg and 25% of the milk produced is 
surplus, for processing and export. It should be noted, however, that farmers who keep animals do 
not consider themselves dairy farmers (animals are rather considered a subsistence livelihood 
source), and the animal breeding and management practices are poor, which accounts for low dairy 
sector productivity. 
 
Livestock productivity is low compared to countries with similar production conditions. 
Furthermore, productivity has been declining from 2,041 kg in 2009, to 2023 kg in 2012 and 2, 013 
kg in 2013.  Many factors cause this low productivity at the farm level: inadequate on-farm animal 
health management, poorly equipped laboratories and disease diagnostic services, irregular and 
incomplete vaccinations, low breed stock (genetic) quality, absence of sustainable breeding policies 
and practices, inadequate feeding, improper shed maintenance, and farm hygiene issues, overall 
poor knowledge of animal husbandry techniques, low level of investments into production and 
marketing infrastructure. Addressing these issues can significantly increase both the productivity 
and total output of milk, which would contribute to increasing producers’ incomes and help address 
the sourcing problems faced by dairy processors. Processors experience a shortage of clean and 
high quality milk, and as a result underutilize their processing capacities and forego additional 
incomes that could come from exporting to other countries, and primarily, to the neighboring 
Kazakhstan. Export bans have a multiplier effect, as they affect not only the processors but also the 
milk-selling farmers and households and other players in the value chain.  
 
The Kyrgyz Dairy Sector Development Program (KDSDP) was initiated with support from IFC’s 
advisory program in 2015, to help the country capitalize on market opportunities presented by the 
EAEU. The Program is designed to help ensure steady milk exports to Kazakhstan (and other 
countries) through a dairy value chain approach, which would enable farmers to receive steady and 
increased incomes for the milk. It has already started working by supporting dairy processors in 
Issyk-kul Region. However, issues related to animal health and low productivity continue to persist. 
To make value chain development successful, it is imperative that on-farm improvements as well as 
necessary public sector investments are supported to ensure high quality and increased volume of 
milk. Thus, the KDSDP has grown into a comprehensive program addressing the various 
bottlenecks affecting the dairy value chain. The program covers all aspects of the dairy value chain: 
cattle breed improvement, animal feed improvement, improvements of animal productivity and 
milk quality, extension education and outreach services, animal health and hygiene, milk collection 
upgrades, laboratory, disease diagnosis and testing capacity (animal disease control, food safety and 
milk quality) upgrades, processing capacity upgrades, food safety standard upgrades, enabling 
regulatory framework, and export promotion.

II. Proposed Development Objectives
The Development Objective of the Project is to enhance dairy animal productivity and milk quality 
on beneficiary farms.

III. Project Description
Component Name
Component 1: Strengthening Public and Private Services in the Dairy Sector
Comments (optional)
This component would contribute to the program development objective by improving the public-
private dialogue on private sector development issues, and by supporting the improvements in the 
breed stock (genetic quality) of the dairy cows. This component would focus on the following 
activities: (i) Improving the Public-Private Dialogue; (ii) cattle identification and registration in 
Issyk-kul Region; (iii) Establishment of a World Organization for Animal Health-certified Zone 


Free of Animal Diseases (with a focus on Foot and Mouth Disease in close collaboration with the 
Islamic Development Bank); and (iv) Support to Artificial Insemination (AI) Service Providers.
Component Name
Component 2: On-farm Productivity Enhancement
Comments (optional)
During Phase I, the Model Dairy Village (MDV) concept would be introduced, determining the 
locations of the MDV service points, and providing the initial support to these services. The 
component would start with the most-needed services (which could be a veterinarian, an AI office, a 
milking center, a milk collection point, etc.). It would work predominantly with groups of 
beneficiaries. It would provide training, demonstrations and advice to farmers on good animal 
breeding practices, including: (i) fodder production and feeding management; (ii) animal husbandry 
and farm management, including (a) animal housing, general management and handling; (b) animal 
health, farm hygiene & clean milk production; (c) breeding management; and (d) manure 
management; and (iii) milk cooling and handling.

Component Name
Component 3: Farm-level Investments
Comments (optional)
Phase I would finance: (i) a US$ 1.2 million Revolving Fund to facilitate access to finance for small 
farmer for the purchase of inputs and small equipment; and (ii) technical assistance and capacity 
building to project beneficiaries to enable them to access existing financing programs.

Component Name
Component 4: Project Management
Comments (optional)
The component would cover the costs associated with project management, including Monitoring 
and Evaluation for the project implementation, as well as the establishment and maintenance of the 
Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM).

IV. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 5.00 Total Bank Financing: 5.00
Financing Gap: 0.00
For Loans/Credits/Others Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT 0.00
International Development Association (IDA) 2.75
IDA Grant 2.25
Total 5.00

V. Implementation
The Ministry of Agriculture and Melioration (MOAM) and the Ministry of Finance (MOF) would 
be the Implementing Agencies for the project. Both Ministries have prior extensive experience with 
implementation of Bank-financed projects.  
 
The Agribusiness Competitiveness Center (ABCC) reporting to MOAM, and the Credit Line 
Management Unit (CLMU) at MOF would be responsible for implementation of the technical 
assistance and credit line activities, respectively. Both implementing units have extensive 

experience in implementing Bank-financed projects. The technical assistance activities 
(Components 1 and 2) would be implemented through the ABCC, which has been successfully 
implementing technical assistance activities in the agriculture sector in three Bank-financed projects 
(Agribusiness and Marketing Project, Agricultural Productivity Assistance Project, and the JSDF-
financed Support to the Community Seed Funds Project). The Revolving Fund for farmers, farmer 
associations, agro-processors and traders would be managed by the CLMU which has successfully 
managed credit lines in three previous Bank-financed projects (Rural Finance II Project, 
Agribusiness and Marketing Project, and Agricultural Productivity Assistance Project).  Similar to 
the previous projects, procurement functions for the proposed project would be carried out by 
ABCC and the overall Financial Management would be the responsibility of CLMU. Safeguards 
support would be the responsibility of the ABCC. ABCC would also open a regional office in Issyk-
kul, where the technical staff and Environmental Specialist would be located. Both PMUs, but, in 
particular, ABCC would closely liaise with the other projects under the KDSDP, to ensure that all 
necessary activities are implemented, and no duplications occur.  
 
A Steering Committee would be set up to provide strategic guidance for project implementation, as 
well as ensure that key issues that need to be resolved are brought to the attention of the 
Government and their resolution facilitated. The Steering Committee would consist of 
representatives of the Prime Minister’s Office, MOAM, Ministry of Economic Regulation, MOF, 
Issyk-kul Oblast Governor’s Office, and private sector representatives. 
 
A consulting firm with international experience in dairy sector development, in particular, in 
working with farmers to improve on-farm productivity and milk quality, would be contracted under 
the project to support project implementation. The consultants would have the following main 
responsibilities: (i) identify the locations for the service points for the Dairy Model Villages 
(Component 2); (ii) provide training-of-trainers to local consulting companies that would train 
farmers in the project area (Component 2); (iii) provide advisory services to individual larger 
farmers; or groups of farmers, on specific areas related to the improvement of milk quality and 
quantity on beneficiary farms (Component 2); and (iv) assist ABCC in coordinating the project 
activities with other activities of the program, in particular, those financed by IsDB and other donors 
(Component 1 and Component 4).  
 
In addition, local consulting companies and/or NGOs would be hired under the project to ensure 
outreach to farmers, training and advisory services on the ground (under Component 2).  
 
Finally, a local consulting company or NGO experienced in group mobilization and group lending 
arrangements would be hired under the project to provide the necessary training to the groups of 
beneficiaries of the Revolving Fund, as well as help with ensuring collection of repayments due to 
the Revolving Fund (Component 3).

VI. Safeguard Policies (including public consultation)
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
OECS Regional Agriculture Competitiveness Project (P158958) 

 

      

 

Combined Project Information Documents /  
Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (PID/ISDS) 

 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 25-Apr-2017 | Report No: PIDISDSA21792 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The World Bank  
OECS Regional Agriculture Competitiveness Project (P158958) 

 

 

  
Apr 03, 2017 Page 2 of 23  

 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

OECS Countries P158958 OECS Regional Agriculture 
Competitiveness Project 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

LATIN AMERICA AND CARIBBEAN 06-Feb-2017 25-May-2017 Agriculture 

Lending Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing St. Vincent & the 
Grenadines, Grenada 

SVG - Ministry of 
Economic Planning, 
Sustainable Development, 
Industry, Information and 
Labour, Grenada - 
Ministry of Finance & 
Energy, SVG - Ministry of 
Agriculture, Forestry, 
Fisheries and Rural 
Transformation, Grenada 
- Ministry of Agriculture, 
Lands, Forestry and 
Fisheries. 

 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to enhance access to markets and sales for competitively 
selected farmers and fishers, as well as their allied aggregators and agro-processors, in Grenada and St. Vincent and 
the Grenadines. 
 
Components 

Support for Preparation of Business Plans 
Implementation of Business Plans 
General Agricultural Services and Enabling Environment 
Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation 

 
 

Financing (in USD Million) 

Financing Source Amount  

International Bank for Reconstruction and Development    1.80  

International Development Association (IDA)    6.50  



 

The World Bank  
OECS Regional Agriculture Competitiveness Project (P158958) 

 


LOCAL: BENEFICIARIES    1.36  

Total Project Cost    9.66  

 

Environmental Assessment Category 

B - Partial Assessment 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the preparation to continue     
 
 
B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

The small and open countries of the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS)
1
 have 

traditionally encountered serious development challenges, coupled with low growth, high debt, and 
limited fiscal space to maneuver around these problems. Agricultural exports and tourism drove 
growth of roughly 6 percent per year on average in OECS economies the 1980s, but growth and external 
trade began to decline in the late 1990s, after the European Union (EU) withdrew preferential access for 
traditional OECS agricultural exports (bananas and sugar).

2
 Efforts to revive growth and offset 

exogenous shocks through increased public investment engendered a large public debt and stifled 
private investment. The global financial crisis in 2008 heavily curbed tourism, remittances, and financial 
sector activity, while sharply increasing public debt and fiscal imbalances. OECS countries recorded a 
cumulative drop in output of 6 percent during 2009–12; at the same time, periodic natural disasters 
continued to batter their infrastructure and economies. OECS economies started to recuperate recently 
through a steady recovery in tourism and the United States economy. The regional growth forecast for 
2017 is positive, based on improving performance in key sectors (tourism, construction, agriculture) and 
lower fuel prices. Over the medium term, average growth for the region is expected to accelerate to 
about 2.5 percent. 

OECS countries have not reduced poverty and unemployment rates to levels compatible with their per 
capita income levels. Official poverty rates are 30.2 percent in Saint Vincent & the Grenadines (SVG) and 
37.7 percent in Grenada; poverty is concentrated in rural areas.

3
 The financial crisis and reduced 

demand for OECS exports and services have aggravated unemployment, which was already high. 
Unemployment (now 10.2 percent in Grenada and 18.8 percent in SVG) is higher among youth, 
exceeding 30 percent in both countries. Female-headed households, which account for two-thirds of all 
households in the OECS, are more likely to be poor.  

                                                           
1
 Established in 1981, this inter-governmental organization promotes economic harmonization and integration, human and 

legal rights, and good governance. It has seven founding and full members (Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica, Grenada, 
Montserrat, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, and St. Vincent & the Grenadines) and two associate members (Anguilla and the 
British Virgin Islands—British Overseas Territories). Martinique (France) joined in 2015 but is not represented by the OECS 
diplomatic mission.  
2
Governed by the Lomé Convention (1975) and its successor, the Cotonou Agreement, these trade arrangements included 

special protocols for EU imports of bananas and sugar. The EU initiated reforms for banana imports in 1999 and sugar in 2006.  
3
Specific figures on rural poverty are not readily available, but government studies and agricultural sector reviews reveal that 

most poor people in the OECS reside in rural areas. 



 

Sectoral and Institutional Context 
Agriculture is a critical element for improving rural incomes, employment, and food security for OECS 
countries and farmers, however, it has not adapted rapidly to the changing trade regime. For example, 
SVG’s banana exports declined significantly; Grenada’s banana exports collapsed, and its nutmeg and 
cocoa production were devastated by Hurricanes Ivan (September 2004) and Emily (July 2005). 
Consequently, agriculture’s contribution to GDP, which was 13.4 percent in Grenada and 21.2 percent in 
SVG in 1990, was 5.4 percent in Grenada and 7.5 percent in SVG two decades later. The fact that 
agriculture remains a major contributor to employment, representing about 11 percent of the labor 
force in Grenada and 26 percent in SVG, indicates a persistent productivity problem.  

OECS agriculture could drive sustained gains in employment and income, while reducing dependence 
on imported food, if strategic investments are made to improve agricultural productivity and increase 
access to markets. Investment opportunities exist along the two main pathways for developing 
agriculture: import substitution and export expansion. For instance, Grenada produces nutmeg and 
cocoa of exceptional quality, in high demand internationally. Each product has only one principal 
exporter (public rather than private—the Grenada Cooperative Nutmeg Association and Grenada Cocoa 
Association), but the market for processing these products is open, and Grenada has two chocolate 
factories and a plant to produce medicines from nutmeg. Nutmeg and mace still lead Grenada’s 
agricultural exports, and it has also had success exporting soursop, citrus fruits, cloves, ginger, 
cinnamon, and fish, while agro-processing (pepper sauces, jams, juices) is becoming more important for 
the export market. SVG has started to export eddoes and dasheen (taro), arrowroot starch, roots and 
tubers, ginger, coconuts, spices, pineapples, and peppers, mostly to regional markets and the United 
Kingdom (UK). However, key investments are required to increase competitiveness to gain extended and 
sustainable access to regional and international markets. 

Local produce could potentially substitute for some imported produce in the tourism sector as well as 
in local and regional markets. Agricultural imports have increased in volume, variety, and value as 
tourism, supermarkets, and incomes have grown. The volume of OECS agricultural imports—mainly 
meat (especially poultry), cereals, and dairy products—is now about four times higher than the volume 
of agricultural exports. The World Bank estimates that 68 percent of food demand from the tourism 
sector is met through imports, representing around 20 percent of OECS agricultural imports. Locally 
produced fruits and vegetables appear to have the greatest import substitution potential, given high 
local demand, competitive production costs (in some cases), high perishability of these products, their 
ability to grow in most OECS countries, and their suitability for production even on small farms. Apart 
from hotels, the expanding yachting and supermarket sectors offer opportunities for local food 
producers. The freshness of local produce, as well as of fish and seafood, and better transport times and 
costs represent major advantages and opportunities for local farmers and fishermen where 
supermarkets and hotels will pay a premium for freshness. While for some locally grown products the 
cost of production is simply too high to compete with imported products, in some cases local fresh 
produce has the potential to be competitive.

4
 

A major consideration in this context is that the peak agricultural season is out of sync with the peak 
tourism season, impacting food demand, availability, and prices. Local demand for high-quality food 
peaks in mid-December to mid-April, the high season for tourism in the Caribbean, and falls 
precipitously afterward. On the other hand, agricultural production peaks in the wet season (June–

                                                           
4
 Jansen, Hans, Adam Stern, and Eli Weiss (2015), “Linking Farmers and Agro-processors to the Tourism Industry in the Eastern 

Caribbean,” Report No. ACS16280, World Bank, Washington, DC. 


November, coinciding with the hurricane season), which is becoming less predictable and drier with 
climate change. During the December–May dry season, the absence of intensive irrigation to sustain 
horticultural production significantly reduces the consistent supply of local produce. Owing to the lack of 
storage facilities and farmers’ tendency to produce the same products at the same time, the oversupply 
of certain crops in the wet season leads to food losses, lower food prices, and declining farm revenue. 
Key strategic investments to ensure a sustained supply all through the year, to promote proper storage, 
and to diversify markets, seem to be essential for the sector to develop.  

In sum, the main barrier to purchasing more local produce is the limited ability of local farmers to 
deliver the required quantity and quality of produce in a timely, consistent, and competitive manner. 
Most farms are small and lack the inputs, equipment, infrastructure, and farm management skills 
(including production planning, crop management knowledge, and post-harvest handling capacity) to 
become reliable suppliers. Hotels belonging to large international chains prefer to purchase in bulk from 
Miami to get guaranteed quantities and volume discounts, rather than to deal with the uncertainty of 
sourcing large quantities locally from many small farmers. Recently established large hotels received 
government concessions to import duty free. Lacking such options, small and medium-sized hotels 
purchase from multiple local farmers and other sources to meet demand, which can be time consuming. 
They benefit from greater freshness (produce typically is picked and transported to hotels on the same 
day) and lower transport times and costs, but must cope with the inconsistent quantity and quality of 
produce, as well as the limited variety and overall quantity.  

The rudimentary market structure for fresh produce, including the lack of aggregation of smallholder 
supplies, results in suboptimal market performance. The limited aggregation of produce reduces 
smallholders’ access to assured and remunerative markets (and a more stable income), complicates 
buyers’ purchasing operations, and creates a disincentive to buy locally. Virtually all marketing of fresh 
local produce in OECS countries is done by individual farmers, and until they harvest, many do not know 
where or to whom they will sell. OECS countries have few producer or marketing organizations to 
remedy these problems, and such organizations generally suffer from financial problems, unstable and 
limited membership, side-selling, and mistrust. An added complication is that the public sector (typically 
ministries of agriculture) actively purchase and market produce through marketing boards that typically 
run at a loss, fail to provide remunerative prices to farmers, and crowd out private marketing activity. 
Poor communication and coordination between supply and demand complicate the planning of farm 
production and create uncertainty for buyers and sellers. 

The agro-processing industry is not well developed. Several small and medium enterprises (SMEs) 
produce a range of products, but difficulties in obtaining financing on affordable terms limit the 
investments in infrastructure, equipment, and inputs required to scale up and generate consistent 
profits. Many agribusiness entrepreneurs lack technical skills and knowledge to develop viable business 
plans, make the required investments, develop a network of reliable farmer-suppliers, and comply with 
the quality, food safety, and certification standards enabling them to penetrate profitable markets. The 
food processing industry cannot absorb all the produce offered, yet at the same time processors cannot 
obtain consistent supplies of quality produce. This mismatch between local production and industry 
demand, while partly related to seasonality, is mainly an organizational and marketing problem. As in 
marketing, in agro-processing public sector initiatives (largely unsuccessful) have crowded out the 
private sector.  

A combined production-marketing system, based on private sector aggregators of smallholder 
produce and agro-processors, could address most of these constraints and improve international 


 

competitiveness. Promising models are based on aggregation by private sector actors, who purchase 
from small-scale producers and give them a market for their produce. Apart from aggregating, storing, 
and marketing produce, aggregators can add value to certain products through basic activities such as 
washing, packaging and cutting, and can potentially offer support and services for producers (planting 
material, agro-chemicals, technical advice). Some producer organizations in Grenada and SVG could 
possibly act as aggregators and should be supported to do so, but they cannot succeed alone. Private 
actors—traders, wholesalers, or even larger (lead) farmers—need to step in and assume the required 
organizational and aggregation roles. Agro-processors can adopt the same model, in which smallholder 
farmers produce in accord with a plan agreed with the processor and embodied in a written contract.  

The Productive Alliance (PA) methodology, successfully tested in several projects in the LAC region, 
could help to resolve major constraints on producers’ access to markets. The PA methodology, 
introduced during the early 2000s in Latin America and more recently to other regions, engages with the 
private sector to enable smallholders to meet market demand for produce in terms of quantity, quality, 
and timeliness. The traditional PA approach involves three core agents: a group of smallholder 
producers, one or more buyers, and the public sector, while more advanced versions include technical 
service providers and lenders. These agents are connected through a business plan, which describes 
producers’ needs for capital and services and proposes improvements—attained through productive 
investments, technical assistance (TA), and business development—to upgrade their production 
capacities and skills and strengthen their linkage with markets. Evidence shows that the PA approach 
increases productivity, market integration, production, sales volume, prices, and smallholders’ incomes; 
generates on-farm and non-farm employment; and facilitates the inclusion of vulnerable groups in 
commercial value chains.  

The proposed project is well aligned with the revised OECS Regional Plan of Action for Agriculture 
(2012–2022) and national development plans. The priority of the Regional Plan of Action is to promote 
a market-oriented agribusiness approach to alleviating poverty and food and nutrition insecurity, 
consistent with the proposed project. Another priority is to mainstream climate change mitigation and 
adaptation strategies in agricultural programs to protect food production systems and build resilience 
against tropical storms, heavy rains, and droughts in rural/farming communities, which the proposed 
project will do. At the national level, the project is aligned with the National Economic and Social 
Development Plan (2013–2025) of SVG, which among other objectives for agriculture seeks to increase 
productivity, efficiency, and competitiveness; increase market access for agricultural produce; and 
increase agricultural exports; as well as with the National Agricultural Plan (2015-2030) of Grenada. 

Finally, the project is well positioned to contribute to the climate change policies and measures of 
Grenada and SVG, outlined in their Intended Nationally Determined Contributions (INDCs). The INDCs 
of both countries emphasize improving climate change adaptation in the priority sectors of tourism and 
agriculture. By taking climate change into consideration as an emerging risk and reflecting adaptation 
and mitigation in its design and implementation, the project provides a framework to achieve some of 
the INDC commitments.  The project includes strategic investments, both at the level of the public and 
the private sectors, to promote the development, dissemination and adoption of innovative 
technologies that would significantly contribute to decrease vulnerability to climate variability and, 
therefore, generate climate mitigation and adaptation co-benefits. 

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
Development Objective(s) (From PAD)  



 

The World Bank  
OECS Regional Agriculture Competitiveness Project (P158958) 

 

 

  
Apr 03, 2017 Page 7 of 23  

 

The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to enhance access to markets and sales for 
competitively selected farmers and fishers, as well as their allied aggregators and agro-processors, in 
Grenada and St. Vincent and the Grenadines.  

 
The main beneficiaries of the proposed project include:  

(a) Small-scale individual or organized farmers and fishers (FFs). 
(b) Aggregators and agro-processors (AAs), including: (a) producer organizations (associations, 

cooperatives or similar formal organizations with legal standing); and (b) SMEs, such as 
wholesalers, traders, lead farmers (with legal standing to act as aggregator), and industrial 
agro-processors.  

(c) The respective ministries of agriculture, as well as their extension officers and staff, which 
will be strengthened by the Project.  

 

Detailed criteria for eligibility of FFs and AAs for receiving matching grants under the project will be 
defined in the Project Operational Manual (POM). The FFs and AAs will be eligible only if they are 
formally participating together in a strategic productive alliance approved by the project to pursue the 
stated objectives. It is expected that the Project will have 1,700 direct beneficiaries, of which at least 25 
percent will be female and 25 percent will be below the age of 40 years. 

Key Results 
 

The proposed PDO indicators are identical for both countries (with different quantitative targets for 
each country): 

(b) Market Access Compliance Score for participating FFs supplying products to their allied AAs 
in accordance with the agreed Business Plans per semester (this Score is a weighted average 
of the volume complying with the agreed terms of the business plans related to quantities, 
quality, and timeliness of delivery). 

(c) Market Access Compliance Score for sales from all participating AAs complying with buyers' 
specifications  as per their Business Plans per semester (weighted average of volume 
complying with quality, quantities, and timeliness of delivery). 

(d) Percentage increase in the average annual sales of FFs participating in strategic alliances 
under the project. 

(e) Percentage increase in the value of gross sales made by AAs participating in the project to 
their final buyers. 

(f) Direct project beneficiaries (number), of which female (%) and young (%). 

 
D. Project Description  

 

The scope of the proposed project is based on successful experiences with productive alliances (PA) in 
other operations supported by the World Bank in the region, adapted to the specific conditions of small 
island economies such as Grenada and SVG. As noted, the PA approach is intended to improve access to 
markets for AAs and small-size FFs, using the private sector as a vehicle to foster smallholder production 

in accordance to market demand in terms of quantity, quality, and timeliness. The main components, 
apply to both recipient/borrowing countries and are based on the need for improving linkages between 
demand and supply in prioritized value chains. 

Component 1: Support for Preparation of Business Plans (Costs: Grenada IBRD: US$ 0.38m; 

SVG IDA: US$0.40m) 

The objective of this component is to: (i) promote an understanding of the Project’s scope and 
objectives through outreach to potential stakeholders and beneficiaries (such as individual and 
organized FFs, AAs, buyers, and lenders); (ii) identify potential business opportunities for prioritized 
value chains and their translation into viable and profitable business proposals; and (iii) prepare full 
business plans for selected proposals. 

This component will finance the provision of goods, consulting and non-consulting services, training and 
operating costs in support of implementing pre-investment activities, including:  

(a) development and implementation of a communication and information dissemination strategy 
to raise awareness of the Project and its activities;  

(b) organization of networking events, including business roundtables and local workshops for 
supporting the formation of strategic alliances between aggregators and agro-processors 
(“AAs”) and farmers and fishers (“FF”), buyers, and lenders;  

(c) provision of Training to AAs, FFs and buyers to identify business opportunities and to translate 
them into viable business proposals;  

(d) implementation of a country-wide call for interested parties to present business proposals;  
(e) evaluation of business proposals, and selection of those proposals to be developed into business 

plans; 
(f) provision of technical assistance for the preparation of sustainable and competitive business 

plans;  
(g) evaluation and selection of final business plans, and the preparation of Subproject Agreements 

for those selected plans; and 
(h) analysis of the qualifications of input suppliers eligible to participate in the voucher program 

under Component 2 of the Project. 

A Technical Assistance Agreement between the borrowing countries and the Food and Agriculture 
Organization (FAO) of the United Nations, financed by contributions from the credit proceeds of both 
countries, will include TA support for the implementation of activities described under (c), and (f) above.  

Component 2: Implementation of Business Plans (Grenada: IDA US$2.2m; IBRD US$ 0.22m; 

beneficiaries: US$ 0.64m; SVG: IDA US$2.95m; beneficiaries: US$ 0.72m) 

The objective of this component is to provide matching grants to co-finance the implementation of 
technically feasible, financially viable, economically profitable, socially responsible, and environmentally 
sustainable business plans, which, when implemented, will contribute to a consistent and timely supply 
of sufficient quantities of quality produce to buyers while providing a reliable income to allied FFs. The 
implementation of these Business Plans will make possible an increase in productivity and quality of the 
products, as well as reducing dependency on rainfall, thus reducing the constraints for increasing supply 
during peak season and enhancing vulnerability to climatic factors.  In addition, Component 2 is 
expected to provide climate change co-benefits derived from: (i) adaptation, by promoting innovative 
resource management practices to increase resilience, expanding the use of crops and crop 



mixes/rotations less vulnerable to climate variability, and expanding the use of protected agriculture 
and drought/heat resistant varieties; and (ii) mitigation, by promoting agricultural intensification using 
higher yielding varieties, carbon sequestration species and cropping patterns, improving irrigation 
measures and replacing traditional sources of energy (see Annex 4). 

This component will finance:  

(a) The implementation of a matching grant and voucher program, including the provision of: 

(i) training for capacity building to AAs receiving matching grants (such as in logistics, 
storage, marketing, agronomy, accounting, financial literacy, food processing, good 
manufacturing practices, packaging, labelling, traceability, quality control, food safety 
and hygiene, legal and environmental aspects ) and FFs receiving vouchers (such as in 
good production practices, modern and improved technologies, climate-smart 
agriculture, post-harvest handling, and financial literacy); and 

(ii) support in supervising the implementation of the selected business plans, including 
assisting the PIUs to put in place a technical supervision and implementation support 
system, capable of following up the implementation of the Business Plans making sure 
they follow the approved Plans and detecting real or potential issues that could 
compromise the expected results of the Plans or their effectiveness. 

(b) Provision of matching grants to eligible AAs, and vouchers to eligible FFs, which are allied with 
the respective AAs, for the purpose of implementing the business plans selected under 
Component 1 of the Project, and co-financing investments under said plans, including:  

(i) for the selected AAs: (A) equipment (transport, office, ICT tools/mobile applications, 
cold storage, product processing, and so on), infrastructure (such as storage/warehouse 
and cold chain facilities) and other related inputs, and (B) technical assistance and 
specialized Training related to their respective business plans; and 

(ii) for the selected FFs: (A) farming equipment, infrastructure and other related inputs 
(such as equipment for land preparation and harvesting, irrigation infrastructure 
(including rainwater harvesting structures and pressured irrigation, greenhouses, 
tunnels, hydroponics, aquaponics, and so on), and (B) fishing equipment, infrastructure 
and other related inputs (such as boats and fishing implements, logistics, temporary cold 
storage) 

(c) Provision of (i) technical assistance and Training on procurement to AAs receiving Matching 
Grants, and (ii) specialized Training, in relation to the implementation of the relevant business 
plans, to FFs receiving Vouchers. 

The Technical Assistance Agreement to be signed between both countries and FAO to be financed under 
the Project will include necessary technical support for the implementation of activities described under 
(a) above, unless such activities constitute a conflict of interest with the services provided under this 
assignment. 

Each business plan will need co-financing from the AA (at least 20 percent of the AA investments for 
producer organizations and at least 50 percent for other private sector AAs). At least 10 percent of the 
AA costs of the subproject will have to be allocated upfront in cash by the beneficiary. The rest of the 
counterpart financing of the business plan will have to be covered by the beneficiaries from their own 

funds or through resources provided by other lenders (banks, credit unions, development banks, private 
sector, etc.). Proof of the availability of resources secured in advance from these sources will be a 
condition to start implementation of a subproject. Producer organizations with potential will be 
encouraged to participate as AA; however, to give them better opportunities to participate as AAs, they 
will not compete directly with other private sector AAs in the selection process.  Weaker producer 
groups will participate as FFs in alliance with an AA, and they will receive TA in organizational and 
institutional strengthening to help them become an AA in the future. 

The mechanisms to finance subprojects will be different for AAs and FFs:   

(a) For AAs: The procurement of investment items included in the Subproject will be undertaken 
by the AAs for small works, goods, and individual consulting and non-consulting services, 
under a threshold further defined in the POM. Above the specified threshold, and for all 
consulting services by firms regardless of value, all procurement for the benefit of the AAs will 
be undertaken by the PCU. The PCU will have a fiduciary control function of the procurement 
undertaken by the AAs and will provide TA and support to improve the procurement capacity 
of the AAs.  Under this proposed mechanism, each beneficiary AA will receive funds in a 
specific bank account opened by the AA for its exclusive use while implementing the 
subproject. The counterpart funds from the AA are expected to be deposited in the same 
specific account as a precondition for disbursing project funds, which will be sequenced in line 
with physical progress in accordance with the Subproject Agreement and the related schedule 
in the Subproject Procurement Plan. This matching-grants for the AAs would have a maximum 
of $120,000 for productive investments and a maximum of $20,000 for specific technical 
assistance for implementation. 

(b) For FFs: The project will implement a voucher mechanism to provide financial assistance to 
FFs. The investments to be supported by the sub-grants will be partially financed by vouchers 
issued by the PCU in the name of the benefitting FFs (in accordance with the terms of the 
respective business plans and the corresponding Subproject Agreement). The FFs will use 
these vouchers to complement their own funds in purchasing the specific approved items, as 
confirmed and approved by the PCU, from a local supplier selected by them from a list of 
suppliers approved beforehand by the PCU.  The maximum allowed for each individual 
beneficiary FF will be $8,000 and for a total of $120,000 for all the FFs in a single Subproject 
Agreement.  In addition, the FFs will receive free general training and extension services from 
FAO in collaboration with each Ministry of Agriculture and more specialized TA from other TA 
providers directly procured by the PCUs 

Component 3: General Agricultural Services and Enabling Environment (Grenada IBRD: US$0.54m; SVG 

IDA:  US$0.25m)  

The objective of this component is to strengthen general agricultural public services directly linked to 
the subprojects described in Component 2 and needed to enhance the probability of success. It will also 
support the strengthening of the overall enabling environment needed for the sustained development 
of the business enterprises with potential competitive advantages, locally and internationally. The 
project will finance goods, works, consulting and non-consulting services, training and operating costs 
(travel, per diem, etc.) to help implement the key activities under the component. This component will 
contribute to generate climate change co-benefits in two main areas: (i) promotion and incorporation of 
techniques more resilient to climate variability into public extension services practices; and 


(ii) mitigation, by conducting basic research as well as introduce new technologies that reduce GHG 
emissions in crop production and fisheries, as well as promoting the adoption of new systems increasing 
carbon sequestration (see Annex 4). A TA Agreement to be signed with FAO will include technical 
support for the implementation of activities under (c), as described below. 

The main activities under this component are to:  

(a) improve the quality and availability of key inputs required for the adoption of more 

productive technology (such as quality seeds, seedlings, and planting materials) for products 

supported under Component 2 of the Project;  

(b) organize, and facilitate participation in, trade fairs and study tours;  

(c) strengthen agricultural public extension service providers’ knowledge and skills to effectively 

(i) support the selected AAs and FFs to adopt technology for the efficient implementation of 

their business plans under Component 2 of the Project, and (ii) communicate and disseminate 

information broadly across the agricultural sector; 

(d) carrying out technical studies to competition improve competitiveness, including market 

studies, analysis of new potential value chains, enabling environment, reforms, agro-food 

logistics, and food safety requirements and quality standards (including legal framework) and 

related technical skills; and  

(e) carrying out improvements to public infrastructure that are required for the promotion of 

adequate internal distribution of produce, reduction of post-harvest losses, establishment of 

modern food safety mechanisms, as well as cold storage at key exit points for perishable 

agricultural exports (e.g., airports/port terminals).  

Component 4: Project Management, Monitoring, and Evaluation (Grenada IBRD: US$0.66m; SVG IDA: 

US$0.70m)  

The objective of this component is to ensure effective project implementation, monitoring of activities 
and final project evaluation. The project will finance goods, consulting and non-consulting services, 
training and incremental operational costs to the PCU and the PIU for expenditures related to the 
project activities, including: (i) project coordination and management; (ii) monitoring, evaluation, and 
impact assessment; (iii) fiduciary administration, accounting and financial/technical audits; (iv) 
safeguards management; and (v) a citizens’ engagement mechanism. 

 
E. Implementation 
 
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 

Overall implementation responsibility. In each country, a Steering Committee (SC) will be formed by 
representatives of government ministries and agencies considered relevant for a successful project 
implementation and the achievement of its objectives, as well as from the private sector, to provide 
overall guidance and support for project implementation and ensure proper inter-institutional 
coordination. This committee will approve the annual Project Operating Plans and requests for 
budgetary allocations, and it will provide opinions on possible restructuring or adjustments in the 
project’s approach, methodology, and focus. The final constitution of the SC will be defined in the POM. 



Overall responsibility for financial management (FM), procurement, and safeguards for the proposed 
project will rest in the existing PCU in each country. In Grenada, the existing PCU is located in the 
Ministry of Finance and Energy (MoFE) and has been executing Bank-financed operations for several 
years. In SVG, the PCU is located in the Public Sector Investment Program Management Unit (PSIPMU), 
which is based in the Ministry of Economic Planning, Sustainable Development, Industry, Information 
and Labour (MoEP) and has also executed Bank-financed operations for several years. FM, procurement, 
and safeguards assessments of the PCUs were completed at appraisal to determine any needs for 
further strengthening of these functions under the project, either by providing additional staff or 
contracting consultants to efficiently implement the fiduciary and safeguard aspects of the proposed 
project.  

Overall responsibility for technical implementation will rest within the line ministries of agriculture 
(MoALFF in Grenada; MoAFFRT in SVG), through a small PIU in each country. In principle, each of these 
PIUs will consist of at least a Project Manager and an Agribusiness Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist. 
The PIU will be responsible for (i) coordinating and implementing all Project activities, including with 
relevant agencies and beneficiaries, as specified in the POM, (ii) ensuring that the requirements, criteria, 
policies, procedures and organizational arrangements set forth in the POM are applied in carrying out 
the Project, (iii) preparing all Project implementation documents, including Project reports, and (iv) 
monitoring and evaluating the Project. Very close collaboration between the PIU and the PCU will be 
crucial. 

Technical Assistance (TA). The main focus of this TA is to support the preparation and implementation 
of effective and sustainable business plans at the FF and AA levels and to strengthen the capacity of the 
respective ministries of agriculture to deliver the services needed to improve production and 
competitiveness. The TA services, together with the investments included in the business plans (for AAs 
and FFs), are the two main pillars of the project, complementing each other and aiming to achieving the 
development objectives. Grenada/SVG, through each PCU, will enter into a contractual agreement with 
a technical service provider to receive specific assistance and guidance in key aspects of project 
implementation. The two recipient governments have expressed their preference to engage a single 
service provider for covering the key phases of the business plan cycle (from identification/preparation 
of Business Plans to the supervision of implementation), ensuring a consistent approach and 
methodology. The two governments have requested that FAO serve as this main technical service 
provider, given the organization’s long engagement with both countries and its presence in the region, 
as well as its worldwide experience with agricultural competitiveness and technology development 
issues.  

 
 .    
F. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 

Environment Under Component 2, the Project would co-finance aggregators’ investments such as transport, 
storage, post-harvest, cold chain facilities, ICT tools and mobile applications, equipment, infrastructure, or 
energy-saving technologies; and for allied producers, investments such as equipment for land preparation 
and harvesting, irrigation infrastructure including rain water harvesting, greenhouses, tunnels, hydroponics, 
and aquaculture. Technical assistance, training, and extension services would also be provided for storage, 
marketing, agronomy, accounting, financial literacy, food processing, machinery, packaging, labeling, 



traceability, quality control, or food safety and hygiene; and good agricultural practices, modern and 
improved technologies, climate smart agriculture, post-harvest handling or financial literacy. The 
investments could take place anywhere in Grenada or in Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. While the prime 
agricultural lands are in relatively flat lying areas, fairly steep areas are routinely cultivated and therefore 
erosion control is of concern and was incorporated into the ESMF through extension services training for 
best management practice. Pest management is also being improved through other World Bank projects in 
the region and lessons learned will be applied to this Project. Processing or storage facilities could be 
located in non-agricultural lands, and will apply lessons learned in other projects in the region. Social The 
final design and location of sub-project sites will be defined during project implementation. Some of the 
physical characteristics of relevance to social safeguards analysis would include: population density, 
patterns of land ownership, livelihood activities, and presence of vulnerable populations. Once specific sub-
project sites are known, a screening of potential social risks and impacts will be conducted, where needed. 
Given that some investments under Component 2 may lead to involuntary resettlement impacts, a 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was prepared to guide the application of the Operational Policy (OP) 
4.12 requirements. The RPF guides the resettlement objectives and principles, organizational arrangements 
and funding mechanisms for the preparation of the Resettlements Plans (RPs) to be carried out during 
Project implementation.  

 
 
G. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 
 

Silvia Del Pilar Larreamendy Ricardo,Michael J. Darr 

 
 
 

SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The World Bank Safeguard Policy OP 4.01 for 
Environmental Assessment (EA) is triggered, and 
after analysis of the Project and its components it 
was determined that it falls under Category B, due to 
minor to moderate potential negative impacts from 
agricultural production, food processing, 
aquaculture, livestock rearing, and other related 
activities.  The details of individual subprojects are 
not yet known, therefore an Environmental and 
Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been 
prepared for both recipient (Grenada and SVG), 
using examples from other World Bank OECS 
regional projects.  A consultation/workshop was 



held during the pre-appraisal mission in late October 
and early November and the ESMF has been 
disclosed in country for comments. A final version 
has been disclosed on the World Bank's external 
website on January 24, 2017, and in country on 
February 22, 2017 in Grenada and on March 2, 2017 
in SVG. A revised version was disclosed in-country 
and in the World Bank external website on April 18, 
2017.  
 
The ESMF includes guidance for screening of simple 
subprojects (such as washing and sorting facilities) 
that can use standard mitigation measures already 
detailed in the ESMF, as well as identification of 
more complex subprojects (such as large agro-
processing facilities) or subprojects in sensitive areas 
(such as mariculture or seafloor harvesting projects) 
that would require additional assessment during 
implementation to prepare comprehensive 
environmental management plans as needed. For 
simple subprojects and small producers, the ESMF 
includes a condensation of World Bank Group 
Environment Health and Safety (EHS) Guidelines for 
reference as a generic environmental management 
plan.  Additional consideration is given to pest 
management, water supply, fertilizer use, mixed 
cropping (or rotation), soil conservation, and erosion 
control, since these are common issues in 
agricultural projects in the OECS.  Complex 
subprojects will require individual design reviews 
and due diligence for emissions and discharges, 
labor practice, and other environmental and safety 
aspects. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

The Project will screen out and exclude any 
subproject works that would involve clearing of new 
land for agriculture; however, during Project 
preparation it was decided to trigger the policy as a 
precaution to ensure that any affected natural 
habitats are adequately protected, because some of 
the project sites may take place near parks or 
protected areas, or may potentially affect lands that 
meet the definition of natural habitat. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No 
The Project will categorically screen out and exclude 
any clearing or effects on forest lands. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes The Pest Management Policy (OP 4.09) was also 

triggered as a precaution, because pesticide use is a 
necessity in agricultural activities in the region. The 
ESMF promotes Integrated Pest Management as 
standard practice, and a screening mechanism is 
included in the ESMF to determine if there are any 
subprojects with significant pest management 
issues; if so, then a separate Pest Management Plan 
will be required to ensure that these materials are 
well managed for those subprojects. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 

This policy was triggered as a precaution to ensure 
that any "chance finds" or other physical cultural 
resources during excavation or other earth-moving 
activities are adequately protected. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 

Policy OP/BP 4.10 is not triggered. In the context of 
preparation of other OECS regional projects in Saint 
Vincent and Grenada, screening, background 
research, and consultations were conducted by the 
World Bank to determine whether Indigenous 
Populations were present in the project area. These 
screening activities confirmed that while populations 
who claim historical indigenous heritage do exist in 
the OECS (in the area of Sandy Bay, Saint Vincent), 
these groups do not have distinctive customary 
cultural, economic, social or political institutions that 
are separate from the dominant society and culture. 
Nor do they have an indigenous language different 
from the official language of Saint Vincent (English). 
Therefore, it was concluded that this community 
does not retain the minimum characteristics 
necessary to claim indigenous group affiliation under 
Bank Policy OP/BP 4.10. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

The designs of individual subprojects are not yet 
known, however, some investments for aggregators 
(for example: transport, storage, cold chain facilities, 
infrastructure) and allied producers under 
Component 2 may lead to involuntary 
resettlement/land acquisition, affecting land or 
livelihoods. Therefore, OP 4.12 is triggered and a 
Resettlement Policy framework (RPF) was developed 
to guide the application of the OP 4.12policy 
requirements. No project funds will be used for land 
acquisitions. In case land acquisition is needed, it 
would have to be entirely and directly financed by 
the concerned beneficiaries. Activities that could 
involve involuntary resettlement will be avoided, 
nevertheless a RPF has been elaborated as a 
precautionary measure. The RPF clarified 
resettlement objectives and principles, 
organizational arrangements and funding 
mechanisms to be prepared and implemented if any 
safeguards tools (e.g. Resettlement Action Plans) are 
required during project implementation. The RPF 
was prepared and disclosed and consulted  prior to 
Project appraisal.  A revised version was disclosed in-
country and in the World Bank external website on 
April 18, 2017. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 
Improvements of canals or water conveyance 
systems are not envisioned and will be excluded in 
the EMF screening criteria. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
This policy should not be triggered since the Project 
will not finance activities involving the use or 
potential pollution of international waterways. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
The Project will categorically screen out and exclude 
any projects in disputed areas. 

 
 

KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environment:   
 
Two of the main issues identified during Project preparation are the management of pesticides and the potential for 
soil erosion.  Both issues are prioritized in the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) through the 
promotion of best management practices.  Another potential issue relates to discharge and permitting for large agro-
processing facilities; these are also identified in the ESMF and would require additional studies as needed during 
implementation. 
 
The long-term environmental impacts would largely be positive through improved agricultural practice, among small 
farmers and larger co-ops and agro-processors.  There are no large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts 
anticipated from the Project. 
 
Social:   
 
Social impacts addressed in the ESMF, are related to  potential  involuntary resettlement  which are not expected to 
be significant. Other project’s potential impacts are associated with aggravation of social exclusion among 
disadvantaged farmers and fishers. The ESMF provide guidelines for screening business plans and subproject sites and 
for undertaking full social assessments, if needed, to analyze social impacts and risks, including but not limited to land 
acquisition/resettlement/economic displacement. Social assessment identifies population density, patterns of land 
ownership, and defines the establishment of mechanisms to screen for farm and rural larceny; determines the 
presence of vulnerable segments of the population in the Project area, including women, poorest smallholders, as well 
as young farmers under the age of 40, to ensure their participation and share in Project benefits (including in training 
and extensions services). 
 
Most works contemplated will involve temporary impacts, and potential land acquisition and/or resettlement 
associated with construction activities, as per the OP4.12. and estimated social impacts on affected people are 
estimated as low and temporary. The Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) ensures the mitigation and compensation 
of involuntary resettlement. The RPF guides the preparation of Resettlement Plans (RPs) during implementation. 
Regarding potential impacts on vulnerable population for assuring the inclusion of less advantage FFs and AAs, the 
Project’s PA participative approach will be implemented. 
 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
The long-term environmental impacts would largely be positive through improved agricultural practice, among small 
farmers and larger co-ops and agro-processors.  There are not  indirect or long term social impacts estimated in the 
Project area. 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. 
Environment:  
 
The ESMF includes guidance to avoid clearing new agricultural lands, and exclusions of effects on natural habitat or 
forests.  Otherwise the Project alternative analysis is not relevant with regards to environmental aspects. 
 
 
Social:  
 
In order to avoid and minimize land acquisition and define the mitigation and compensation measures needed when 
land acquisition is unavoidable, the Project has prepared an RPF that will guide the preparation RPs in the 
implementation phase. The RPs will define the specific alternatives for each sub-project to minimize and compensate 
social impacts. 
 
Fostering social inclusion will be addressed by a productive alliance (PA) tool that  aims at targeting established 
producer groups and value chains, supporting the inclusion of disadvantaged groups and building broader alliances 
with state agencies and/or municipalities. The proposed project approach is based on the PA methodology, adapted to 
the OECS context and reflecting lessons learned from similar projects, with the objective of improving the access of 
small farmers and fishers (FFs) to markets and increasing their productivity and income. Business plans developed 
under the Project will allow these individuals to upgrade their production, capacities, and skills. Project activities are 
defined to ensure access and opportunities for vulnerable beneficiaries, and capacity building under the Project will be 
tailored to the demands and interests of small producers, different age groups, and women.  
 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower 
capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Project Coordination Units (PCU)s will be responsible for oversight to ensure safeguards policies are followed, and 
their capacity will be strengthened by sharing of PCU staff dedicated to environmental safeguard resources among 
other World Bank projects.  The Ministries of Agriculture will be responsible for technical project management 
through Project Implementation Units(PIU)s and will coordinate with the PCUs, as well as directing the liaison with 
beneficiaries on the field level with extension officers.  Finally, technical training including best environmental practice 
and business plan preparation will be provided by academic partners, NGOs, and/or consultants who will be 
contracted to support the Program. Safeguards assessments of the PCUs will be completed prior to appraisal to 
determine any needs for further strengthening these functions under the project, either by providing additional staff 
or contracting consultants to efficiently implement the safeguard aspects of the proposed Project. 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, 
with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders of the proposed project include: (i) small-scale farmers and fishers (FFs), either individually or 
organized in associations, cooperatives, or similar formal organizations with legal standing, or in the process of 
obtaining legal status, and (ii) aggregators and agro-processors (AAs), such as producer organizations, lead farmers, 
wholesalers, traders, and industrial agro-processors. Equally important, the project will support the participation of 
the rural private sector, including new suppliers. Workshops with key stakeholders were held in the pre-appraisal 
mission (Oct.-Nov. 2016) including the Ministries of Agriculture, the extension officers, other relevant government 
agencies, and potential beneficiaries (agro-processors, coops, and individual farmers). Disclosure of the draft ESMF 
was done by posting on the government website and targeted e-mailings to key stakeholders to solicit feedback.  
 
Comments were addressed and evidence of consultation and disclosure was included in the final ESMF.  If any 
sensitive or complex projects are identified during screening (such as large agro-processing facilities, mariculture or 
seafloor harvesting projects) which would require additional assessment and/or permitting, then the appropriate 
consultations would be done during implementation. A project-level Grievance Redress Mechanism has been 
developed by the Social Specialists at the PCUs to provide a way for project affected people and communities, as well 
as members of the public to lodge complaints and/or request information about the Project. Once subprojects’ sites 
are known, the social specialists will undertake community consultations to provide beneficiaries and stakeholder 
communities with information about the subproject and to elicit feedback on subproject activities and design. 
 


























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Sierra Leone Agro-Processing Competitiveness Project (P160295) 

 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Sierra Leone P160295  Sierra Leone Agro-
Processing 
Competitiveness 
Project (P160295) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA Oct 18, 2017 Feb 08, 2018 Trade & 
Competitiveness 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Republic of Sierra Leone Ministry of Trade and 
Industry 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
To improve business environment in agribusiness sector and increase productivity of targeted agro-processing firms in 
Sierra Leone. 

 

 Financing (in USD Million)      

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B-Partial Assessment  Track I-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

Finance OLD 

Financing Source Amount  

International Development Association (IDA)   10.00  

Total Project Cost   10.00  

 
SAFEGUARDS_TABLE_OPS Have the Safeguards oversight and clearance functions been transferred to the Practice Manager? (Will not be 
disclosed) 
No    
 
 

 
 
Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 

Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here. 



 
The World Bank  
Sierra Leone Agro-Processing Competitiveness Project (P160295) 

 
 

 
B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
Sierra Leone, a low-income country with a population of 7.1 million people, has made good progress towards political 
stability and economic growth. The country has had three relatively peaceful national elections since the end of the 10 
year civil war in 2002 and recorded average annual growth of 7.8 percent from 2003-2014. Post-war economic growth 
continued to be robust, bolstered by the resumption of iron ore exports, increased inflows of foreign direct investment 
(FDI), and rising government revenues. These developments led to a surge in economic activity, manifested in GDP 
growth of 15.2 percent in 2012 and 13 percent in 2013. In spite of the impressive growth, 2015 GDP per capita was 
US$653.1, well below the Sub-Saharan Africa average of US$1588.5. Poverty levels remain high, even though the 
poverty headcount declined from 66.4 percent in 2003 to 52.9 percent in 2011.

1
 Strong growth in rural areas, where 

poverty declined from 78.7 percent in 2003 to 66.1 percent in 2011, explains much of overall reductions in poverty. 
However, rural poverty level is still higher than urban poverty. While about 62 percent of the working age-population is 
formally or informally employed, there is a dearth of good quality jobs, particularly among urban youth and in rural 
areas.

2
 The lack of sufficient technical and vocational skills needed for the labor market compounds the unemployment 

problem despite the potential offered by a growing workforce that is dominated by young people 
 
Sierra Leone has vast natural resources and the economy is heavily dependent on its land endowments; mineral 
resources including rutile, diamonds, gold, chromite and iron ore; water and tourism. Agriculture including forestry and 
fisheries still accounts for the largest GDP share but that share declined from 57percent in 2012 to 41percent in 2013. 
The mining sector’s contribution to GDP increased substantially from 8.5 percent in 2011 to 16.8 percent in 2012 and 
on to 27.2 percent in 2013 due to the expansion of large-scale iron ore operations. The service sector, led by banking, 
retail, transport and tourism, accounted for 28.8 percent of GDP in 2013, down from 35.5 percent in 2011, while the 
manufacturing sector, dominated by cement and light manufacturing, accounts for only 2percent of GDP.

3
  

 
 
 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
The promotion of value addition and private sector-led growth in agriculture are essential elements in achieving its 
vision and goal of the AfP. The National Sustainable Agriculture Development Plan (NSADP) serves as the overarching 
sector strategy with a focus on: (i) Commodity Commercialization, (ii) Agriculture Infrastructure Development, (iii) 
Private Sector Promotion and (iv) Sector Coordination and Management. Through the NSDAP, The Smallholder 
Commercialization Program (SCP) 2010 -2015, helped organize smallholder farmers by establishing Farmer Based 
Organizations (FBOs) and Agribusiness Centers (ABCs), involving about 122,500 farmers, of which 30 percent were 
female-headed households. The ABCs were designed as farmer-owned multi-purpose facilities delivering a broad range 
of services, including micro-credit, sales of inputs and tools, rental of labour-saving equipment, storage of seeds and 
farm products, processing, transport, information on new technologies and markets and group marketing. The 
successor of the SCP, the Inclusive Comprehensive Agricultural Development Program (ICADEP), 2016-2020 focuses on 
private sector-led commercialization and agribusiness development as a basis for inclusive growth. Key tenets of the 
strategy emphasizes reduced government intervention with an emphasis on implementing evidence-based private 

                                            
1
 World Bank and Statistics Sierra Leone, A Poverty Profile for Sierra Leone, June 2013 

2
 Statistics Sierra Leone, World Bank, ILO, Sierra Leone 2014 Labor Force Survey 

3
 Statistics Sierra Leone: Report on 2013 Real GDP Figures, October, 2014 



sector support policies and projects.  
 
Strengthening economic diversification is a policy priority for achieving strong and sustainable growth and reducing 
poverty in Sierra Leone. Currently, the economy is dominated by mining and agriculture but there is huge potential to 
diversify into other sectors such as fisheries, light manufacturing, and tourism. While mining has dimmed, there are 
bright prospects for agribusiness investments. The Sierra Leone Investment and Export Promotion Agency (SLIEPA), has 
prioritized increased investment inflows in agribusiness as a key objective in its Strategic Plan, 2016 – 2018. This strategy 
aims to attract domestic and foreign direct investments and to develop and diversify exports, particularly in the 
agricultural sector, given the sector’s contribution to GDP and livelihoods. In addition, SLIEPA supports SMEs to enhance 
their competitiveness and participation in trade. Both the investment Promotion and Export Development and 
Promotion Departments have developed strategies and activities that focus on enhancing competitiveness of 
agribusiness, SMEs and other segments in agribusiness value chains that have strong potential for creating jobs and 
income opportunities. 
 
Relationship to CPF 
 
The proposed project is aligned to Pillar 1 of the Bank’s Strategy for Africa, competitiveness and employment and 
consistent with the pillars on diversified economic growth and international competitiveness in GoSL’s Agenda for 
Prosperity, the Third Generation Poverty Reduction Strategy, 2013-2018. The AfP prioritizes agriculture and 
agribusiness as a key sector for promoting economic diversification because of its long term potential for inclusive 
sustainable growth and value addition. In addition, the proposed project is aligned to components 2 and 3 of the 
Inclusive Comprehensive Agricultural Development Project (ICADEP) that focus on commercialization and agribusiness 
development. Project interventions are also consistent with the Private Sector Recovery Priorities relating to creating 
jobs and supporting MSMEs to increase their competitiveness in key agricultural value chains.  
 

The proposed project will directly contribute to the Joint Country Assistance Strategy (JCAS) 2010-2013. Pillar 1 on 
promoting inclusive growth. The 2012 Country Assistance Strategy Progress Report (CASPR) recognized the potential of 
agriculture, agricultural value addition, and supporting services in driving an inclusive growth strategy. 
 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 

 
 
The project objective is to improve business environment in agribusiness sector and increase productivity of targeted 
agro-processing firms in Sierra Leone. 

 
Key Results (From PCN) 

 

 Lower unit cost of production for local agro-processing firms 
 

 Increased agro processing investment (from existing and new agro-processing firms) 
 

 Improved institutional framework for coordination of agro processing investments  
 

Note to Task Teams: The PDO has been pre-populated from the datasheet for the first time for your convenience. 
Please keep it up to date whenever it is changed in the datasheet. 

 



 
D. Concept Description 
In Sierra Leone, productivity and growth of agro-processing firms is held back by key market failures and constraints, 
characterized by limited knowledge of FDI linkages and market opportunities, coordination externalities, weak supply 
chain linkages, lack of access to finance and technology, policy failures, and skills gap. Consequently, most local and 
foreign-owned agro-processing firms have installed modern plants and utilize state of the art technology but have low 
productivity and operate at less than 30 percent utilization 
 
The proposed project focuses on enhancing domestic value addition in agro-processing through strengthening vertical 
(forward and backward) linkages between local companies and foreign investors. Such linkages provide important 
channels for enhancing competitiveness of the sub-sector through flow of new technology, know-how, innovation, and 
skills. Interventions supporting domestic value addition in agro-processing will involve local and foreign actors that are 
operating in the sub-sector as well as those that provide goods and services to the industry. Project interventions will 
emphasize upgrading of local large enterprises and SMEs, enabling them to be competitive in domestic, regional, and 
international markets.  

 
Project interventions will address key market failures and constraints that limit competitiveness of agro-processing firms 
in domestic and international markets (see annex 1). Modalities for project support will include financing and technical 
assistance for targeted investment promotion and retention and connecting local companies to foreign investors in ways 
that enhance the benefits of agglomeration economies and networking effects 
 

 
 
    

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
The project location is collocated with the catchment area of the SCADeP Project. The specific sub-project sites are yet to 

be determined. 
 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
The Ministry of Trade and Industry being the burrower for the project will work in close collaboration with the Ministry 

of Agriculture Forestry and Food Security through the Worldbank Funded Smallholder Commercialization and 
Agribusiness Development Project (SCADeP). The project coordinating unit for the implementation of the project will 
recruit a safeguards specialist and will work in close collaboration with the safeguards specialist of the SCADeP project 
who are already in place. It is expected that through the close collaboration with the SCADeP project, the needed capacity 
building for the client will take place throughout implementation. 
 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 
Demba Balde, Gloria Malia Mahama, Anita Bimunka Takura Tingbani 

 
D. Policies that might apply 

Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal. 
 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The proposed project categorization is B (partial 
assessment). The project will fund agro-processing 
equipment and other value chain enhancement 
activities, the impacts associated with these activities 
are expected to be site-specific and reversible in 
nature. An environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF) will be prepared and disclosed 
prior to appraisal. The ESMF will outline measures for 
screening of sub-projects to determine any further 
environmental assessment that might be required 
during implementation. The ESMF will also provide a 
template for the preparation of an EMP based on the 
screening results of sub-projects. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 No 

The project is not expected to impact on any natural 
habitats because the proposed activities will be limited 
to existing agro processing firms. The project is also 
not expected to fund any expansions in agriculture 
production areas. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No Forests will not be impacted by the project 

Pest Management OP 4.09 No 
The project activities do not involve any pest 
management activities. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No 
It is not expected that any physical cultural resources 
will be impacted. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 
The policy is not triggered because there are no 
indigenous people (as per definition) in the project 
area. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 TBD 

Triggering OP4.12 will be determined during appraisal. 
The project will provide matching grant to support 
domestic value addition in agro-processing. The 
project still needs to clarify whether or not the 
activities funded under the matching grant will lead to 
construction of warehouses, agro-processing units or 
any activities that may require land acquisition. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 
The Project does not involve construction or 
rehabilitation / maintenance of dams. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No The Project does not involve International Waterways. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No The Project does not involve Disputed Areas. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
May 22, 2017 
 

Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
The need for safeguards related studies will be determined during preparation missions. An Environmental Assessment 

and any other required safeguards studies will be prepared prior to appraisal. 
 
 
























































World Bank Document


COMBINED PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENTS / INTEGRATED 
SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET (PID/ISDS)

Additional Financing
.

Report No.: PIDISDSA21768
Date Prepared/Updated: 26-Jul-2017
I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data
Country: Lesotho Project ID: P162397

Parent Project ID (if 
any):

P119432

Project Name: Lesotho Smallholder Agriculture Development Project Additional 
Financing (P162397)

Parent Project Name: Lesotho Smallholder Agriculture Development Project (P119432)

Region: AFRICA

Estimated Appraisal Date: 12-May-2017 Estimated Board Date: 15-Sep-2017

Practice Area (Lead): Agriculture Financing Instrument: Investment Project 
Financing

Borrower(s) Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security
Implementing Agency Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security
Financing (in USD Million)

    Financing Source Amount

International Development Association (IDA) 10.00

Financing Gap 0.00

Total Project Cost 10.00

Environmental Category: B-Partial Assessment

Appraisal Review Decision 
(from Decision Note):

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate

Other Decision:

Is this a Repeater project? No
.

.

B. Introduction and Context
Country Context

The Kingdom of Lesotho is a small mountainous country characterized by extensive land degradation 
and erratic climatic conditions. It has a population of 2.1 million people of whom around 57% live 


below the poverty line and 34 percent fall below the extreme poverty line (CPF, 2016). The country is 
also beset with high unemployment rates and a high incidence of HIV/AIDS. This interaction of socio-
economic factors and environmental constraints results in low agricultural productivity with maize 
yields averaging only 800 kg/ha leading to food and nutrition insecurity.

Variations in the Kingdom’s topography and micro-climate shape its ecological zones—the lowlands, 
the foothills, the highlands, and the Senqu (Orange) River Valley. Annual precipitation is highly 
variable, both temporally and spatially, ranging from 500 mm to 760 mm. Temperatures are also 
highly variable, ranging from –10°C to 30°C. Agriculture accounts for less than 10 percent of the 
country’s gross domestic product, but it provides employment for as many as 63 percent of the 
country's population. The crop sector’s contribution to agriculture GDP declined by 17.2% in 2015, 
with the main crops of maize, sorghum, and wheat planted on more than 85 percent of the cultivated 
area.  Livestock contributes 30 percent of total agricultural output, including domestic production of 
pigs and poultry and extensive production of wool and mohair on rangelands in the hill and highland 
areas.
The IPCC categorizes Lesotho as one of the countries highly vulnerable to the impacts of climate 
change. The country has a temperate climate with subalpine characteristics, having four distinct 
seasons, and experiences regular droughts, floods, frosts, snow, hailstorms, and strong winds.  
Frequent droughts result in poor harvests and large livestock losses to rural farmers. Dry spells also 
create food shortages and can lead to an increase in invasive plants and destructive insects. Strong 
winds and floods also pose devastating threats to Lesotho’s agricultural sector; as a result, there are 
large swings in output, with maize yields ranging from a high of more than 1.5 t/ha in 1977 to only 
170 kg/ha in 2011.

The impact of climate change on crop and livestock production systems, and consequently livelihoods, 
may be severe if existing cropping and land use systems remain unchanged.  Lesotho is over-reliant on 
rain-fed agriculture for food production and has a large rural population engaged in undiversified 
subsistence farming. Climate change and increasing climate variability may be reflected in reduced 
crop yields and increased incidence of crop failure. There is also likely to be a decrease in forage 
production and a decline in the carrying capacity of the rangelands, which will have negative impacts 
on livestock production resulting from reduced animal vigor and fertility. As animal condition 
deteriorates, the quality of animal products, especially wool may decline. Furthermore, there may be a 
higher incidence of livestock pests and diseases which will have negative implications for animal 
production.

Less than 1 percent of crop production in Lesotho is under irrigation and almost all subsistence and 
smallholder farming is rain-fed. The development of medium to larger irrigation schemes is expensive 
and may not be suitable due to the demanding topography and geology, and lack of local scheme 
management skills and experience is a serious limitation. The fragile soils also demand very careful 
irrigation management. Thus, while water is available, it is being allocated for other purposes and 
farmers have yet to productively exploit their country’s water resources. Small-scale water harvesting 
schemes are seriously lacking and yet these remain viable adaption options for smallholders in the face 
of expected climate change impacts on water resources.

The commercial farming sector in Lesotho  remains underdeveloped. Full-time commercial farmers 
are still few in number, and specialized agribusiness firms are equally scarce. Lesotho stands in stark 
contrast with neighboring South Africa, where production, processing, and distribution of food is 
carried out by commercial producers and agribusiness firms.

Opportunities continue to exist in Lesotho for developing commercially viable smallholder agriculture. 



Demographic changes, compounded by rising incomes and accelerating urbanization, and improved 
access to South African markets, are fueling changes in consumption patterns that are creating new 
opportunities for agricultural producers and processors. Local and regional demand is projected to 
continue to strengthen in the coming years for fresh fruits and vegetables; for meat and processed 
livestock products (sold through local market stalls, small and medium-scale butcheries, and large-
scale meat wholesalers); for milk and dairy products; and, for processed foods and products (dried 
fruits, processed meat and animal feed).

Continued support to smallholders and close coordination at the national, district and community 
levels is still needed.  Strategies for strengthening smallholder capacity must take into account the 
communities’ stated needs and aspirations and align them with targeted innovations to create resilience 
and sustainability.  However, guidance is needed to help farmers gradually re-orientate their farming 
approaches to produce for markets and to be resilient to the imminent impacts of climate change in 
fragile and highly vulnerable production systems.

Two options for scaling-up the SADP were considered: (i) increase counterpart funding; and (ii) seek 
additional IDA 17 financing. Given fiscal restrictions, the Government of Lesotho is unable to 
increase counterpart funding for the SADP. Therefore, additional IDA 17 financing was identified as 
the most appropriate mechanism to enable expansion of the SADP’s activities to new districts. With 
the AF, the SADP’s objectives, which include increasing marketed output among project beneficiaries 
in Lesotho’s smallholder agriculture sector, can be expanded in more districts in the country, 
contributing to government efforts to develop smallholder agriculture. The proposed scale-up can be 
completed by February 28, 2020 – representing a cumulative implementation period of less than ten 
years. The original closing date is March 31, 2018.

The AF for the Smallholder Agricultural Development Project (SADP II) will continue to support 
smallholder farmers in targeted areas of Lesotho – Botha-Bothe, Leribe, Berea, and Mafeteng, rural 
Maseru, Mohale's Hoek, and Quthing – with the goal of helping them exploit opportunities to increase 
their productivity in a changing climate and diversify into market-oriented agriculture, and to improve 
the enabling environment for agribusiness activities.  Project support will continue to be driven by 
market opportunities and perceived commercial viability of enterprises and products.  These three 
additional border districts with good potential and accessibility to markets, have a rural population of 
almost 500,000 people (about 100,000 households); a cropped area of about 80,000 ha; and ready 
access to Maseru and South African markets due to their location along the border.  The addition of 
these three districts will result in all of the more productive lowlands and foothill areas being included 
in the project.  It is expected that at least an additional 18,000 beneficiaries will benefit from the AF in 
addition to the 55,000 already reached under SADP.

The overall zones of intervention for this project have been identified and prioritized to complement 
current activities supported under the Smallholder Agriculture Development Project (SADP) and to 
consolidate and support the achievements under SADP.  SADP supports smallholder farmers in 
targeted areas of Lesotho, with the goal of helping them exploit opportunities to diversify into market-
oriented agriculture. SADP is driven by market opportunities and perceived commercial viability of 
enterprises. The proposed Additional Financing will focus on continuing to increase the capacity of 
farmers in Lesotho, smallholder and commercial, to build more productive climate resilient 
commercial agricultural systems.

The incremental benefits of this AF are expected to be extensive. For example, by initiating the 
process of discussing food quality and safety standards in Lesotho, the GoL and the international 
community can begin to finance and provide the focused expertise and funds needed to undertake 



actions in setting standards and strengthen capacity to enforce them.

Sectoral and Institutional Context

Rural and agricultural sector. Manufacturing and mining contribute the largest shares to GDP in 
Lesotho, but agriculture remains important as a major provider of employment and source of food.  
About 70-80 percent of Lesotho’s people live in rural areas, and more than three-quarters of these are 
engaged in agriculture – mostly traditional, low input, low output, rain-fed cereal production and 
extensive animal grazing.  In the past, remittances from mineworkers were a major source of rural 
livelihoods, providing vital cash needed to purchase agricultural inputs and productive assets or to 
invest in household assets and housing, but remittances have declined steadily over the past decade as 
the number of Basotho employed in the South African mining sector has declined substantially from 
more than 100,000 20 years ago to less than 30,000 at present. Despite the economic growth that has 
been achieved in recent years, income-generating opportunities remain limited and are generally 
confined to urban areas and wage employment in the industrial sector especially in garment 
production.

Because the urban economy has limited ability to absorb new labor market entrants, the rural economy 
in general and agriculture in particular will continue to play a major role in Lesotho’s development 
strategy for the foreseeable future. Agricultural development faces a number of challenges; however, 
most significant are difficult agro-climatic conditions and limited availability of irrigable arable land. 
The country’s limited production potential is not fully exploited due to poor farming practices, limited 
use of quality seeds, inappropriate crop selection and lack of diversification. Agricultural productivity 
is further undermined by unsustainable land management practices that in many cases have led to 
declining soil fertility and severe soil erosion. If agriculture were commercially viable, these 
constraints could likely be overcome through well-targeted investments, but the development of 
market-oriented crop and livestock production enterprises faces a number of constraints such as 
limited small-scale irrigation, lack of access to finance, and limited supply of produce of the required 
quality.

Institutional Context:
The successful transformation of Lesotho’s smallholder agricultural sector will continue to depend on 
sustained support in the form of technical advisory services, improved technology, and investment 
capital, among other factors. This support has come from three main sources: (i) public service 
providers, (ii) producer organizations, trade associations, and other industry groups; (iii) NGOs and 
donor-funded programs. SADP II will continue to benefit from the current institutional arrangement of 
having the PMU embedded within the main service provider in this sector - MAFS, which has proven 
efficient as an implementation and communication strategy. The Ministry of Forestry, Range and Soil 
Conservation continue to be implementing partners in NRM projects along with the Ministry of Water 
Affairs.  Producer groups such as piggery and poultry associations, as well as wool and mohair 
grower’s associations are also important partners and can prove instrumental in setting standards, 
prices and spreading knowledge towards increasing marketed output; however, much still needs to be 
done for this to be realized.  NGOs and donors provide services in support of agricultural 
development.  Most technological innovations continue to be introduced by both national and 
international NGOs, donor-funded projects and programs, and by private entrepreneurs in some cases.

.

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
Original Project Development Objective(s) - ParentPHORGPDO

To increase marketed output among project beneficiaries in Lesotho's smallholder agriculture sector.

Current Project Development Objective(s) - Parent



Increase in marketed output among project beneficiaries in Lesotho's smallholder agriculture sector 
and, in the event of an Eligible Crisis or Emergency, to provide immediate and effective response to 
said Eligible Crisis.

Proposed Project Development Objective(s) - Additional Financing

To increase marketed output among project beneficiaries in Lesotho's smallholder agriculture sector.

Key Results 

.

D. Project Description

The proposed AF offers a well performing vehicle to scale up smallholder agricultural productivity to 
other districts in Lesotho – reinforcing a key component of the CPF pillar on private sector jobs, in 
line with Lesotho’s National Strategic Development Plan.  The AF provides combined multi-faceted 
support in the form of technical advisory services, improved technology, and investment capital that 
are key to meeting the government’s goals in the new districts. The AF will be allocated to expand 
project activities to three additional border districts with good potential and accessibility to markets, 
namely rural Maseru, Mohale's Hoek and Quthing.  The addition of these three districts will result in 
all of the more productive lowlands and foothill areas being included in the project.  It is expected that 
at least an additional 18,000 beneficiaries will benefit from the AF in addition to the 55,000 already 
reached under SADP.
PHCOMP

Component Name:
Component 1: Increasing Agricultural Market Opportunities.
Comments ( optional)

PHCOMP

Component Name:
Component 2: Increasing Market-oriented Smallholder Production- Climate Smart Packages for 
Smallholders.
Comments ( optional)

PHCOMP

Component Name:
Component 3: Project Management.
Comments ( optional)

PHCOMP

Component Name:
Component 4: Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC)
Comments ( optional)

E. Project location and Salient physical characteristics            relevant to the safeguard analysis 
(if known)
The activities to be financed by the Additional Financing include small-scale gravity irrigation 
schemes, small-scale water harvesting structures such as weirs and tanks for households or community 
groups, small-scale investments in livestock operations (such as piggery), cultivation of high value 
crops, wool and mohair production, production of tree seedlings and horticulture, processing and 
storage, rangeland management, climate smart agriculture, gully reclamation and catchment 



conservation. Although a list of potential sub-projects is known, the specific sub-project locations are 
not yet known. The project is designed as demand driven and, therefore, the exact locations will only 
be known at the time when the applications are received by the PMU through the Competitive Grants 
Programme. This will take place during the implementation phase of the project.

The Additional Financing will be scaled up in three (3) additional districts which have been identified 
as suitable for agriculture and have good potential for accessing markets, namely (i) rural Maseru, (ii) 
Mohale's Hoek, and (iii) Quthing located in the southern lowlands agro-ecological zone. ..

Topographically, Lesotho is predominantly mountainous, with the mountain zone covering 
approximately 65% of the total land area. The land is mostly characterized by steep slopes with fragile 
soil formations which are extensively degraded. Only 9% of Lesotho’s land is arable and over 80% of 
this is found in the lowlands, where it is not only used for agriculture, but rather for other purposes 
such as housing. They typically have rich black soils or sandy loams in the valleys where the major 
agricultural activities occur. The southern lowlands, where the new districts are located, are 
characterized by poor soils and low rainfall and cover the western part of the country, occupying about 
2,700 km2 which is 9% of the total surface area. Generally, the lowland soils are the duplex type 
which are prone to erosion, and have poor moisture retention capacity. They are thus liable to rapid 
loss of top soil. The region forms the main livestock grazing area in the country. Although the soils are 
much less susceptible to erosion, inadequate grass cover combined with the steep slopes, and torrential 
rains result in massive erosion in this zone. It will be important to include sub-projects that will control 
runoff and control soil erosion such as sustainable landscape management, gully reclamation, 
catchment management and small-scale infrastructure such as gabions and check dams.

.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Kisa Mfalila, Social Safeguards Specialist

Majbritt Fiil-Flynn, Social Safeguards Specialist

II. IMPLEMENTATION
The AF will benefit from the institutional arrangements established under Parent Project which 
established a Project Management Unit (PMU) However, the capacity of the existing Project 
Management Unit (PMU) to implement, monitor and report on environmental and social 
safeguard issues during the implementation of the Parent Project was inadequate. With the 
guidance of the World Bank, the PMU is currently in the process of recruiting a dedicated 
environmental and social specialist who will oversee the screening of sub-projects to determine 
the level and degree of risk and impacts, ensure that site-specific ESMPs are prepared and 
mitigation measures are implemented, monitored and reported on in the progress reports, and 
which will eventually strengthen the capacity of the PMU. Further safeguard training will be 
provided by the World Bank staff throughout the implementation phase to ensure adequate 
capacity is retained.
.

III. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional)

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 
4.01

Yes The Additional Financing to the Lesotho 
Smallholder Agriculture Development 
Program will maintain the Environmental 
Category B classification of the Parent 



Project. Environmental risks and impacts 
inherent to the agriculture and agribusiness 
industry are largely related to effluent 
discharges from use of pesticides/herbicides in 
controlling weed infestation, use of fertilizer 
to increase crop productivity, pollution of soil 
and water resources from runoff, occupational 
health and safety of workers, efficient use of 
water and energy resources, and solid waste 
disposal. The review of the ESMF of the 
Parent Project indicates that the instrument is 
adequate for the Additional Financing in terms 
of identifying potential environmental impacts 
that will likely occur from implementing the 
project activities, the proposed measures to 
mitigate the impacts and monitor the 
implementation, the pest management 
approaches to be used to ensure sustainable 
use of fertilizers and pesticides, and 
community health and safety issues. The 
ESMF also contains adequate and very clear 
screening procedures and methodologies to 
guide the PIU in the screening, assessment, 
review, approval, implementation and 
reporting of environmental issues for the sub-
projects.

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 No The project will not support sub-projects that 
have the potential to adversely alter or impact 
natural or critical habitats as defined under OP 
4.04. Therefore, the policy is not triggered.

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No The project will not support sub-projects 
located within forested areas or plantations as 
defined under OP 4.36. Therefore, the policy 
is not triggered.

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes The Pest Management Policy is triggered to 
allow for the use of agrochemicals, as needed, 
using licensed professions and in a manner 
described in the Integrated Pest Management 
Plan (IPMP). The initial screening of the 
potential sub-projects to be funded under the 
AF, indicates that the risk of pesticides use is 
minor to moderate due to the small amounts of 
pesticides currently being used in the sub-
projects of the Parent Project. The ESMF 
prepared for the Parent Project, incorporates 
an Integrated Pest Management Plan (IPMP) 
which provides guidance on the sustainable 
application of fertilizers and pesticides taking 
into consideration the soil type and slope to 



ensure protection of watershed and 
groundwater. The use or purchase of 
significant amounts of pesticides will be 
excluded in the screening process described in 
the ESMF.

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 
4.11

No The AF will not support physical cultural 
resources but in some of the districts that the 
project will be implemented, artifacts from 
historical cultural resources have been found. 
The ESMF of the Parent Project have included 
Physical Cultural Resources Chance Find 
procedures for handling chance finds that 
might occur during the implementation of the 
sub-projects.

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No OP 4.10 is not triggered as there are no 
indigenous people within the project area of 
influence.

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes It is not anticipated that there will be any land 
acquisitions as a direct result of the project. 
However, communities are expected to 
continue to pool their land or provide 
voluntary land donations of communal land. 
This potentially impact livelihood through 
affecting access, for example for grazing and 
water. The existing RPF will be applied to 
screen and guide implementation.

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No OP 4.37 is not triggered as the project will not 
finance construction or rehabilitation of dams, 
nor will it rely on the performance of an 
existing dam or a dam under construction, as 
defined in the policy.

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50

No The project is not expected to affect 
international waterways and, therefore, OP 
7.50 is not triggered.

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 
7.60

No The project will not finance any activities 
located in any known areas under territorial 
dispute as defined in OP 7.60. Therefore, the 
policy is not triggered.

.

IV. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and 
describe any potential large scale,  significant and/or irreversible impacts:

The activities to be financed by the Additional Financing include small-scale gravity irrigation 
schemes, small-scale water harvesting structures such as weirs and tanks for households or 
community groups, small-scale investments in livestock operations (such as piggery), 



cultivation of high value crops, wool and mohair production, production of tree seedlings and 
horticulture, processing and storage, rangeland management, climate smart agriculture, gully 
reclamation and catchment conservation. The sub-projects are similar to those that are already 
being financed under the Parent Project, and therefore the AF will maintain the Environmental 
Category B classification of the Parent Project. Environmental risks and impacts inherent to 
the agriculture and agribusiness industry are largely related to effluent discharges from use of 
pesticides/herbicides in controlling weed infestation, use of fertilizer to increase crop 
productivity, pollution of soil and water resources from runoff, occupational health and safety 
of workers, efficient use of water and energy resources, and solid waste disposal. The 
anticipated risks and impacts are expected to be small-scale in nature and scope, limited to the 
project sites and can be addressed with known mitigation measures. Overall, there are no large 
scale, significant or irreversible impacts that have been identified.

The PMU will use the ESMF of the Parent Project – which describes the screening, 
reviewing, implementing and monitoring procedures – to assess the risks and impacts and 
prepare the appropriate mitigation measures during the implementation phase.  Review of the 
ESMF of the Parent Project indicates that the instrument is adequate for the Additional 
Financing in terms of identifying potential environmental impacts that will likely occur from 
implementing the project activities, the proposed measures to mitigate the impacts and 
monitor the implementation, the pest management approaches to be used to ensure sustainable 
use of fertilizers and pesticides, and community health and safety issues. The ESMF also 
contains adequate and very clear screening procedures and methodologies to guide the PIU in 
the screening, assessment, review, approval, implementation and reporting of environmental 
issues for the sub-projects.

Review of the environmental performance of the Parent Project:

The team has been continuously reviewing the environmental performance the Parent Project 
through regular missions to the sub-project sites, and the overall environmental performance 
of the Parent Project is moderately unsatisfactory. Some of the issues identified under the 
parent project relate to, for example, improper handling of solid and liquid waste, insufficient 
monitoring of water access, improper handling of agrochemicals. A detailed time bound 
action plan has been agreed with the Borrower to remedy any environmental issues and avoid 
them reoccurring in the future

Climate Vulnerability
There is a need for climate vulnerability to be considered particularly during the siting of 
subprojects.  One poultry subproject is located on a mountainside exposed to severe wind and 
cold, and consequently many of the chickens died. Recently, a number of horticulture tunnels 
were damaged due to strong winds, hail and rain, and although these conditions were 
reportedly a one-off event, tunnels that were located in less sheltered terrain were more 
severely damaged than those that were somewhat sheltered.   The siting of subprojects taking 
into account climatic factors is therefore important in ensuring sustainability of the 
investments.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in 
the project area:



The sub-projects to be supported under the AF will not generate indirect and/or long term 
impacts in the sub-project areas. It is, however, anticipated that some of the sub-projects that 
entail landscape restoration and management, will result into long term positive and beneficial 
impacts.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse 
impacts.

In accordance with the RPF, voluntary land contributions will only be permitted where the 
land is communal land. If private use the communal land contributed under the project exists, 
then the private users must either benefit directly from project activities or be provided 
suitable alternatives. Such arrangements must be fully documented and are subject to 
informed consent procedures.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an 
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.

The Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) prepared for the Parent 
Project by the Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security will serve as the key environmental 
safeguard instrument for the project. Review of the ESMF by the project team indicate that 
the instrument is adequate for the Additional Financing in terms of identifying potential 
environmental impacts that will likely occur from implementing the project activities, the 
proposed measures to mitigate the impacts and monitor the implementation, the pest 
management approaches to be used to ensure sustainable use of fertilizers and pesticides, and 
community health and safety issues. The ESMF also contains adequate and very clear 
screening procedures and methodologies to guide the PIU in the screening, assessment, 
review, approval, implementation and reporting of environmental issues for the sub-projects

With the guidance of the World Bank, the PMU is currently in the process of recruiting a 
dedicated environmental and social specialist who will oversee the screening of sub-projects 
to determine the level and degree of risk and impacts, site-specific ESMPs are prepared and 
mitigation measures are implemented, monitored and reported on in the progress reports, and 
which will eventually strengthen the capacity of the PMU. Further safeguard training will be 
provided by the World Bank staff throughout the implementation phase to ensure adequate 
capacity is retained. The first task to be carried out by the PMU environmental specialist will 
be to undertake an environmental audit for all ongoing sub-projects to assess the extent to 
which the World Bank Safeguard Polices are complied with and make recommendations on 
how environmental risks and impacts will be mitigated.

All other institutions that will be involved in implementing the AF have previously 
implemented World Bank funded projects or are currently involved in implementation of 
other World Bank programs. As such they are familiar with World Bank safeguard policies 
and have gained experience in the implementation and oversight of Bank projects.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on 
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

The safeguards documents (ESMF and RPF) were subject to discussions with various groups 
of stakeholders at district and national level, including relevant government agencies, national 
and international NGOs, and farmer associations during appraisal of the original project in 



2011. In addition, beneficiary farmers and communities will receive appropriate training, as 
they will participate in screening, verification and mitigation measures (as relevant).

.

B. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/OtherPHEnvDelete

Date of receipt by the Bank 03-May-2011

Date of submission to InfoShop 11-Jun-2011

For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the 
EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy ProcessPHResDelete

Date of receipt by the Bank 30-May-2011

Date of submission to InfoShop 11-Jun-2011

"In country" Disclosure

Pest Management PlanPHPestDelete

Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal? Yes

Date of receipt by the Bank 30-May-2011

Date of submission to InfoShop 11-Jun-2011

"In country" Disclosure

If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why::

.

























































World Bank Document


Page 1 of 6

PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
ADDITIONAL FINANCING

Report No.:  PIDA21011

Project Name Moldova Agriculture Competitiveness Project Additional 
Financing (P154238)

Parent Project Name Moldova Agriculture Competitiveness Project (P118518)
Region EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
Country Moldova
Sector(s) Agricultural extension and research (50%), Agro-industry, 

marketing, and trade (50%)
Theme(s) Rural markets (100%)
Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P154238
Parent Project ID P118518
Borrower(s) Government of Moldova
Implementing Agency Ministry of Agriculture and Food Industry
Environmental Category B-Partial Assessment
Date PID Prepared/Updated 04-Mar-2015
Date PID Approved/Disclosed 11-Mar-2015
Estimated Date of Appraisal 
Completion

04-Mar-2015

Estimated Date of Board 
Approval

30-Mar-2015

Appraisal Review Decision 
(from Decision Note)

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate

I. Project Context
Country Context
Economic growth and poverty reduction gains achieved over the last decade in Moldova have been 
fueled by strong remittance flows that triggered increased, import-served consumption. The decade-
long growth has not been accompanied by an increase in employment. On the contrary, total 
employment in Moldova declined by 27 percent over the period 2000-2010. Agriculture released 
most of the labor that found jobs through internal and external outward migration. Another 
macroeconomic negative resulting from a consumption-led growth model was the buildup of an 
alarming trade deficit. With the value of imports more than triple to that of exports, the trade gap 
has reached over 50 percent of GDP in 2008. The fallout from the global crisis of 2008, as well as 
the lingering crisis in Europe and the Russian Federation in 2014 (key migration labor destinations), 
exposed the fragility of this growth model. As remittances declined, domestic demand fell by 10 % 
and the real economy contracted by 6% in 2009. Moldova’s quick recovery from the crisis in 2010 
and 2011 has been again largely based on the restored supply of remitances, but also on increased 

agricultural prices and growing exports. Remittance flows have not grown much in 2014, and are 
expected to stall in 2015 primarily due to the marked depreciation of the Russian Ruble, tighter 
labor migration controls and a slowing economy in the Russian Federation.  
 
The lessons from Moldova’s development pattern over the past decade, have underlined the critical 
need for a second engine of growth – the revival of exports. As Moldova’s working population 
declines, export-led growth needs to come from investment and improvements in productivity and 
competitiveness. The Government of Moldova recognizes the need for an investment- and export-
led engine of the growth based on on increased capital investments, innovation and 
competitiveness.  The National Development Strategy “Moldova 2020”, reinforces the 
Government's commitment to a development paradigm based on a dynamic model driven by 
domestic and foreign investment and export-oriented sectors. In addition, the Government's reforms 
in 2011-2014 focused on achieving closer trade integration with the European Union, which 
culminated in the conclusion of an Association Agreement between the Republic of Moldova and 
the European Union, complemented by a Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Agreement which 
came into effect on August 1, 2014. The latter, has brought about new and exciting opportunities 
for market diversification of the country's agro-food exports.

  

Sectoral and institutional Context
Recently, the country's shift to an export-led growth model has suffered a number of setbacks due 
to uncertainties with supply to the Russian market. Moldovan agricultural and food exports to the 
Russian Federation have been subject to various trade restrictions through 2013 and 2014 - starting 
with a ban on wines, followed by ban on meat and a nearly complete ban on fruits and vegetables, 
and canned goods. The most affected export items were wine, apples and plums. In 2013, prior to 
the bans, approximately thirty percent of the country's wine exports (valued at US$350 million), 
ninety three percent of apple exports (valued at US$43.7 million) and eighty percent of plum 
exports (valued at US$21.1) went to Russia.  The loss of the Russian Federation market represented 
a significant blow to horticulture in Moldova as there are few alternative markets for the agro-food 
produce, especially for apples and plums. There is very limited potential for meaningful import 
substitution. Moldovan imports of apples were only about 1,500 tons in 2013 (valued at US$1.34 
million) and imports of plums are negligible. Un-utilized processing capacity for apples and plums 
in the country is limited and has only absorbed additionally approximately 60,000 tons of apples 
and 40,000 tons of plums in 2014 (15% and 35% of output respectively). The resulting supply glut 
of apples and plums, compounded by an existing large stock of processed products has led to a 50% 
drop in the domestic market price for apples and plums. Similarly, as a result of the wine ban, and 
accumulating stocks in 2014, grapes are traded at 40% of the 2013 price.   
 
In recent years there have been significant productivity gains in the Moldovan horticulture sector 
due to significant investments and, these gains could easily be lost because of the impact of the 
Russian embargoes.  Productivity gains have contributed to a steady  increase in output and are 
likely to have come from stricter application of growing technologies, and/or replacement of old 
orchard/vineyards, more intensive production and use of modern technologies. This is a result of 
increased investment in the sector, which is a very positive development given Moldova’s 
comparative advantage in high value agriculture.  This transformation has been the result of a fairly 
long-drawn struggle, which is finally showing results. The embargos have the potential to have a 
major negative impact on fruit growers’ competitiveness by stalling, if not reversing, 
modernization, as a result of deteriorating financial standing and de-capitalization.   


 
The majority of fruit growers is represented by small peasant farmers (66% for apples, 69% for 
plums, 70% for vineyards) and provides significant rural employment and incomes, for an 
estimated 350,000 people. A large share of these jobs now are either at risk or are yielding 
significantly lower pay due to the impact of the embargo. The resulting social consequences could 
be severe, as the highest poverty rates are already registered among the agriculture-related 
population: 21.7 percent of farmers and 31.3 percent of agricultural workers have been found poor 
in 2013, these two categories accounting for 31 percent of country's poor.

II. Proposed Development Objectives
A. Current Project Development Objectives – Parent
The Project Development Objective is to enhance the competitiveness of the agro-food sector by 
supporting the modernization of the food safety management system, facilitating market access for 
farmers, and mainstreaming agro-environmental and sustainable land management practices.

III. Project Description
Component Name
Compensatory Sales Support Grants
Comments (optional)
The new component will finance targeted support to farmers with farms of less than or equal to 15 
hectares, who sold apple, plums and grapes domestically for processing in 2014. The grants will 
compensate the difference between the potential non-embargo price and the domestic sales price, 
with an aim of avoiding possible de-capitalization and collapse of the horticulture sector, thus giving 
it a much needed respite for reorientation to new markets and/or amortization of the financial losses.

IV. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 12.00 Total Bank Financing: 12.00
Financing Gap: 0.00
For Loans/Credits/Others Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT 0.00
International Development Association (IDA) 12.00
Total 12.00

V. Implementation
The parent - Agriculture Competitiveness Project (ACP) was approved by the Board on May 1, 
2012. It is financed by (i) an IDA credit in the amount of US$18.0 million; (ii) a fully-blended GEF 
grant of US$4.4 million; and (iii) a SIDA grant of US$3.0 million. The PDO is: to enhance the 
competitiveness of the country's agro-food sector by supporting the modernization of the food safety 
management system, facilitating market access for farmers, and mainstreaming agro-environmental 
and sustainable land management practices. The ACP has the following components: Component 1: 
Enhancing Food Safety Management; Component 2: Enhancing market access potential; 
Component 3: Enhancing land productivity through sustainable land management. The project 


became effective on September 24, 2012. The closing date for the ACP is June 30, 2017. 
 
The project was designed to contribute to the realization of the economic growth model described in 
the 2011-2014 Government Program aimed at enhancing export competitiveness, attracting 
investment and achieving closer trade integration with the EU. More specifically, the ACP is 
supporting the Government's ambitious efforts in reforming the food safety management system, 
efforts to improve farmers’ market opportunities through investment support (to bring about 
upgrades in post-harvesting infrastructure) and institutional development support (creation and 
strengthening of productive partnerships), and efforts to mainstream the use of good agricultural 
practices and sustainable land management.  
 
Project performance is currently rated “moderately satisfactory” for Implementation Progress (IP), 
“satisfactory” for the PDO, and “satisfactory” for procurement and financial management . Current 
commitments for the IDA credit stand at 70% , and generally progress continues to be solid across 
the project's three components at this phase of implementation.  Currently, disbursement under the 
IDA Credit is at US$3.6 million (20%), under the GEF grant at US$2.1 million (48%), and the 
SIDA grant at US$0.25 (8%). Disbursement rates under the IDA Credit are expected to reach 45% 
by the end of FY15. Procurement of goods, works and consulting services has considerably picked 
up in pace in 2014; calls for proposals for matching investment grants supporting the emergence of 
productive partnerships have been carried out and awards were made; capacity building activities 
have been increasing in scope and complexity. 
 
Component 1: Enhancing food safety management. There is solid progress in the implementation of 
this component. The country's Food Safety Agency, is a relatively new institution (established in 
2012) which has largely become functional due to the support of the project. Two major civil works 
activities are under way - the rehabilitation of the Food Safety Agency (FSA) building and the 
construction of the Border Inspection Point in Tudora on the country's Southern-Eastern border with 
Ukraine. Procurement of civil works for another three border inspection points - Leuseni (West), 
Giurgiulesti (South) and Criva (North) has been completed and works are expected to commence in 
the spring of 2015. Procurement of works for the construction of the country's national reference 
laboratory for safety of products of vegetable origin (Balti) has been completed. Capacity 
strengthening activities at the national reference laboratory for safety of products of animal origin 
and animal health aimed at future international accreditation are in full swing. Additionally, the FSA 
continues to receive support for legislative and regulatory improvements, capacity building 
activities, training and knowledge sharing with various European food safety institutions. 
 
Component 2: Enhancing market access potential. Progress in the implementation of this component 
has been very strong. One call for proposals for matching investment grants from emerging 
productive partnerships has been completed in the summer of 2014, and 8 producer groups received 
matching investment grant awards in an amount of US$2.1 million for a variety of investments in 
post-harvest processing of apples, table grapes and berries. A second call for proposals is currently 
under way until January 30, 2015. In parallel, outreach activities are under way to raise awareness 
about the project's opportunities for fruit and vegetable growers especially in light of on-going 
difficulties Moldovan agro-food exports have on the traditional Russian market, and a stringent need 
for reorientation of trade flows to different, more stable markets. 
 
Component 3: Enhancing land productivity through sustainable land management.  
Implementation of this component is progressing well. All activities related to the rehabilitation of 



protective shelter-belts are on schedule, and the equipment which was procured for these purposes is 
being utilized efficiently by two mobile mechanized agro-forestry squads. The component's 
sustainable land managed grant scheme has been launched and a first call for proposals yielded 
more than 80 applications that are currently under review. It is expected that about 30 awards will be 
made in the next few weeks, for an amount of approximately US$0.6 million.

VI. Safeguard Policies (including public consultation)
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖



























































World Bank Document


Page 1 of 12

COMBINED PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENTS / INTEGRATED 
SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET (PID/ISDS)  

ADDITIONAL FINANCING
Report No.: PIDISDSA20600

Date Prepared/Updated: 23-Dec-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION

  A.  Basic Project Data

Country: Lesotho Project ID: P160964
Parent 
Project ID 
(if any):

P144933

Project Name: Second Private Sector Competitiveness & Economic Diversification - AF 
(P160964)

Parent Project 
Name:

Second Private Sector Competitiveness and Economic Diversification Prj 
(P144933)

Region: AFRICA
Estimated 
Appraisal Date:

16-Jan-2017 Estimated 
Board Date:

30-Mar-2017

Practice Area
(Lead):

Trade & Competitiveness Lending 
Instrument:

Investment Project Financing

Borrower(s): Ministry of Development Planning
Implementing 
Agency:

Ministry of Trade and Industry

Financing (in USD Million)
Financing Source Amount
International Development Association (IDA) 13.40
Total Project Cost 13.40

Environmental 
Category:

B - Partial Assessment

Appraisal 
Review 
Decision (from 
Decision Note):

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate

Other Decision:
Is this a 
Repeater 
project?

No

B.   Introduction and Context
Country Context
The Kingdom of Lesotho is a small, landlocked, lower-middle-income country with a per capita 
GNI of US$1,350. Lesotho is one of the poorest countries in Southern Africa, and has one of the 
highest income inequality in the world. Home to about 2 million people, Lesotho is surrounded by 
South Africa, the second largest and most industrialized economy in Africa. Lesotho generates 
income mainly by exporting textiles, water, and diamonds, and is a member of the Southern 
African Customs Union (SACU), the Southern African Development Community (SADC), and 
the Common Monetary Area (CMA). The national currency➢❨  the loti➢❨ is pegged to the South 
African rand. Lesotho➢❨ s main trading partners are South Africa and the United States. 
 
Several factors are concerning for Lesotho➢❨ s fiscal and economic outlook: in the short term, a 
projected sharp decline in SACU revenues and higher food prices caused by drought; in the 
medium term, insecurity in textile manufacturing given uncertainty of continued renewal of the 
African Growth and Opportunity Act, and risks caused by the Trans-Pacific Partnership. Lesotho 
now faces large fiscal and current account deficits, which will require substantial fiscal 
adjustment to restore macroeconomic stability and avert erosion of the exchange rate peg to the 
South African rand.  
 
The signs of fragility are exacerbated by other vulnerabilities, such as political instability, climatic 
vulnerability, including El NiÃ±o, and high rates of HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis (TB), and maternal 
and infant mortality. The 2015/16 El NiÃ±o induced drought prompted authorities to declare a 
state of emergency in December 2015, with a high share of the rural population now expected to 
be food insecure through the March 2017 harvest. For Lesotho➢❨ s small and highly dependent 
subsistence farming economy, El NiÃ±o related stress factors risks further depressing household 
incomes, which had already dropped due to declining migrant remittances from South Africa➢❨ s 
mining sector. Lesotho➢❨ s poor historical record in addressing climatic vulnerabilities adds to 
the capacity risks. The burden of disease is disproportionately higher among HIV/AIDS affected 
households.
Sectoral and institutional Context
Several factors hinder Lesotho➢❨ s private-sector growth, affecting both Foreign Direct 
Investment (FDI) and the growth of the local micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs). The 
Trans-Pacific partnership could cause FDI in textile manufacturing to fall over the medium term. 
All quantitative measures ➢❨  including the Global Trade Reports, Doing Business Indicators, 
and Enterprise Surveys ➢❨  suggest that business regulations seriously constrain growth. Despite 
making progress in streamlining business and property registration and in establishing and 
operating a credit bureau, Lesotho ranks low on key Doing Business Indicators ➢❨  such as 
dealing with construction permits, accessing finance, and the cost of capital. These are constraints 
on domestic entrepreneurship, suggesting that the domestic private sector remains dependent on 
the state and non-tradable sectors. Over the last two decades, Lesotho shifted its growth drivers 
from export-led development towards dependency on government spending. 
 
Increased public spending has further crowded out private sector investment. Limited job 
opportunities in the private sector have exacerbated poverty and inequality and led to a situation 
in which the public sector has become a de facto social safety by absorbing employment which 
has led to a bloated public sector and oversized public spending. This has led to a vicious cycle 
that simultaneously crowds out investment in the country.



Page 3 of 12

C.  Proposed Development Objective(s)

Original Project Development Objective(s) - Parent
The development objective of the proposed project is to contribute to the development of selected 
non-textile sectors resulting in increased private sector investment, firm growth and job creation.

Proposed Project Development Objective(s) - Additional Financing
To improve the business environment for firms, strengthen select government institutions, and 
further diversify the economy.

Key Results 
The Additional Financing (AF) would seek to ensure that: (i) legislation supported by the Project 
is passed and implemented, (ii) automated systems supported by the Project are widely used, (iii) 
institutional changes supported by the Project are completed and institutional entities are fully 
operational, and (iv) deciduous fruit production, piloted by the Project, is supported by an 
enabling environment that facilitates investment in the sector. A new activity would include 
support for issues of trade facilitation and logistics given their cross-cutting importance to the 
economy.

D.  Project Description

The AF will provide additional support to the three original components, as well as support a new 
subcomponent on trade facilitation and logistics. Activities have been chosen for the following 
reasons: (i) those which can be completed during the time available for implementation of the AF; 
(ii) those with overall positive results during the current project; (iii) those where implementation 
needs to continue in order for benefits for firms to be realized and sustained; (iv) those with 
significant stakeholder buy-in and clear alignment with the country➢❨ s economic needs and 
policies, including the Vision 2020 and the NSDP for 2012➢❨ 2017; and (v) those 
complementary with other private sector development projects.  
 
Component 1: 
 
Project activities under this component will continue to support efforts to reduce the time and cost 
associated with doing business, and increase access to finance. Subcomponent 1A would be 
divided into two subcomponents, in order to properly reflect anticipated results against Doing 
Business indicators. A new subcomponent on trade facilitation and logistics aims to make trading 
across borders faster and cheaper for firms. 
 
In Subcomponent 1A, support would continue under the AF for the enactment of the business 
registration and licensing bill, and the implementation of automated business licensing and e-
payment gateway services at the One Stop Business Facilitation Centre (OBFC). The AF would 
additionally support: 
 
(i) Strengthening of the OBFC, which would include developing OBFC➢❨ s legal framework; 
integrating the Business Registration system with LRA➢❨ s system to issue tax identifier 
numbers; supporting OBFC management; designing and implementing a capacity building 
program; completing necessary technology upgrades; developing and deploying a reform 
communication strategy; and creating public access sites in various districts for OBFC and other 



Page 4 of 12

government-to-business services. 
 
(ii) Improving business inspections reform, through a careful review of the legal and regulatory 
framework, the training of inspectors, and the development of a business inspections policy and 
associated manuals, risk-assessment tools, and training modules for its implementation. 
 
In Subcomponent 1B (formerly part of 1A) support would continue for the automation of the 
construction permit system. The AF would additionally support the implementation of an e-
payment system, and system support and maintenance for two years.  
 
In Subcomponent 1C (formerly 1B), support would continue under the AF for access to finance 
activities. 
With regards to the establishment of the credit information bureau (CIB), the AF would 
additionally support: 
 
(i) Expanding CIB coverage to include businesses, which would require legal reforms since the 
current law only allows for collection of consumer (individual) data. 
  
(ii) Training to enable credit providers associations and microfinance institutions to upgrade 
systems and processes and use various new credit information tools being developed by the 
project. 
With regards to the establishment of a movable assets collateral registry, the AF would 
additionally support: (i) extensive campaigns to raise public awareness; (ii) development of a 
mobile application; (iii) development and implementation of a capacity building program for 
credit providers; (iv) continuous alignment and harmonization of associated laws. 
 
With regards to the establishment of a leasing industry, the AF would support technical assistance 
on financial leasing for credit providers.  
 
With regards to insolvency reform, the AF would additionally support: (i) extensive campaigns to 
raise public awareness; (ii) intensive training to prepare for the implementation of the new Bill, 
focused on the Office of the Master of the High Court, the judiciary, and insolvency practitioners; 
and (iii) the design and implementation of ICT systems to ensure efficiency in insolvency 
proceedings and for the Master of the High Court. 
 
Finally, in order to ensure the sustainability of ongoing reforms and to entrench capacity within 
Lesotho to generate further reforms as needed, an institutional assessment of the Office of 
Parliamentary Counsel (OPC) will be undertaken under the AF in the areas of technology, skills, 
and human resources, and a training and capacity building plan will be developed and deployed. 
 
Subcomponent 1D would be new, and it would support two trade facilitation and logistics 
activities. Importantly, the majority of the related technical assistance and training would be 
funded by the LICP. 
 
(i) Support for Customs operations. This would cover the upgrading of ASYCUDAWorld, 
including additional modules, and the provision of redundancy for the system: a disaster recovery 
site to secure and sustain the customs operation, a back-up server, a stand by generator and other 
equipment as required. 



Page 5 of 12

 
(ii) Support for preparing and developing a single window that would connect selected 
government agencies involved in trade. This would enable Lesotho to move towards a paperless 
environment for import/export related procedures and processes.  
 
This component would finance technical assistance, training, goods, works, and equipment. 
Indicatively, Subcomponent 1A would be US$ 1.3M, Subcomponent 1B (formerly part of 1A) 
would be US$ 0.03M, Subcomponent 1C (formerly 1B) would be US$ 1.7M, and Subcomponent 
1D would be US$ 2.3M. 
 
Component 2: 
 
This component will continue to support economic diversification activities. 
 
In Subcomponent 2A, support would continue under the AF for investment promotion and 
fostering increased linkages to the local economy. The AF would additionally support: (i) the 
reorganization of the LNDC, including implementation support for the resulting entity(ies); (ii) 
the development of a Private Sector Development Strategy; and (iii) the scaling up of a linkages 
program currently being piloted, including capacity building in the government to sustain the 
program.   
 
Subcomponent 2B will continue supporting the tourism sector, albeit in a different capacity given 
the complementarity with the AFDB project. Under the AF, support would be provided for: (i) the 
construction and management of the Tourism & Handicraft Information Center, which would 
provide information to tourists, offer retail space for fashion accessories and home decor 
products, and offer leisure and entertainment; and (ii) the development and implementation of a 
business plan for the handicrafts sector.  
Subcomponent 2C will continue supporting commercial horticulture by building out the value 
chain for fresh fruit produce and leveraging the private sector to scale-up production. The AF 
would additionally support:  
  
(i) Support for the existing commercial horticulture plots in order to render them commercially 
sustainable. 
 This includes upgrading the irrigation system; and developing and implementing a marketing and 
distribution strategy; among others.  
 
(ii) Development of a research and training center, to conduct applied research, including variety 
testing, and yield and performance monitoring, and to provide training on good farm practices, 
retail standards, and business skills to farmers in Lesotho. If adequately funded and governed, the 
research and training Center could take over many horticulture- related activities, currently 
managed by the PMU, when the Project ends. 
 
(iii) Development and implementation of a capacity building program for quality and standards, 
directed at farmers, trainers, auditors and GoL Officials.  
 
(iv) Integrate horticulture suitability maps with the master irrigation plans that are being 
developed for Lesotho.  
 



Page 6 of 12

(v) Support for financial institutions, to strengthen their capacity to effectively assess business 
plans, conduct due diligence, and gauge risks in the fresh fruit sector. After the initial assessment, 
support could be provided through LEAP. 
 
(vi) Support for a targeted investor attraction program, that clarifies at which levels of the value 
chain investors may seek to engage or invest, what the GoL expects from investors, and what 
potential investors can expect in return. This would include support for road shows in selected 
target markets, including South Africa and Kenya, among others. 
 
(vii) Support for agri-logistics, including a feasibility study for a packhouse, among others. LICP 
is embarking on an in-depth agri-logistics survey to identify technical and regulatory constraints 
from the field to domestic and international retailers, with a special emphasis on cross-border 
logistics and cold chains (storage and transport). The AF would consider supporting some of the 
recommendations, subject to financing availability. 
 
Subcomponent 2D will continue to support the management of the Lesotho Enterprise Assistance 
Program (LEAP) Program. A review of the systems and processes of LEAP will be carried out 
under the current project such that under the AF, the scope of the LEAP matching grants program 
can be expanded to include machinery and equipment. 
 
This component would primarily finance technical assistance, training, goods and works. 
Indicatively, Subcomponent 2A would be US$ 1.4M, Subcomponent 2B would be US$ 1.7M, 
Subcomponent 2C would be US$ 2.4M, and Subcomponent 2D would be US$ 0.5M. 
  
Component 3: 
 
This component will continue supporting the costs of the Project Management Unit, including the 
Monitoring and Evaluation system, and the management and implementation of the Environment 
and Social Management Plans (ESMP). To accommodate the larger scope of the PSCED-II 
Project under the AF, it is proposed that the PMU hire a Horticulture Coordinator, an Investment 
Climate / Business Environment officer, and a Communications Specialist. While the first of 
these is contemplated under the current project but has never been filled, the latter two positions 
would be new. A review of salaries is proposed to ensure PMU staff are paid competitively and 
according to their experience and performance.

Component Name
Improving the Business Environment
Comments (optional)

Component Name
Supporting Economic Diversification
Comments (optional)

Component Name
Project Implementation



Page 7 of 12

Comments (optional)

E.  Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis (if known)

Under Component 2, the construction of a Tourism Handicraft Centre will take place in Maseru, 
while horticulture related activities will be implemented in Mahobong and Likhetlane in the 
Leribe District located approximately 215km from Maseru.

F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

Kisa Mfalila (GEN01)
Nneka Okereke (OPSPF)
Paula F. Lytle (GSU07)

II. Implementation
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
Reflecting the multi-sector nature of the project, implementation arrangements are intended to offer a 
balance between the effective overall supervision and monitoring of the activities at the project level, 
as well as reinforcing the management and institutional responsibilities of individual sub-
components.  
 
Project Steering Committee (PSC): The PSC consists of members representing the agencies 
responsible for the project implementation i.e. the principal secretaries from the MTICM, MTEC, 
MAFS, MFLR, MoF, MDP, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank, Town Clerk of the MCC, the 
Parliamentary Counsel, Master of High Court and the CEOs from LNDC and LTDC. The committee 
meets every semester to monitor the implementation progress of the project and help to resolve 
technical and implementation problems affecting project progress. Meetings are chaired by the 
Principal Secretary of MTICM. 
 
Project Management Unit (PMU): The day-to-day operations of the project are overseen by a Project 
Management Unit that is headed by a qualified Project Manager. In addition, the PMU includes a 
Financial Manager and a Procurement Manager who oversee the Financial Management and 
Procurement issues respectively. The PMU provides for overall fiduciary management, monitoring 
and evaluation, project oversight, and coordination. The role and functions of the PMU have been 
detailed in the Project Implementation Manual (PIM). The Project Manager is responsible for: (i) 
overall day-today management of the project, including coordination of procurement, financial 
management and M&E; (ii) coordination with all the implementing agencies responsible for the 
implementation of the various sub-components; and (iii) coordination with other donors and relevant 
programs/projects. The Project Manager reports to the Project Steering Committee chaired by the 
Principal Secretary, MTICM. The project covers the operating costs of the PMU, necessary 
equipment purchase, training of staff and the costs of annual audits of project accounts.

III. Safeguard Policies that might apply

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional)



Page 8 of 12

Environmental Assessment 
OP/BP 4.01

Yes The Additional Financing to the Second Private 
Sector Competitiveness & Economic Diversification 
Project will maintain the Category B classification of 
the original loan. The environmental impacts of the 
AF are expected to derive mainly from the 
horticulture activities and the small-scale 
construction works related to the Tourism Handicraft 
Center which were assessed in the original loan. 
Potential minor to moderate adverse impacts are 
being managed and monitored through Global GAP 
certification for the horticulture sub-component, and 
through the provisions of the Environmental and 
Social Management Framework (ESMF) prepared 
for the horticulture sub-component and the 
Environmental and Social Management Plan 
(ESMP). Both instruments where prepared in 
anticipation that the project will scale up horticulture 
production in Lesotho, and was therefore designed 
for the Government of Lesotho to use post PSCED-II 
Project. Given the nature and scale of the project, the 
environmental impacts are expected to be generally 
limited to the sites and can be addressed with known 
mitigation measures included in the ESMF 
 
Environmental safeguard implementation 
arrangements will follow the arrangements that are 
already in place for the parent project. Activities to 
be carried out under the proposed Additional 
Financing (establishment of nurseries and a research 
center) are derived from continuity of the current 
project, and therefore the Additional Financing will 
not trigger additional safeguards policy.

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 No The project will not support activities that will affect 
natural or critical habitats.

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No The projects will not support activities located within 
forested areas or plantations as defined under OP 
4.36.

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes While the total land under the project is not 
substantial (only 30-35 hectares) and the risk of 
pesticides is minor to moderate due to the small 
amounts of pesticides being used, the ESMF 
incorporates an integrated pest management plan 
(IPMP). The application of fertilizers and pesticides 
will consider soil type and slope to ensure protection 
of watershed and groundwater. Application of 
pesticides and fertilizers will follow sustainable 



Page 9 of 12

approaches described in the Integrated Pest 
Management Plan (IPMP) for the parent project and 
monitored under the Global Gap framework. The 
subscription to Global Gap ensures that the project is 
compliant with international norms in the use and 
handling of agrochemicals. The horticulture 
coordinator will monitor erosion, water quality and 
soil nutrition, but with the 
Global Gap the project has enhanced inspection with 
an independent monitoring regime.

Physical Cultural Resources 
OP/BP 4.11

No While the project will finance minor construction 
works related to the Tourism Handicraft Center that 
will provide information on tourism sites, including 
physical cultural resources, the AF will not have 
direct impacts on physical cultural resources.

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 
4.10

No There are no Indigenous Peoples identified in the 
project areas.

Involuntary Resettlement OP/
BP 4.12

No The Tourism Information & Handicraft Center will 
be built on land on which there are no encroachers or 
squatters. A shortlist of potential sites has been 
developed for the tourism center and all shortlisted 
sites are held by public entities. Activities under the 
project will avoid any potential involuntary 
resettlement impacts and will ensure that if land 
acquisition is necessary, it will be carried out in a 
fully voluntary nature. Given that risk of involuntary 
resettlement impacts is low, the ESMP will include 
land acquisition screening criteria in order to ensure 
that involuntary resettlement impacts are avoided.

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No The project will not finance construction or 
rehabilitation of dams, nor will it rely on the 
performance of an existing dam or a dam under 
construction, as defined in the policy.

Projects on International 
Waterways OP/BP 7.50

No The project will not affect international waterways.

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/
BP 7.60

No The project will not finance any activities located in 
any known areas under territorial dispute as defined 
in OP 7.60.

IV. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify 

and describe any potential large scale,  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
There are no large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts anticipated from the project since 
the project will mainly be providing technical assistance to the GoL in Maseru, and only sub-
components 2B and 2C will support the tourism sector and horticulture, respectively. Potential 



Page 10 of 12

minor to moderate potential adverse impacts are being managed through Global GAP certification 
for the horticulture subcomponent, and through the provisions of the ESMP and ESMF prepared 
for the sub-components, respectively.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities 
in the project area:
There are no potential indirect and/or long term impacts envisaged in the project area.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse 
impacts.
N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an 
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The AF will benefit from the institutional arrangements established under PSCED II Project. In 
anticipation of potential adverse impacts that could arise from construction of the Tourism 
Handicraft Centre, an ESMP has been prepared, and for implementation of the horticulture 
subcomponent, an ESMF has been prepared.  
 
All institutions that will be involved have implemented bank projects previously or are currently 
involved in implementation of other programs. As such they are familiar with World Bank 
safeguards and have gained experience in the implementation and oversight of Bank projects.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure 
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders include: (i) the Ministry of Trade and Industry, which provides guidance to 
the PMU; (ii) The Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security, which provides support to the 
Ministry of Trade and Industry; (iii) The Ministry of Forestry, which provides guidance to the 
project on matters related to technical on-farm activities; (iv) The Project Steering Committee, 
which consists of the principal secretaries from the MTICM, MTEC, MAFS, MFLS, the Central 
Bank, Registrar General and CEOs from LNDC and LTDC; (v) The National Environmental 
Secretariat (NES), the environmental agency responsible for reviewing and clearing all safeguards 
documentation for the project; (vi) operators in the handicraft sector in Lesotho who were 
consulted during the preparation of the ESMP for the Tourism Handicraft Center to be constructed 
in Maseru; (vii) the current participating farmers in the horticulture industry who have been 
consulted during the preparation of PSCEDP II as well as ESMF preparation; and (viii) the 
Lesotho Revenue Authority (LRA), which will be the beneficiary of activities relating to the 
Project's new trade facilitation & logistics subcomponent.

B. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank 20-Dec-2016

Date of submission to InfoShop 23-Dec-2016
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors

"In country" Disclosure
Lesotho 22-Dec-2016
Comments: Disclosed here: http://www.psc.org.ls/viewNewsletter.aspx


























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 
 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 1 of 33  

     

 
     

 

Combined Project Information Documents /  
Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (PID/ISDS) 

 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 08-Dec-2017 | Report No: PIDISDSC21361 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 2 of 33  

 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Haiti P162908 Resilient Productive 
Landscapes in Haiti 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

LATIN AMERICA AND CARIBBEAN 04-Dec-2017 28-Feb-2018 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Economy and 
Finance 

Ministry of Agriculture, 
Natural Resources and 
Rural Development 
(MARNDR), Ministry of 
Environment 

 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
The Project Development Objectives are: (i) to improve the adoption of resilience-enhancing agricultural and 
landscape management practices in selected sub-watersheds; and (ii) to enable the Government to respond promptly 
and effectively to an eligible emergency 
 
 
Components 

Strengthening of institutional and organizational capacities for landscape level interventions 
Investments to strengthen the establishment of resilient agricultural production and practices 
Project Coordination and Monitoring and Evaluation 
Emergency Response Mechanism 

 
 

Financing (in USD Million) 

 
 
FIN_SUMM_PUB_TBL 
SUMMARY 
 

Total Project Cost 26.21 

Total Financing 26.21 

Financing Gap 0.00 

 
   
DETAILS-NewFin3 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 3 of 33  

 

Total World Bank Group Financing 15.00 

     World Bank Lending 15.00 
 

Total Non-World Bank Group and Non-Client Government Financing 5.00 

Multilateral and Bilateral Financing (Concessional) 5.00 

 

Environmental Assessment Category 

B - Partial Assessment 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the preparation to continue     
 
 
Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
 
Baseline and business as usual 
 

1. Haiti is a densely populated island state, the third largest nation by area and population (10.4 
million) in the Caribbean and benefits from a rich economic endowment. Assets include proximity 
and access to major markets, a young labor force, a dynamic diaspora, and substantial geographic, 
historical, and cultural assets. The country possesses untapped markets and unmet demand for the 
private sector to explore, including agribusiness, light manufacturing, and tourism. Yet Haiti remains 
the poorest country in the Western Hemisphere and one of the poorest countries in the world, with 
a GDP per capita of US$820. Almost 60 percent of the population lives below the national poverty 
line with marked differences between urban and rural areas

1
, inequality is high, with wealth and 

economic opportunity concentrated around Port-au-Prince. Access to basic services is limited, 
particularly in rural areas, which has translated into low human development indicators (Haiti ranks 
168th out of 187 countries in the Human Development Index). 

 
2. Agriculture continues to play a dominant role in the Haitian economy, contributing over 20 

percent of GDP and most rural Haitians rely on agricultural production as their primary livelihood 
strategy. The agriculture sector also accounts for around 50 percent of overall employment, 66 
percent of employment in rural areas, and 75 percent of employment in low income households. 
Agriculture is the sole economic activity for 55 percent of the rural households, and involves more 

                                                           
1
 75% fall below poverty line in rural areas compared to 40% in urban areas 



 

than 70 percent of them. This production is critical for food security
2
, in a context where more than 

half of the population is affected by undernutrition (2016, FAO); around a third of the production is 
being used for subsistence

3
, while the rest of productions is sold generating much needed income. 

 
3. Climate change is significantly impacting agriculture and will increasingly do so in the future. 

Climate change is projected to manifest itself in Haiti the following ways:  a) increases in 

temperatures: it is likely that temperatures will increase by 0.8-1°C by the year 2030 and by 1.5-

1.7°C by the year 2060, with the highest increases expected in the months of June or July; b) 
decreases in precipitation: precipitation is expected to decrease by 5.9-20 percent by 2030 and by 
10.6-35.8 percent by 2060, with the greatest decreases also expected in the months of June or July

4
. 

This will affect agriculture in general, and subsistence agriculture in particular, which is primarily 
rain-fed and therefore highly vulnerable to rainfall patterns. A combination of increasing 
temperatures and decreasing precipitation, especially in June and July, is likely to impose 
particularly severe stresses on agricultural systems, especially given the highly-degraded nature of 
soils and vegetation in the target sub-watersheds.  

 
4. Haiti’s population and territory are extremely vulnerable to natural disasters and exposure is 

expected to increase as climate change impact intensifies. Haiti has the highest index of 
vulnerability to hurricanes (12,9 on a scale of 13) among small Low Income Countries (LIC) Island 
States and is the third country hardest hit by climatic events in the world

5
. Ninety-six (96) percent of 

the population is considered at risk. Climate change predictions for 2050 and beyond suggest that 
more than 50 percent of the total area of Haiti will be in danger of desertification largely due to 
climate variability and change. Extreme weather events, according to the Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change (IPCC)

6
, indicate that the Caribbean region is likely to be exposed in the future to 

more intense and frequent extreme weather events. On average, each disaster costs two percent of 
GDP per year, and occasionally much more (in 2008, tropical storms’ economic impact reached 15 
percent of GDP), and significantly affects the agriculture sector

7
. The country is highly mountainous 

with more than half of Haiti’s territory having slopes over 20 degrees, that centuries of 
deforestation have rendered particularly vulnerable to climatic events. Exposed agricultural fields 
which are now commonly exploited on slopes

8
 further exacerbates the issues. Deforestation, and 

inappropriate agricultural practices have produced predictable interlinked environmental and social 
consequences: the loss of topsoil, decreasing soil fertility, rain water run-off and depletion of 
aquifers, droughts, agricultural productive capacity decline, farmers’ losses of incomes and rural 
out-migration. In a context of climate change, extreme weather events and their average intensity 
and frequency are expected to increase, and will further accelerate land and population 

                                                           
2
 Undernutrition concerns more than half of the population (FAO)  

3
 Traditionally, rural Haitians take advantage of seasonal, nutrient rich productions, to complement their diet (fruits, vegetables, 

legumes, small livestock), yet this diversity is at risk due to the deterioration of natural resources that decreases the availability 
of many of these sources of supplementation. 
4
 http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/natc/presentations/haitipres.pdf   

5
 Global index on Climate Change, 2016 : from 1993 to 2012 the country faced 2 droughts, 1 earthquake, 31 floodings and 26 

tropical storms/hurricanes. 
6
 https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar5/wg2/   

7
 In the case of tropical storms, almost 50 % of damages and losses in productive sectors have been concentrated in the 

agriculture sector (PDNA, Feb 2017)  
8
 63% of agricultural land is on more than 20 degrees’ slopes, and 40% of cultivated land in mountains is on slope of more than 

50 degrees. 


vulnerability trend
9
 : identified climate related hazards in Haiti include flash flooding, salt water 

intrusion, drought, intense rainfall, landslides, severe soil erosion, and hurricanes
10

.  
 

5. Addressing intertwined human and ecological vulnerabilities requires a holistic landscape-level 
“productive” approach. The above-mentioned context provides a rationale for integrating a 
landscape approach within watersheds (or sub-watershed) in Haiti to address major soil erosion and 
water retention capacity, prioritizing interventions helping to reduce downstream impacts. 
Improving the natural resource base through the promotion of climate-smart productions and 
practices best adapted to the agro-ecological context

11
, and, as importantly, the capacity to 

generate sustainable incomes out of these, is expected to have a significant positive impact on 
agriculture and the many people who derive their livelihoods and income from, together with the 
provision of nutritious food, and jobs. It will also contribute to protect in a sustainable way 
communities at large against the risks of flash flooding and landslides linked to soil erosion and 
water runoff.  

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 

 
6. Agriculture in Haiti is beset with problems, despite its importance in local food security and 

contribution to GDP. Production is highly dependent on rainfall, with around five percent of farmers 
using irrigation. Most farmers have poor access to tools, machinery, and purchased inputs including 
improved seeds and fertilizer. Access to credit in rural areas is not a viable option either for poor 
farmers. In addition, there is little organization among producers and underdeveloped value chains, 
further compounded by a lack of rural infrastructure to access markets e.g. rural roads for 
connectivity with buyers, water storage and irrigation for production in dryer seasons and mitigation 
of drought impacts, food dryers and storage for reduction of vulnerability to prices volatility, 
reduction of post-harvest losses, , improved quality for better marketability as well as accessibility of 
nutritious food all year long. The lack of value addition along value chains, reliability and 
sustainability of sources of incomes for farmers generated from tree-crops and other types of 
resilient agricultural productions constitutes a major impediment to the maintenance and 
sustainable expansion of such systems. This also drives their choices towards higher demanded/less 
perishable productions, often at the expense of the environment (e.g. peanuts production on 
slopes, trees cutting for land expansion and/or cash generation with fire wood or charcoal 
production and sales), contributing to the vicious circle of land degradation and increasing 
population vulnerability. In addition, women play a major role in the post-harvest marketing of 
products in Haiti, and the improvement of these value chains is a critical factor for women’s 
economic empowerment, livelihoods and resilience, which offers opportunities for vulnerable 
population- such as women and youth- to increase rural income and jobs diversification.   
 

7. In a country that is already densely populated, steady population growth and land inheritance 

                                                           
9
 Based on available projections, major climatic changes expected to occur in Haiti include a reduction in rainfall of 6 to 20 

percent by 2030 and 11 to 36 percent by 2060. While annual precipitation is projected to decrease, the more limited rainfall 
events are expected to become more intense. Temperatures are also expected to increase by 0.8°C to 1.0°C by 2030, and by 
1.5°C to 1.7°C by 2060.  
10

 Source: Review of Current and Planned Adaptation Action: The Caribbean (Nov, 2011) 
11

 These would seek to improve the stability and quality of the soil substrate through measures such as agroforestry, live fences, 
hedgerows intercropping, vegetative wind breaks, soil vegetative cover, conservation tillage, among others. 

rules
12

 continues to put pressure on land, and drives land use changes. Haiti has 961 inhabitants 
per square kilometer of arable land, the highest pressure density on arable land in the Western 
Hemisphere. Farm sizes have shrunk dramatically over time: 85 percent of farms now have less than 
1 hectare. The main food crops produced are rice (in lowlands), maize, bananas, yams, cassava, 
beans, and millet, and main export crops include coffee and mangoes. Diversification has commonly 
been practiced by farmers as a risk-mitigation strategy (70 percent of farmers produce more than 4 
crops and 75 percent raise some livestock) but is becoming harder to implement in increasingly 
smaller plots. In addition, the traditional practice of creole garden (or “jardin creole”

13
) 

corresponding to small but highly diversified agro-forestry systems, providing fresh and nutritious 
food throughout most of the year among other benefits (high biodiversity, higher productivity linked 
to species associations, soil protection and quality), have tended to decrease to give way to annual 
crops. Yet these resilient systems are particularly adapted to face harsh topographic and climatic 
conditions and are now recognized as a typical climate-smart/agro-ecological best practices. 
Restoring these agro-forestry systems is however not affordable for the vast majority of farmers.   
     

8. The natural resource base and agriculture are linked by a negative feedback loop. Unsustainable 
farming practices such as agriculture on slopes and marginal areas, lack of agriculture conservation 
technologies, are driven by land pressure, low farmers’ education level, and poor farmers’ economic 
conditions. These have contributed to the severe degradation of around 85 percent of watersheds

14
 

with wide ranging impacts, namely on (i) yields -the depletion of the natural resource base and high 
exposure and vulnerability to extreme weather events have driven an average rate of decline in 
yields of between .5 to 1.2 percent per annum (World Bank, 2005). Stagnating or shrinking yields in 
turn further exacerbate land pressure, causing more degradation and deforestation; and (ii) on 
critical habitats such as mangroves

15
 -run off from denuded slopes and gullies leading to soil washed 

away and settling into valleys, rivers and eventually into the sea. Soil erosion caused by water, either 
as direct rainfall on the soil surface, or indirectly through gullies and channels, causes an annual loss 
of land for the whole country estimated at about 37 million metric tons (MT). This corresponds to an 
average loss of about 15 MT/ha/yr across the country. Without trees’ complex root systems to hold 
Haiti’s mountainous terrain in place, protect gullies from serious erosion and prevent water 
resources depletion, vulnerability of landscapes and people living on them is doomed to increase. 
Reducing poverty and building system resilience will require an integrated management approach 
that considers the complex interactions between the environment and agriculture and turns the 
negative- into a positive feedback loop.  Climate change is expected to increase these negative 
feedback loops. 
 

9. The unique challenge to building resilience in the Haitian Agriculture sector arises from the 
combination of climate change adding further stress to a system already engaged in a negative 
feedback loop between the agriculture production and the natural resource base.  As described 
above, the depleting natural resource base and lack of landscape level management increase the 
sensitivity of agricultural production and ecosystems to weather and climate events. Climate change 

                                                           
12

 All land is inherited bilaterally and equally between siblings, with arable land being usually divided immediately. 
13

 A Creole garden is a multi-storied agro-forestry system including a mix of perennial and annual crops, i.e. woody perennials, 
tree crops (i.e. bread fruit, mango, avocado, bananas, citrus, coffee), vegetable and staple crops, playing multiple roles, 
including household’s food security and providing ecosystems benefits 
14

 According to Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources, and Rural Development (MARNDR), 2016  
15

 Mangroves are essential for maintaining fish nursing sites, protecting coasts against storms, and lowland crops from soil 
salinization (e.g. rice production) which are ultimately important for livelihoods 

is expected to further amplify the exposure to such events. With both sensitivity and exposure set to 
increase, vulnerability will follow suit. The weather and climate events that today’s depleted natural 
resource base offers much reduced protection against are congruent with priority issues for 
resilience building in the climate change context: extreme events, drought, extreme rainfall events, 
etc. In each of these cases, the health of the natural resource base is a key determinant of farmer 
resilience. For example, the risk of drought is much reduced if the moisture retention capacity of 
soils is rehabilitated, micro-catchment areas include water storage facilities and water is being 
retained for longer periods in upstream forests. As a result, any effort to build resilience to climate 
change in Agriculture will need to take an integrated approach taking into account both sensitivity 
due to a diminished natural resource base and exposure due to climate change. 

 
Institutional context 
 
10. Ministry of Environment (MdE) and Ministry of Agriculture Natural Resources and Rural 

Development (MARNDR) recognize the interdependency between Natural Resources 
Management and Agriculture Production as well as the added stress imposed by climate change. 
In its policy framework 2010-2025, MARNDR identifies watersheds degradation as a major issue, and 
establishes the reduction of environmental vulnerability as a long-term objective requiring the 
protection of environment and natural resources. It also establishes the prevention and 
management of natural disasters as a priority

16
. In 2006, the Government submitted their National 

Adaptation Program of Action (NAPA, 2006) (Plan d’ Action National d’ Adaptation - PANA).  In this 
document, the Government lays out their most urgent risks from climate change and propose a way 
forward.  One of the key risks outlined is that of soil erosion

17
 and its relationship with the 

agriculture sector vulnerability. In a recent update of the National Action Plan against Desertification 
(2015), MdE establishes as one objective the collaborative development of management plans for 
the most vulnerable watersheds in the country. However, the operationalization of the Plans has yet 
to unfold. The need for stronger cross-sectoral collaboration is mutually recognized, but little 
concrete actions have taken place in a context of institutional weaknesses, absence of joint planning 
and insufficient budget to operationalize actions plans.  

 
11. In response to the country’s vulnerability to current climate variability and to climate change, there 

is a baseline of investments in this area: 

 World Bank (WB) financed Strengthening Hydro-Meteorological Services project (2015-2020, 
US$ 5 million), which aims to strengthen Haiti’s institutional capacity to provide hydro-
meteorological and climate information services customized to the needs of the civil protection 
and agriculture sectors, contributing to increasing disaster and climate resilience. The main 
counterpart agency is the Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources and Rural Development 

                                                           
16

 The MARNDR Triennial Plan for Relaunching Agriculture 2013-2016 also identifies as a strategic pillar the watershed 
integrated approach (ridge to reef). 
17

 “Haiti is a mountainous country whose peaks reach up to 2684 meters over altitude. Poor farming practices weaken the soil 
capital and weaken the productive capacity as they lead the arable land towards the sea Land erosion, under the effects of 
some natural factors. Drought, wind, rain and some anthropogenic factors: excessive deforestation and uncontrolled 
construction in urban areas leads to a country's land desertification processes. The vulnerability of the agricultural sector is 
closely linked to that of water and soil.  Climate change by acting on water resources also influence agricultural production. On 
the other hand, winds, floods, droughts have direct impacts on agriculture given the level of soil erosion leading to their 
aridity. In addition, a study conducted by the MOE (2000) argues that early in the second half of the 21st century, more than 
half of the area of land of Haiti will be at desertification risk due to climatic conditions.” 

(MARNDR). 

 WB financed Relaunching Agriculture: Strengthening Agriculture Public Services Project Phase II - 
RESEPAG II  (2012-2019, US$ 85 million) which aims to  (a) reinforce the capacity of the Ministry 
of Agriculture, Natural Resources and Rural Development to provide or facilitate access to 
services in the agricultural sector; (b) increase market access to small producers and food 
security in Selected Areas; (c) improve livelihood in areas affected by Hurricane Matthew; and 
(d) enable the Government to respond promptly and effectively to an eligible emergency. The 
project finances interventions in the North/North East, Centre, and South departments. It 
supports in particular a Farmer Subsidy scheme using various technical packages and 
implemented through individual vouchers to improve the adoption of improved agriculture 
inputs/technologies (with a particular emphasis on climate resilient production and practices) ; 
finances Farmer Field Schools as a vehicle to promote best practices (extension services 
mechanism) ; and a Market Support Facility, using matching grants to allow group of producers 
to add value to their productions (value chain development).  

 Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) financed Natural Disaster Mitigation Program II (2016-
2020, US$ 42 million), which aims to reduce rural economic losses through the improvement of 
climate risk management in selected watersheds. Some specific objectives include to: (i) 
increase capacities for adaptation to climate change and disaster risk management (DRM) in the 
agriculture sector; (ii) improve water and sediment conservation in selected gullies of priority 
watersheds; and (iii) reduce the risk of rural economic losses due to floods in targeted 
watersheds. 

 United States Agency for International Development (USAID) Reforestation Project (2017-2021, 
US$ 40 million), which aim is to reduce the threat of deforestation, improve resilience to 
economic and natural shocks, increase tree cover in targeted areas, and improve environmental 
governance and coordination. It will be implemented in northern departments. 

 International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) financed Projet Small Irrigation and 
Market Access Development Project in the Nippes and Goavienne Region (PPI-3) (2012-2017, 
US$ 13.2 million), which aims to achieve a sustainable improvement in the livelihoods 
and incomes of rural poor households, especially those belonging to the most vulnerable 
groups. Its specific objectives include: (i) increasing agricultural production sustainably through 
efficient water management and the consolidation of both collective and individual irrigated 
agriculture; (ii) improving the value of irrigated agriculture production and increasing farmers' 
access to markets and financial services in order to raise the incomes of the poorest families; 
and (iii) strengthening the planning, organizational and management capacities of grass-roots 
organizations in order to facilitate their access to markets and financial services. 

 Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) implemented with LDCF co-financing of the 
Strengthening Climate Resilience and Reducing Disaster Risk in Agriculture to Improve Food 
Security in Haiti Post Earthquake project (2012-2017, US$ 12 million), which aims to increase the 
resilience of vulnerable farmers including their livelihoods and agro-ecosystems against the 
impacts of climate variability and in the post-earthquake crises through integration of disaster 
risk management and adaptation practices in the agricultural sector and replication of more 
hazard resilient crop varieties and cultivation technologies. 

 UNEP implemented with GEF co-financing Program Ecosystem approach on the South Coast of 
Haiti (2015-2020, US$ 6.2 million), aims to strengthen the resilience of ecosystems in 
communities vulnerable to the impacts of climate change. This program advocates an integrated 
strategy encompassing all ecosystems and agricultural production areas from the mountains to 


the sea. The various components of the project will also try to address the whole issue of the 
destruction of the ecosystems of the Great South in a perspective of recovery and the fight 
against poverty. 

 French Development Agency (AFD) and European Union co-financed Project for Food Security 
(SECAL) (2013-2017, 15 million euros), which objective is to support agricultural sectors with 
high potential in southern Haiti, contribute to improving the food security of people in the South 
Department and generate additional revenue in the rural areas.  

 
12. Collaborative efforts are underway to boost the implementation of watershed approaches to 

strengthen the management of natural resources (wood, water, soil). In the context of the COP21 
process and resulting Paris Agreement, and in order to relieve the agriculture and population 
pressure on forests and landscapes, as well as adapt to the effects of climate change, a Haiti-based 
NGO, the J/P Haitian Relief Organization (J/P HRO), together with MdE and MARNDR, developed in 
2015 a proposal for a broad initiative – Haiti Takes Roots (HTR) – focused on watershed 
management and reforestation in key areas of Haiti

18
. Its objective is to facilitate engagement, 

coordination, learning, monitoring and synergies in a programmatic approach. This platform would 
be a conduit to operationalize Ministries’ plans, helping to bring key actors together around the 
issue, and establish long term strategies and mechanisms to sustain and implement its objectives. 
Supported by seed funding from J/P HRO and the French government, HTR has shaped its 
governance mechanisms

19
. The IDB and the WB participate in this initiative and more partners are 

expected to join. Two studies have been financed under the HTR umbrella by the WB together with 
J/P HRO to develop a participatory watershed management planning methodology and a post-
hurricane Charcoal and Arboreal Assessments

20
, contributing to the development of a body of 

knowledge and resources. The proposed Resilient Productive Landscapes Project (RPLP) is envisaged 
as a proof of concept under HTR aimed at being scaled-up in other (sub)watersheds of the country. 
For this reason, and in order to also benefit from the WB project management experience, J/P HRO 
has committed to provide a parallel financing of US$5 million to RPLP, which will be fully blended 
with IDA and the Global Environment Facility/Least Developed Countries Fund (GEF/LDCF) co-
financing. In this context, LDCF will leverage IDA and parallel financing resources to more 
systematically integrate the climate adaptation lens into productive-oriented interventions.  
 

13. RPLP builds on solid analytical work, as well as the lessons learned from other Global Environment 
Facility (GEF) funded and donor-funded project, including the World Bank’s own projects. Key 
lessons learned emphasize in particular the need for collaborative efforts including strong 
communities’ participatory engagement throughout a project process and continuous institutional 
commitment and support, as well as the necessary generation of revenues for farmers out of the 
supported investments. Since the 2010 Earthquake, the WB’s portfolio in Agriculture expanded with 
RESEPAG I and RESEPAG II,

21
 supporting MARNDR’s capacity to deliver public goods and piloting 

                                                           
18

 The mission of HTR is to contribute to a more rational management of Haiti’s natural, renewable through the management of 
watersheds, the restoration of soils, increasing forest cover, and the promotion of agroforestry – most notably in vulnerable 
watersheds – therefore breaking the vicious cycle of poverty and deforestation. 
19

 HTR shall be governed by a Steering committee chaired by the Prime Minister and supported by a Secretariat, a technical 
platform, a Monitoring and Evaluation Committee, a Geographical Platform, and a virtual Resource Centre; it will include 
members from concerned ministries, institutional partners, international organizations, civil society and private sector. 
20

  PROFOR-funded works to develop (i) a Resilient Productive Landscape Planning Methodology (P162352), and (ii) Haiti 
Arboreal Assessments - post- hurricane tree counting and charcoal assessment (P164024). 
21

 Relaunching Agriculture: Strengthening Agriculture Public Services Project – Phase II (P126744) is ongoing and will close on 

incentives schemes to support farmers’ improved productions through vouchers mechanisms and 
the strengthening of agricultural value chains through matching grants. RPLP would take advantage 
of the experience gained and use the same approaches, adjusted to the specificities of RPLP. On the 
environment side, the GEF co-funded several projects in Haiti and in the Caribbean, that focused on 
increasing the resilience of agriculture and ecosystems, and boosting food security through climate 
change adaptation. Several of these projects have also focused specifically on the Grand Sud 
(greater south area), given its increased vulnerability to climate shocks. While many of these 
projects were financially supported for the duration of the project, there was little effort to ensure 
that this financing was sustainable.     
 

14. In the context of Climate Change, sustainable financing over time is an important tool to address 
environmental and social vulnerability, and to support Climate adaptation and mitigate Climate 
Change impact. Ministries and other institutions in Haiti face significant financial resources 
constraints. Sustainability of short term programs have consistently been challenging. To address a 
similar problem faced by five other Caribbean islands, a GEF financed project, Sustainable financing 
and management of Eastern Caribbean Marine Ecosystem Project (P103470) (closed June 2016), set 
up and endowed a Caribbean Biodiversity Fund (CBF) mechanism to ensure sustainable financing 
over time to combat threats to biodiversity that arise through human, climate or other sources. 
Under the proposed Project, Haiti, which is an observer and has taken steps to become a full 
member of the CBF, would use LDCF financing (and co-financing from other donors) to join the CBF 
by contributing to the endowment, and establish a National Trust, which will enable Haiti to access 
long term sustainable financing for climate adaptation and biodiversity conservation into perpetuity. 
While the CBF has for various reasons retained this name, it will create a climate change adaptation 
window under RPLP to address climate change adaptation priority needs. This National Trust shall 
use the interests raised by the CBF from the LDCF funding to continue to fund sub-projects that 
would support primarily the sustainability of interventions financed under RPLP, and other future 
climate change adaptation related investments. The interest raised, however, will be off the total 
amount in the CBF (over US$34 million currently) to allow all the CBF countries to benefit from 
economies of scale. This longer-term source of predictable financing will mean that when a disaster 
strikes Haiti, the current practice of diverting government funding to address that crisis will not 
impact this fund. As such it presents a key long term stabilizing mechanism for addressing 
adaptation. 
 

15. The Project is consistent with the climate change action plan submitted to the UN Framework 
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), in the context of the Paris meetings in 2015 (Intended 
Nationally Determined Contribution – INDC)

22
. The Action Plan specifically names natural resource 

management within watersheds, use of agricultural technologies adapted to climate change, use of 
drought-resistant crops, soil conservation, reducing disaster risk in areas most vulnerable to 
drought, reforestation of upstream areas, as priorities for adaptation within the plan.  
 

16. It responds directly to strategic objectives laid out in the GEF Programming Strategy on 
Adaptation to Climate Change: Least Developed Countries Fund Special Climate Change Fund 
(June 11, 2014) and Haiti’s National Adaptation Program of Action (NAPA, 2006) by helping the 
country reduce its vulnerability to soil erosion, which are exacerbated through increasing volatile 
climatic events (floods, cyclones, hurricanes) and human (agriculture) activity. The project will 
contribute to the LDCF strategy Objective 1 (Reduce the vulnerability of people, livelihoods, physical 
assets and natural systems to the adverse effects of climate change); Objective 2 (Strengthen 
institutional and technical capacities for effective climate change adaptation) ; and  Objective 3 
(Integrate climate change adaptation into relevant policies, plans and associated processes)

23
. The 

Project, using LDCF funds jointly with IDA financing and J/P HRO parallel financing, will (i) contribute 
towards building an increased awareness of climate change impacts, vulnerability and adaption, and 
directly reducing the vulnerability of farmers to climate change through investment in more resilient 
agricultural practices. These will occur in (sub)watersheds areas by financing climate-smart 
agricultural production practices (agroforestry, conservation agriculture, slope management, etc.) ; 
the project will also finance improvement of the product value chains to generate higher and more 
sustainable income, and reinforcement of climate resilient infrastructure assets ; (ii) support the 
enabling environment by strengthening institutional capacities to develop and implement sound 
cross-sectoral policies and action plans integrating climate change adaptation considerations in 
national and local level strategies ; access to and analyze geo-spatial and other climate related data 
to better address climate risks and inform decision processes ; and support a mechanism aimed at 
sustaining long term financing of adaptation technologies and practices; and (iii) it will provide 
extensive trainings programs to increase skills and knowledge tailored to the key stakeholders and 
audiences. RPLP will support the achievement of objectives set forth under the NAPA, which served 
as the basis for the plan submitted to the UNFCCC in 2015. The document weighted adaptation 
options based on their impact on vulnerable natural resources and groups, and ranked “watershed 
management and soil conservation” at the top (5 on a 1 to 5 scale).    
 

17. RPLP is consistent with the World Bank Group’s Haiti Country Partnerships Framework (CPF) 2016-
2019. Objective 1 of the CPF aims to enhance economic activities and income-generation 
opportunities, including in the agricultural sector through improving agricultural productivity by 
reinforcing the ability of farmer’s groups to bring quality products to market. RPLP will support value 
chains to access to new and better markets and reduce production risks while decreasing 
vulnerability to the effects of prices and climate shocks. The CPF’s Objective 2 targets improving 
disaster prevention and strengthening climate resilience through a number of avenues, including the 
analysis of land management practices and definition of entry points for investment in the 
promotion of resilient productive landscapes. RPLP will directly tackle the issue of improving disaster 
prevention, reducing the vulnerability to the adverse impacts of climate change, increase adaptive 
capacity to respond to the impacts of climate change, and strengthening climate resilience. It will 
target four sub-watersheds within hydrological zones hard-hit by Hurricane Matthew in the 
Department of Nippes, and help mitigate the impact of future extreme weather events.   

 
18. RPLP will work closely and coordinate actions with other development partners, especially 

through the HTR platform.  Given the challenges with fragmented donor contributions to all sectors 
in Haiti as identified by the CPF, the HTR platform will be important for the sector to bring all 
partners around critical development themes, and coordinate efforts for broader impact. In addition 
to ongoing projects mentioned above (see point 11) new projects with similar objectives are under 
development that RPLP will coordinate with. These include projects to be financed through IDB, 
AFD, and IFAD.  

 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
Development Objective(s) (From PAD)  
 

19. The Project Development Objectives are: (i) to improve the adoption of resilience-enhancing 
agricultural and landscape management practices in selected sub-watersheds; and (ii) to enable the 
Government to respond promptly and effectively to an eligible emergency. 

 
20. The crisis or emergency referred to in the PDO reflects a legal requirement that relates to the 

Contingency Emergency Response Component (component 4 of the Project).  
 

21. Selected areas for intervention. While Component 1 addressing institutional and organizational 
capacity would have a nationwide coverage, Component 2 would be implemented in selected sub-
watershed. In the process of selection of these sub-watersheds, specific aspects were considered: (i) 
Agro-ecological criteria; (ii) Socio-economic criteria; (iii) Environmental vulnerability criteria; and (iv) 
Institutional criteria. Using a ranking scale of 1 to 5 for each of these criteria to prioritize areas, and 
based on available funding from the Project, four sub-watersheds were selected. These are:  (i) Rivière 
Froide watershed; (ii) Petite Rivière de Nippes watershed; (iii) Piémont area and Baconnois Plain; and 
(iv) Bondeau sub-wastershed and its mangrove. They offer a diversity of agro-ecological conditions, 
yet geographically close, within the department of Nippes, under two municipalities.  

 
22. In the context of RPLP, resilience is defined as the ability of people, assets, and systems to resist, 

absorb, accommodate, and recover in a timely and efficient manner from climatic hazards without 
undermining its welfare, value, structure, and functioning, while also maintaining the capacity for 
adaptation, learning, and transformation in the long term. Resilient-enhancing agriculture and 
landscape management practices correspond to the group of technologies, practices and systemic 
approaches under the climate smart agriculture and landscapes framework of the Global Alliance for 
Climate Smart Agriculture. In the context of the RPLP, these include interlinked actions at diverse 
levels: at farm level; along food value chains; and, at landscape level.  

 
23. Landscape is defined as “an area large enough to produce vital ecosystem services, but small enough 

to be managed by the people using the land which produces those services” (FAO 2013). A landscape 
can contain various ecosystems, and human activities and institutions are viewed as an integral part of 
landscapes. Ecosystems services include soil health, essential for sustainable and productive 
agriculture; water retention; biodiversity conservation; carbon sequestration; renewable energy 
sources; among others. 

 

Project Beneficiaries 
 
24. Primary beneficiaries of RPLP will be smallholder farmers and communities living in the selected sub-

watersheds targeted by the Project that depend on agricultural production for their livelihoods. In a 
context of high poverty prevalence, extensive land use for agricultural production including on steep 
slopes including gullies, very small size plots, degraded or at risk for degradation, all farmers and 
communities can be considered vulnerable. They will benefit individually from improved agricultural 


production practices adapted to the agro-ecological context, improving soil conditions and becoming 
more resilient to extreme weather events, as well as from improved marketing conditions; and 
collectively from reduced soil erosion, improved water retention capacity, enhanced field level 
productivity linked to ecosystems services generated collectively and synergies created between 
differed production systems at the watershed level. 

 
25. Interventions will also benefit key actors along the agriculture value chains, including service and input 

providers, buyers, processors, and retailers. Lastly, it will benefit the national, regional and local 
institutions in providing with essential tools, knowledge, and management capacity of landscape level 
interventions. Direct beneficiaries would include: (i) producers who have benefited from the voucher 
mechanism (3,000 of which minimum 30% are female); (ii) Service Providers (100 of which minimum 
10% are female); (iii) members of producers’ groups that benefit from co-financing in selected value 
chains (800 of which minimum 50% are female); and, (iv) persons trained in Ministries and local / 
regional authorities (100). The total percentage of women is estimated on the basis of a weighted 
average.  In order to strengthen the role of women, they will receive preferential support to benefit 
from the Project’s interventions.  

 
26. Private sector. Investments of RPLP look at poor to extremely poor segments of the population. 

Access to rural credit is not an option for an already vulnerable population. In addition, changing 
practices, even if expected to provide longer term gains and reduction of vulnerability, involves an 
important level of risk in a context of frequent natural disasters, occurrence of pests, and markets 
uncertainties. No insurance mechanism exists either to cover for such types of high frequency, high 
impact types of risks. RPLP would therefore provide technical packages to producers (including 
knowledge/services and inputs on a one-off basis) required for them to move towards a less 
vulnerable category, and doing so in a concentrated manner in a determined area to produce the 
expected broader ecosystems benefits. The Project would strengthen the private sector actors related 
to agricultural production valorization, critical to develop economically viable and sustainable 
businesses as well as job opportunities; the voucher mechanism involves systematically private sector 
beneficiaries, which supply such inputs and services at market price. Matching grants for groups of 
producers or other actors along the value chains will also aim at filling access to finance gaps to 
increase agricultural production valorization. The Project will also work with the Ministries to 
strengthen their capacity to deliver on their public good mandates, and establish the enabling 
environment for supporting resilient landscapes management. 
 

27. Gender and Nutrition. RPLP acknowledges that women and men are not given the same opportunities 
towards climate adaption and raising of incomes. Women face supplementary constraints -such as less 
access to information, to assets, to credit, to inputs- that have to be taken into account. 
Mainstreaming gender and nutrition into the different investments and monitoring and evaluation 
(M&E) mechanisms will ensure that the Project will contribute to reduce gender gaps when building 
resilience and contribute toward improving food security. The Project will build on experience and 
knowledge developed through RESEPAG II Project, which will be facilitated by the fact that RPLP core 
actions to support climate smart practices adoption and value chains improvement will use similar 
instruments as RESEPAG II. Namely the design of selection mechanisms of beneficiaries and co-
financing rules for matching grants, the tailoring of participatory and training activities, including 
related to nutrition, and gender-disaggregated data collection in M&E and grievances, will be 
embedded into RPLP. In order to  address any possible outstanding  gender gaps in the areas of 
interventions,  further  analysis and gender planning will be conducted prior to Project 
implementation by the RESEPAG II gender specialist.   
 

28. Food Security co-benefits. Food insecurity is an important problem in Haiti particularly in rural areas 
that the Project will tackle at different levels. First, the promotion of activities contributing to the 
restoration of degraded areas and improvement of current practices in the different watersheds will 
have a positive impact on overall agricultural productivity as well as on the production of food of high 
nutritional value (mostly fruits and vegetables). Second, the Project will contribute to improve food 
security through the promotion of crop quality and diversity induced with agroforestry investments, 
named traditionally “jardins creoles” in Haiti.  The project expects to promote several types of fruit 
trees, such as breadfruit, coconut, mango, guava, banana, citrus, as well as vegetables and yam. In 
addition, the combination of such investments combined with small infrastructure and support to 
commercialization (through groups of producers, intermediaries, or small enterprises) within the 
entire value chain will therefore contribute to their greater accessibility, availability and thus 
affordability of food, creating more resilience of households toward food insecurity. Investments 
could be related not only to private but also institutional markets. The government has already been 
discussing with school feeding program in the area of intervention. Such intervention would seek to 
help increase the accessibility of nutritious local food to Haitian students and guarantee a stable 
market access to institutional markets for producers and groups. 
 

29. Climate change adaptation co-benefits. RPLP activities are expected to yield significant adaptation co-
benefits (as well as mitigation co-benefits described below). An initial assessment at concept note 
stage indicated that >80 percent of RPLP financing would achieve climate co-benefits. The below table 
summarizes expected adaptation co-benefits: 
 
Table1 Climate change adaptation co-benefits  
 

Current situation Project interventions (selection) Adaptation co-benefits 

Increasing vulnerability to climate 
change driven by: 
- Increased exposure to climate 

change impacts such as: droughts, 
extreme heat, flash floods etc. 

- Increasing sensitivity of production 
to climatic phenomena due to 
reduced resilience driven by a 
degrading natural resource base 

- Increased sensitivity due to a lack of 
adaptive planning capacity at the 
micro-catchment level 

- Increased sensitivity due to lack of 
cross-sectoral adaptive institutional 
capacity to take informed decisions, 
guide, report, and monitor 
interventions on the ground in 
function of a changing climate 

Capacity building: 
- Development of Master Plan for 

Resilient Landscapes Development 
- Intensive technical trainings within key 

line Ministries, at national and local 
level and other relevant stakeholders 

- Capacity building in cartography, 
satellite imaging data collection and 
analysis for climate modeling, , 
development and application of spatial 
decision support tools, forecasting and 
early-warning systems 
 

Investments: 
- Development of “technical packages” 

(including inputs, such as tree 
seedlings, seeds, stakes, fences; and 
services, such as grafting, and technical 
assistance)” adapted to specific agro-
ecological zones 

- Development of participatory 
investments plans identifying priority 
investments and their geographical 

Strengthening of resilience through 
fortification of natural resource 
base at landscape level: 

- Soil quality improvement in 
areas with high risks of erosion 

- Increased water retention 
capacity 

 
Reduced sensitivity of agricultural 
production & livelihoods to climate 
impacts: 

- Increased coverage of resilient 
agricultural practices, adapted 
to the topography and agro-
ecological context 

- Improved adaptation capacity 
of agricultural production 
through increased 
diversification of productions 
practices to increase resilience 

- Improved livelihoods with 
additional and more diversified 
incomes 
locations;  
- Development of participatory business 

plans based on specific vulnerability 
criteria (including ecosystems and 
livelihoods) to allow the 
implementation of climate smart 
productions and practices ; and  

- Set-up of Farmer-Field-Schools (FFS) for 
producers focusing on transferring 
knowledge and know-how on Climate 
resilient production systems and 
practices. 

 
Improved adaptive capacity: 

- Improved capacity for planning, 
implementing, monitoring, 
watershed-level interventions 
towards improved natural 
resources management and 
livelihoods. 

 
30. In terms of mitigation co-benefits, it is estimated that RPLP activities will lead to significant benefits 

compared to the baseline. A quantification of the Green House Gas (GHG) mitigation potential using 
the EX-ACT tool estimated that over a duration of 40 years (4 years for actual project implementation 
and 16 years for capitalization of its effects), the Project’s carbon emission reduction  is estimated at 
572,397 tons of CO2 equivalent (tCO2-eq), or 28,620 tCO2-eq per year. These benefits will principally be 
achieved through improved landscape management, in particular through the promotion of 
afforestation, agroforestry systems and perennial agriculture cultivars.  

 
Key Results 
 

31. The following PDO level results indicators have been identified: 
 

- Land area under sustainable landscape management practices (Ha) – Corporate Indicator - (target 
of 2,000 Ha) 

- Farmers adopting improved agricultural technology (number), of which female (in percentage) – 
Corporate Indicator - (target of 3,000 farmers) 

- Share of targeted farmers with improved market access (%) – (target of 40%) 

 D. Project Description  
 

32. RPLP is designed to restore ecosystem services at sub-watershed level to safeguard and enhance agricultural 
production, reduce vulnerability of economic and ecological systems to external shocks, and to strengthen 
capacities for the long-term sustainable management of those landscapes. The investment will result in the 
provision of environmental services, private and public goods, including enhanced watershed services 
encompassing soil conservation, hydrological services, and biomass supply.  

Project Alternative 
 

33. The approach used by RPLP builds on a rich set of lessons learned from past projects and evidence from analytical 
work. The Project will take a landscape approach and operate at sub-watershed level, combining a socio-

economic and an ecological approach to landscape management.
24

 The Project’s interventions in the selected 
sub-watersheds will build on the results of two watershed management participatory planning exercises piloted 
within one of the selected sub-watersheds during Project preparation (Rivière Froide) that will be implemented in 
the entire area of the Project by effectiveness with the support of J/P HRO. The operationalization of these plans 
will consist in the development of sub-watersheds’ investments plans, that will be providing more detailed 
information related to each category of intervention offered by the Project with the volume of activities, types of 
instruments pre-identified during project preparation based on lessons learned and pilot participatory planning 
exercises (see Component 2), location and corresponding estimated budget.  

 
34. Resilience-enhancement from RPLP in the selected sub-watersheds will result from actions  to decrease the 

vulnerability of: (i) farmers linked to increasing soil degradation and subsequent continuous reduction of 
production capacity, and insufficient capacity to sell productions in a profitable and sustainable manner, including 
due to poor infrastructure condition; and (ii) landscapes, linked to the lack of holistic, participatory planning 
capacity, required to establish a common understanding of problems, propose solutions, prioritize actions 
expected to have the larger positive impact on ecosystems and populations in a defined sub-watershed, including 
interventions aimed at reducing soil erosion and enhancing water retention capacities in gullies as well as around 
natural springs, mostly through intensification of vegetative and tree cover, as well as small water harvesting 
infrastructure reducing water run-off.  
 

35. RPLP is designed to contribute to break the natural resources degradation/increasing populations’ vulnerability 
cycle in the selected sub-watersheds by taking an integrated approach. Based on geographic concentration, the 
Project will work at both farm- and community level to simultaneously raise production and productivity using 
more resilient, adapted agriculture practices to the hydro-geological context, which will directly contribute to 
rebuild the natural resource base; by protecting and restoring top soil cover in particular, the Project will improve 
water retention capacity, reduce erosion, enhance soil quality, which are required to counter the soil quality 
loss/productivity loss/increasing vulnerability cycle.  The Project will also work along the entire value chain from 
inputs via production to processing and marketing to ensure that the changes introduced result in income gains 
for farmers that are essential for Project sustainability. It will also support the construction or rehabilitation of 
small infrastructures considered critical to enhance landscape’s resilience (e.g. related to water management or 
improved access to markets), taking care of their quality to ensure the best possible resistance to adverse climatic 
conditions. 
 

36. It will also strengthen the institutional enabling environment and build capacity for landscape level governance 
and management at both national and local levels as well as delivering a proof of concept of the approach by 
investing into selected watersheds, to create the enabling conditions for subsequent scale-up. 
 

37. RPLP will include four components: (i) Strengthening of institutional and organizational capacity for landscape 
level resilience; (ii) Investments to strengthen the establishment of resilient agricultural production and practices; 
(iii) Project coordination, monitoring and evaluation; and (iv) Emergency Response Mechanism. The core of the 
investments and expected impact from RPLP shall be seen under Component 2 that will finance agricultural, value 
chains and infrastructure related activities to reduce land and farmers’ vulnerability in the four selected sub-
watersheds; while Component 1 shall establish the enabling environment for Component 2 to achieve its 
objectives and contribute to longer term implementation of sustainable productive landscapes approach by key 
institutions, in particular through the CBF mechanism to provide financing for climate adaptation into perpetuity.  

                                                           
24

 Landscape-level Land Management Efforts in Haiti. Lessons Learned from Case Studies Spanning Eight Decades. World Bank, 
2016 
Fig. 1: Theory of Change/Strategic Overview, Thematic Linkages and expected Achievements of  RPLP 

 
Component 1: Strengthening of institutional and organizational capacities for landscape level 
interventions (US$ 5.6 M total -US$ 1.4 M IDA and US$ 4.2 M LDCF- ; parallel financing of US$ 1.4 M 
from J/P HRO).  

38. This component will support national efforts to : create Agriculture/Environment joint landscapes policy and 
action plan towards resilient agriculture and ecosystems; fill skills and knowledge gaps required to implement 
respective mandates; foster partnerships and communication; strengthen institutional capacity to analyze climate 
related data for improved planning and climate related disaster risk prevention; fund the set-up of a National 
Trust Fund that will provide financing for climate adaptation into perpetuity through the CBF; and will also pave 
the way for Component 2 interventions that will rely on communities’ participatory planning exercises in all 
selected sub-watersheds. Specifically, the component will support:  
 

39. Sub-component 1.1. Institutional capacity building (US$ 2.6 M total -US$ 1.4 M IDA and US$ 0.8 M LDCF- ; parallel 
financing of US$ 0.4 M from J/P HRO). This sub-component would finance: (i) the development of a joint 
MdE/MARNDR Master Plan for Resilient Landscapes Development, building on respective policies and action 
plans

25
 and recent international commitments under Climate Change/Climate Adaptation global agendas 

(including NAPA and INDC implementation), establishing areas of synergies, joint action plan and related M&E, 
that will be field-tested under Component 2, and serve as a reference under HTR ; ii) intensive technical trainings 

                                                           
25

 Relation to policies and mandates from other relevant institutions shall be included as well, e.g. CIAT (Comité Interministériel 
d'Aménagement du Territoire).   

within key line Ministries, including MARNDR and MdE, at national and at local level with the branches of line 
ministries, as well as local governments and other relevant stakeholders (in the selected sub-watersheds), to carry 
out their mandate towards sustainable landscapes management; exchange visits in-country and abroad to share 
landscapes restoration and management experiences ; and students sponsorships for Masters degrees related to 
landscape /ecosystems /environmental fields ; iii) capacity building in cartography, satellite imaging data 
collection and analysis for climate modeling, , development and application of spatial decision support tools, 
forecasting and early-warning systems ; and establishing linkages with global networks of expertise in this field 
offering options to get high resolution Agro-Meteorological data. Informed by a background study supported by 
the WB, a set of dynamic decision support tools driven by geospatial and hydro-meteorological data were 
selected that would be supported by RPLP: soil health & erosion risk monitor; drought risk monitor. The creation 
of these tools would (a) help establish a baseline in project areas on critical variables and 2) inform project 
implementation at farm and landscape level. 

 
40. Sub-component 1.2. Support to national level sustainable landscape management approach to agriculture and 

watershed management (US$ 0.0 M total -US$ 0.0 M IDA and US$ 0.0 M LDCF- ; parallel financing of US$ 1.0 M 
from J/P HRO). Activities under this sub-component would be financed entirely through parallel financing from J/P 
HRO. They will aim at supporting (i) HTR, to develop/update its strategic and action plans, and operate its 
secretariat; (ii) the establishment, and operation of the National Committee for Climate Change in charge of 
steering, monitoring and reporting on activities to be implemented under the INDC; and (iii) the development of 
detailed participatory sub-watersheds management plans in the four selected sub-watersheds and their update. 
The development of these plans will follow the methodology piloted by J/P HRO, in close collaboration with 
MARNDR and MdE through the PROFOR study referred to in section I.B. They will serve as a basis for the 
development of detailed participatory business plans focused on RPLP interventions out of which the selection of 
investments financed under Component 2 will be made. The participatory sub-watersheds management plans will 
be completed by effectiveness of IDA and LDCF financing.     

 
41. Sub-component 1.3. Sustainable Financing of Resilient Productive Landscapes and Environmental Investments 

(US$ 3.4 M total - US$ 0.0 M IDA and US$ 3.4 M LDCF-). As indicated in section I.B, it would support the 
participation of Haiti in the CBF to benefit from financial resources towards climate adaptation and biodiversity 
conservation objectives into perpetuity. In the context of RPLP, it would specifically contribute to ensuring the 
long-term sustainability of interventions financed under Component 2. This sub-component would finance (i) 
remaining activities required to set up the National level Trust Fund to receive funds from the CBF on a yearly 
basis, complementing other donor’s contributions and (ii) an initial endowment of US$3 million to the CBF, 
earmarked for climate adaptation related interventions, complemented by a US$7 million endowment for 
biodiversity to be provided through the German Development Bank (KfW). It is estimated that the fund will take 
up to 3 years to establish and disburse funds. In the interim the other sources of project financing (IDA and J/P 
HRO parallel financing) will be used to support adaptation activities. Therefore, the establishment of the Trust 
Fund does not present delays to overall project implementation. 

 
Component 2: Investments to strengthen the establishment of resilient agricultural production and 
practices (US$ 12.1 M total -US$ 10.1 M IDA, US$ 2.0 M LDCF- and parallel financing of US$ 3.6 M from 
J/P HRO).  
 

42. This component will support individual farmers and communities within selected sub-watersheds to establish 
more resilient agricultural productions and practices, adapted to the agro-ecological contexts, and prioritized 
according to participatory planning exercises (under sub-component 1.2 and business plans under 2.2), supported 
by scientific expertise, in order to provide individual, and, to the maximum extent possible, landscape-level 
collective co-benefits from increased soil quality, water retention capacity and biodiversity. It will also support 
actions aimed at improving the revenues and livelihoods from better market access and improved food availability 
and nutritional quality, required to reduce people and, consequently, ecosystems’ vulnerability; and support the 
establishment or rehabilitation of small infrastructures supporting (i) and (ii) for increased farmers and landscape 
level resilience.   

 
43. Sub-component 2.1. Investments in resilient, sustainable agriculture and ecosystems (US$ 8.55 M total -US$ 6.55 

M IDA and US$ 2.0 M LDCF). This sub-component will support investments at individual and community levels 
that focus on increasing climate resilience of agricultural production systems in the selected sub-watershed. 
Specifically, the sub-component will finance (i) the development of a limited menu of “technical packages” 
(including inputs, such as tree seedlings, seeds, stakes, fences; and services, such as grafting, and technical 
assistance)” adapted to specific agro-ecological zones, and priority issues to be addressed, building on 
participatory planning documents, and experts inputs; (ii) the development of participatory investments plans 
identifying priority investments and their geographical locations, and costs to be financed out of RPLP under 
Component 2; (iii) the selection of beneficiaries according to participatory business plans based on specific 
vulnerability criteria (including ecosystems and livelihoods) and their access to one of these technical package 
over the course of the Project to allow the implementation of climate smart productions and practices ; and (iv) 
the set-up of Farmer-Field-Schools (FFS) for producers focusing on transferring knowledge and know-how on 
Climate resilient productions and practices (such as planting following contour lines, improved tillage, 
boundary/live fences planting for wind and water erosion protection, soil coverage, inter-cropping, agroforestry 
systems management, soil and water conservation and so on)

26
, as well as organizational and marketing 

approaches to add value to these productions (related to sub-component 2.2). This sub-component will use 
RESEPAG II experience with its farmer’s incentive scheme using a voucher mechanism, and be implemented with 
the support of an operator (consulting firm). It will also benefit from the registry of farmers being developed with 
the support of RESEPAG II. 

 
44. Sub-component 2.2. Intensification, diversification and commercial agriculture (US$ 2.85 M total -US$ 2.85 M IDA 

and US$ 0.0 M LDCF- ; parallel financing of US$ 1.1 M from J/P HRO). This sub-component will improve access to 
inputs and services from farmers, as well as marketing capacities and options, considered essential to ensure the 
profitability of investments, improve livelihoods and thereby contribute to sustain resilient landscapes. Under this 
sub-component, the Project will also seek to facilitate the mobilization of commercial credit both during and after 
project implementation. Before RPLP effectiveness, a market/value chains analysis for productions likely to be 
supported under sub-component 2.1, as well as an analysis of relevant inputs and services suppliers, would be 
carried out through J/P HRO financing. J/P HRO would also contribute to support these latter in order to meet 
expected quality and quantity of such inputs and services. This sub-component will both support (i) groups of 
producers within the selected watersheds to develop basic business plans identifying key inputs 
(equipment/services) to be financed under RPLP aimed at improving the quality and quantity of products sold to 
intermediaries or directly placed on markets ; and (ii) more advanced constituted groups of producers or small 
enterprises to increase their capacity to generate additional value to climate smart productions produced in the 
selected sub-watersheds (e.g. addressing logistics, agro-processing, reduction of food losses aspects), through 
improved business/marketing skills, as well as improved infrastructures and equipment to be financed through a 
matching grant mechanism. For this activity, the experience of the “Market Support Facility (MSF)” implemented 

                                                           
26

 The Farmer-Field-Schools will also be a vehicle to promote food diet-nutrition education which will be built from (i) the 
material being compiled in the context of J/P HRO arboretum, where a women repertoire of traditional plants used for 
medicine and diets is being created, and (ii) also re-use the food practice diet training developed under RESEPAG II.  
 

45. The sub-component will also finance trainings that will provide more capacity in technical, financial as well as 
management and strategy, to improve market access -for inputs suppliers’ and services providers’ organizations, 
as well as producers and other actors along the value chains. The same operator as sub-component 2.1 would 
support the implementation of this sub-component to facilitate coordination between these complementary 
activities.  
 

46. Sub-component 2.3. Protection of infrastructure and watersheds (US$ 0.7 M total - US$ 0.7 M IDA and US$ 0.0 M 
LDCF- ; parallel financing of US$ 2.5 M from J/P HRO). This sub-component will finance works to: (i) protect 
/rehabilitate small public infrastructures (e.g. rural and access roads or tracks, river crossing structures) (ii) 
enhance water management in the selected areas (building small water harvesting infrastructures in gullies or 
slopes, rehabilitating small water catchments or small irrigation systems in plains). The activities to be carried out 
under this sub-component will be based on the investments plans developed in each of the selected areas. This 
stage would be followed by technical studies to inform the detailed scope and nature of works to be supported 
under the Project.  
 

47. Most of the works are expected to be simple, hence a community-based approach would be promoted using a 
labor-intensive workforce. This approach has been used various times by MARNDR successfully (including through 
RESEPAG II in response to Hurricane Matthew’s to restore some damaged infrastructures. A specific manual exists 
that would serve as a basis for RPLP. 

 
Component 3: Project Coordination and Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) (US$ 3.5 M total – 100% 
IDA).  
 

48. The objective of this component is to support Project coordination and M&E as well as all aspects of management 
(including fiduciary matters, knowledge management, communication, gender and citizen engagement as well as 
monitoring mitigation measures related to safeguards). It will finance staff costs, goods, equipment and vehicles, 
incremental operating costs, assessments and studies (including technical and financial audits), construction 
and/or rehabilitation of Project Implementation Unit offices and in general eligible expenses associated with the 
overall management of the Project implementation. It will also provide resources to monitor progress and 
evaluate results and impact. For this purpose, an impact evaluation baseline will be established by no later than 
year one of Project implementation. 

 
Component 4: Emergency Response Component (US$0 - only IDA if activated).  

49. A Contingency Emergency Response Component (CERC) with zero allocation will be created to allow the 
Government to respond quickly in case of an eligible emergency. If an eligible emergency occurs, the inclusion of 
this component would provide a conduit for the use of uncommitted funds from the unallocated expenditure 
category and/or allow the government to request the Bank to re-categorize and reallocate financing from other 
project components to partially cover emergency response via implementation of key activities by the appropriate 
agencies to respond to the emergency. The CERC could also be used to channel additional funds should they 
become available as a result of an eligible emergency. An Emergency Response Operational Manual, acceptable to 
the WB, will be prepared and adopted during the first year of project implementation and clearly outline the 
triggers, eligible expenditures and procedures for tapping into the CERC.   

E. Implementation 
             Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 

50. Joint Implementation, Project Duration and Geographic Coverage. The Project will be implemented 
jointly by the MARNDR and the MdE, with an expected duration of five years. This proposed 
duration (expected over calendar years 2018-2023) is set to allow a realistic timeframe for 
implementation. In terms of geographic coverage, four (4) specific zones have been selected based 
on detailed criteria (environmental, socio-economic, vulnerability, institutional, budget availability 
as well as relevance in view of proposed interventions).  
 

51. MARNDR and MdE Experiences. The MARNDR began implementing the US$5M RESEPAG I project in 
2009.  Within MARNDR, the Project will leverage the existing capacity – specifically on safeguards 
and fiduciary aspects – of the coordination unit currently supporting RESEPAG II and other donor 
projects. Conversely, MdE has no experience in the implementation of Bank-funded projects, and 
would develop its capacity building on MARNDR experience. The Project will collaborate closely with 
other development partners and receive parallel financing from the NGO J/P HRO.  
 

52. Implementation arrangements. It was agreed that the Project will be jointly implemented by 
MARNDR/MdE through one Project Implementation Unit; this latter would report to both Ministries 
through focal points nominated by the respective Ministers. The PIU will be split in two locations: at 
the Central Level (PIU-C or Unité de Gestion de Projet Centrale) based at Port-Au-Prince and at the 
local level (PIU-L or Unité de Gestion de Projet Locale) based at the Agricultural Communal Office 
(Bureau Agricole Communal – BAC) Anse-à-Veau, close to the areas of intervention. The two units 
will be staffed as needed (i.e. staff hired and paid for by Project resources and appointed civil 
servants by MARNDR/MdE paid for by the Government) with appropriate skills, taking into account 
existing human resources and arrangements as well as existing staff from active World Bank 
operations when relevant (i.e. RESEPAG II). All staff paid using Project resources will be hired on a 
competitive basis under terms of reference and qualifications acceptable by the World Bank. 
 

53. The PIU-C and PIU-L will ensure timely and effective coordination of activities in order to monitor 
progress towards PDO. The implementation arrangements will allow a joint technical coordination 
by MARNDR/MdE as well as capitalizing on the MARNDR’s existing capacity and experience with 
World Bank projects’ management, especially on the fiduciary aspects. In addition, the PIU-L will 
allow to coordinate with the local offices of MARNDR and MdE at Departmental and Communal 
levels, as well with the other local stakeholders. The PIU-C will be responsible for: (i) managing the 
project at national level, including financial management, procurement in accordance with World 
Bank guidelines and procedures, and M&E; (ii) finalizing the Project Implementation Manuel (PIM) 
before effectiveness; (iii) producing project progress reports; and (iv) project communication.  
 

54. Staffing. The PIU-C will be located at Port-Au-Prince and headed by one (1) General Coordinator. 
He/She will also coordinate aspects related to Component 1. Other members of the PIU-C will 
include the fiduciary staff: one (1) principal accountant and one (1) procurement specialist, receiving 
support from existing fiduciary staff from RESEPAG II. All PIU-C staff, including the General 
Coordinator, will be hired on a competitive basis and paid for by Project resources. Support Staff will 
also be hired. All other staff will be based in the field at the PIU-L in the BAC Anse-à-Veau and hired 
on a competitive basis and paid for by Project resources. Staff will include one (1) Coordinator in 
charge of Component 2 as well as one (1) communication & grievance redress mechanism specialist, 
one (1) environmental safeguards specialist, one (1) social safeguard/gender/citizen engagement 
specialist, one (1) M&E specialist. Support Staff will also be hired. In order not to delay the start of 
the Project, the recruitment processes of these specialists will be launched during the preparation 
phase with the preparation of Terms of References (TORs), and selection, using the existing 
RESEPAG II fiduciary team to manage the recruitment process according to WB rules. Under the 
LDCF Project Preparation Grant, a core team of two persons (technical and admin) should also be in 
place not later than February 2018 to support the MARNDR and MdE RPLP focal points carry out 
these tasks among others contributing to swift implementation post declaration of effectiveness.   
 

55. In terms of governance mechanisms, a Project Steering Committee – PSC will be created at national 
level and serve as a guidance and exchange body (Meeting Frequency: once a year) and endorse 
Annual Work Plan & Budget. The PSC will be co-chaired by MARDNR and MdE, and comprised of 
high level representatives of MARNDR, MdE, Ministry of Economy and Finance, Ministry of Interior, 
as well as co-financiers, Audubon Society, HTR, other key stakeholders including donors (with 
observer status). The detailed composition and mandate of the PSC will be provided in the PIM. PIU-
C General Coordinator will assure the role of PSC Secretariat. In addition, a Technical Committee – 
TC will be established and ensure regular follow-up on the implementation of RPL activities 
(Meeting Frequency: quarterly, in Nippes Department). The TC will be chaired by the General 
Coordinator of the PIU-C and comprised of local stakeholders and authorities (DDA, DDE, other 
relevant Directorates, Civil Protection Committees, Municipalities, CASEC, ASEC), selected sub-
watersheds communities’ representatives, private sector representatives, etc.).  
 

56. A detailed PIM will be adopted before Project effectiveness, which will incorporate all operational 
details at the national and local levels, including the implementation of technical activities, M&E, 
safeguard implementation and administrative and fiduciary procedures. It will include detailed TORs 
for key RPLP/PIU-C/PIU-L staff. A harmonized IRM Operational Manual for the management of the 
CERC will be prepared and validated no later than three months after the Project effectiveness. 
Detailed Project implementation arrangements are found in the PAD. 

 
Figure 2:  Project risk mitigation matrix  

 

Risk  Level Mitigation measure 

Environmental and Social risks:  
The project has substantial positive 
environmental benefits.  
Negative impacts are likely to be 
small and highly localized, and are 
largely related to the commune 
level infrastructure activities that 
will be financed under the project  

Moderate The ESMF contains a screening 
tool to screen out works that will 
have a significant impact on the 
environment as well as a table of 
potential environmental impacts 
and associated mitigation 
measures. Robust technical and 
monitoring team will be in place. 

 

Climate and Disaster Risk: 
Haiti is highly vulnerable to the 
negative impact of climate change.   

Highly vulnerable 
country 

Project is designed to address 
these risks including through an 
unallocated component to 
reallocate IDA in event of a 
specific disaster/emergency. 

 
 
 .    
F. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 

RPLP will be implemented in four sub-watersheds offering a diversity of agro-ecological conditions, yet 
geographically close, within the department of Nippes, under two municipalities : (i) Rivière Froide 
watershed; (ii) Petite Rivière de Nippes watershed; (iii) Piémont area and Baconnois Plain; and (iv) Bondeau 
sub-wastershed and its mangrove. 

 
 
G. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 
 

Nicolas Kotschoubey, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 
Asli Gurkan, Social Safeguards Specialist 
Felipe Jacome, Social Safeguards Specialist 
Robert H. Montgomery, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 

 
 
 

SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The project will have an overall positive impact on 
the environment. It will promote conservation 
agriculture, agroforestry, soil and water 
conservation, water harvesting, water stewardship, 
re-afforestation and sustainable livestock grazing. 
The negative environmental impacts will be small 
and highly localized.  Such impacts may be 
associated with the construction works that 
communes will be able to finance under the project 
(rural roads, small bridges, etc) and impacts may 
include noise, waste management, worker health 
and safety issues and so on.  Other negative impacts 
may be related to improper technology transfer (e.g. 
inadvertent propagation of exotic species, expansion 
of plantations in natural forests, water harvesting 
that impacts the water table) and so on. For these 
reasons, the project is a category B and all activities, 
including those that seem environmentally harmless 


would need to be screened.  The completed ESMF 
provides a screening tool as well as a table of 
possible impacts and mitigation measures.  Proper 
and timely supervision from the Bank will also 
ensure that these activities are adequately 
monitored by the Environmental specialist in the 
PIU. 
 
For the sub component on planning and policy 
development, the intention is for the project to 
promote sustainability; however, the risk that a well-
intentioned plan or policy has negative impacts is 
possible, and therefore the ESMF that will be 
prepared, and the Operations Manual, will include 
measures to ensure that all plans and strategies 
prepared under the project are sustainable; support 
the preservation, maintenance and rehabilitation of 
the environment; are publicly consulted during their 
drafting process; take into account cumulative 
effects; and include measures to strengthen 
environmental management.  
 
For the CBF, for which activities are not yet clearly 
defined, and to ensure that the project does not 
indirectly finance activities with negative 
environmental impacts, the project ESMF will also 
apply. The Operation Manual will include a measure 
to ensure that the CBF adopts the ESMF as part of its 
screening mechanism.  
 
 
On the social side, no major safeguards risks are 
expected. A potential risk may include delays in 
compensation related to land acquisition. The 
project will avoid or minimize land acquisition based 
on the lessons learned. RPF will include measures to 
deal with such potential delays in payments should 
land acquisition be necessary. Another potential 
social risk may be perceived inequities in the 
selection of beneficiaries. The Project will mitigate 
this risk by focusing on citizen engagement 
measures and robust grievance redress measures.  
 
Risks linked to labor influx are expected to be 
limited. They will be mitigated by prioritizing local 
labor and ensuring clarity on where laborers coming 
 
from outside will be hosted through their stay in the 
host community and ensuring that contracts are 
consistent with ESMF and RPF provisions. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

This project will improve and support natural or 
critical habitat by increasing tree and ground cover 
with appropriate natural vegetation. It will operate 
in mangroves, forests, wetlands and other natural 
habitats and therefore the policy is triggered. Where 
infrastructure is being built, the project will ensure 
that it does not denude natural areas or remove 
cover that can expose the soil to erosional forces. 
The project will have an overall positive impact on 
natural habitats, but will ensure through applying 
the ESMF that negative impacts such as improper 
technology transfer, introduction of alien invasive 
species, etc., is not financed. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes 

The project will finance activities related to forestry 
and improve, rather than cause destruction to forest 
cover.  Activities that involve conversion of natural 
forests or degradation of critical areas will not be 
financed. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

Given that the project involves significant 
interventions in agriculture, and that the 
improvement of crop production is an ultimate 
objective, it is likely that pesticides will be used.  The 
types of activities that may require pesticides 
include dissemination of technologies for 
sustainable agricultural intensification; forestry; 
agricultural storage programs; and livestock health 
programs. All pesticides that are disseminated or 
used under the project will comply with WHO's 
list/standards for acceptable pesticide use. An 
integrated pesticide management plan has been 
prepared by the project and the document will be 
disclosed prior to appraisal. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 

The project will not operate within or near known 
cultural or historical heritage sites. However, as a 
precaution, this OP is triggered in the event of 
chance finds of historical or cultural relics, which are 
numerous in Haiti, during works, soil sub-surface 
drilling or excavation. Chance finds language has 
been reflected in the ESMF. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 
The policy is not triggered because there are 
no groups in Haiti who meet the definition of 
IPs of OP 4.10. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes The policy is triggered given that the project will be 


funding the rehabilitation of existing rural 
roads/tracks, possibly new small infrastructures for 
water harvesting/storage which are usually placed 
along the roads or in gullies, as well as potential 
expansion of local offices of the Ministry of 
Agriculture. These construction works may require 
land acquisition leading to involuntary resettlement, 
including the loss of income sources and means of 
livelihood, such as the loss of fruit trees and crops. 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be 
prepared by the GOH with guidance from the Bank 
to address the triggering of OP 4.12. RPF will be 
consulted and disclosed by appraisal. Upon the 
identification of cases of involuntary resettlement, 
Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) or Abbreviated 
Resettlement Action Plans (Abbrev. RAPs) will be 
prepared, consulted and disclosed in accordance 
with the policy. 
 
Any activity that may potentially lead to changes in 
land-tenure agreements, result in the establishment 
of protected areas, or may cause restriction of 
access to natural resources will be excluded from 
the project. The environmental screening form, 
which will be part of the ESMF will also include 
questions on social risks and impacts. The PIU 
responsible staff received a training by the Bank on 
October 18 on how to screen OP 4.12 impacts. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 
The project will not finance any activities related to 
dams or the operation of dams.  The ESMF will 
screen out any dam-related activity. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
The project will not be on international waters as 
defined under this policy. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
The project does not take place in any Disputed 
Area. 

 
 

KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
On the environmental side, there are no large scale, significant or irreversible impacts.  The interventions are largely 
soil conservation, tillage, tree planting and other soil enhancing activities.  Where there may be investments in 
infrastructure, these will be restricted to low impact public infrastructures such as rural and access roads, small 
bridges for crossing rivers and water harvesting infrastructure.  Impacts will therefore be small and highly localized. 
Other negative impacts may be related to improper technology transfer (e.g. inadvertent propagation of exotic 
species, expansion of plantations in natural forests, water harvesting that impacts the water table) and so on.  These 
can be effectively screened out and monitored, reducing the risk associated with these activities. On the social side, 
there are no large scale, significant and irreversible impacts expected. 
 
The promotion of policy and plans under the project will promote sustainable development; however, the ESMF 
prepared for the project includes measures to ensure that policies and plans developed under the project do not have 
long term negative impacts.  
 
Also, activities undertaken by the Caribbean Biodiversity Fund, which will be capitalized by the project, will be subject 
to a screening mechanism derived from the Project ESMF in order to screen out any activities with considerable 
negative environmental impacts, or mitigate impacts to an acceptable level.  
 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
No potential indirect or long term environmental or social impacts are expected.  The environmental impacts will be 
small scale and limited in scope. The potential social impacts are described under OP 4.01 and OP 4.12. 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. 
In terms of the environment, the project focuses on improving the stability of slopes and enhancing the fertility of soils 
in Haiti by introducing trees, stabilizing vegetation and so on.  The types of vegetation to be considered will be 
carefully matched with the particular environment/climate related problem that is evident in a region. For example, 
one would plant deep rooted vegetation in some cases where slopes need to be stabilized.  These are the types of 
alternatives that have been discussed and will continue to be discussed throughout preparation.  In terms of financing 
infrastructure, the project focused on key infrastructure that would support climate resilience- for example, bridges to 
allow river crossings when the river level is high and so on. The chosen infrastructure (by the commune) will be 
screened to ensure that the type of infrastructure chosen does not have significant adverse impacts on the 
environment. 
 
On the social side, any activity that may potentially lead to changes in land-tenure agreements, result in the 
establishment of protected areas, or may cause restriction access to natural resources will be excluded from the 
project.  
 
Civil works to be financed under the project are expected to be mostly of small size, and efforts will be placed on 
minimizing any possible negative effect through solid preliminary studies  and screenings allowing to clearly identify 
areas of interventions, and ensuring the adequate design, use of appropriate construction materials, and construction 
techniques etc. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower 
capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The project team has prepared an ESMF, an IPMP and an RPF, which will be consulted and disclosed by appraisal.  The 
Ministry of Agriculture, MARNDR, the primary agency responsible for the implementation of the project, has managed 
other Bank-funded projects in the past and they have experience with Bank safeguards policies and instruments, 
especially on the environment side. MARNDR will be hiring a second safeguards specialist to monitor social risks and 
impacts under this project. The second ministry that will be involved in this project’s implementation, the Ministry of 
Environment, does not have familiarity or capacity to implement social safeguards policies.   However, they have been 
closely involved in the preparation of the ESMF, IPMP and RPF. The safeguards implementation will be the 
responsibility of MARNDR, which will house the safeguards specialists.  
 
In the event that involuntary resettlement cannot be avoided by the necessary works, the Bank team will support the 
PIU to develop and implement Resettlement Action Plans. The project will develop a citizen engagement plan and a 
Grievance Redress Mechanism. The GRM ensures that complaints received are promptly reviewed in order to address 
project-related concerns. Additionally, communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected by a 
World Bank (WB) supported project may submit complaints to project-level grievance redress mechanism or the WB’s 
Grievance Redress Service (GRS). 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, 
with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The primary stakeholders of this project are smallholder farmers and families living in the selected watersheds 
targeted by the project, that depend on agricultural production for their livelihoods. Other key stakeholders along the 
agriculture value chains are service and input providers, buyers, and retailers.  The national, regional and local 
institutions that play a role in the landscape management and agriculture services are also important stakeholders for 
this project.  
 
The Project team will conduct consultations with a group of these stakeholders at the regions, that are tentatively 
identified at this stage. The ESMF and RPF will be consulted by appraisal. with key local actors (such as local 
government staff, farmers’ organizations, regional representatives of Ministry of Agriculture and Environment) in the 
tentatively identified municipalities.  Once the sites are identified, further detailed consultations that will take place 
with direct beneficiaries during project implementation.  People affected by involuntary resettlement will be 
consulted on compensation and resettlement policies in accordance with OP4.12. 
 
 
B. Disclosure Requirements  

 
OPS_EA_DISCLOSURE_TABLE Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other 

Date of receipt by the Bank Date of submission for disclosure 
For category A projects, date of 
distributing the Executive Summary of 
the EA to the Executive Directors 

06-Nov-2017 09-Nov-2017 
 

   

"In country" Disclosure   

   Haiti 
  13-Nov-2017 

Comments 

 
   

OPS_RA_D ISCL OSURE_T ABLE  

 

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process 

   

Date of receipt by the Bank Date of submission for disclosure  

06-Nov-2017 09-Nov-2017  

   

"In country" Disclosure   
   Haiti 
  13-Nov-2017 

Comments 

 
     

OPS_ PM_D ISCL OSURE_TA BLE  

 

Pest Management Plan 
 
Was the document disclosed prior to 
appraisal? Date of receipt by the Bank Date of submission for disclosure 

Yes 06-Nov-2017 09-Nov-2017 

   
"In country" Disclosure   
   Haiti 
 13-Nov-2017 
 



























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Benin Second Fiscal Reform and Growth DPF (P166115) 

 
 

  
 Page 1 of 8  

     

 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Program Information Document 
(PID)  

 
Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 20-Jul-2018 | Report No: PIDA25112 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Benin P166115 
Benin Second Fiscal Reform 
and Growth DPF (P166115) 

P160700 

Region Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) Financing Instrument 

AFRICA 30-Aug-2018 
Macroeconomics, Trade 
and Investment 

Development Policy 
Financing 

Borrower(s) Implementing Agency 

Government of Benin Ministry of Economy and Finance 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The program development objectives of this FRG series are to: 1) strengthen fiscal management; 2) increase agricultural 
productivity and strengthen the financial viability of the power sector; and 3) improve equitable access to education 
and health services. 

 
 Financing (in US$, Millions) FIN_SUMM_PUB_TBL 

SUMMARY 
 

Total Financing 465.00 
 

 
DETAILS-NewFin3 

Total World Bank Group Financing 195.00 

     World Bank Lending 15.00 

     World Bank Guarantees 180.00 
 

Total Non-World Bank Group Financing 450.00 

Private Capital and Commercial Financing 450.00 

of which Private Capital 450.00 
  
  
Decision 
The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate 

     
 

 
This PID covers both the IDA Credit (US$ 15 million) and the PBG (US$ 180 million). 
 

B. Introduction and Context  
 
Country Context  
Benin is one of the world’s least-developed countries, with an annual per capita income of approximately US$830 in 
2017.  Poverty remains widespread, with a poverty rate of about 50 percent (US$1.90 a day poverty line – 2011 
purchasing power parity) in 2016. With an average per capita gross domestic product (GDP) growth rate of 1.4 percent 
(2007-2016) driven primarily by the services sector, poverty reduction has been limited, highlighting the need to ensure 
a broad-based and stronger growth. There are significant regional disparities in poverty rates and rural poverty rates 
are higher than those in urban areas. Fewer female-headed households fall below the national poverty line than male-
headed households. However, women continue to suffer from a lack of economic opportunity and are under-
represented in politics and in other high-level decision-making positions. 
 
The macroeconomic policy framework provides an adequate basis for the proposed operation. This assessment is 
affirmed by favorable medium-term growth prospects underpinned by continued strength in agricultural production 
and sustained investments. It is further strengthened by the Government commitment to meet the 2019 West African 
Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) fiscal deficit target; and the participation to the WAEMU and the prudent 
monetary policy at the union level. The Government macroeconomic and fiscal framework is supported by an 
International Monetary Fund (IMF) External Credit Facility (ECF) supported program which aims to address Benin’s 
balance of payments needs, and alleviate the impediments to inclusive growth and poverty reduction by creating fiscal 
space for infrastructure investment and priority social spending.  While public debt has risen in recent years, the results 
of the external debt sustainability analysis (DSA) show that Benin’s debt dynamics are sustainable, facing a moderate 
risk of debt distress. 
 
The operation supports Benin’s efforts to strengthen fiscal management; increase agricultural productivity and 
strengthen the financial viability of the power sector; and improve equitable access to education and health services.  
The introduction of a Policy Based Guarantee (PBG) as a part of the second operation aims to improve debt 
management. 
 

 
Relationship to CPF 
 
DPFs are a key instrument in the World Bank’s ongoing policy dialogue with the Government of Benin and its 
development partners. The Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for FY13-17 (Report No. 75774-BJ) noted the importance 
of relying on a combination of development policy and investment operations in order to encourage a coherent 
approach to supporting structural reforms. The new Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY19-FY23 explicitly 
includes the current DPF series as a key IDA instrument for supporting Benin's structural transformation for 
competitiveness and productivity and notes that development policy operations (including the proposed operation) will 
target domestic revenue reforms designed to reduce Government reliance on revenues generated from imports 
informally re-exported to Nigeria.  Furthermore, the recently completed PLR, which extended the CPS for an additional 
year, and the forthcoming Country Partnership Framework (CPF 2018-2023) identified the need for new investments 
and reforms in agriculture as a priority – an area supported under this series. 
 
The success of Benin to attain the WBG twin goals in the coming years is highly dependent on its capacity to promote 
private sector development, which is the most efficient channel to create jobs and to reduce poverty. Achieving this 
goal will require an increase in the productivity of the agriculture sector and also require a regular and affordable supply 
of electricity, which is frequently noted as a leading constraint to private sector growth, particularly in the light 
manufacturing and agricultural processing sectors.  The DPF series aims at supporting the Government in its efforts by 
focusing on two main objectives. The first is to increase the productivity of the agricultural sector through a series of 
measures aimed at developing high value chains and improving the quality of agricultural products. The second 
objective is to strengthen the power sector financial viability and the reliability of electricity supply, which is consistently 
viewed as one of the key constraints by firms operating in Benin. 
 

 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
The proposed operation supports Benin’s efforts to strengthen fiscal management; increase agricultural productivity 
and strengthen the financial viability of the power sector; and improve equitable access to education and health 
services. 

 
Key Results  
 
The measures supported by this DPF series are expected to strengthen fiscal management; increase agricultural 
productivity and strengthen the financial viability of the power sector; and improve equitable access to education and 
health services. The measures supported by the first pillar are expected to strengthen fiscal management by having a 
positive impact on tax compliance and revenue mobilization and by strengthening human resource management and 
promoting more efficient wage spending. The measures supported by the second pillar will have a short-term impact on 
technology for food processing, quality of agricultural products, and their market access; and a medium-term impact on 
the productivity of the agriculture sector. In addition, they will strengthen the country’s power sector financial viability by 
increasing the energy utility revenues and reducing arrears in the sector. Finally, the measures supported by the third 
pillar will are expected to improve access to education and health services in an equitable manner through a more effective 
deployment of newly recruited education and health personnel. 
 

D. Project Description   

 
In the context of rising public debt, this series supports stronger fiscal management (Pillar 1) through measures to 
increase revenue and use public resources efficiently. In the run-up to the 2016 Presidential elections, uncontrolled 
increases in the wage bill and off-budget expenses led to significant increases in public debt (by almost 20 percent of 
GDP) and in the fiscal deficit (from 1.9 percent of GDP in 2014 to 8 percent in 2015, including grants).  The fiscal deficit 
was reduced from 8 percent of GDP in 2015 to 5.9 percent in 2017 by containing public spending. The DPF series 
supports the authorities’ efforts to strengthen fiscal management by improving revenue collection and by managing 
public expenditure more efficiently, particularly wages and transfers. 
 
Increasing agricultural productivity and value addition and strengthening the power sector’s financial viability (Pillar 
2) is a Government’s priority. Addressing the challenges of the agriculture and power sectors is key to promote private 
sector development, which is the most efficient way to create jobs and to reduce poverty. Agriculture employs about 
50 percent of the population and is the economy’s leading formal sector foreign exchange earner. The country has a 
large endowment of arable and fertile land and adequate water resources. However, Benin’s comparative advantage in 
agriculture remains largely unexploited. The sector’s productivity can be improved, once deficiencies in the agriculture 
policy framework and governance structure are addressed and constraints to farming, such as limited access to input 
and output markets and food safety and quality are tackled. As for the power sector, the inconsistent supply of 
electricity is noted as a leading constraint to private sector growth, particularly in the light manufacturing and 
agricultural processing sectors. Strengthening the financial viability of the power sector is essential to increase 
electricity production capacity in a fiscally sustainable manner.  
 
A new third pillar will support to the reforms necessary to improve access to education and health services. This pillar 
is consistent with the new national development strategy that emphasizes the need to strengthen the delivery of social 
services with. While access to education and health care has improved over the last decade, it varies considerably across 
income groups and locations. A key challenge is the disparity in the allocation of primary school teachers and key health 
care staff (doctors, nurses and midwives) across regions, with a relatively low number of them allocated in poor and 
marginal areas of the country.  
 
The introduction of a Policy Based Guarantee (PBG) as a part of the second operation aims to improve debt 
management. The PBG is expected to partially guarantee a Euro-denominated commercial loan extended by 
international commercial banks at more favorable terms than existing CFA-denominated short-term debt. The PBG 
would support the Government’s debt management strategy which aims at increasing the diversification of public 
borrowing and reducing refinancing risks by extending tenor. The Government has expressed its intention to use the 
proceeds of the commercial loan to prepay existing and more expensive short-term debt accumulated on the domestic 
and regional markets. This would reduce the Net Present Value of public debt and lead to reduced interest payments 
over time.  
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

E. Implementation  
 
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements  
 


The Ministry of Economy and Finance is responsible for overall implementation of the proposed FRG series. The 
ministry’s Monitoring Unit for Economic and Financial Programs (Cellule de Suivi des Programmes Economiques et 
Financiers – CSPEF) leads the Government's technical team, with additional representatives from sector ministries 
participating as required. The Government has determined that the monitoring and evaluation of the DPF series and 
other externally financed budget-support operations will be based on performance indicators and targets set out in 
sector program budgets. Sector ministries collect data and transmit it to CSPEF, which analyses the data and produces 
periodic reports. This framework, which builds on the mechanism put in place for Benin’s PRSPs, supports the coordinated 
action and synergies between stakeholders involved in the monitoring and evaluation of the Government’s strategy and 
the provision of donor support. The donor community and the Government have agreed to an annual review process 
that includes quarterly review meetings, additional meetings on special subjects as needed, a mid-year progress review 
on the previous year’s aide memoire, individual sector reviews, a joint donor-government review mission and the 
preparation of a new aide memoire for the coming year. The World Bank is fully involved in this process, participating in 
and contributing to every element of it. 

 

F. Poverty and Social Impacts and Environmental Aspects 
 
Poverty and Social Impacts 
 

The FRG series is expected to have a positive impact on poverty reduction through different channels. Some of the 
measures supported will have a mostly indirect through stronger fiscal managemnet, improved public spending efficiency 
and productivity gains as well as job creation in the agricultural and no-farm sectors. This impact has been strengthened 
by the inclusion of the third pillar on human capital development that could have both a direct and indirect influence on 
the level and distribution of poverty.  
 
Prior Actions 1,2 and 3 support measures to strengthen fiscal management. These measures are expected to facilitate 
the delivery of essential public services and to contribute to a macroeconomic environment conducive to economic growth 
and private sector employment creation. Prior actions 4, 5, and 6 focus on increasing agricultural productivity and 
contribute to the Government’s poverty reduction goals. In 2015, 60 percent of the rural population lived below the 
US$1.90 per day poverty line. Limited agricultural growth (around 3.5 percent per year, which is approximately the rate 
of population growth in the country) has weakly contributed to poverty reduction. The development of value chains and 
diversifying production into more valuable crops should boost incomes of households involved in agriculture.  Prior actions 
supported in the power sector pillar (Prior actions 7 and 8) promote reliable access to electricity and a more cost-
effective electricity provision and should have a direct and positive impact on the poor. Only 29 percent of Benin’s 
households have access to electricity, and due to the significant disparities between urban and rural areas, only 6 percent 
of the rural population has access to electricity. The measures supported under this series will support the financial 
viability of the power sector. Furthermore, access to electricity liberates non-paid family time demands, particularly for 
women and girls, and further increases quality of life and opportunities for investment in human capital, including in girls 
and women. Increased and more reliable access at affordable prices should also have a significant impact on firm creation, 
firm growth and resultant employment opportunities, particularly in the higher productivity formal sector.  Prior action 9 
supports equitable access to education services and is expected to have indirect positive effects on poverty reduction. 
Schools quality play a determinant role in education outcomes. Improving school quality (through lower pupil to teacher 
ratios) is likely to improve learning outcomes and increase grade attainment. As education outcomes improve for the 
poor, they will have better job opportunities that offer higher earnings and security.  Prior action 10 supports equitable 
access to health services through the deployment of new health workers to underserved areas. Providing affordable 
health care service to the poor remains a challenge in Benin particularly in the rural areas.  Addressing health care needs 


of the poor requires a multidimensional strategy integrating availability of health services, their quality, and financial 
accessibility.  
 
Environmental Aspects 
 

The reforms and policy actions supported by the proposed operation are not likely to have significant negative impacts 
on the country’s environment, forests and other natural resources. In addition, all the potential environmental and social 
adverse impacts associated with activities supported by the current DPF will rely on the existing National legal and 
regulatory framework and then, will be monitored and addressed through the national procedures in place in Benin.  Over 
the last 20 years, the Government has made significant strides in mainstreaming environmental sustainability in projects. 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) is a legal requirement and it is widely applied to all developmental 
projects. Environmental assessment is a necessary condition to obtain the approval to implement any development 
project. It has been set up in Law N° 98-30 relating to the environmental framework and in Decree N° 2001-235 relating 
to the environmental assessment procedures. 
 
The prior action of strengthening the financial viability of the power sector is likely to produce climate change mitigation 
co-benefits since strengthening the financial viability of the sector is likely to promote the development of new energy 
efficient production capacities. In the agricultural sector, measures intended to diversify agriculture away from a reliance 
on cotton could have a potentially positive environmental effect as agriculture becomes less mono-culture based and 
increasingly diversified. 
 

G. Risks and Mitigation 

 
The overall risk level associated with this operation is substantial. Substantial governance, institutional capacity, and 
macroeconomic risks could adversely impact the PDO. Despite the substantial risk rating, staff believe that the potential 
benefits of the proposed operation outweigh the risks involved and warrant IDA’s assistance in proceeding with the 
operation and in implementing the critical reforms and policy actions supported by this operation, in coordination with 
other donors, along with appropriate risk mitigation actions.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Guinea Bissau Emergency Food Security Project (P174336) 

 
 

  
 Page 1 of 10  

     

 
 
      

 

Project Information Document (PID) 
 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 06-Jul-2020 | Report No: PIDA29687 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Guinea-Bissau P174336 Guinea Bissau Emergency 
Food Security Project 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA WEST 18-Jun-2020 28-Jul-2020 Agriculture and Food 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Finance Ministry of Agriculture 
and Rural Development 

 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
(i) to support increased food crop production; and (ii) increase access to food for consumption by food insecure 
households in Guinea Bissau 

 
Components 

Support to Agricultural Production 
Support to Community Safety Nets 
Support to Risk Mitigation 
Project Management 
Contingent Emergency Response 

 
OPS_TABLE_FCC The processing of this project is applying the policy requirements exceptions for situations of urgent need of 
assistance or capacity constraints that are outlined in OP 10.00, paragraph 12.     
Yes 

 

PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
   

SUMMARY-NewFin1  
 

Total Project Cost 15.00 

Total Financing 15.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 15.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 

 
   
DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 


World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 15.00 

          IDA Grant 15.00 

    

Environmental and Social Risk Classification 

Moderate 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate     
 
 
B. Introduction and Context 

 
Country Context 

1. Guinea-Bissau is one of the most fragile countries in Sub-Saharan Africa, plagued by political 
turmoil and coup d’états since independence in 1974. Between 2000 and the present, the country has 
had 16 Prime-Ministers appointed to lead different Governments. The internal instability, often 
associated with problems in the political and military structure of the country, has prevented the 
formation of stable and accountable institutions and had devastating effects on the economy.   

2. The incidence of poverty is high, with over 69 percent of the population living below the poverty 
line (2011 PPP at US$1.90 per person per day), making it one of the poorest countries in the world. 
Poverty is more entrenched in rural areas where it is compounded by deprivation of social services, human 
capital, and infrastructure. Average real GDP growth, although modest, improved from 0.3 percent per 
year in 2013 to 6 percent per year in 20171, mainly driven by increased global demand for cashew nuts - 
the country’s main export crop. Per capita GDP is now estimated at US$780, although the Gini coefficient 
is high (sharply increasing from 0.35 in 2002 to 0.5 in 2010), pointing to high levels of inequality- with 
economic growth mostly benefiting the top income group. The country ranks 178th out of 189 countries 
on the 2019 United Nations Development Program (UNDP) Human Development Index, and thus falls 
under the low human development category. 

3. The impact of COVID-19 on the overall economy is expected to be severe. The main transmission 
channels include external (falling global cashew demand and price, tighter financial conditions, and low 
oil prices) reduced remittances, and domestic (economic disruptions caused by lockdowns and direct 
health impact of a wider spread of COVID-19). Health sector capacity is low and government effectiveness 
is weak. Guinea-Bissau has no fiscal and financial sector buffers to counter a sharp economic downturn, 
but it benefits from regional monetary buffers in the short-term. In the baseline scenario where 
lockdowns are short-lived, growth is projected to decline from 4.6 percent in 2019 to -1.5 percent in 2020 
and the fiscal deficit to increase from 5.1 to 6.2 percent. In the downside scenario, where lockdowns are 
sustained, growth would decline to -3.1 percent in 2020. The crisis could undo the modest gains made in 
poverty reduction2. 

 
1 Declined to 3.8 percent in 2018 due to a sharp drop in cashew production and somewhat lower international cashew prices. 
2 Guinea-Bissau: The Economic Impact of the COVID-19 Global Crisis. World Bank Note (April 30, 2020). 


4. Although Guinea Bissau has mineral resource endowments that could generate substantial 
revenues and greatly contribute to economic growth and development, agriculture is still the mainstay 
of the country’s economy. Over 80 percent of population relies on agriculture for their livelihood and the 
sector employs close to 70 percent of the country’s work force (most of whom are women)3. The sector, 
driven by cashew nut production, generates most - 95 percent - of the country’s foreign exchange, 17 
percent of fiscal revenues, and accounts for over 47 percent of GDP. 

5. Guinea-Bissau is one of the countries that are most vulnerable to climate change. Recent climate 
scenarios portend significant changes in the climate of Guinea-Bissau. These scenarios systematically 
signal increased average daily temperatures of up to +1.4°C for the period 2016-2045, potentially reaching 
up to +2.2°C in the 2046-2075 period, per a low emissions assumption. Under a high emissions scenario, 
the changes are in the order of +1.6°C to +3.1°C for the period 2046 to 2075. These changes are expected 
to lead to a dramatic reduction in rainfall, with serious implications on agriculture, especially production 
of rice, the main staple. 

Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 

6. Agriculture (defined as crops, fisheries, livestock and forestry) is the dominant sector in the 
economy, contributing about 47.5 percent of GDP. Agriculture represents the primary source of income 
for 85 percent of the population and provides the livelihood for most of the poor. Within agriculture, the 
production and export of raw cashew nut is the dominant sector, acting as the main source of income for 
more than two thirds of households and for virtually all smallholders in the country. It also accounts for 
more than 95 percent of total export revenue and 17 percent of its fiscal revenues. High concentration in 
and dependence on cashew nuts exposes the country’s economy to both external and internal shocks on 
the sector.   

7. While the favorable ecological and climatic conditions render more than 60 percent of the total 
land area suitable for crop production, less than 12 percent is currently under permanent or seasonal 
cultivation. Years of instability destroyed household capacity as well as productive relationships, 
traditional markets, infrastructure, and social and economic institutions that support the sector. In 
addition, chronic public sector underinvestment in agriculture (less than 1 percent of GDP) undermines 
delivery of public goods and as a result, the sector is characterized by low productivity - with yields of key 
crops lagging behind those of the country’s regional peers (for example: 320 kilograms per hectare for 
cashew nuts compared to 520 kilograms per hectare in Cote d’Ivoire; and 1.7 tons per hectare for rice, 
compared to 4 tons per hectare in Senegal). Any increases in aggregate production have largely been 
achieved through area expansion, rather than improvements in total factor productivity and average 
annual sector growth has barely kept pace with population growth.  

8. A confluence of the comparatively superior benefits from cashew production (see Table 1), gaps in 
the land property law (which incentivize tree planting as a way of strengthening tenure security), and lack 
of an enabling environment4, has  over the last four decades, mediated a strong shift in the country’s 
agriculture production system towards cashew production.  

 
3 Female employment in agriculture in Guinea Bissau was 70.7 percent in 2019, compared with 65.8 percent for male 
employment-http://datatopics.worldbank.org/gender/country/guinea-bissau 
4 Including poor infrastructure, constrained access to inputs, technology, knowledge, markets, capital and availability of skilled 
labor. 


Table 1. Comparative advantage of the cashew crop in relation to main crops in Guinea-Bissau. 

Crop option Days spent Added value per day (CFA) Advantage compared with cashew (CFA) 

Paddy rice 312 232 -2,478 
Pluvial rice 109 177 -2,533 
Maize 70 1657 -1,053 
Sorghum 94 870 -1,840 
Millet 114 618 -2,092 
Peanuts 78 660 -2,050 
Cotton 115 987 -1,723 
Cashew 118 2710 0 

9. From 14,000 ha in 1978, area under cashew cultivation has expanded at an average annual growth 
rate of 8 percent and now stands at 223,000 ha, which is about 56 percent of total area (about 400,000 
ha) under cultivation. Most farming households maintain a disproportionately higher share of their 
cultivated area under the perennial cashew, devoting the rest to food production- mainly rice, sorghum, 
millet, maize, peanut, and cassava. Farmers also use income from cashew sales to finance the purchase 
of agricultural inputs necessary to produce the food crops. 

10. Low average productivity5 and the already smaller acreage devoted to food crops, constrains, not 
only the production of amounts of food crops enough to meet farming households’ food requirements, 
but also the generation of marketable surpluses that could feed into the domestic market. 
Consequently, most farmers are also net food buyers and yet again use cashew nut proceeds to meet, in 
some cases up to 6 months of their food needs. Because of insufficient domestic production, the country, 
as a whole, relies on imports to bridge the gaps in domestic production. These food imports are mostly 
financed by forex revenues accruing from cashew exports. 

11. Guinea Bissau’s food security is therefore intimately tied to the cashew nut sector and any market 
volatilities or shocks to the cashew sector, are wired to have wide ranging implications on food security. 
The COVID-19 pandemic vividly spotlights these links. The country is now reeling from the effects of 
COVID-19 related cashew value chain disruptions on food security. Among others, due to stalled cashew 
sales: (i) most farmers cannot access necessary input and now face the dire prospect of not engaging in 
the forthcoming food crop growing season; (ii) those who rely on cashew sales and wages from the cashew 
value chain to meet some of their food security requirements are already experiencing challenges in 
accessing food; and (iii) food imports required to fill the demand gaps, are expected to be constrained by 
the limited foreign exchange reserves as a result of both the delayed cashew sales as well as the expected 
lower prices. The prevailing political uncertainty exacerbates these food security challenges. 

12. Government strategies acknowledge the risk posed by the high concentration in and high 
dependence of the economy on a single commodity. Within its limited resource and capacity constraints, 
the Government has been increasingly intentional in supporting more diversified agricultural production 
to wean the country off the raw cashew nut sector. The Government, with support from the World Bank 
Group has also supported the emergence of a cashew processing industry to reduce marketing risks and 
to help the country capture a larger share of final cashew prices through value addition. In the specific 
case of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, Government has made available about US$0.65 million to help 
16,359 agricultural households to access input for the coming cropping season. There are also ongoing 
discussions with the International Fund for Agriculture Development (IFAD) for a US$43.8 million project 

 
5 Mainly due to limited access to advisory services, inputs, technologies, financing, and poor physical infrastructure. 


targeting diversification of production (some of the proceeds of which could go towards supporting 
increased food production in the short to medium term), as well as the African Development Bank for 
assistance with responding to the food security challenge and to support the cashew campaign. In 
addition, the Government also used the WAEMU/Central Bank facility to borrow FCFA 15 billion to support 
the cashew marketing campaign implemented through an MOU with the five locally based commercial 
banks. This operation contributes to these  efforts and will focus on: (i) provision of agricultural input 
(seed, fertilizer, small equipment, and labor) necessary to engage in food production in the short term; 
(ii) provision of a community safety net tied to a public works program; and (iii) developing market risk 
reduction strategies for the raw cashew nut sector. 

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

13. The objectives of the project are: (i) to support increased food crop production; and (ii) increase 
access to food for consumption by food insecure households in Guinea Bissau. 

Key Results 

14. The Project is expected to: (i) reach 50,000 farming households with agricultural assets or services; 
(ii) contribute to the production of 205,000 metric tons of food crops; and (iii) provide immediate 
conditional cash support to 10,000 poor beneficiaries through participation in public works (cash-for-
work). Overall, the Project is expected to reach 378,000 beneficiaries, at least 50 percent of whom will be 
women. 

D. Project Description  
 

15. The proposed project seeks to urgently support the government of Guinea Bissau to proactively 
mitigate the short-to-medium-term food security challenges that the country is expected to face, as result 
of COVID-19 impacts on cashew nut production and marketing and on food production and prices. In 
addition, financing will be provided to strengthen the resilience of the cashew sector to market risks.  The 
project will be organized around five components as described below. 

Component 1: Support to Agricultural Production (US$10.0 million) 

16. The objective of this component is to support an accelerated supply response focused on 
preserving/restoring the productive capacity of 50,000 eligible farming households to enable them to 
effectively engage in continued and expanded production of key staple foods in the short - to medium -
term (6-24 months). The project will finance: (i) procurement and distribution of improved seeds and 
planting materials, with a focus on key food crops and vegetables; (ii) access to necessary farm equipment 
and labor; and (iii) provision of requisite advisory services in support of improved production, productivity 
and production system resilience to climate change. Special focus will be provided to market gardening, 
an important farming activity in the urban and peri-urban areas, which is mainly a women’s vocation. 
Where deemed critical to household food security, the project will support livestock services, including 
vaccination, deworming, and disease management. In addition, support under this component will go 
towards promoting climate-smart agriculture (CSA) techniques and practices, drought-resistant seeds, 
and capacity-building of the farmers.  

Component 2: Support to Community Safety Nets (US$2.5 million) 

17. The COVID-19 pandemic shock on the cashew nut sector is expected to lead to job losses along the 
value chain.  The impact of these job losses is expected to be greater for the multitude of unskilled laborers  

in the value chain, for whom the daily labor wages are the only source of income for household food 
security. The anticipated escalation in food prices (partly due to projected lower domestic production and 
higher import prices), is expected to amplify the shock on their household food security.  

18. Investment under this component is to ensure household food security for sections of the 
communities affected by job losses, by mitigating the expected shortfalls in their incomes through support 
for public works community-level works. This activity will target 10,000 beneficiaries, and its focus will be 
on establishing public assets that would contribute to or enhance the impact of support under Component 
1 as well as those that foster adaptation to climate change. These could include support to the distribution 
of inputs, rehabilitation of storage facilities, opening of access roads to agriculturally productive areas, 
public irrigation infrastructure, construction of local markets, rehabilitation of rice fields, etc. Presence of 
clear post operation maintenance mechanisms will be key in choice of public works to be funded to ensure 
sustainability. The daily wages for the cash-for-work activities will be below the local level for unskilled 
labor thus providing an ‘in-built” self-targeting mechanism for the conditional cash transfers that would 
also ensure that the public works do not compete with agriculture for seasonal labor. Where high levels 
of structural unemployment dictate against self-targeting, beneficiary selection will be guided by local 
leadership. Beneficiary selection would be sensitive to gender considerations. 

Component 3: Support to Risk Mitigation (US$1.5 million) 

19. The COVID-19 pandemic, has unveiled the significant vulnerability of Guinea Bissau’s economy to 
shocks, occasioned by high dependence on the quasi monoculture of a singular crop. While diversification 
is the ultimate panacea for this vulnerability, a number of ex-ante risk management measures (e.g. 
forward contracting, insurance, hedging, improved storage, etc.) as well as ex-post risk management 
instruments (e.g. contingent risk financing) can reduce the specific vulnerabilities of the cashew sector to 
market risks. The proposal is to explore the feasibility, and then pilot the implementation of locally 
appropriate market risk management measures for the cashew sector. This would serve to strengthen the 
resilience of the sector to market risks that the sector is increasingly exposed to (e.g. a price drop in 2018, 
current disruptions to the global supply chains) and would lay the ground for a sustainable recovery.  

Component 4:  Project Management (US$1.0 million).   

20. The objective of this component is to support MARD in facilitating   efficient implementation of 
project activities and tracking of results. The component will finance activities related to project 
coordination and management, including developing annual work plans and budgets, financial 
management (FM) and procurement, safeguards compliance, project monitoring and evaluation (M&E), 
citizen engagement as well as a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM).    

Component 5: Contingent Emergency Response (US$0 million) 

21. This zero-cost, contingent emergency response component (CERC) will finance eligible expenditures 
in case of natural or man-made crises, disasters, severe economic shocks, or other crises and emergencies 
in Guinea Bissau. Implementation of this component will follow a detailed Contingent Emergency 
Response Implementation Plan (CERIP) satisfactory to the World Bank that will be prepared for each 
eligible crisis. 

.

.  



 

Legal Operational Policies 

            Triggered? 

Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50             No  

Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60             No  

 

Summary of Assessment of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts 
. 

22. The project is expected to have positive impacts by targeting mitigation of food crisis due to the 
COVID-19 pandemic outbreak through the support of crop diversification, helping smallholders to find 
alternative income besides from cashew value chain production, provide a community safety net tied to 
public works program; and support market risk reduction for raw cashew nuts. As project locations are 
yet to be agreed upon, an Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared 
covering environmental and social risks and impacts caused by the civil works, use of pesticides and 
fertilizers and generation of waste during the implementation of the project. The ESMF sets out the 
principles, rules, guidelines and procedures to assess the impacts from civil works provided by the project 
and help guide the preparation of site-specific (Environment and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs) and 
Environment and Social Management Plans (ESMPs). It includes screening, measures and plans to reduce, 
mitigate and/or offset adverse risks and impacts, provisions for estimating and budgeting the costs of such 
measures, and information on the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MARD) responsible for 
addressing project risks and impacts, including on its capacity to manage environmental and social risks 
and impacts of the project activities. The ESMF will include general Environment Health and Safety 
Guidelines (EHSGs), Good International Industry Practice (GIIP) and Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) 
measures for the identified sub-projects. In addition, a Pest Management Plan (PMP) will also be 
developed for proper handling and use of pesticides. The recipient will also prepare an Environmental and 
Social Commitment Plan (ESCP), with the support of the Bank. The ESCP will include the commitment and 
the timeline for the preparation of subsequent ESIAs. 

E. Implementation 
 

Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 
 

23. Project implementation will be the responsibility of MARD, through a Project Coordination Unit 
(PCU) to be set up in MARD with project support. The primary responsibility of this PCU will be: (i) ensuring 
coordination, timeliness and technical soundness of implementation; (ii) contracting of implementation 
support partners; (iii) monitoring implementation and reporting to the Bank. For these functions, the PCU 
will be staffed with a competitively selected Coordinator, Agricultural Specialist, Monitoring and 
Evaluation expert, Environment and Social Safeguards specialists, Procurement Specialist, Financial 
Management Specialist, as well as a Communication Specialist. The PCU will also work closely with 
technical staff from the relevant MARD directorates, to provide backstopping support to implementation. 
The relevant MARD staff will be identified as part of the assessment that would need to be conducted. As 
needs arise, other expertise would be hired into the MARD-PCU.  

24. Because of potential delays in establishing a functional PCU against a backdrop of the emergency 
nature of the operation, project implementation will start with the support of the Food and Agriculture 


Organization (FAO) which will manage Component 1 and Component 2 implementation in close 
collaboration with the MARD. In this context, FAO will support the sourcing and distribution of production 
inputs, provision of advisory services to beneficiary farmers, and identification of eligible beneficiaries 
under the cash-for-work activities, overseeing implementation of the cash-for-work activities and 
payments to beneficiaries. Similarly, project procurement and financial management will be initially 
delegated to the Project Implementation Unit of an on-going IDA-financed Safety Net and Basic Services 
Project (P163901), established within the Ministry of Economy, Planning and Regional Integration. Once 
the PCU under MARD is fully functional, it will take full charge of implementation, including for Component 
3 activities. 

25. A Project Steering Committee (PSC), chaired by the Minister, MARD (or his/her representative), will 
be established to provide general oversight of the project. The PSC will include representatives from the 
Ministries of Economy and Finance, Trade, Social Affairs, cashew sector stakeholders, FAO6, and other 
entities deemed relevant. The PSC will be responsible for providing overall implementation and policy 
guidance. The PSC will meet four times a year. 

 
























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Zambia Integrated Forest Landscape Project (P161490) 

 
 

  
Dec 22, 2016 Page 1 of 18  

     

 

 
 
      

 

Combined Project Information Documents /  
Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (PID/ISDS) 

 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 24-Feb-2017 | Report No: PIDISDSA20573 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Zambia P161490 Zambia Integrated Forest 
Landscape Project 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA 16-Jan-2017 04-May-2017 Agriculture 

Lending Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Finance Interim Climate Change 
Secretariat 

 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
To improve landscape management and increase environmental and economic benefits for targeted rural 
communities in the Eastern Province and to provide an immediate and effective response to an eligible crisis or 
emergency. 
 
Components 

1. Enabling environment 
2. Livelihood investments 
3. Project management 
4. Contingent emergency response 

 
 

Financing (in USD Million) 

 

Financing Source Amount  

BioCarbon Technical Assistance Trust Fund    8.00  

Borrower    0.00  

Global Environment Facility (GEF)    8.05  

International Development Association (IDA)   17.00  

Total Project Cost   33.05  

 

Environmental Assessment Category 

B - Partial Assessment 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the preparation to continue     
 



 
Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
 

1. Zambia is a lower-middle-income country with close to 16 million inhabitants. It had a Gross Domestic 
Product (GDP) of US$27.1 billion in 2015, equating to a per capita income of about US$1,300. Zambia 
has made significant socio-economic progress over the past two decades and achieved average growth 
of 7.4 percent between 2004 and 2014. However, since mid-2015 economic growth has slowed down 
considerably to 2.9% in 2015 and a forecasted 3.0 percent in 2016, as external headwinds and domestic 
pressures have intensified.  

2. In 2015, global economic conditions for growth deteriorated and the price of copper (typically 77 
percent of Zambia’s exports) fell further from its 2011 peak. This has put downward pressure on 
revenues, widening the fiscal deficit and reduced the value of exports, opening up a trade deficit. In 
addition, Zambia experienced domestic pressures in the form of: (i) repeat fiscal deficits (reducing 
confidence in the economy); (ii) reduced and delayed rainfall in 2015 (undermining agricultural incomes 
and lowering the water level in reservoirs); and (iii) increased power outages. Further, the strengthening 
of the US$ in 2015 put pressure on the Zambian Kwacha that combined with lower confidence so that 
the local currency lost 41% of its value against the US$. 

3. Close to the end of 2015 the government acted vigorously to contain the impact of ebbing confidence 
with monetary policy measures. These measures restored stability of the Kwacha, which appreciated by 
11.2 percent in the first 9 months of 2016, and helped curb inflation from its peak of 22.9 percent in 
February 2016 to 8.8 percent in November 2016. However, fiscal policy remained loose in 2016 and 
monetary policy has had to remain very tight, reducing liquidity, putting pressure on the financial sector, 
and causing a drag on growth.  

4. The August 2016 elections went in favor of the incumbent President and political party. After five 
elections in ten years the constitutional changes mean that a full five-year term is expected to be served, 
raising cautious optimism about the political space for reform in 2017 and over the medium-term. The 
Government has presented its economic recovery plan: “Zambia Plus” that provides a framework for 
restoring fiscal sustainability, closing the twin deficits and ensuring that structural reforms are carried 
out to boost the non-copper economy. The Government has requested the support of the World Bank, 
IMF and other partners to make it a success. Accordingly, GDP growth is forecast to rise to 4.0 percent in 
2017 and 4.2 percent in 2018. The forecasts are subject to upside and downside risks, but the return of 
investor confidence in the fourth quarter of 2016 (evidenced by over-subscribed bond auctions), bold 
measures by government (including the removal of fuel subsidies), and a rally in copper prices 
(November 2016), suggest that economic circumstances are improving.  

Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here. 


5. The rapid and sustained growth achieved from the early 2000s to 2014 was insufficiently inclusive and 
despite the economy doubling in size, poverty remains widespread. As based on the 2015 Living 
Conditions Monitoring Survey Report of the Government’s Central Statistical Office, an estimated 54.4 
percent of Zambians live in extreme poverty (below US$1.90 per day, purchasing power parity terms) 
and poverty is higher among women. Rural poverty (at 76.6 percent) is more than three times the 23.4 
percent rate of urban poverty. The benefits of growth have accrued mainly to those already above the 
poverty line, inequality has remained high, and efforts are needed not only to restore the economy to 
faster growth, but ensure planned pro-poor policies are implemented and more inclusive growth 
follows. 

Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 

6. In Zambia’s Eastern Province (EP), the majority of the province’s 1.7 million people live in rural areas 
with livelihoods dependent on natural resources. As in Zambia as a whole, this rural population is 
characterized by high levels of poverty and addressing this challenge is the highest priority of the 
provincial administration. According to the World Bank’s Mapping Subnational Poverty in Zambia report, 
the Eastern Province is one of three poorest provinces in Zambia

1
. In addition, according to the Living 

Conditions and Monitoring Survey (2015), at 70 percent, the Eastern Province had the fourth highest 
proportion of population that was poor. The Zambian diet is mainly composed of cereals, predominantly 
maize, starchy roots and, to a lesser extent, fruit and vegetables. Cereals provide almost two-thirds of 
the dietary energy supply. According to the 2013-14 Zambia Demographic and Health Survey, the 
nutrition indicators for Eastern province stand at 43 percent for children under five who are stunted and 
20 percent of the women are overweight or obese (ZDHS, 2013-14).  Women and children are the most 
vulnerable to the problems related to nutrition because of their socioeconomic characteristics.  

7. Compounding the challenges of rural development in the EP is a changing climate, which models suggest 
will continue to change dramatically over the coming decades. The country is already experiencing 
climate-induced hazards. Droughts and floods have increased in frequency and intensity over the past 
few decades and have adversely impacted food and water security, water quality, energy generation, 
and livelihoods of people, especially in rural communities. Recent climate trends based on records from 
1960 to 2003 indicate that the mean annual temperature increased by 1.3 degrees Celsius, an average 
rate of 0.34 degrees Celsius per decade. Mean rainfall in Zambia has decreased by an average rate of 1.9 
mm/month (2.3 percent) per decade since 1960. The future trends in the country are towards a higher 
average temperature, a possible decrease in total rainfall, and some indication of more intense rainfall 
events. Zambia’s Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) report to the UNFCCC has estimated 
national GDP loss due to climate change over a 10-20 year mid-term planning horizon will be in the 
range of US$4,330-5,440 million with the following sector GDP losses: agriculture (US$2,200 – 3,130), 
energy-related (US$270 – 450), health (US$460), and natural resources (US$1,400).  
 

8. In addition to being subject to the impacts of climate change, Zambia contributes to global carbon 
emissions. According to the Second National Communication (SNC), the latest data available from the 
UNFCCC, annual greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions in Zambia have increased by 6.2 percent from 51.52 
million tons carbon dioxide equivalent (CO2e) in 1994 to 54.72 million tons CO2e in 2000. The largest 
contribution to GHG emissions in 2000 came from land use change and forestry, which accounted for 

                                                           
1
 World Bank Group (2015), Mapping Subnational Poverty in Zambia. 

7 percent followed by agriculture at 18.9 percent. 
 

9. Addressing rural poverty and improving livelihoods, helping rural communities adapt to major impacts 
to be expected from climate change, and reducing national carbon emissions from the forest and land 
sector all require a carefully integrated landscape approach. Major sources of rural livelihoods in the EP 
are in agriculture, forestry, and wildlife, but all of these are inter-dependent and all are intertwined with 
climate change adaptation and mitigation. 

 
10. The Government of the Eastern Province is in the process of preparing a development vision in 

consultation with provincial stakeholders. The vision statement is “to improve rural livelihoods in Eastern 
Province by reducing deforestation and forest degradation using a low emission pathway through local 
community participation by 2030”. In order to address the challenges associated with the drivers of 
deforestation, local communities’ participation and commitments as well as private sector involvement 
will be critical in optimizing natural resources management at both communal and individual farmer 
levels. According to the vision, the targets for reducing drivers of deforestation include reducing the 
total annual area burnt from 16.7 percent to 5.0 percent by 2036 through forest fire management; 
establishment of a minimum of 3,000 hectares of plantations on deforested land by 2037; promoting 
ecotourism with community participation to combat poaching; and promoting soil fertility 
improvement, good agricultural practices, and land use planning among 40 percent of the farmers in the 
province to tackle food security and poverty at local level. The estimated financing investment to 
achieve these goals is US$140 million, part of which will be leveraging private sector investments and a 
significant part of which will be mobilization of additional financing for institutional strengthening and 
implementation of activities. The ZIFLP will contribute towards supporting activities for addressing the 
drivers of deforestation as stated in the vision. 
 

11. Institutionally, responsibilities for coordination of the national climate agenda falls to the Interim 
Climate Change Secretariat (ICCS), under the Ministry of National Development Planning (MNDP). The 
ICCS ensures coordination with the many other ministries and organizations which need to be engaged 
in a landscape-level livelihoods/climate change initiative such as this project. Responsibility for 
implementing projects is often with the line ministries. At the provincial level, the provincial 
administration of the Eastern Province exercises considerable control over activities in its jurisdiction, 
consistent with the recently adopted decentralization law of Zambia. 

 
C. Proposed Development Objective  
 

 
 
Development Objective 
 

12. The PDO is “to improve landscape management and increase environmental and economic benefits 
for targeted rural communities in the Eastern Province and to provide an immediate and effective 
response to an eligible crisis or emergency”.  

 

Note to Task Teams: The PDO has been pre-populated from the datasheet for the first time for your 

convenience. Please keep it up to date whenever it is changed in the datasheet. 


Key Results 
 

13. The achievement of the PDO will be measured using the following indicators i) Forest area brought 
under sustainable management practices as a result of the project (ha); ii) Land area under climate-
smart agricultural practices (ha); iii) Yield change for selected crops (%); and iv) People in targeted 
communities with increased monetary and non-monetary benefits (% share of which women). The 
project outcome and intermediate indicators are presented below in the Results Framework. 

 
D. Project Description  
 

14. The project aims to provide support to rural communities in the EP to allow them to better manage the 
resources of their landscapes so as to reduce deforestation and unsustainable agricultural expansion; 
enhance benefits they receive from forestry, agriculture, and wildlife; and reduce their vulnerability to 
climate change. The project must also invest in ensuring that enabling conditions are in place for these 
changes to happen – conditions such as tenure security, planning at different spatial scales, and capacity 
development. Simultaneously the project will create the enabling environment for emission reduction 
purchases to be made in a subsequent project. 

 
15. ZIFLP will promote the adoption of sustainable landscape management practices and climate-smart 

agriculture (CSA) as an alternative. Community empowerment, strengthening local and traditional 
governance and land use planning are the key to integrating, optimizing multiple land uses within the 
landscape. However, collective action is unlikely in the absence of rights to use, benefit from, and 
protect natural resources. Leverage for transforming the system will include village land use plans, 
improved governance, matching land use with land characteristics, and poverty reduction outcomes 
including emission reduction payments. This will require strong monitoring systems for 
livelihoods/economics, governance, the implementation of land use plans, and resources monitoring 
and protection. 

 
16. ZIFLP would finance activities under four components over a five-year period using funds from the 

BioCFplus-ISFL (US$8.0 million), GEF (US$8.05 million) and IDA (US$17.0 million). The project 
components include 1) Enabling Environment, 2) Livelihood and Low Carbon Investments, and 3) Project 
Management. A fourth component, with a zero budget, is included in the event funds need to be 
reallocated for an emergency response. 
 

17. Component 1: Enabling Environment. This first component is intended to help create conditions that 
will allow the livelihood investment of Component 2 to be successfully implemented. This entails 
supporting plans, partnerships, and regulatory conditions to help rural communities in the project area 
to have the capacity to adopt sustainable and low-carbon land management practices. The component 
would include support for (i) Developing integrated district development and local planning; and (ii) 
Establishing emissions reduction framework leading to an Emission Reduction Payment Agreement 
(ERPA) (for future results-based emissions reduction payments). Enabling environment interventions will 
be financed through grant support from the BioCarbon Fundplus-ISFL. 
 

18. Component 2: Livelihood and Low-Carbon Investments. Component 2 will finance on-the-ground 
activities that improve rural livelihoods, conserve ecosystems and reduce GHG emissions. It has 2 



subcomponents: Agriculture and forestry management and Wildlife management. These activities will 
be financed by IDA, BioCFplus-ISFL and GEF resources. Although the subcomponents are sectoral in 
nature, the cross-sectoral and landscape approach of the planning activities that will underlie the 
activities will ensure a landscape approach is retained.  

 
19. Agriculture and forestry management. The objective of this subcomponent is to provide financing for 

interventions that increase agricultural productivity, enhance agro- and forest ecosystem resilience, 
reduce GHG emissions, and sequester carbon using a landscape approach. This subcomponent will cover 
the following activities: (i) scaling up of climate-smart agricultural practices; (ii) community forestry 
management; and (iii) land tenure and resource rights regularization, a pre-condition for the adoption of 
improved agriculture and forestry management. 

 
20. Climate smart agriculture. Interventions under climate smart agriculture will apply a train the trainers 

approach to introduce (i) conservation agriculture (CA) practices and integrated soil fertility 
management, (ii) agroforestry, and (iii) enhanced market access for smallholders and private sector 
engagement. In addition, the project supports community matching grants which can support livelihood 
interventions including climate-smart agriculture interventions, introducing small ruminants or poultry, 
supporting market access through agro-processing. Interventions will aim at enhancing the income and 
livelihood of the communities and farmer families through income generating and value added activities 
in the Eastern Province.  

 
21. Community forestry management. The objective of forestry management is to assist local communities 

and their organizations to improve the management and conservation of their natural resources, create 
income opportunities, and generate carbon benefits. This will be accomplished by developing and 
implementing participatory land and resource use planning and management–including fire control and 
prevention–and providing specialized technical assistance and training to identify viable investments 
from the sustainable production of timber and not-timber forest products. Activities to be supported 
will be consistent with the land and resource use plans developed at the village and district levels. The 
sub-component would finance specialized technical and extensions services, small works and 
equipment, operational costs and non-consultant services (e.g. workshops and study tours).  
 

22. Land tenure and resource rights regularization. The sub-component will provide analytical and 
technical assistance support to expand past and ongoing efforts at documenting land rights that could 
underpin adoption of sustainable low-carbon land management practices and private sector 
engagement.  Activities will feed into the National Land Titling Program, and will comprise (i) developing 
cost-effective systems to sustainably manage information on land rights and linking it to land use; (ii) 
identifying new possibilities of private sector engagement based on an assessment of the extent and 
impact of existing arrangements; (iii) documenting different types of land rights in ways that are 
supported by local stakeholders, and provide incentives for adoption of CSA, sustainable land use and 
intensification; and (iv) linking land rights to key parameters of land use (crop cover, soil moisture, soil 
carbon) using remotely sensed imagery.  

 
23. Wildlife management. This sub-component will have two major focus areas: i) improved management of 

the complex of protected areas centered on Lukusuzi National Park in the Eastern Province; and ii) 
adoption of improved management practices of wildlife at the community level, which can contribute to 

improved livelihoods of targeted communities. The project will support (i) preparation of park 
management plans; (ii) investments in infrastructure such as guard houses or other park buildings, 
upgrading of existing roads and tracks to facilitate park management and ecotourism, provision of water 
holes, fencing (only in limited areas where judged necessary to minimize human-wildlife conflict, HWC); 
(iii) purchase of equipment such as radios for communication, park guard equipment, patrol equipment, 
etc.; and (iv) support to park patrols, with a particular focus on management of poaching. 

 
24. Component 3: Project management. This third component will finance activities related to national and 

provincial-level project coordination and management, including annual work planning and budgeting; 
fiduciary aspects (financial management and procurement); human resource management; safeguards 
compliance monitoring; M&E and impact assessment studies; and communication strategy and citizen 
engagement).   

 
25. Component 4: Contingent emergency response. This is a zero budget component which is included to 

facilitate the use of IDA funds in the event of a disaster and to be able to respond quickly to a potential 
government request to reallocate some funding from existing World Bank projects to provide 
emergency relief.  

 
E. Implementation 
 
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 
 

26. The major investments of the ZIFLP will take place in the Eastern Province. However, there are activities 
such as those related to REDD+ policy, MRV, safeguards, etc. which are national in scope. 
Implementation of ZIFLP will therefore be at both the national and at the Eastern Province level. A 
National Project Unit (NPU) will be responsible for activities at the national level, and will be located 
within the Ministry of National Development Planning. At the provincial level, the Provincial 
Administration of the Eastern Province will be the executing agency of the project. This implementation 
arrangement aims to: (a) ensure sectoral mainstreaming of investment; (b) lessen the approval layers 
for faster decision-making, enabling more efficient project implementation; and (c) respect the 
constitutionally mandated decentralization process and governance structures at the national and 
provincial levels, to the extent possible.  

 
 

 
 
 .    
F. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 

Project location is the Eastern Province of Zambia. Wildlife conservation activities will focus on improved 
management of Lukusuzi National Park (and surrounding areas). The land planning, agriculture, and forestry 
investments will take place throughout the Province. 

 

 
G. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 
 

Kenneth M. Green,Majbritt Fiil-Flynn,Nicholas Meitiaki Soikan 

 
 
 

SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The policy is triggered as this is an integrated forest 
landscape project that will involve afforestation, 
reforestation, promotion of sustainable conservation 
farming methods as well as preservation of wildlife 
habitat in national parks and adjacent GMAs, all of 
which could have environmental or social impacts 
which must be assessed and managed. As a 
landscape management project its impacts are 
nonetheless expected to be overwhelmingly 
positive. 
 
The positive impacts of the program will be a 
reduction in greenhouse gas emissions with 
improved forest cover, rural livelihoods 
improvement, and wildlife conservation. The 
potential negative environmental impacts will be 
known with more specificity as project activities are 
identified during project implementation but are 
expected to be limited, localized, small-scale and not 
significant given that many of the on-the-ground 
project activities will be from community-driven 
development initiatives. An Environmental and 
Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been 
prepared to assess and guide the screening and 
mitigation of any negative impacts of the program. 
The project will monitor possible cumulative 
negative impacts and take action as needed. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

The policy is triggered given the potential impacts on 
natural habitats either directly or indirectly, through 
REDD+ activities, conservation farming, and the 
management of wildlife habitats. The expected 
impact on habitats is overall positive. Changes in 
livelihoods of rural farmers, due to increased 
agriculture activities and the introduction of new 


agricultural technologies, are likely to have limited 
negative impacts on natural habitats. The proposed 
avoidance and mitigation measures for these 
impacts are included in the project's ESMF. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes 

The policy is triggered as the project forestry 
management activities seek to assist local 
communities and their organizations to improve the 
management and conservation of their forests. The 
project will have impacts on the health and quality 
of forests, will affect the rights and welfare of people 
and their level of dependence upon and interaction 
with forests, and aims to bring about changes in the 
management, protection, and utilization of natural 
forests. However, the project will not lead to 
significant conversion or degradation of critical 
forest areas or related critical natural habitats. There 
may be continuing intrusion of smallholder farming 
into natural forests in the project area but the 
overall purpose of the project investments is to limit 
such intrusions and never to promote them. The 
project's Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF) and Process Framework (PF) 
address the potential impact of the project on 
forests and/or the rights and welfare of local 
communities. 
Since the project potentially finances harvesting 
activities carried out by local communities under 
community or even possibly joint forest 
management, such communities will adhere to a 
time-bound phased action plan to achieve a 
standard of forest management developed with the 
meaningful participation of locally affected 
communities, consistent with the principles and 
criteria of responsible forest management as 
outlined in paragraph 10 of OP 4.36. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The policy is triggered as increased agriculture 
activities and the adoption of new climate smart 
agriculture technologies could conceivably result in 
increased usage of agrochemicals by farmer 
beneficiaries. The project additionally will procure 
supplies and equipment for nurseries which may 
include pesticides. While a stand-alone Pest 
Management Plan (PMP) is not required for this 
project, the ESMF contains an abbreviated PMP to 
avoid usage of restricted pesticides, promote use of 



personal protective equipment (PPE), training of 
producers in proper handling of agrochemicals, and 
to promote integrated pest management. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 

The policy is triggered as a preventative measure in 
the event of potential impacts on the known and 
currently unknown physical cultural resources (PCR) 
of the area. The ESMF contains measures for 
avoiding and managing impacts on known PCR in the 
project area as well as chance-find procedures in the 
event new resources are discovered in the course of 
project implementation. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 

The policy is not triggered as the proposed program 
activities in the Eastern Province of Zambia are in 
areas that do not include indigenous groups as 
defined by the policy. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

OP 4.12 is triggered and applies mainly to certain 
activities relating to project interventions in 
protected areas. A Resettlement Policy Framework 
(RPF) was prepared in consultation with key 
stakeholders, consulted, and publicly disclosed. A 
Process Framework (PF) will also be required given 
that the project will support improved management 
of Lukusuzi National Park, adjacent GMAs and 
possibly other protected areas, thus potentially 
limiting access to resources. 
 
The PF is intended to avoid or minimize any adverse 
impacts upon local livelihoods and to support the 
development of alternative livelihoods as needed, 
on the lands already available to the affected 
households or communities. The project will support 
the preparation and implementation of follow-up 
action plans to provide livelihoods support where 
needed, following the criteria and procedures 
specified in the PF.  
 
The Zambian Government has recently resettled 
communities who encroached into Lukusuzi National 
park in the recent past. The Government has 
prepared and sent to the Bank a review of how the 
resettlements were carried out and an action plan to 
cover any remaining gaps that might remain. 
 
During the project, the Government could be 
required to continue to deal with those who have 

dy encroached into the park, or with new 
encroachers. If the project will in any way be 
associated with new resettlements, this would have 
to be done in strict accordance with the RFP. 
Additionally, the PF outlines the process of dealing 
with such situations following the Zambian laws, the 
provisions of the PF in accordance with OP 4.12, as 
well as international best practices.  
 
The Land tenure and resource rights regularization 
activities will be informed by and will be 
complementary to the PF and RPF as appropriate. 
 
All project-supported civil works (such as 
construction of office space, staff accommodations, 
and ranger posts) will be on government, public, or 
voluntarily donated community lands. This will be 
verified through the environmental and social 
screening mechanism specified in the ESMF, before 
any civil works commence. 
 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 

The policy on the Safety of Dams is not triggered as 
the project will not involve the construction of water 
retention structures that are likely to pose potential 
hazards to human or animal health and safety. The 
project will not fund any dams as defined in OP 4.37 
that would trigger the requirements of the policy. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 

The policy for Projects on International Waterways is 
not triggered as the proposed activities will not 
potentially impact any shared international 
waterway. Any conceivable increase in water use 
and direct abstraction of water resources in the 
Luangwa watershed will be of low significance and of 
local impact only. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
The Bank policy on Projects in Disputed Areas is not 
triggered by the project, as it is not located in any 
disputed territory of the country. 


KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
While there are environmental and social safeguard issues associated with the proposed project, no large-scale, 
significant, or irreversible negative impacts are foreseen. In general, the project is expected to generate positive, 
environmentally friendly land management practices including climate-smart agriculture and implementation of 
national park management plans. However, the project takes place in and could conceivably negatively impact natural 
habitats, protected areas, and forests. Additionally, as a project with an agricultural component, there are safeguard 
issues related to pesticide use. In all these cases, activities are largely community and demand-driven, and potential 
impacts are small-scale and localized. There may be cumulative impacts from these small-scale activities which will 
need monitoring. 
 
Zambia in the past has resettled persons illegally encroaching into national parks, including from Lukusuzi National 
Park, to be supported under the project. There could be possibilities of dealing with encroachment in the life of this 
project. The Government has conducted a review of how resettlement was carried out in the past in Lukusuzi NP as 
well as a gap analysis to identify any additional measures that may be needed to ensure compliance with both 
Zambian law and World Bank requirements. Any resettlement carried out during the project will be subject to the 
project's Resettlement Policy Framework. Additionally, the Process Framework (PF) outlines the process of dealing 
with limiting access to resources, following Zambian laws and the provisions of the PF in accordance with OP 4.12, as 
well as international best practices. 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
No negative long-term impacts are expected. As mentioned, a potentially indirect impact due to increased or new 
agricultural practices may be increased pesticide use but since such activities are largely community and demand-
driven, these issues are small scale and localized. The project will also support livelihood restoration activities and 
sustainable community forestry, which in turn is expected to be beneficial to the local communities. 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. 
In order to achieve the project objectives of promoting landscape management in the Eastern Province, in agricultural, 
forestry, and wildlife sectors, no project alternatives were identified that would further minimize environmental or 
social impacts and still allow for achievement of project objectives. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower 
capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The borrower has developed an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), a Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF), and a Process Framework (PF) in order to address safeguard policy issues. Specifically for issues 
related to the resettlement of encroachers out of Lukusuzi National Park, the Government has prepared a review and 
action plan. Although not related to potential impacts of the project activities, it should also be noted that the project 
includes significant funding to support the preparation of the safeguard instruments that will be needed to advance 
toward signature of an Emissions Reduction Purchase Agreement, in the context of REDD+. 
 
The Interim Climate Change Secretariat, under the Ministry of National Development Planning is currently 


implementing the Pilot Program for Climate Resilience (PPCR) in the Western Province of Zambia. Hence, the 
implementation unit has good knowledge of safeguards and of implementation requirements. At present there is a 
knowledgeable Environmental and Social Safeguards Officer with proven experience with implementing management 
measures in line with World Bank safeguard policies. Safeguards capacity is much more limited or absent in the 
provincial administration unit; staff will need to be hired or training will need to be provided. Safeguards training 
needs have been identified in the ESMF, which would be provided through the technical assistance component of this 
project. 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, 
with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Citizen engagement and participation for the project’s implementation will build on the various multi-stakeholder 
consultations that have taken place in the Eastern province during project preparation, and will take account of 
existing communication structures.  
 
Specifically, the project collaborates with stakeholders regularly through the following channels: project preparation 
missions, Monthly REDD+ Working Group meetings organized by the Interim Climate Change Secretariat and Forestry 
Department and Chipata Round Table meetings. The Chipata Roundtable was established to provide a forum for 
government and non-governmental stakeholders to discuss major environmental threats to the Luangwa Valley 
ecosystem, and is chaired by the Permanent Secretary, with active participation of chiefs and civil society. The 
Roundtable will likely be expanded to cover the entire Eastern Province. The ICCS will also develop a clear consultation 
and participation plan and protocols to be operationalized during implementation of this project, to ensure that all 
relevant stakeholders are targeted by the project.  
 
 
 
B. Disclosure Requirements  

 
OPS_EA_DISCLOSURE_TABLE Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other 

Date of receipt by the Bank Date of submission to InfoShop 
For category A projects, date of 
distributing the Executive Summary of 
the EA to the Executive Directors 

20-Jan-2017 15-Feb-2017 
 

   

























































World Bank Document


COMBINED PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENTS / INTEGRATED 
SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET (PID/ISDS)  

APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: PIDISDSA20709

Date Prepared/Updated: 08-Feb-2017
I. BASIC INFORMATION

  A.  Basic Project Data

Country: Maldives Project ID: P157801
Parent 
Project ID 
(if any):

Project Name: Sustainable Fisheries Resources Development Project (Fourth South West Indian 
Ocean Fisheries Governance and Shared Growth Project) (P157801)

Region: SOUTH ASIA
Estimated 
Appraisal Date:

10-Jan-2017 Estimated 
Board Date:

10-Apr-2017

Practice Area
(Lead):

Environment & Natural 
Resources

Lending 
Instrument:

Investment Project Financing

Borrower(s): Government of Maldives
Implementing 
Agency:

Ministry of Fisheries and Agriculture

Financing (in USD Million)
Financing Source Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT 0.00
IDA Grant 1.50
IDA recommitted as a Grant 16.50
Financing Gap 0.00
Total Project Cost 18.00

Environmental 
Category:

B - Partial Assessment

Appraisal 
Review 
Decision (from 
Decision Note):

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate

Other Decision:
Is this a 
Repeater 
project?

No

B.   Introduction and Context

Country Context
Maldives and eleven other countries border the waters of the South West Indian Ocean (SWIO) 
➢❨  the island nations of Comoros, Madagascar, Mauritius and Seychelles; and seven mainland 
countries: France, Kenya, Mozambique, Somalia, South Africa, Tanzania and Yemen. Together 
these countries are members of the South West Indian Ocean Fisheries Commission (SWIOFC), a 
regional fisheries body. The SWIO marine fisheries are part of a larger marine ecosystem shared 
by all countries of the region. They are a regional public good, whose health and sustainability 
require regional coordination to limit the negative and enhance the positive externalities yielded 
by national activities, especially on the migratory fish species, such as tuna. Conservation and 
sustainable harvesting of the regional public goods in particular, and the shared ecosystem in 
general are central to the economy of the island countries in SWIO region.  
 
Fisheries sector accounts for a substantial portion of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of the SWIO 
countries. Seafood export from these countries was approximately US$2.7 billion in 2014. Local 
industrial fisheries (mainly shrimp) and tuna processing constitute a substantial part of 
employment, income and foreign exchange earnings. Aquaculture and recreational fishing (sport 
fishing and diving) are rapidly growing industries and growing source of revenues in several of 
these countries. Fisheries, especially small-scale and subsistence fisheries play an important role 
for the livelihoods of estimated 107 million people living within 100 kilometers of the coast in the 
SWIO countries. They are often among the most vulnerable communities with high exposure to 
climate change impacts. The fisheries sector is a major contributor to nutritional health and food 
security in the SWIO region, especially for poor coastal communities with limited alternatives to 
fish for animal protein, as well as essential nutrients, vitamins, minerals and trace elements. 
 
Maldives, comprising of 26 atolls of 1,190 small coral islands of which 188 are inhabited by a 
local population of 338,434, has successfully built on its extraordinary natural assets to promote 
growth and socio-economic development. This was achieved mainly by developing a successful 
high-end tourism sector, whose sizeable rents have been redistributed to the population to address 
its development challenges. GDP per capita increased from US$268 in 1980 to US$7,681 in 2014 
(highest in South Asia), mainly driven by tourism and non-tradable tourism related activities. 
Incidence of poverty in Maldives is in line with that of an upper middle-income country, and its 
human development index is second only to Sri Lanka among the countries in South Asia. The 
share of the population living with less than US$1.25 a day was 4.9 percent in 2010, whereas the 
corresponding share using the US$2 a day poverty line was 17.02 percent in 2010. 
  
Despite this outstanding performance, the pace of poverty reduction has been below potential; and 
the level of inequality remains a major challenge. Limited job opportunities and skill-
endowments, especially for women and youth might have played an important role in limiting 
contribution of growth to poverty reduction. In particular, lack of growth in fisheries is an 
important cause of the limited impact of growth to poverty reduction, especially in the atolls away 
from MalÃ©.   
 
The World Bank➢❨ s Systematic Country Diagnostic, 2015 (SCD) provides a snapshot of the 
inherent vulnerabilities of Maldives➢❨  development program including immediate concerns 
about the fiscal, environmental and social sustainability. Due to its macro-economic vulnerability, 
given the small size, it is important to look for economic diversification away from tourism and 

heavy reliance on imports; and to promote an inclusive development of the labor market with 
particular opportunities for women and youth. There is a need to augment climate-proofing of the 
economy as climate change could cause annual economic losses of more than 12 percent of GDP 
by 2100. Emphasis on environment and natural resources management, especially preventing 
damage and pollution of the coral reefs is important to sustain and increase climate resilience of 
tourism and fisheries, the crucial components of the national economy.
Sectoral and institutional Context
An estimated 28 percent of the SWIO regional fish stocks are over-exploited or depleted 
(especially the high-value resources, such as shrimp, lobster, and sea cucumber). A further 40 
percent of stock are fully exploited (SWIOFC, 2011) from overfishing by industrial vessels and 
artisanal fishers, and widespread use of destructive equipment and techniques (such as dynamite 
or beach seines). Critical ecosystems, already weakened by land-based pollution are further 
endangered by loss of biodiversity, and destruction of coral reefs and mangroves; and 
consequently the coastal resource base is acutely threatened. As a result, it was estimated that 
SWIO coastal states incurred annual losses of US$225 million in 2008. Furthermore, a weak 
investment and business climate, coupled with limited or underperforming infrastructure and 
services, significantly constrain industrial and artisanal private sector development.  
 
As small-scale fisheries modernize, the limited potential of many coastal fisheries will require 
that fishing effort be reduced to become sustainable. This will generally translate into fewer 
vessels or jobs in harvesting operations, and require that attention be devoted to alternative 
livelihood opportunities in post-harvest value addition, aquaculture, and recreational fisheries or 
in other sectors. Reduction or elimination of destructive fishing is also a significant governance 
and social challenge.  
 
The fisheries sector in the SWIO is already largely regional, with each country➢❨ s decision 
affecting other countries➢❨  activities. In particular, large national investments, such as ports, 
fishing fleets, or processing plants, are competing against each other. Regional coordination is 
therefore needed to avoid conflicts and suboptimal sectoral investments, and to promote equitable 
distribution of wealth. Furthermore, several technical aspects of the sector are regional in nature 
(e.g., monitoring, control and surveillance, safety at sea), and their implementation, at the least, 
has to be coordinated at a regional level. The countries also face common constraints with regard 
to their fisheries sector: weak governance, weak human and institutional capacity, and a fragile 
business environment. The SWIO countries will therefore benefit from addressing these 
challenges jointly. They already use regional platforms to share their experience in implementing 
more sustainable and economically viable fisheries policies and practices, including the Indian 
Ocean Tuna Commission (IOTC) and SWIOFC. Greater regional cohesion will enhance the 
countries➢❨  voice in international fora as well as in negotiating fishing-related agreements, 
where decisions made have significant impacts on the fisheries sector of the SWIO countries. 
 
The SWIO countries have repeatedly called for attention to regional collaboration in the sector, 
recognizing the important contribution by the marine fisheries to regional and national goals: 
poverty reduction, food security, economic growth, balance of payments, and the value of natural 
capital. In response, major donors (the European Union, EU; France; the Global Environment 
Facility, GEF; and the World Wide Fund for Nature, WWF) and the World Bank have all 
supported regional fisheries programs in the recent past.  Consolidating and expanding past 
projects and analytical advice, the World Bank committed in-principle to finance the multiple 


South West Indian Ocean Fisheries Governance and Shared Growth (SWIOFish) series of 
projects (SOP) in 2015. Three consecutive series of projects are expected: SWIOFish Phase 1 
during 2015-21 (hereafter referred as the SWIOFish SOP); SWIOFish Phase 2 during 2022-27; 
and SWIOFish Phase 3 during 2028-32. Under the first series, the First South West Indian Ocean 
Fisheries Governance and Shared Growth Project (SWIOFish1) was approved in 2015 (covering 
Comoros, Mozambique, Tanzania and the Indian Ocean Commission). The second project 
covering Madagascar and the Indian Ocean Tuna Commission) and the third project covering 
Seychelles are expected to be approved in 2017. Maldives is the fourth planned project in the 
SWIOFish, to be followed by similar country-level projects in Somalia, Mauritius and Kenya (all 
expected to be approved in FY18). 
 
At the national level, the fisheries sector is a critical contributor to the national economy and an 
important economic activity in all of Maldives➢❨  inhabited islands. In 2015, primary fisheries 
accounted directly for 1.4 percent of GDP {excluding manufacturing (3.5% of GDP); wholesale 
and retail trade (4.7%) and transport (8.7%) where fisheries has a major role} and 11 percent of 
employment. The sector generated US$140 million in export revenue in 2015 (and a high of US
$161 million 2013), which is amost all of Maldives physical exports. Although the relative 
importance of the fisheries sector has declined since the late 1970s (due to the rapid growth of 
tourism), its role in the economy remains significant, including in providing food and nutrition 
security and as a source of livelihood and employment in remote islands without a major tourism 
facility. In the atolls away from MalÃ©, 30 percent of the household heads work in fisheries.  
 
Although the country benefits from vast fishing resources spread over 923,000 square kilometer 
of exclusive economic zone (EEZ), the total fish catch has declined from 185,923 tons in 2005 to 
127,350 tons by 2015; and direct employment reduced from around 14,000 in 2001 to less than 
9,000 persons now. The bulk of fisheries catch (up to 95 percent) are skipjack and yellowfin tuna. 
The Maldivian tuna is considered a premium product due to high quality fish stocks, pristine 
water, and sustainable fishing methods. Reef fishes, which account for 5 (average) to 16 percent 
(in low ➢❨ tuna years➢❨ ) of catch are mainly used for domestic consumption and supply to 
resorts, but export is rising (especially for grouper, sea-cucumber and aquarium fish). The tuna 
fishery, especially the skipjack ➢❨ pole and line➢❨  fishery has been recognized as one of the 
most environmentally responsible fishery operations in the world (certified by the Marine 
Stewardship Council, MSC), a dimension that has helped maintain the higher than usual export 
prices in recent past. 
 
Sustainable and diversified development of the fisheries sector is part of the Government of 
Maldives➢❨  vision, which encourages economic growth based on a diversified economy and 
aims at increased job opportunities. The Ministry of Fisheries and Agriculture (MoFA), with 
support from the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA), is preparing a Master Plan for 
Sustainable Fisheries to: (a) update and implement fisheries management plans including 
diversification; (b) strengthen the country➢❨ s monitoring, control and surveillance systems; (c) 
establish a better knowledge of the impacts of climate change on the fisheries sector; (d) reduce 
the excessive use of live bait in tuna fishery; and (e) address the heavy exploitation of export-
oriented reef fishery.  
 
The business-as-usual (BAU) scenario suggests that the fishery sector is threatened, and the 
income and jobs from the sector is at risk. The challenges of the fisheries sector are threefold. 
First, given the dependence of so many island people on fisheries, sustenance of capture fishery at 

about 120,000 tons and maintaining an export of about 60 percent of the catch are important for 
the national income and welfare of fishers and their families. Measures, such as compliance with 
the IOTC recommendations on improved surveillance and monitoring, or improved monitoring 
and generation of evidence to justify continuation of MSC certification, will be important to 
sustain exports and premium export prices. Operationalization of the Government of Maldives➢❨  
decision to focus on all value-added processing of tuna, and a quality control limit for tuna fishing 
are also required. Other challenges include inefficient use of infrastructure, inadequate 
distribution, and lack of access to finance to invest in fisheries value chains. 
 
Second, there is a need to ensure sustainability of live-bait and reef fishing. The high value tuna 
fisheries sector is dependent on live-baits and reef ecosystem. Excessive reef fishing as well as 
capture of live-baits (for tuna fisheries) is considered threats to coral reefs. Anecdotal evidence 
suggests that capture of groupers is already unsustainable. Diversification and consequent 
(partial) shift away from capture fishery is important on three accounts: (a) to minimize impacts 
on coral reefs, and to sustain the reef fish population, especially groupers; (b) ensure sustenance 
of the capture fishery to protect jobs and income of most of the households who are currently 
engaged in fisheries and associated vocations; and create alternatives for households who will not 
be able to continue in capture fishery; and, (c) to create dependable income and growth 
opportunities for communities and individuals who have gradually been excluded from the 
mainstay tuna fishing and related local processing operations, and who are involved in 
opportunistic reef fishing.  
 
The opportunities for diversification are, however, limited. Mariculture appears to be the only 
substantial opportunity, for benefiting the communities, reducing the excessive pressure from reef 
or bait fishing; and providing meaningful employment opportunities for individuals, including 
women and youth currently outside the gainfully employed workforce. Some initial mariculture 
works had been experimented so far: with pearl oysters, Maldivian clownfish, and brown marbled 
groupers. A private aquaculture farm is producing sea cucumbers, producing the larvae in 
hatcheries before growing them in lagoons. The future development of mariculture, however, is 
hindered by limited availability of fingerlings/juveniles, feed, financing and appropriate 
technology.  
 
Third, inclusive development of fisheries sector is important for substantive job creation. Towards 
this, mariculture, diversified capture of relatively deep-sea species and aquarium fishery appear to 
be ideal for Maldives. These have the potential to grow, and contribute to the reduction of 
unemployment among inhabitants of remote atolls. In implementing such a program, however, 
special attention needs to be given to the establishment of gender sensitive policy and regulatory 
framework, the establishment of benefit sharing mechanisms for the natural resources to be 
managed and, capacity building of atoll councils and small businesses. 
 
While Maldives➢❨  fisheries sector represents an undeniable engine of inclusive growth for the 
country, its sustainability and future will depend on three important and interrelated factors: (a) 
better and more transparent governance over fishing through all aspects of the value chain 
including post-harvest processing; (b) ensuring that greater value is captured across the value 
chain and that wealth generation opportunities are shared with marine resources dependent 
communities, especially youth and women; and (c) improved livelihoods and meaningful income 
opportunities for communities in the remote atolls, who should squarely be at the center of future 
sustainable mariculture development efforts. 


Fisheries in Maldives is intricately connected with the wellbeing of the regional fishery stock. In 
spite of using sustainable fishing practices, the capture of tuna has come down from 184,000 tons 
to 127,000 tons ➢❨  arguably due to the diminishing stock in the Indian Ocean as a whole. In 
recent years, Maldives was focusing on yellowfin tuna as one way of offsetting the reducing catch 
of skipjack tuna. In spite of practicing sustainable fishing in the Maldivian waters, the yellowfin 
tuna population in the Indian Ocean Region has shrunk, and the IOTC has now specified reduced 
quota for yellowfin catch. It is evident that these regional level issues have had implication at the 
national level. The tuna stock in the Indian Ocean is somewhat at risk, and it is expected that tuna 
catch will reduce further in the coming years.  
 
The best option for Maldives is to work with other countries to ensure sustainable practices over 
all of the Indian Ocean Region. At the same time, Maldives needs to (a) augment its own systems, 
procedures, compliance mechanisms, and skills to retain the ➢❨ environmentally sustainable➢❨  
branding to capture premium price in international markets, and (b) offer to share the knowledge 
of its own systems, procedures, compliance mechanisms, and the ➢❨ environmentally 
sustainable➢❨  fishing technology to the other countries. By demonstrating higher capture of 
value and premium price, Maldives can demonstrate to the other countries that conservation 
indeed pays.  
 
Nevertheless, Maldives will need to grow, and this need threatens other parts of the ecosystem 
even if tuna fishing is at the current sustainable level. Maldives cannot afford to espouse the cause 
of conservation of tuna fishery (in its own waters and in the region) and at the same t ime destroy/
diminish reef fishery. Therefore, diversification into mariculture and consequent (partial) shift 
away from capture fishery (in particular for new entrants) is important on two accounts: (a) to 
minimize impacts on coral reefs, and to sustain the reef fish population, especially groupers; (b) to 
create dependable income and growth opportunities for communities and future generations, 
especially women who had been gradually excluded from the mainstay tuna fishing and related 
local processing operations, and youth who are involved in opportunistic reef fishing. The agenda 
of conservation of reef and waters, reef fishery, and development of mariculture as the best 
diversification option, therefore are closely linked to the regional conservation agenda.  
 
As discussed above, a Regional IDA investment in Maldives is a crucial part of the SWIOFish 
SOP. SWIOFish1 and SWIOFish2 mention specific investment in Maldives. Maldives is currently 
co-chairing (and will take over as chair in 2017) the SWIOFC, and is participating in the 
SWIOFish Bureau meetings, the Scientific Committee Meetings, meetings of the Working Group 
on Fisheries Data and Statistics, meetings of the Working Party on Cooperation and Coordination 
in Tuna Fisheries; and the overall SWIOFC meetings including annual SWIOFC Sessions ➢❨  all 
supported by SWIOFish1. Maldives also benefits from SWIOFish1 regional support to develop a 
National Observer Program, in line with the IOTC➢❨ s recommendations, to eventually be able to 
participate in the SWIOFC Countries➢❨  Regional Observers Program. Under SWIOFish2, 
Maldives will benefit from training by IOTC Secretariat➢❨ s technical teams to better implement 
Maldives➢❨  international fisheries obligations under the IOTC, such as the Port States➢❨  
Measures to combat Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated fishing. 
 
In essence, an investment in sustainable fisheries resources development in Maldives will be 
beneficial to the countries in South-West Indian Ocean region, due to (i) economies of scale from 

shared infrastructure, technologies, and knowledge; (ii) positive externalities yielded by national 
activities to avoid the ➢❨ tragedy of the commons➢❨  scenario; (iii) addressing common 
constraints jointly through regional platforms and workshops; (iv) greater regional cohesion in the 
international fora as well as in negotiations of fishing-related agreements where decisions need to 
be collective and impacts are shared; and, (v) upgraded value-chain linkages by collectively 
helping their fisheries sector integrate into more competitive value chain.

C.  Proposed Development Objective(s)

Development Objective(s)
To improve management of fisheries at regional and national levels including support to establish 
mariculture in targeted atolls in the Maldives.

Key Results 
The project seeks to achieve the following key results: 
(a) Compliance rate of SWIO countries with IOTC resolutions (Regional-level Indicator; 
same as SWIOFish2 indicator)  
(b) Vessels complying with IOTC and European Union requirements on monitoring and 
reporting (Regional-level Indicator) 
(c) Value of production from mariculture 
(d) Direct project beneficiaries (of which share of female beneficiaries) 
(e) Share of target beneficiaries with rating ➢❨ satisfied➢❨  or above on project 
interventions.

D.  Project Description

The proposed project is the fourth in the SWIOFish SOP. As articulated in the SOP description, a 
central thrust of the SOP is that while the challenges are regional in nature, addressing them 
requires action at the national level, which will yield regional benefits, enhance ownership and 
efficiency, and strengthen national institutions to help enhance the overall health of fisheries in 
the region. The project components are directly linked to the wellbeing of the regional fishery 
stock. Other than ➢❨ Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation➢❨ , the project will 
consist of two components ➢❨  one will focus on improving the currently inadequately managed 
capture fishery, and the other one will support diversifying the fisheries economy so that 
sufficient jobs and income are created outside capture fishery to reduce stress on the regionally 
shared fish stock. Both components will build improved resilience in Maldives.  
 
Component A: Augmentation of Institutional Capacity for Marine Fisheries Management. This 
component seeks to enhance the Government➢❨ s capacity to implement a more effective 
monitoring of fisheries sector and internal control system of key marine fisheries value chains, 
and will focus on delivery of the Indian Ocean Regional agenda (as well as the intended 
adaptation agenda) of improving the overall fisheries management, marine zoning for long-term 
benefits, and a longer-term plan to establish and operationalize in-country skill and capacity 
building activities, essential for sustenance and growth of the fishery sector in Maldives. The four 
sub-components include: (A1) Development of key fisheries management and planning 
instruments including updating fisheries policy and legislative framework, zoning covering the 
entire Maldivian EEZ, and support to grouper fish management, coral reef and reef fishery 
management plans which are essential for regional conservation and improved compliance with 

IOTC recommended conservation and management measures; (A2) Development and 
implementation of fisheries management activities to ensure  compliance with IOTC and EU 
requirements, including expanded MCS, vessel registration and monitoring systems, electronic 
observer systems and augmentation of related reporting systems for commercial marine fisheries; 
collaboration with the SWIO Sub-Regional Fisheries Monitoring Centers; and, support and 
facilitation to regional agencies and international actors on the common agenda of conservation 
and management measures; (A3) Support to long-term program for fisheries management 
including sampling programs for tuna and recreational fish species, stock assessments and 
conservation zone surveys which will contribute to regional assessments and subsequent actions; 
and preparation of protocols disease surveillance, and quality control of brood stocks and fish 
feed; (A4) Fisheries sector capacity building including short and medium-term training, 
development of curriculum and teaching aids, collaboration with National Geographic 
Information System (GIS), and development and operation of a fisheries management information 
system ➢❨  all focusing on strengthening local and national skills that will contribute to national 
and SWIO Region agenda related to fishery management and consequent diversification into 
mariculture.  
 
Component B: Support to Mariculture and Diversification of Fisheries. Potential economic 
growth from diversification of capture fishery and from mariculture are pre-requisites for 
sustenance of the capture fishery resources in the Maldivian EEZ. However, mariculture is 
nascent in Maldives; and to be able to develop this sector, research, demonstration and provision 
of extension services will play key roles in addition to the three primary inputs: seeds, feed and 
access to finance. The four sub-components, therefore, include:  (B1) Development and 
demonstration of mariculture production and technology package, including completion and 
operationalization of, and preparation of medium-term operations plans and service standards for 
the Maniyafushi research and development facility (MRDF) as a center of excellence for the 
entire SWIO region; development and demonstration of technology packages for mariculture 
species; and market studies in support of mariculture choices; (B2) Promotion of mariculture out-
grower schemes and seafood growth clusters, including assessment of carrying capacity and 
supporting community custodianship of the coral reef resources, start-up investments including 
training, advisory support and compliance monitoring in out-grower farms, technical support to 
small enterprises for establishing out-grower contractual arrangements between small producers 
and larger private sector aggregators, and studies to help develop gender actions in mariculture; 
(B3) Supporting design, construction and operation of a multi-species hatchery including breeder 
stock development programs and professional training plans; and, (B4) Scoping of long-term 
marine fisheries diversification studies including planning and scoping of studies related to 
technology packages and conservation plans for new marine species to be explored in future.  
 
 
Component C: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (US$2.15 million).  This 
component would provide equipment, technical assistance, training, and incremental operating 
cost to strengthen the overall administrative capacity and capability of the Ministry of Fisheries 
and Agriculture and its Project Management Unit (PMU) to manage, implement, and monitor and 
evaluate project activities. Specifically, support will include staffing and operation of the PMU; 
establishment of adequate financial management and procurement management systems; 
implementation of the communication plan and grievance redress activities; monitoring and 
evaluation (M&E) and third party audits; preparation and implementation of specific 
environmental impact assessments as per the national laws; coordination with other ministries 

such as the Ministry of Environment and Energy and the private sector; special evaluation studies; 
and sharing of monitoring protocols, evaluation studies and specific experience of implementation 
of various aspects of fisheries management activities that are of interest with SWIO Region 
countries.

Component Name
Augmentation of Institutional Capacity for Marine Fisheries Management
Comments (optional)

Component Name
Support to Mariculture and Diversification of Fisheries
Comments (optional)

Component Name
Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation
Comments (optional)

E.  Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis (if known)

Maldives is an island nation in the Indian Ocean oriented north-south off India's Lakshadweep 
Islands. The Maldives consists of 1,192 coral islands grouped in a double chain of 26 atolls. The 
country➢❨ s atolls encompass a territory spread over roughly 90,000 square km, making it one of 
the world's most geographically dispersed countries.  Of the 1,192 islands, 188 are inhabited by 
the country➢❨ s population, with an average of 5-10 islands in each atoll being inhabited islands 
that have infrastructure such as housing, roads and other facilities built in. The country➢❨ s total 
land area is estimated to approximately 300 square km, with islands varying in size from 0.5 to 
5.0 square km. A significant number of uninhabited islands in each atoll have also been converted 
to resorts and tourism facilities as well as house infrastructure such as industrial facilities and 
airports. 
 
The atolls are composed of live coral reefs and sand bars, situated atop a submerged ridge 960km 
long that rises abruptly from the depths of the Indian Ocean. Maldives is noted as the country 
placed at the lowest elevation in the world, with maximum and average natural ground levels of 
only 2.4 m and 1.5 m above sea level, respectively. More than 80 per cent of the country's land is 
composed of coral islands which rise less than one meter above sea level. The islands consist of 
coral, sea grass, seaweed, mangrove and sand dune ecosystems which are of great ecological and 
socio-economic significance. Maldives is home to a number ecologically sensitive marine habitats 
in shallow and intertidal zones which have been designated as protected areas by the Ministry of 
Environment and Energy (MEE) and these regions and any activities in their vicinity are 
stringently monitored and managed. 
 
Climatic conditions in the Maldives belong to the tropical-monsoon category with temperatures 
ranging between 24Â°C and 33Â°C throughout the year. Climatic conditions in the Maldives is 


predominantly affected by the large landmass of South Asia situated to the north. The presence of 
this landmass causes differential heating of land and water. These factors set off a rush of 
moisture-rich air from the Indian Ocean over South Asia, resulting in the southwest monsoon. 
Two seasons dominate Maldives' weather: the dry season associated with the winter northeastern 
monsoon and the rainy season which brings strong winds and storms. The shift from the dry 
northeast monsoon to the moist southwest monsoon occurs during April and May and the 
southwest monsoon Maldives in the beginning of June and lasts until the end of August. Annual 
rainfall averages 254cm in the north and 381cm in the south, with the southern region 
experiencing more rain.  
 
The project focuses on the whole nation. The island of Maniyafushi where the project will finance 
the augmentation of the infrastructure of the Maniyafushi Research Centre, is an uninhabited 
island and the airport island located in South MalÃ© Atoll, where the physical infrastructure has 
already been set up. The establishment and subsequent operation of mariculture out grower farms 
(in the remote northern atolls, selected specifically to avoid any potential impacts corals and water 
quality).

F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

Mokshana Nerandika Wijeyeratne (GEN06)

Susrutha Pradeep Goonesekera (GSU06)

II. Implementation
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
The Ministry of Fisheries and Agriculture (MoFA) has the mandate, jurisdiction and experience in 
managing fisheries, and will lead project implementation. The MoFA has implemented or 
participated in implementation of Bank-financed projects several years ago, not in the recent past. 
While MoFA has a large mandate, it has limited staff. A dedicated Project Management Unit (PMU) 
has therefore been established within MoFA, with adequate number of technical staff, including 
expert staff on mariculture development, extension, research, and market studies; environmental and 
social management; financial management, procurement, communication, monitoring and evaluation. 
 
The responsibilities of MoFA including the Steering Committee include providing national policy 
and implementation framework; approval of the project and securing the required budget from the 
Ministry of Finance and Treasury (MoFT); approval of the project➢❨ s overall annual action plans 
and annual budgets; and overall implementation oversight. MoFA will ensure that most of the project 
activities are duly executed by its regular divisions and field offices. MoFA has also prepared a 
Project Implementation Plan (PIP), which describes the project activities and their estimated costs, 
allocation of implementation responsibilities, procurement and financial management arrangements 
and plans, to guide implementation. 
 
The PMU mimics the organizational structure of the MoFA. This is important because: (a) the actual 
execution of project activities will take place using the MoFA divisions and their field offices, and a 
clear coordination between the PMU and the relevant MoFA division is needed, as PMU staff will be 
deputed in those divisions and field offices; (b) an appropriate part of the additional expertise and 
staff recruited under the PMU will be absorbed in the respective MoFA divisions at closure of the 
project for long-term improvement of institutional capacity; (c) even if most of the staff will be 

recruited from market (including expatriate consultants given the shortage of qualified fisheries 
experts in Maldives), the organizational structure of the PMU will allow MoFA to depute permanent 
staff of regular divisions to the PMU in a manner that staff can make career progressions and based 
on performance can return to their parent divisions when the deputation is over.  
 
The PMU will be responsible for project implementation, facilitating statutory clearances, including 
environmental permits; procurement of works, goods and services; and implementation of specific 
capacity building activities as per the PIP. PMU staff working on procurement, financial 
management, knowledge management, monitoring and evaluation will be located in MalÃ© while all 
other PMU functions, including fisheries management, fisheries compliance, marine research, and 
mariculture will be co-located with the MoFA divisions at MalÃ© or at the field (including at the 
offices of Island Councils) and/or the offices of MRC, MRDF, or the site of the multi-species 
hatchery. The PMU, through its marine research, fisheries management, and compliance cells, will 
support MoFA for its retained role in coordinating with IOC, IOTC, SWIO Region countries; and 
through its central cell, will provide research and logistics support to MoFA in its incoming role of 
chairing the SWIOFC. 
 
The PMU will collaborate with and seek support and partnerships with a range of other agencies to 
strengthen the capacity of the main implementing actors. These will include international knowledge 
centers, including the World Aquaculture Alliance; academic and research institutes including the 
Maldives National University; private sector business houses and industries including the Maldives 
National Chamber of Commerce and Industry; civil society groups, atoll level community 
organizations and other government departments responsible for development and protection of 
marine resources (such as the Ministry of Environment and Energy).

III. Safeguard Policies that might apply

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental 
Assessment OP/BP 
4.01

Yes The project was categorized as an Environmental Category B 
project, due to the potential, unless avoided, of direct and 
indirect impacts flowing from physical interventions such as 
(a) establishment of a multi-species hatchery; (b) augmentation 
of the infrastructure of the Maniyafushi Research and 
Development Facility (MRDF); and (c) establishment and 
operation of out grower farms for mariculture in different 
atolls. To avoid, mitigate and/or manage such potential 
environmental impacts, an Environmental and Social 
management Framework (ESMF) has been prepared, which 
provides detailed analysis of the scale of due diligence 
required (such as specific guidance site selection, preparation 
of environmental assessments, environmental management 
plans, etc.) as may be required, or generic but appropriate 
avoidance and environmental mitigation measures in the 
project. Specific standalone environmental impact assessments 
(and subsequent permits from the Ministry of Environment and 
Energy) will also be needed for the multi-species hatchery; 
augmentation of the infrastructure of the MRDF; and out 
grower farms for mariculture. The ESMF provides budgets to 


prepare such environmental impact assessments (which contain 
the respective environmental management plans). A standalone 
EA (including the relevant environmental management plan) 
has already been prepared for the quality assurance, quarantine 
and disease control research laboratory of the MRDF (which a 
front-runner intervention) and has been annexed to the ESMF 
and disclosed accordingly.

Natural Habitats OP/
BP 4.04

Yes This policy was triggered as all of the islands in Maldives are 
surrounded by coral reefs, with some reefs, island and waters 
around being legally protected; and it is important to avoid any 
significant impacts on these natural resources. As per the 
criteria included in the ESMF, the project design avoids any 
activity in and around of the protected marine or terrestrial 
areas. The ESMF has in place the due diligence measures to 
avoid or reduce the impacts on coral reefs, marine ecosystems 
and associated fauna and flora during the establishment and 
subsequent operation of mariculture out grower farms (in the 
remote atolls, selected specifically to avoid impacts on corals 
and water quality). The project will not involve the 
introduction of any non-native/naturalized species for the 
purpose of mariculture.

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No There are no areas classified as forests in Maldives. Any 
potential impacts on island or sea vegetation (such as sea grass, 
seaweed) are covered through OP/BP 4.01.

Pest Management OP 
4.09

No This policy is not triggered as the project will not finance the 
purchase, use or promotion of any pesticides, herbicides or 
similar other synthetic chemicals.

Physical Cultural 
Resources OP/BP 
4.11

No No project-supported activities are expected in the vicinity of 
or will affect physical cultural resources, as defined by OP/
BP4.11. All sites of physical cultural resources value in the 
Maldives are already designated and mandated as protected 
areas where no physical interventions can take place. Measures 
for safeguard chance finds have been included as part of 
mitigation measures defined in the ESMF.

Indigenous Peoples 
OP/BP 4.10

No This policy is not triggered as there are no identifiable 
indigenous communities in the project locations (islands and 
atolls).

Involuntary 
Resettlement OP/BP 
4.12

No No involuntary resettlement from land, livelihood or access to 
livelihood is expected in the project. Project activities such as 
capacity-building, research, MRDF, quality control and disease 
surveillance, establishment of household-level mariculture out-
grower farms do not give rise to any involuntary resettlement 
from land, livelihood or access to natural resources. However, 
there remains a possibility of indirect impacts that could arise 
if the marine zoning, zoning plans, and conservation plans for 
reef fishes financed by the project proposes restrictions on 


non-sustainable practices, establishment of new conservation 
areas if any, or increased level of enforcement of management 
regulations for existing conservation areas. In all such cases 
the short-term economic and/or livelihood interests of local 
communities currently engaged in activities that rapidly 
deplete resources including fish stock could be impacted. 
Although the OP4.12 explicitly provides exemption to actions 
such as natural resources management, or preparation of 
fisheries management plans, the ESMF contains a framework 
compliant with the principles of OP4.12, to specify that any 
activity which has the chance of adverse impact on citizens and 
communities, or any chance of restricting traditional access to 
natural resources will be excluded from the project (throughout 
during implementation), and the process of preparation of 
zoning and other fisheries sector conservation plans will 
employ participation and citizen engagement. The policies and 
priorities that drives preparation of any zoning plans and 
regulations, conservation plans and/or strategies in Maldives 
are to protect the rights, claims and access of Maldivian 
citizens to the territorial waters of Maldives. These principles 
are also be strictly adhered to by the project, and all such 
zoning plans and conservation regulations will require 
approval of the Atoll Councils. Therefore, it is not conceivable 
that any restriction of access to traditionally used natural 
resources will be restricted by zoning plans, regulations, 
conservation plans and enforcement supported by the project. 
Further, while the exact locations and potential impacts of all 
activities, especially the mariculture grow-out facilities, are not 
yet known, the ESMF and the site specific social assessments 
will guide these sets of activities.

Safety of Dams OP/
BP 4.37

No This policy is not triggered as there will be no activities that 
invest on dams or water retention structures.

Projects on 
International 
Waterways OP/BP 
7.50

No This policy is not triggered as there will be no activities in 
international waterways or activities that will have impacts on 
international waterways.

Projects in Disputed 
Areas OP/BP 7.60

No The policy is not applicable because there are no disputed 
areas in Maldives.

IV. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify 

and describe any potential large scale,  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
While the project is classified as environmental category B, the project is expected to bring 
positive environmental benefits to the project areas as the entire design of the project is based on 
the need to conserve the marine resources, avoid and stop unsustainable capture and yields, 


comply with the best regional and international standards, and diversify into mariculture as an 
alternative to threatened reef fisheries. The project will not lead to potential large scale significant 
and/or irreversible impact as the impacts will be largely localized to project sites and can be 
managed via stringent due diligence and adherence to national and international sectoral standards. 
Specific standalone environmental impact assessments and subsequent permits from the Ministry 
of Environment will be needed for the (i) multi-species hatchery; (ii) augmentation of the 
infrastructure of the Maniyafushi Research Centre; and (iii) out grower farms for mariculture and 
it is through these assessments that site specific impacts will be identified. 
 
The project will support the establishment of infrastructure such as training and research centers 
and laboratories as well as infrastructure to conduct mariculture activities such as fish cadges and/
or pens. These could, unless carefully managed and mitigated, lead to localized environmental 
impacts typical to civil works, such as the generation of construction wastes, generation of dust, 
noise, etc., and occupational and safety impacts that will be managed accordingly. The civil works 
contracts may involve the use of expatriate/ migrant/ non-local labor but no influx related issues 
are expected - two out of the three islands involved are uninhabited (therefore, there is no host 
community), and the work at the Airport Island/ Hulumale will be expansion of an existing small 
building to create the required laboratory facility. 
 
The project will finance start-up investments into household-level aquaculture/mariculture 
production, for example, cage cultivation of native/naturalized fish species. Operations of the 
multi species hatchery, and the MRDF could also pose potential operational impacts. During 
mariculture operations, typical environmental impacts include eutrophication from feeds and 
effluents, release of antifouling chemicals and antibiotics, and impacts introduction of alien 
invasive species. The project, in conformity with the Maldivian national environmental regulations 
will support mariculture of native/naturalized species. Careful site selection of grow-out 
mariculture farms will avoid eutrophication, pollutant loading on undersea surfaces, and use or 
accumulation of synthetic pollutants. Other impacts include scenarios of fish escaping from farms 
may compete with wild stocks, or transfer of parasites and diseases, or genetic interaction between 
escaped farmed fish and wild fish stocks. However such site-specific impacts will be regulated, 
controlled and managed, especially through specific EA/EMP that will be undertaken, and 
incorporating stringent measures for mitigating and managing operational impacts in the design 
and operation of the grow-out mariculture farms. Mariculture is not entirely new to the Maldives; 
in the last decade two projects have been initiated in the islands, for which EAs were undertaken, 
and the recommended mitigation and management measures were undertaken. Similar EAs will be 
prepared for the grow-out mariculture farms, which will also comply with the requirements under 
Maldives➢❨  own regulatory framework.  
 
While the project does not envisage any adverse social impacts, some of the Component 1 
activities may lead to possible restrictions in access and increased cost to some fishers. Sub-
Components A1 and A3 in particular seek to improve the regulatory and management practices of 
the fishing industry but, in doing so, may restrict access to fisheries resources and could reduce 
income for some fishers. However, given that any fishery management plan will, by its 
characteristic intent, will try to curb overexploitation of fish stock without exception, the 
management plans (sub-components A1 and A3) will need to adopt a transparent and participatory 
process of agreement on the actions  to be included in the management plans. 
 
Overall, there is no potential large-scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts likely from the 
project.


2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities 
in the project area:
The social and environmental impacts of the proposed project is deemed to be positive and 
sustainable in the long term. The project is also expected to improve the overall socio-economic 
status of the communities, including youth and women, as a result of the potential opportunities 
via employment creation and livelihood activities.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse 
impacts.
No alternatives have been considered, predominantly as the fisheries sector, after tourism, is the 
main source of livelihood and income generation in the Maldives and the proposed project 
activities will provide the most environmentally sound management options of the sector in 
comparison to current practices.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an 
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) in lieu of an overall project-
specific Environmental Assessment (EA) and a Social Assessment (SA) has been prepared as 
details of all specific sites and design of the project➢❨ s physical interventions are not known. A 
standalone EA has already been prepared for the quality assurance, quarantine and disease control 
research laboratory, which is a front runner intervention and is annexed to the ESMF and disclosed 
accordingly.  The ESMF outlines detailed guidelines of measures for environmental and social risk 
mitigation and institutional arrangements for conducting environmental and social assessment, 
instruction to the preparation of Environmental and Social Assessments (ESIAs), Environmental 
and Social Management Plans (ESMPs), and other such measures as well as implementation and 
monitoring. 
 
All interventions will be subject to an environmental and social screening with the objective to: (a) 
determine the anticipated environmental and social impacts, risks and opportunities of sub-project; 
and (ii) determine if the anticipated impacts and public concerns warrant further analysis, and if so 
to recommend the appropriate type and extent of Environmental and Social Assessments needed as 
per the criteria set in the ESMF. The ESMF also provides the screening and selection criteria for 
household-level mariculture out-grower farms. 
 
The ESMF takes the applicable safeguard policies into account as well as the national 
environmental requirements and World Bank environmental Health and Safety Guidelines, which 
serves as a guide to the level of environmental and social analysis and mitigation required for all 
interventions supported by the project that will have any potential to cause negative environmental 
and social impacts; and thereby ensure compliance with the World Bank➢❨ s safeguard policies 
and the relevant national regulations during implementation.  
 
The implementing agency of the project, the MoFA, has not led implementation of any World 
Bank-financed project the recent years. Capacity within MoFA to manage environmental and 
social risks within a project setting is be limited. Therefore, in the Project Management Unit 
(PMU) set up for implementation of this project, staffing includes an Environmental and Social 
Officer with relevant technical and sectoral expertise to take up the role of environmental and 
social coordinator.  S/he will report to the Project Director and will work closely with the assigned 
PMU team, the Ministry of Environment and Energy, the Island Councils, the Environmental 
Protection Agency, and will be responsible for ensuring the overall implementation of the ESMF. 


S/he will liaise with other agencies, contractors and consultants at the activity levels to implement 
the required mitigation and management measures. The E&S Coordinator will be responsible for 
monitoring and evaluation of implementation of the environmental and social management plans, 
and will prepare regular reports on compliance and status of performance indicators. The Island 
Councils will be the first level of contact for any grievance/feedback for the community, and the 
E&S Coordinator will work closely with the Island Councils to redress any grievance. The E&S 
Coordinator will lead to orient PMU and MoFA staff, consultants and contractors on the ESMF 
and on operationalization of the ESMF for each of the project activities. 
 
The project will provide training in environmental and social management to improve institutional 
capacity. The cost for monitoring and supervising the implementation of environmental and social 
project regulations have been integrated into the overall project investment cost. In addition, the 
project will also provide capacity building to potential operators of out grower farms on 
maintaining a good mariculture environment, and mitigating and managing potential 
environmental impacts during the operation.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure 
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders included fisherpersons, fishing vessel-owners, fisherpersons➢❨  
associations, exporters and transporters involved in export of capture tuna and reef fishes, and 
relevant government officials. The MoFA organized elaborate discussions and consultations with 
these key stakeholder groups during November 2015 ➢❨  September 2016. The ESMF has been 
developed based on suggestions and recommendations from these key stakeholder groups. The 
project activities do not lead to adverse social or involuntary resettlement impacts, and 
consequently, there is no adversely affected person. The ESMF document was disclosed prior to 
appraisal of the project. Specific consultations at national, atoll and island levels will continue 
during implementation of the project, including during preparation of activity-specific 
environmental and social assessments.

B. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank 17-Jan-2017

Date of submission to InfoShop 18-Jan-2017
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors

"In country" Disclosure
Maldives 17-Jan-2017
Comments: The Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) is available in the 

website of the Ministry of Fisheries and Agriculture (http://www.fishagri.gov.mv/
images/download/MSFDP/msfd-esmf-january-17-2017.pdf).

If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Samoa Agriculture & Fisheries Productivity and Marketing Project (SAFPROM) (P165873) 

 
 

  
Feb 18, 2018 Page 1 of 13  

     

 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 26-Mar-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSC24085 


BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Samoa P165873  Samoa Agriculture & 
Fisheries Productivity 
and Marketing Project 
(SAFPROM) (P165873) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC Sep 03, 2018 Dec 10, 2018 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Finance Ministry of Agriculture & 
Fisheriers 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
To increase the productivity and access to markets of targeted beneficiaries in selected crops and livestock value-chains 
and to improve management of targeted fisheries. 

 
 Financing (in USD Million) 

FIN_SUMM_PUB_TBL 
SUMMARY 
 

Total Project Cost 21.00 

Total Financing 21.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 

 
   
DETAILS-NewFin3 

Total World Bank Group Financing 21.00 

     World Bank Lending 21.00 
   

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B-Partial Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 



INTRODUCTION AND CONTEXT 

 
A. Country Context 
The Independent State of Samoa (Samoa) is a small remote Pacific Island Country (PIC) with a population of 
approximately 197,000 people1. Samoa consists of two large islands (Upolu and Savai’i), and several smaller islands, it 
has a total land area of approximately 2,830 km2 and an exclusive economic zone of 131,000km2. Samoa is a stable 
democracy with steady growth supported by the tourism and agriculture sectors.  

 
Like many PIC’s, Samoa faces unique challenges to its economic growth, due to its small size, remoteness, high 
exposure to shocks and environmental fragility. Economic growth has picked up in recent years, and in FY2016 real GDP 
expanded by around 7 percent, much faster than originally forecast and a significant acceleration from growth of 
between 1 and 2 percent in the previous two years. Growth in FY16 was driven by tourism arrivals, lower fuel prices, 
and new fish processing facilities, as well as two major sporting events. Over the medium term, real GDP is expected to 
increase at an annual rate of around 2 percent2. However, it’s important to note that frequent natural disasters can 
distort this picture. Samoa was hit by Tropical Cyclone Evan in late 2012 and, according to the Damage and Loss 
Assessment3 caused an estimated US$210 million (30% of annual GDP) in damages and losses, including a loss of 49 
percent in crop and livestock GDP, and 5 percent in fisheries GDP. While Samoa has largely recovered from the effects 
of TC Evan, Category 5 Cyclones have been a 1 in 10-year event for Samoa.  
 
Samoa’s growth is also constrained by the high instances of obesity and noncommunicable diseases. Fifty-four percent 
of Samoa’s population is obese and 25 percent of people smoke and it is predicted that the economic burden of NCDs 
will reach as high as 8.5 percent of GDP by 20404. 
 
Samoa faces persistent challenges in securing prosperity for all and the incidence of hardship remains high. While 
extreme poverty is low, at 0.6 percent, basic needs poverty or ‘hardship’, is at 26.9 percent. Eighty-one percent of 
Samoa’s population live in rural areas and most households are engaged in some form of agricultural activity. While 
strong traditional family and community based safety nets are still effective in preventing extreme hardship, these 
traditional networks cannot manage local or country-wide shocks that affect most of their members, such as natural 
disasters. 

 
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context 
Sectoral context: In Samoa, and across the Pacific, agriculture and coastal fisheries play an important role in meeting 
subsistence needs. The most commonly produced crops are taro, banana and yam, and many households have small-
scale subsistence livestock production. In February 2017, ‘food and live animal’ imports were the top category of 
imports, accounting for 27.5 percent of total imports5, and in 2015, approximately 67 percent of all retail beef and 95 
percent of chicken meat was imported. Low cost and low quality food imports often crowd out domestic production 
and contribute (together with irrelevant food behaviors) significantly to the non-communicable disease crisis 
experienced in the region. On the other hand, fresh fish, particularly tuna, still constitutes one of the largest export 
commodities, accounting for 39 percent of exports in 20166, however in terms of contribution to GDP, fishing 
accounted for only 3.2 percent of nominal GDP in the July to September 2017 quarter. 

 
1 Samoa Bureau of Statistics.  
2 Samoa First Resilience DPO, The World Bank (2017) 
3 “Samoa Post-Disaster Needs Assessment, Cyclone Evan 2012”, Government of Samoa, March 2013.  
4 Pacific Possible, The World Bank (2017) 
5 Samoa Bureau of Statistics (http://www.sbs.gov.ws/index.php/new-document-library?view=download&fileId=1990) 
6 Central Bank of Samoa 


According to the 2015 Samoa Agriculture Survey, 97 percent of households grow some crops or raise some livestock. 
For most of these households, agriculture is a secondary activity, growing crops for subsistence purposes only. Despite 
this, agriculture in Samoa is becoming more market-oriented; between 2009 and 2015, there was a 5.2 percent 
increase in agriculture households selling ‘some produce’ and a 4.4 percent increase in major crop households 
producing mainly for sale7.  
 
Based on the same survey, 21 percent of all households are engaged in fisheries activities, with the highest rate (37 
percent) in Savaii. Home consumption is the main purpose, representing 70 percent of those households in 2015. As a 
result of destructive fishing practices, near shore fish and fishery products had a steep decline in the early 1990’s, 
however conservation and management plans were put in place and anecdotal evidence suggests the sector is 
gradually recovering.  
 
Samoa’s Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) is the smallest in the Pacific region and tuna longline fishery, particularly 
albacore, is the main offshore fishery. While tuna used to be the country’s largest export earner, recent years have 
seen a decline in the overall tuna catches, with a more than 50 percent reduction between 2009 and 2013.  
Transshipment operations by Taiwanese longliners began in Apia, Samoa in 2010. As of April 2012, there had been 34 
such operations, with 6 occurring in 2012.  Numerous smaller domestic longliners also transship in Samoa with the 
target market being the cannery in neighboring American Samoa. In 2014 Samoa signed onto the Tokelau Arrangement, 
a joint approach to managing the South Pacific Longline Fishery. 
 
Currently only 1 percent of Samoan’s are formally employed in the agriculture and fisheries sector, one third of these 
are women8. While female labor force participation overall increased between 2011 and 2015, paid farm work for 
women is still low, at its lowest comprising only 12 percent in Savai’i9. However, in line with the rest of Samoa, women 
engaged in farm work tend to have higher levels of education than men; in 2015 the percentage of women in farm 
households with tertiary qualifications was double that of men. It is also more likely that an educated farm labor force 
will be open to modern farming techniques and tools10. 

 
Agriculture in Samoa is very vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change. Climate change is predicted to 
manifest itself in more frequent and extreme rainfall events, longer dryer spells and drought events, rising sea levels, 
extreme winds, and high air and water temperatures. According the World Bank’s Climate and Disaster Risk Screening 
Tool, this project is likely to face (i) a high level of exposure to climate and disaster hazards, (ii) high impact on physical 
infrastructure and assets as a result of those hazards and (iii) a high level of risk to the outcomes and service delivery of 
the project. More on the results of the Climate and Disaster Risk Screening tool can be found under the ‘Overall Risk’ 
section. 
 
The limited access to: (i) extension and veterinary services for farmers, (ii) markets, and (iii) financing services 
constitute the key bottlenecks to unlocking the agriculture potential in Samoa. Currently only one state Veterinarian 
services the entire country’s livestock needs and there is limited knowledge and available training for farmers wanting 
to try new or innovative practices. New regulations around food labelling and health and safety standards coming into 

 
7 A major crop household is defined as an agricultural household with more than 625 square yards of land under garden crops; or more than 20 
coconut trees; or more than 20 banana plants; or more than 20 other tree crops. 

effect will also create additional requirements for market access. However, if well accompanied, smallholders farmers 
could also benefit substantially from these. 

 
Institutional context: The Government of Samoa’s Agriculture Sector Plan 2016-2020 provides the framework to guide 
coherent programs and actions from all key stakeholders to achieve the goal of increased food, nutrition and income 
security in Samoa. Under this plan, additional attention is being paid to build the institutional capacity of the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Fisheries (MAF) to manage the sector-wide program. A lack of data was identified as a challenge to 
planning and monitoring in the agriculture sector, so the MAF is working closely with the Samoa Bureau of Statistics to 
strengthen data collection systems, analysis and reporting. 
 
A key outcome in the Plan is to increase the supply and consumption of competitively priced, domestically produced 
food. Fish and Taro are the top two agriculture exports (accounting for 38 and 9 percent of exports respectively in July-
September 2017 quarter). Chicken legs, followed by sugar and mutton were the biggest food imports in 2017 – poultry 
and sheep production therefore present substantial potential for import substitution. Building on the achievements of 
SACEP, the Plan looks to extend and scale up adoption of new technologies, strengthen farm business management 
skills and producer linkages to sustainable and profitable markets. Improving access to productive resources, financial 
services and business skills particularly for women is also key, noting that global experience has shown where women 
have increased access to income generating opportunities and social decision-making empowerment at community 
level, household nutrition improves. 

 
C. Relationship to CPF 
The Regional Partnership Framework (RPF) for FY17 to FY21, which was approved in February 2017, covers nine small 
Pacific Island countries (PIC9), including Samoa. The RPF identifies four areas of focus: (i) fully exploiting the available 
economic opportunities; (ii) enhancing access to employment opportunities; (iii) protecting incomes and livelihoods; 
and (iv) strengthening the enablers of growth and opportunities (macro-economic management, infrastructure and 
addressing knowledge gaps). Alongside this, the Pacific Eight Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD), found very 
important solution areas for Samoa include increasing incomes from agriculture and coastal fishing, preventing 
noncommunicable diseases and strengthening disaster risk preparedness.  
 
The proposed Samoa Agriculture and Fisheries Productivity and Marketing Project (SAFPROM) generally supports both 
the RPF focus areas and the Samoa-specific solution areas in the SCD. More commercially-viable farming practices and 
better access to markets will make use of economic opportunities available to most Samoans, and increase incomes for 
those involved; providing more climate-resilient crops, education and farming infrastructure will protect incomes and 
livelihoods in the face of natural disasters and a changing climate, and; promoting locally produced food will support a 
healthy diet and less dependence on food imports.  
 
The FY2017 to FY2020 Strategy for the Development of Samoa highlights increased agricultural production as a priority 
area for Samoa, which the Samoa Agriculture and Marketing Project will also contribute to. The project is also aligned 
to the Government of Samoa’s Agriculture Sector Plan 2016-2020, aimed at increasing the food, nutrition and income 
security in Samoa. 
 
The SAFPROM will also allow Samoa to join the Pacific Islands Regional Oceanoscape Program (PROP). The PROP 
Program was developed as a Series of Projects (SOP) to be implemented in three phases, each six years’ in duration. 
Phase 1 began in 2014 and is being implemented with four countries (Federated States of Micronesia, Republic of 
Marshall Islands, Solomon Islands, Tuvalu) and one regional institution, the Pacific Islands Forum Fisheries Agency 
(FFA). The Phase I country projects all share the same Regional Program PDO and Results Framework. They also reflect 

the same component design drawing on a pre-set menu of investment activities. By allowing Samoa to join the PROP, 
this project meets key criteria for utilizing the regional International Development Association (IDA) funds. The program 
(i) involves three or more countries; (ii) has benefits, economic, social and environmental, that spill over country 
boundaries (tuna / pelagic fishes’ stocks and fisheries management); (iii) requires coordination with regional bodies 
(SPC and FFA) and with other countries in the region; and (iv) provides a platform for a high level of policy 
harmonization among countries. 
 
As the PROP Program expands into Phase II with Tonga and Samoa operations, it has been decided that the regional 
project with FFA will not incorporate these new countries in Phases II and III, as it was found that the regional 
implementation approach is not the optimal model with which to secure regional support and coordination of the 
national projects.  Rather, a soft technical assistance model bilaterally to each of the four main regional fisheries 
agencies11 will be employed during Phase II of PROP to ensure that each of these agencies pro-actively engage in 
supporting the national projects to strengthen their commitment and collaboration toward shared management of 
their oceanic and coastal fisheries resources.  
 
 

PROPOSED PDO/RESULTS 

 
A. Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
To increase the productivity and access to markets of targeted beneficiaries in selected crops and livestock value-chains 
and to improve management of targeted fisheries.  
 
B. Key Results 
 
Progress will be measured against the following PDO-level indicators: 

(a) Increased yields in selected crops and livestock value-chains 

(b) Increased value of sale in selected crops and livestock value-chains 

(c) Number of fisheries management plans implemented 

(d) Total number of beneficiaries, disaggregated by gender 

 
Direct beneficiaries are expected to be semi-commercial and commercial farming households and farmers, as well as 
small and medium enterprises (small agribusiness involved in collecting, processing, packaging and marketing activities, 
but also inputs suppliers). MAF will also directly benefit from capacity building activities. 
 
A detailed results framework will be developed during preparation.  
 

 

11 Pacific Islands Fisheries Forum Agency (FFA), Pacific Community (SPC), Parties of the Nauru Agreement Office (PNAO), Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat (PIFS) 



PROJECT CONTEXT 

 
A. Concept 
 
1. Description 
The Samoa Agriculture Competitiveness Enhancement Project (P115351) is currently in its last year, closing 31 
December 2018, and has achieved significant accomplishments for Samoan farmers, as well as relevant government 
departments. Based on SACEP’s successes, the government of Samoa would like to build on these achievements and 
take advantage of the opportunities presented.  
Through its objectives of increasing crops and livestock productivity and access to market increase as well as improving 
the management of targeted fisheries, this project may contribute to: (i) import substitution and increase the supply 
and consumption of domestically produced food; (ii) boost exports of some commodities, and (iii) strengthen resilience 
of farming households to climate change and climate-induced disasters (cyclones, heavy rains, prolonged dry seasons).  
 
It is proposed that SAFPROM will have four components.  
Component 1: Creating an enabling environment for increased productivity and access to markets for target farming 
and fishing households. This will include: 

a. Institutional capacity building activities in the MAF as well as current and potential cooperatives and 

associations. Activities will be based on a needs assessment and a capacity building action plan. The project 

will also support the establishment of an Agriculture Sector Coordination Division within the MAF for 

project management. This component will also help reviewing the regulatory and policy framework and 

update it if needed. A special focus will be looked at national standards that affect the capacity of Samoan 

agriculture products to reach specific high value markets. 

b. Development and improvement of infrastructure and equipment of public good nature. On the model of 

SACEP (with the Static and Mobile Slaughtering Units and the Tissue Culture Laboratory), this sub-

component will support the development of feasibility studies, work and equipment of key collective 

infrastructures that have been identified as bottlenecks for the development of the sector. For instance, in 

Savai’I island, a small veterinary laboratory and a fruits and vegetable Packhouse would help farmers to 

address their animal diseases and packaging concerns. 

 
Component 2: Support to farming and fishing households through a matching grant program (MGP). The design of 
which will be informed through a review of the MGP under SACEP. As per the GoS Concept Note, this financing 
mechanism should expand, not only to increase the number of farmers benefiting, but also to allow farmers’ groups to 
work together in post-harvest handling and agro-processing. It will help establishing alliances between the farmers, 
fishers, their groups and cooperatives and services providers or buyers. This MGP will give priority to sub-projects that 
promote innovative technologies aimed at improving productivity and quality for products for which there is a market 
demand. It will also support climate change mitigation activities through for instance intensification of livestock 
production, pasture management, improved feeding rations and practices using local products; and adaptation by 
promoting inter alia poly-tunnels to protect crops against heavy rains, water collection and small-scale irrigation to 
cope with prolonged dry seasons, etc. – therefore contributing to strengthened resilience to climate-related events. 
 
Regarding coastal fisheries, this component, through the MGP, will provide the opportunity to strengthen the 
community based fisheries management program (CBFMP) that has been implemented since 1995. This could upgrade 
the CBFMP to assess potential development support for participating communities or look at income generating 
activities for local communities. Over 100 villages have joined the program. Other coastal fisheries areas may include 

effective management regimes for the sea cucumber fishery (hatchery production, grow out and possibly processing).  
Post-harvest and value adding for low value fish are key components as community undertakings. 
 
Component 3: Aims to help GoS strengthen management of the region’s long-line tuna fisheries while identifying 
opportunities for sustainably increasing domestic revenues from this shared resource. This component will allow 
Samoa to join the PROP and is proposed to be financed through the following IDA grant resources: US$ 3 million in 
national IDA and US$ 6 million in regional IDA. 
  
Towards this objective, the component will support GoS’ regional and national activities to:  

a. Strengthen its capacity to engage effectively in the Tokelau Arrangement, the Western and Central Pacific 

Fisheries Management Commission (WCPFC) and other regional forums;  

b. Strengthen capacity and establishment of a national observer program 

c. Invest in and implement robust Monitoring, Control and Surveillance (MCS), stock monitoring and fisheries 

management mechanisms and schemes. This includes upgrading Samoa’s Fisheries Information 

Management Systems and skills on MCS, carrying out joint regional patrol operations, boarding inspections, 

data collection, analysis and application; and combating Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated (IUU) fishing 

d. Develop and implement strategies to enhance the competitiveness of the domestic longline fleet and the 

oversight and value of oceanic fishing activities within their EEZ including enhancing transshipment and 

related services.     

 
Component 4: Contingency Emergency Response Component (Total Cost: US$0): Following an eligible crisis or 
emergency, the government of Samoa may request the Bank to re-allocate project funds to support emergency 
response and reconstruction. This component would draw from the uncommitted grant resources under the project 
from other project components to cover emergency response. These activities would be carried out, as needed to 
ensure continued achievement of the project development objective. This component will only be used in the event that 
an emergency response is required. 
 
    

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
The project would be implemented over a period of five years on Upolu and Savaii islands. Samoa is made up of nine 

islands with four main inhabited islands (Upolu,Savaii, Manono and Apolima) and has a total land area is 2,830 km2. The 
islands are of volcanic origin dominated by olivine basaltic rocks. The area is generally mountainous. 
  
Samoa has a population of approximately 197,000 people, of which 97% are Polynesian. The majority of people live on 

Upolu and Savaii. Settlements and agricultural activity on these islands are concentrated on the coastal plains and rolling 
slopes. 
 
Approximately 60,000 ha or 21% of the total land area is under crops or grazing regimes. Forest cover is approximately 

60%. Samoa’s 12 terrestrial national parks, reserves and community conservation areas are located on Upolu and Savaii. 


The country’s reef area is approximately 10,000 km2 and its exclusive economic zone is approximately 131000 km2. The 
main fishery landing sites in Samoa include Apia (Upolu), Salelologa (Savaii) and Apolima-uta (Upolu) with local 
subsistence landings scattered in coastal villages around inhabited islands . Samoa has three (3) protected marine areas 
(inshore). 
 
As for offshore fishery, Samoa’s Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) is the smallest in the Pacific region and tuna longline 

fishery, particularly albacore, is the main offshore fishery. While tuna used to be the country’s largest export earner, 
recent years have seen a decline in the overall tuna catches, with a more than 50 percent reduction between 2009 and 
2013.  Transshipment operations by Taiwanese longliners began in Apia, Samoa in 2010. As of April 2012, there had been 
34 such operations, with 6 occurring in 2012.  Numerous smaller domestic longliners also transship in Samoa with the 
target market being the cannery in neighboring American Samoa. In 2014 Samoa signed onto the Tokelau Arrangement, a 
joint approach to managing the South Pacific Longline Fishery. 
 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
The current World Bank financed Samoa Agriculture Competitiveness Enhancement Project (SACEP) has addressed 

safeguards' capacity constraints within MAF through a Coordination group (PCG) which includes an environmental and 
social (E&S) officer. For SAFPROM, E&S capacity within MAF is expected to be further strengthened with the 
establishment of a dedicated Agriculture Sector Coordination Division (ASCD) including a senior E&S specialist, to 
effectively coordinate and management agriculture sector activities, including environmental and social safeguards. This 
unit will be supported by a Centralized Technical Services and Support Unit (CTSSU) within the MOF which will also 
include an E&S Advisor. Her/his role will be to build capacity of E&S specialists within the line ministries, including the 
ASCD, and advise these teams on complex issues on an ad hoc basis. 
 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 
Thomas John Callander, Social Safeguards Specialist 
Nicholas John Valentine, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 

 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The project would finance a number of small-scale, 
household-based farming (i.e. livestock development 
and crop development) and community fisheries 
production/marketing subprojects through a small 
grants scheme. Negative environmental and social 
impacts associated with these activities are expected 
to be minor, localized and temporary primarily 
because of their small-scale and 
household/community focus. 
 
The project would support the development and 
improvement of collective infrastructure and/or 
equipment (i.e. small veterinary laboratory, 
renovation of a local fish market or a fruits and 
vegetable pack-house). These small to medium-scale 
investments have the potential to cause some minor 
adverse environmental and social impacts however 
these are readily managed through standard 
mitigation measures. 
 
The project would finance the development and 
implementation of strategies to enhance the 
competitiveness of the domestic longline tuna fleet 
and the value of oceanic fishing activities within the 
Samoa’s EEZ including enhancing transshipment and 
related services.  
  
An Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) is proposed as the safeguards instrument given 
that the specific locations of the investments are not 
known and these will be determined through the grant 
process. The ESMF will incorporate the requirements 
of the World Group’s Environmental, Health and 
Safety Guidelines (EHSGs) and industry specific 
guidelines for agribusiness, food production and 
pesticides management. 
 
The project also includes a Contingency Emergency 
Response Component to support emerency activities 
that ensure continued achievement of the project 
development objective. The ESMF will outline the 
approach and principles for managing potential E&S 
impacts and risks of the CERC including ascreening 
process in accordance with the World Bank’s Rapid 
Response to Crises and Emergencies: Procedural 
Guidelines. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

For agriculture and livestock, the project will not 
finance any activities that significantly convert or 
degrade any protected areas or natural habitats as the 
screening procedures in the ESMF will exclude all 
subprojects with these impacts. 
The project will support enhanced management of 
coastal and ocean fisheries/ecosystems. While 
proposed activities are expected to enhance positive 
and sustainable returns to these important habitats, 
the ESMF will contain measures to properly manage 
the risk of any unforeseen adverse environmental 
impact on natural habitats, including critical natural 
habitats, as well as measures to enhance positive 
environmental impacts. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes 

For agriculture (crops and livestock), the policy will not 
finance activities that impact on the health and quality 
of forests. 
For fisheries, the project may support marine 
ecosystem conservation activities (i.e. mangroves 
conservation). 
The ESMF will contain measures to properly manage 
the risk of any unforeseen adverse environmental 
impacts of these activities, as well as measures to 
enhance positive environmental impacts. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The client will review and update the current SACEP 
Integrated Pest Management (IPM) following the 
standards and requirements set forth in OP4.09 and 
the World Group’s Environmental, Health and Safety 
Guidelines (EHSGs) for agribusiness and food 
production. The project will include measures to 
strengthen the institutional capacity for implementing 
IPM in project areas. This will include a stronger focus 
on health and safety. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No 

The project will not finance any activities that will have 
impacts on physical cultural resources; screening and 
chance find procedures will be included in the ESMF to 
exclude all subprojects with these impacts. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 
The ethnic structure in Samoa is predominantly ethnic 
Samoan (92.6%) with a minority of Europeans and 
biracial European/Polynesian. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

At present, no involuntary land acquisition is expected 
under the project. The majority of sub-projects will be 
undertaken on customary land with the voluntary 
participation of grants scheme recipient landowners. 
The only exception will be the siting of collective 
infrastructure facilities which will be either on 
Government-owned land or land secured via voluntary 
land donation. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) 
will be prepared to address these potential scenarios. 
In fishery, certain activities may involve the restriction 
of access to natural resources and/or marine 
protected areas which local people may depend upon 
for their livelihood. A Process Framework will be 
developed in compliance with OP4.12 requirements to 
address these potential issues.  

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 
The project will not finance any dams as defined under 
OP 4.37. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
The project does not impact or relate to any known 
international waterways as defined under the policy. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
The project is not located in any known disputed areas 
as defined under the policy. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Aug 15, 2018 
 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
As soon as the GoS will access the Project preparation Facility, the recruitment of an E&S specialist and a consultant to 

develop both the ESMF and the PMP. It is therefore expected that the safeguards documents will be ready by mid-August 
to inform the Appraisal stage ISDS. 
 
 
























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Afghanistan Strategic Grain Reserve ( SGR Project ) (P160606) 

 
 

  
Feb 13, 2017 Page 1 of 21  

     

 

 
 
      

 

Combined Project Information Documents /  
Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (PID/ISDS) 

 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 25-Apr-2017 | Report No: PIDISDSA21211 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Afghanistan P160606 Afghanistan Strategic 
Grain Reserve ( SGR 
Project ) 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

SOUTH ASIA 10-Apr-2017 13-Jun-2017 Agriculture 

Lending Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Islamic Republic of 
Afghanistan - Ministry of 
Finance 

MAIL  

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
The development objective of the project is “To establish a wheat strategic reserve to be available to Afghan 
households to meet their needs following emergency situations and improve the efficiency of the grain storage 
management.” 
 
Components 

Component A: Institutional Infrastructure and Capacity Building 
Component B: Physical Infrastructure 
Component C: Project Management: 

 
 

Financing (in USD Million) 

 

Financing Source Amount  

IDA Grant   18.00  

Japan Policy and Human Resources Development Fund   11.45  

Total Project Cost   29.45  

 

Environmental Assessment Category 

B - Partial Assessment 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the preparation to continue     
 
 
Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
 

Afghanistan is a landlocked country, surrounded by Tajikistan, Uzbekistan, and Turkmenistan in the north, 
Iran in the west, Pakistan in the south and southwest, and China in the northeast. The country is divided 
into thirty four provinces, each province consists of a number of districts. Within these districts, most 
families live in villages. Rural households make up around 80 percent of the population, which is estimated 
to be 32.5 million (World Bank, 2015), with one of the highest growth rates of population worldwide (3 
percent / year). The Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of Afghanistan is around $ 19.2 billion (World Bank, 
2015).  

 
Over the last several decades, the country went through wars, and internal conflicts, resulting in weak 
economy, and absence of some of the basic services in parts of the country. All economic activities, and the 
potential for economic growth in Afghanistan have been badly affected by the deteriorating security 
situation, and the uncertainty about its political future, with around 39 percent of the Afghans falling under 
the poverty line (World Bank, 2013). Recently, Statistics showed negative levels of consumers’ prices index 
reflecting the high unemployment rates, and the weak economic conditions. The security situation remains 
a serious challenge, it has even deteriorated recently in some areas of the country, with limited presence or 
control from the government. 
 
Agriculture is the main pillar of the Afghan economy, being the second contributor to the GDP, following 
the services sector, which primarily depends on the presence of the international community in 
Afghanistan. The agriculture sector employs around 40 percent of the working force of the country

1
, and 

provides support to approximately 80 percent of the population in their livelihood. Direct agriculture 
activities contribute 25 percent to the GDP of the country. The number would be much higher if other 
related activities such as food processing, logistic, and trade of food items, are included. Wheat and its 
related activities such as logistics, and milling represents around 6.5 percent of the national GDP on the 
country.  

 
Agriculture productivity per unit of land in Afghanistan is low compared to world standards and some of its 
neighboring countries for most of the crops. Arable land in Afghanistan is around 12 percent of its total 
area, with less than half of the cultivated land is irrigated, while the larger portion of crops is rain-fed. 
Along with the high annual growth rate of population, this makes the country import-dependent for a large 
number of major food products, including wheat.  
 
Malnutrition is another chronic challenge in Afghanistan. It is estimated that 33 percent of Afghans are 
food insecure. Access to basic food items is limited for many Afghans, with around 34.7 percent of rural 

  
households suffering from caloric deficiency in normal condition. This become even worse during times of 
shortages of supply. 
 
Given the fact that the agriculture sector in Afghanistan is not yet developed, in terms of adopting modern 
technologies, especially those related to climate resilient seeds, water management, and improved farming 
practices, this makes its agriculture production highly volatile, and vulnerable to sudden shocks, resulting 
from any unforeseen situation. 
 
Agricultural production in Afghanistan consists mainly of wheat, horticulture, nuts, and poppy

2
. Due to the 

very high level of consumption per capita, and being major part of the Afghan diet, wheat accounts for 
more than 60 percent of total areas cultivated, with a total area of around 2.4 million hectares

3
, almost 

equally split between irrigated and rain-fed cultivation, which creates high level of volatility in production 
every year. This has resulted in a fluctuating supply of wheat for households’ consumption on annual basis. 
This deficit of supply is mainly addressed by imports.  
 
Additionally, the political relations between Afghanistan and its neighbors, affects to a large extent the flow 
of goods to the country, bearing in mind its position as a landlocked country, with limited access to 
international trade and supply routes.  
 
By nature, Afghanistan is also prone to other natural disasters such as earthquakes, which adds to the 
already weak situation in the country. When such incidents occur, supply of wheat through the regular 
channels become more challenging, and many Afghans especially the poor lack access to wheat for their 
daily diet.   
 
Altogether, these factors puts Afghanistan in a very fragile situation with regard to its ability to secure basic 
food requirements specially wheat, for the need of its citizens especially at times of shortages of supply due 
to unforeseen situations, and emphasizes the need to establish a strategic reserve of wheat to be utilized 
during possible deficits of supply.     

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 

Wheat is the largest crop grown in Afghanistan, covering nearly 60 percent of all cultivated lands. 

Production of wheat in Afghanistan comes mainly from the northern regions, which is mostly rain-fed 

cultivations, this increases the risk of volatility of production on annual basis. Over the last ten years (2005 

– 2015), annual production of wheat fluctuated between 2.1 million tons in 2008, to slightly above 5 million 

tons in 2014. There are several factors resulting in this large variability, mainly adverse climate conditions- 

specifically drought. Afghanistan is affected by global climate change, which is resulting in less rains, and 

increase in temperature, which accordingly have negative impact on its agricultural production in terms of 

areas cultivated and productivity per unit of land, bearing in mind that more than half of its cultivated lands 

are rain-fed. Additionally, the poor quality of seeds, and the limited adoption of modern farming practices 

adds to the situation.  

The recent significant shortages of local production were observed in 2004, 2006, 2008, and 2011, with 

 
the unfavorable weather conditions being
4
 the main reason.  During these years, supply of wheat for 

household consumption dropped sharply, it was also accompanied with ban on exports of wheat from 
some of the neighboring supplying countries facing the same unfavorable climate conditions. This 
resulted in limiting the access of many Afghans to wheat for their daily consumption.  
 
In Afghanistan, bread constitutes around 70 percent of the daily caloric intake

5
. Globally, the country 

has the highest annual rate of wheat consumption per capita (160kg)
6
. This makes the availability of the 

crop a significantly important factor for the social stability of Afghanistan. Each year large quantities of 

wheat are imported primarily by the private sector, which mainly serve the urban community, along 

with donations from other countries.  With the limited availability of data in Afghanistan, different 

sources have different estimates for the annual imports of wheat ranging between one to two million 

tons every year, which roughly represents 20 – 40 percent of the overall consumption of the country, 

depending on the size of domestic production. For the 2016 / 2017 crop season, MAIL estimates that 

import requirements will be around 1.25 million tons.  

Regularly, the government of Afghanistan receives grain donations from other countries (mainly India), 

over the period 2011 – 2014 the government received 250,000 tons from India, and in 2016 – 2017 

season only, India is planning to provide around 100,000 tons to Afghanistan. All these quantities are 

stored and distributed to the poorest in Afghanistan. Irregularly, the government purchases much 

smaller quantities from farmers for the same purpose, in 2015 MAIL purchased only 900 tons from 

Afghan farmers. 

 Imports of wheats by the private sector usually offsets the deficit of domestic production, however in 

some years, and due to various reasons including market forces, political issues, and the impact of 

climate conditions, the availability of wheat in neighboring exporting countries becomes quite limited. 

Coupled with the shortfalls of local production of wheat in the country, this results in strong shocks to 

the supply for Afghan households’ consumption, especially the poorest in the country. In 2008 with the 

global hike in price of commodities, along with the decline in production is many countries, Pakistan 

which is the main supplier of wheat and wheat flour to Afghanistan banned exports of wheat, although 

some quantities of wheat were illegally exported, Afghanistan witnessed a serious situation in this 

regard.  

In 2008, and as per the historical data from MAIL, price of one ton of wheat reached around $750 in 

Afghanistan, compared to around $250 in 2007, and around $350 in 2009, the situation was similar 

earlier in 2004, 2006, and then later again in 2011, however it was not as severe as it was in 2008. These 

hikes in wheat prices make it very hard for average households in Afghanistan to secure their needs of 

bread, considering the poverty rates in the country, and the high level of wheat consumption per capita. 

During all these circumstances the government of Afghanistan was not able to respond to these 

unforeseen situations, by providing support to its people, especially poor households, which were 

already struggling to earn their living. 

 

Productivity levels per unit of land for both irrigated and rain-fed wheat in Afghanistan remains low, 

compared to neighboring countries. Additionally, the weak post-harvest practices, and value addition 

activities, such as threshing, handling, and milling, and also the poor condition of the storage facilities, 

results in losses in the harvested crop, and deterioration of quality.  

 The World Bank through other agriculture projects in Afghanistan, specifically the ARTF funded project; 

Afghanistan Agriculture Inputs Project (AAIP) is already providing support in areas of wheat productivity 

enhancement, through introducing high quality seeds, and providing support to farmers on the adoption 

of improved agricultural practices. The government of Afghanistan have an ambitious goal to be self-

sufficient of wheat by 2020 through increased productivity, and expansion of irrigated wheat 

cultivations. This represents a real challenge at least on the medium term, considering the limited 

resources of water, arable land, and the need to 

expand beyond the high growth rate of the 

population. However, the challenge is even 

higher with the supporting activities such as 

storage and handling, which are currently weak, 

and have large impact on the quality of wheat, 

and is a direct result for high post-harvest 

losses.  

 

The government owns five large silos located in 

the provinces of Kabul, Kandahar, Heart, 

Baghlan, and Balkh as spotted on the map of Afghanistan. These silos operate as State Owned 

Enterprises (SOEs), operating under supervision of MAIL, and they charge the government for the 

quanities of wheat stored. The five silos are concrete constructions, and were built during the Soviet 

presence in Afghanistan during the 1970’s. Combined together, the silos have a total theoretical storage 

capacity of 170,000 tons. There are a number of warehouses owned by the Ministry of Agriculture, 

Irrigation, and Livestock (MAIL), adjacent to the silos with a total storage capacity of approximately 

65,000 tons, additionally, fifty two small scale warehouses are owned and operated by MAIL, and are 

distributed over 17 provinces, and all facilities are used for the storage and distribution of wheat. 

However, none of five large silos are operating at capacity, it is estimated that the utilization of the silos 

storage capacities is around 25 percent of its original capacity. This is mainly due to the lack of 

maintenance, human skills, and spare parts, accordingly the actual available storage capacity is much 

less. More importantly, the poor condition of these storage facilities, and its outdated operating 

procedures negatively affects the quality of the wheat stored. Generally, skills of the technical team 

operating these facilities are weak, and their knowledge on modern practices in managing grain stocks 

are quite limited. Although there is no specific assessment, some officials and donors estimates storage 

losses to be around 20 percent.  

Although, there is a directorate under MAIL responsible for the management of the grain reserve of the 

country. However, this directorate has limited capacities, and lacks the required set of skills to engage in 

managing such program, and due to the implementation of the standard governmental procedures and 

regulations, their ability to directly engage in the wheat market is limited. While operating in such a 

dynamic market requires certain level of flexibility, to make decisions and engage in the procurement 

process when there is a good market opportunity.  

 

These factors altogether, from the importance that wheat represents in the afghan diet, and the fact 

that the country is wheat import-dependency, along with the volatile ties with its main suppliers, make 

it significantly important to build up wheat reserve, that can be used in responding to any unforeseen 

situations that may occur similar to those which the country witnessed several times, over the last 

twelve years. This wheat reserve can also be utilized in addressing the malnutrition situation in 

Afghanistan, through including a fortification program to the wheat stored.  

However, building up such a reserve requires solid storage structures, by which wheat can be stored in 

compliance with international standards in storing, handling, and quality control of wheat. More 

importantly, there is a need to establish an entity to be responsible for managing this reserve, with the 

required highly skilled human capital. 

The government of Afghanistan represented by MAIL, have been prioritizing the establishment of a 

Strategic Grain Reserve, and have been engaged in discussion with the World Bank seeking support in 

this regard. Initially, the government was interested in developing the grain reserve to serve two 

purposes, firstly, responding to emergency situations, and secondly to be utilized in stabilizing the wheat 

market in Afghanistan for the benefit of the farmers, through setting up minimum guaranteed price. The 

Bank advice on this regard was that such a practice would result in crowding out the private sector from 

the market, and eventually harm the farmers themselves, as this would limit the market opportunities 

for them, especially that it would require the allocation of significantly large financial resources from the 

government side, which is not available. 

Recently, and following extensive discussions between the World Bank and the Government of 

Afghanistan (GoA), an agreement was reached that the objective of establishing a strategic grain reserve 

should only be to efficiently respond to emergency situations, enabling the government to be able to 

secure basic food supplies of wheat for at least two million people for one year.  

In preparation for the proposed engagement in building a grain reserve, the World Bank conducted an 
engineering assessment for the five silos and the warehouses adjacent to it. The findings of the 
assessment covered the condition of building, machinery, other equipment and supportive activities on 
site. All five facilities were found in need for extensive rehabilitation, with different level of work 
required according to the condition on each site, and accordingly different cost estimate for each 
location. The study also provided a brief cost estimate for establishing Greenfield silos using modern 
storage technologies. In parallel, MAIL, reached out to a number of international suppliers, and obtained 
tentative cost estimations for Greenfield silos.  

 

Also, during the preparation for this project, a vulnerability assessment was conducted to study the 
current status of the food security in Afghanistan, and access to basic food supplies, based on trends in 
wheat production and to identify the areas within the country that are highly vulnerable in case an 


emergency situation occurs, based on previous incidents, and the current storage capacities. The 
objective of the assessment was to advise on the suitability of the locations of the existing storage 
facilities, and provide recommendation on other locations (if any), to ensure efficient coverage, and 
ability to respond to sudden shocks.  

 

The vulnerability assessment reviewed a range of food insecurity assessments undertaken by the Bank, 
the government of Afghanistan, World Food Program, and others.  The assessment used to the most in 
depth degree was the 2013/14 Afghanistan Living Conditions Survey (ALCS) as this data resource had the 
most in depth data set on food insecurity which could be effectively used to evaluate the spatial 
distribution of vulnerability in the country.   Two of the main findings of the vulnerability assessment 
were; a) food insecurity in the country is generally widely distributed around the country, and b) the 
existing placement of the silos infrastructure, in most cases, if improved can be relatively well placed to 
address problems of food insecurity for most of the population, with one exception for a specific region 
that showed a deficit on food security in relation to the available storage capacity. 
 
The table below uses data on populations of severely and moderately food insecure populations from 
the 2013/14 ALCS survey disaggregated by region to develop an estimate of potential grain storage 
needs to respond to problems of food insecurity.  The evaluation makes the assumption that severely 
food insecure populations would be provided a 100 percent ration of wheat though the three month 
winter lean season.  On a per capita consumption rate of 170kg/annum, this would be a ration of 42kg 
of wheat grain for the period per person.  For moderately food insecure populations, a ratio of 50 
percent of consumption would be provided for the same three month lean season.  This would be 
equivalent to 21kg of wheat grain per person

7
.   

The analysis revealed that those regions near already planned large storage facilities; Kabul, Mazar-e-
Sharif, and Herat, do not have wheat requirements larger than the scale of the existing storage facilities 
if improved.  Similarly, a centralized facility in Kandahar would be able to serve the southwest of the 

                                                           
7
 Equivalent to 170kg/capita/annum x 0.25 years (3 months) x 50% 

Region 

Severe Food 
Insecurity 
Wheat 
Requirement 
(MT) 

Moderate 
Food 
Insecurity 
Wheat 
Requirement 
(MT) 

Total Est. 
Req. (MT) 

Service Point and Comments 

Central 27,058 18,920 45,977    Area effectively serviced from Kabul 

Central Region 12,168 17,950 30,118 
   Decentralized facility or met from Kabul or Herat  
(jointly) 

Eastern 4,191 4,757 8,948 Area could be serviced from Kabul 

North 17,488 21,736 39,224 Area effectively serviced from Mazar Sharif 

North-east 28,970 24,334 53,304 
Capacity in Mazar Sharif not sufficient for need.  
Would also need decentralized facility 

South-east 10,045 5,523 15,568 Serviced from Kandahar or from Kabul 

South-west 21,204 16,034 37,238 Kandahar or serviced from Heart 

West 21,490 16,046 37,536 Area effectively serviced from Herat 

     

National 142,613 125,301 267,914 
 

country, or feasibly this region could also potentially be served from Herat.  The ALCS data show 
relatively low rates of food insecurity in the east of the country (estimated food requirement in this 
region is less than 10,000MT), this region could very likely be served out of Kabul.  In the Southeast 
region total estimated food requirements are also relatively modest, estimated at roughly 15,000MT.  
This region might also be served out of Kabul or if need be, the facility in Kandahar could also contribute 
to address needs in this area.      
 
The areas that present the most substantial challenges are the Central region and the Northeast regions 
of the country.  The Northeast, according to this analysis, has a wheat requirement of 53,000MT.  At this 
requirement level it is not likely that it would be feasible to service this area from the facility in Mazar-e-
Sharif.  In addition, the facility in Pul-e-Khumri is potentially too distant to be able to effectively address 
needs in this area.  As such it seems that it would be a reasonable approach to develop smaller 
decentralized facilities in this region able to address food insecurity problems in this area.  Government 
data show that there is an estimated storage capacity of 6,000MT in Badakhshan province.  This 
infrastructure could be built on and further developed.  ALCS data by province show that in the 
northeast the large bulk of food insecure populations are in Badakhshan more so than Kunduz or 
Takhar.  As such, infrastructure would need to be developed to respond to the structure of current 
needs.   

 
The Central region are also an area where the quantity needed is relatively substantial (30,118 MT).  
According to government data, there are 5,000MT facilities in each of Central region provinces of 
Bamyan, Ghor, and Daykundi that were built in the last 10 years.  This total storage level of 15,000 MT 
for this region would be a very good start in terms of having available local storage capacity in these 
provinces.  For needs over and above this, it is likely that the balance of required foods could be 
supplied from Mazar-e Sharif and Herat.   

 

Ultimately, the assessment confirmed that the enhancement of the current storage facilities or the 

consideration of a greenfield silos at the same locations, along with the sufficient stock of wheat 

available, can help the Government of Afghanistan be in a good position to respond to emergency 

situations, and be able to supply Afghans with wheat as the basic and main food item consumed, of 

course with the presence of other factors such as solid logistics, and distribution mechanism. However, 

the study also revealed that a need exists for an additional large storage facility in the northeast region 

of the country, where productivity rates of wheat are very low since wheat cultivations in this area are 

mainly rain-fed, in addition to the absence of large storage facilities for wheat, and the fact that this 

region is generally prone to natural disasters such as earthquakes, plus the difficulty in reaching out to 

some of the areas of the region especially during winter time. 

 
 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 

 
 
Development Objective(s) (From PAD)  
The development objective of the project is “To establish a wheat strategic reserve to be available to Afghan 
households to meet their post-disaster needs and improve the efficiency of the grain storage management”.  

Key Results 
The achievement of the PDO would be measured by the following PDO results indicators:  
 
Increased availability of wheat stocks.  

Increased number of households whose wheat needs can be met immediately after the occurrence of 

an emergency situation affecting their access to wheat, and  

Reduced losses in wheat stored, as a result of the upgrade of the storage facilities, relative to pre-

project intervention.  

 
D. Project Description  
 

The project aims to support the Government of Afghanistan, in building up a reserve of wheat that can 

be utilized in responding to any emergency situation the country may face, which usually leads to 

shortages of supply of wheat, which is considered the most important food item for household 

consumption in the country.    

Emergency situations occurring in Afghanistan are generally due to unforeseen weather conditions such 

as severe drought resulting in share decline in the local wheat crop, natural disaster such as 

earthquakes, which is frequent in the country, and usually results in limiting people’s access to wheat.  

Declaration of an emergency situation is assigned to a ministerial committee. The entity that will be 

established by the project to manage the reserve will coordinate with this committee as part of its tasks 

in working closely with relevant stakeholders.  In this regard, the entity will be prepared to act on up the 

declaration of an emergency situation in the country, to do so, the new entity will have its own 

operational procedures for actions to be taken to respond accordingly.    

The objective of the project will be achieved through the establishment of an autonomous entity to 

manage the grain reserve. This entity will be responsible for obtaining and receiving wheat 

internationally and locally, from aid provided by other countries, and also the purchase of wheat from 

local and international markets, and managing the handling, storage, and distribution operations of 

wheat, while ensuring that quality is maintained through the adoption of global best practices in this 

regard. In order to enable the new entity in becoming well-positioned to help in responding to 

emergency situations, the project will work on building existing capacities under MAIL, and benefit from 

those have gained the required knowledge in the activities of the new entity, in addition to adding 

additional calibers as needed.  

The objective of the project will also be achieved through the improvement of the existing storage 

capacities through rehabilitation process, and also the establishment of Greenfield facilities. On this 

regard, the project will decide on the selection between different options of silos rehabilitation versus 

the establishment of Greenfield facilities. Currently, the proposed activities includes the rehabilitation of 

the two silos located in Mazar-e-Sharif, and Pul-e-Khumri, considering that both are in relatively good 

condition, while establishing three greenfield silos in Kabul, Kandahar, and Herat considering the level of 

work required for rehabilitation is significant, and also the fact that one of these silos (Kabul), is now 

being in the center of the city, which may have negative impact on the surroundings if rehabilitated.   

The objective of establishing the grain reserve will remain only to respond to emergency situations in 

the country. However, in order to maintain the quality of the wheat stored, and as a common practices 

in managing grain stocks, a portion of the wheat will be offered for sale annually on basis of stock 

replenishment. The sale of wheat will be at the prevailing market prices, and will be in a manner that 

has no impact on market dynamics, and will not engage in price setting.  

The project will utilize new technologies in developing a wheat crop estimation tool, which will provide 

accurate forecasts for the locally grown wheat in Afghanistan, to assess the needs for imports based on 

local supply, and annual consumptions rates.  

The project will also seek to partially address the malnutrition situation in Afghanistan through the 

introduction of a fortification program for the wheat / wheat flour distributed under the project.  The 

fortification of wheat flour will be achieved in collaboration with the World Food Program, which enjoys 

solid on ground presence in Afghanistan, and have already established large network with hundreds of 

local wheat millers to ensure implementation of the fortification program during wheat milling.  

Both activities of the development of the crop estimation, and the nutrition support, will be 

subcomponents under the first component, which covers the establishment of the grain reserve 

management entity, and the related intuitional infrastructure development.  

Implementation will of project activities will be carried out by a transit Project Implementation Unit 
(PIU), until the entity that will be in charge of managing the grain reserve is established, then it will take 
over from the transit PIU.   

 
The project will be implemented over five years, and will consist of the following three main 

components: 

Component A: Institutional Infrastructure and Capacity Building: (US$ 3.9 million) 

This component will be focused on the establishment, and support the start-up activities of the 

proposed entity to be in charge of managing the grain reserve. Activities of the component will also 

include the development of the crop estimation system, and also include activities related to the 

nutrition, and wheat fortification.  

Component B: Physical Infrastructure: (US$ 23.1 million) 

The silos are located mostly in urban centers, except Kandahar. Kabul silo is located in a growing urban 

center, surrounded mostly by residential and commercial development. Pul-e-Khumri silo is also 

surrounded by residential areas on the north and south side of the facility and lies directly on the main 

road running through the town. Mazar Sharif silo is approximately 4 km from the city center, surrounded 

by residential and commercial development. Herat silo is also located in an urban area on a valuable 

land site. Kandahar silo is located on the outskirts of the city, but this silo is in a very poor condition.   


This component will finance the required physical engineering work including the rehabilitation of the 

existing 2 silos, and also the establishment of 3 Greenfield Silos and a new warehouse facility in the 

northeast region of the country considering its high vulnerability.  Activities of the component are based 

on the outcome of the field assessment conducted during the project preparation process.  

Activities under this component will be implemented through a gradual work approach, so that the 

timeframe for the rehabilitation of the existing facilities, and the construction of new facilities allows the 

utilization of each of the storage facilities once completed, while maintaining sufficient storage capacity 

available at other facilities prior undergoing an upgrading process. The work schedule will be designed 

to ensure that by end of the fourth year of the project all five silos are fully operational, and the new 

warehouse facility in the north east region is fully functioning.  

Both the physical assessment of the silos which was undertaken recently as part of project preparation, 

and also the vulnerability assessment will guide the work under this component. From the results of the 

assessment and the cost effectiveness analysis, three new Greenfield silos will be constructed in Kabul, 

Kandahar and Herat as the cost of rehabilitating these facilities is more than new Greenfield 

construction.  The facilities on Mazar Sharif and Pul-e-Khumri will be rehabilitated as this is the most 

economical way to restore these facilities to full operational capacity, and considering that both are in 

relatively good condition.  For rehabilitation, substantial repairs will need to be made to the actual 

concrete silos as these have deteriorated over time.  In most cases the grounds around the facilities also 

need to be upgraded and rehabilitated to facilitate the movement of trucks into and around the facility.  

Truck weigh scales will also have to be replaced.  The mechanical equipment such as elevators, conveyor 

belts, cleaning and drying equipment, scales, and other machinery will need to be replaced in full as it 

has deteriorated from a long period of disuse.  In most instances, replacement of this mechanical 

equipment comprises roughly 50 percent or more of the total rehabilitation expenses.  In the cases of 

new Greenfield construction, new steel silos will be constructed on the grounds of the existing storage 

facilities.  The location of the existing facilities are sufficiently large that there should be more than 

sufficient room for this new construction.  .  Finally, a new laboratory along with testing equipment will 

be installed in all storage facilities.   

In addition, as recommended a new flat warehouse will be built in Badakhshan province to address food 

insecurity problems in this region of the country as was identified by the vulnerability assessment.  The 

activities of this subcomponent will commence by assessing different plots of land owned by MAIL in 

Badakhshan province, preferably close to the capital city of Faizabad. Criteria for land selection will 

include the topography of the land being flat, with no signs of elevation or slopes, with an area of 

around 5 - 6 hectares, and are connected to main roads for ease of access.  

Design and preparation work will be carried out to establish a modern warehouse, with steel 

construction, suitable for the storage of bagged and bulk wheat. The site should include a weight bridge 

scale, ventilation system, quality control laboratory, and pest and dust control systems. The site will 

include area for trucks’ movement and maneuvering.  

Component C: Project Management: (US$ 2.46 million) 


This component will finance activities related to the establishment and operations of a Project 

Implementation Unit (PIU), to be in charge of managing all project activities. The PIU will be located at 

MAIL in Kabul, and will be responsible for all implementation activities including the finalization and 

development of the required institutional structure which will eventually be responsible for managing 

the grain reserve.  

The PIU will be transitional, so that once the new entity in charge of managing the strategic grain 

reserve is established and fully functioning, the PIU will be handing over all of its assignments and 

activities to it. It is anticipated that this step will take place by the end of the third year of the lifetime of 

the project. However, prior to the establishment of the grain reserve managing entity, the PIU will be in 

charge, and will coordinate all its activities with the SGR directorate and other units under MAIL.   

The PIU will be responsible from the start of the project for the rehabilitation of the 2 silos, and 
establishment of 3 Greenfield Silos, in addition to construction of a warehouse in the north east region, 
and in hiring of consultants, advisors, and carrying our all related procurement work. The PIU will be also 
responsible for coordination with other governmental agencies, and carrying our all related 
procurement work. The PIU will be also responsible for coordination with other governmental agencies.  
The PIU will include managerial, technical, and fiduciary staff, and will be also responsible identifying the 

areas where it will require international expertise, and will carry out all their hiring process in line with 

the World Bank guidelines.    

E. Implementation 
 

Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 
 

The implementing agency for this project will be the Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation, and Livestock (MAIL). 
Implementation of all project activities will be carried out by the Project Implementation Unit (PIU), which will 
be established under MAIL, and will be located at the ministry’s premises in Kabul.    
 
The PIU will be responsible for the managerial, financial, operational, and technical aspects related to the 
implementation of all components, and will be reporting regularly on progress of project activities to MAIL and 
the World Bank in relation to all project activities. The PIU will develop the project procurement plans, identify 
requirements for international expertise, and obtain the required resources accordingly.  
 

The PIU will coordinate its activities with relevant partners, and stakeholders including donors, governmental 
agencies, consultants, and private sector.  
 

With the establishment of the proposed entity that will be dedicated to manage the grain reserve, this new 
entity will take over the full responsibility of activities, and will seek to coordinate the work with the relevant 
stakeholders. The entity will be overseen by an inter-ministerial committee chaired by MAIL.  
 
 A Project Steering Committee (PSC) chaired by H.E. Minister of MAIL (or his delegates), will oversee project 
activities, and the implementation process carried out by the PIU, the committee will provide guidance and 
support, and will facilitate the interaction with other stakeholders. 

 
 
 

 
 
 .    
F. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 

The project is rehabilitating two silos in the cities of Mazar-e-Sharif, and Pul-e-Khumri, in addition to the 
construction of three new Silos in the cities of Kabul, Kandahar, and Herat, and also constructing an 
additional Greenfield warehouse in the northeast region of the country. This may have minor potential 
environmental, health and safety issues/impacts during construction and operation on site. Therefore, the 
World Bank OP 4.01 is triggered and MAIL has prepared an ESMF to be applied during the whole project 
cycle. Site specific ESMPs were prepared for the current two sites of rehabilitation operation, similar site 
specific ESMPs will be prepared based on guidelines and check lists provided by the project ESMF. The site 
specific ESMPs will be properly implemented by the Ministry and the relevant contractors. An 
implementation level Pest Management Plan (PMP) will also be prepared to for any environment health and 
safety issues that may raise from the fumigation process for preserving the quality of the wheat stored in 
the silos. 

 
 
G. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 
 

Mohammad Arif Rasuli,Qais Agah 

 
 
 

SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The WB OP/BP 4.01 is triggered because the project 
will rehabilitate two silos, and construct three new 
silos, and also a new storage facility at the northeast 
region. The rehabilitation and operation of the old 
facilities as well as selection, construction and 
operation of three new storage facilities may have 
minor potential environmental, health and safety 
issues and impacts on the operators and the labors 
as well as on the local environment.  Therefore, in 
order to mitigate such potential impacts an ESMF 
was prepared by MAIL and found acceptable by the 
Bank. Based on the direction and guidelines as well 
as check lists of the ESMF, two site specific ESMPs 
were also prepared for the existing silos that will 
undergo rehabilitation and will be implemented to 
avoid, minimize, and mitigate any potential impact. 
Once the location of the three new sites are 
identified, site specific ESMPs will also be prepared 
during implementation stage and will be applied on 
the new sites of the remaining three new silos. 
 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 No 
 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No 
 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The WB Pest Management Policy (OP/BP 4.09) is 
triggered as the silos will be using fumigation for 
maintaining the quality of wheat stored as a general 
practice in managing grain reserves. Use of 
fumigants should be according to the USEPA and 
WHO guidelines . Health and Safety measures should 
strictly be followed for Operation and Maintenance 
of silos to ensure the safety of the workers at the 
site of the silos . MAIL and the project with the help 
of WB safeguards team will prepare a Pest 


Management Plan during the project 
implementation much in advance before the 
facilities are used for storing wheat which is not 
expected to be before the second year of the 
project. The plan will consider the current practices 
and knowledge about the issue, e.g., what 
technology is used for preservation of wheat and 
availability of fumigants in the market. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No 
 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 
 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

OP/BP 4.12 is applicable since the project will 
support the construction of new three Silos, which 
may require land acquisition and involuntary 
resettlement. 
Since the scope and other details of all proposed 
activities, including the exact locations of the new 
silos are not yet determined, an ESMF and a 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) have been 
prepared by the client and the executive summary 
was disclosed both in-country and at the Bank’s 
external website prior to project appraisal on 
4/11/2017. 
The ESMF and RPF will guide preparation of the 
social safeguards studies, such as limited Social 
Impact Assessment (SIA), ESMPs and RAPs (where 
needed). The RPF includes the requisite Terms of 
Reference (TORs) for the RAP.  
ESMF and RPF consultations with stakeholders have 
been conducted and minutes from public 
consultation have been included. 
 
 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 
 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
 

 
 
KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project will not have significant and/or irreversible impacts and might only have minor reversible impacts as the 
civil works would only be either rehabilitation of two existing silos, and construction of three new silos. When the 
ESMF tools and the ESMPs for the two locations under rehabilitation are properly applied during the implementation, 
this potential impact will be mitigated. ESMPs will carefully chalk out the sanitation and drinking water needs and their 
interaction and will give specific mitigation measures, and will also provide directions in sites of labor camps if any, 
selection and rehabilitation of specific areas, transportation routes, and the occupational health and safety measures 
for the labors and the local relevant communities. 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
The sub-projects will include rehabilitation of two silos in Mazar-e-Sharif, and Pul-e-Khumri and construction of three 
new silos in Kabul, Herat, and Kandahar in addition to the establishment of a new warehouse facility in Badakhsan. 
The project ESMF, the subprojects site specific ESMPs have been prepared, and an outline for the  Pest Management 
Plan (PMP) is also included in the project ESMF, and during project implementation, a full PMP will be developed. With 
these instruments, the project will be positioned to reduce and mitigate any potential impact. However, due to the 
nature of the Project compoentnts there will be no indirect and /or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities 
The project triggers OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement, because the physical infrastructure activities under 
component B may  involve implications that could impact individuals and/or communities in different ways. Therefore, 
the preparation of the ESMF and the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will guide the preparation of any Social 
Impact Assessments (SIA) or Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) that may be needed. However, it is expected that all 
new constructions will be all on lands owned by MAIL, and free from any settlers.  
 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. 
The project aimed to use government owned land and environmental friendly technologies for establishing and/or 
renovating the Silos, and also for the construction of the new warehouse in the northeast region. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower 
capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The borrower will address all safeguards related issues under a framework approach. A project Environmental and 
Social Management Framework(ESMF) has been developed by the borrower and a safeguards specialist will be hired 
by the project in order to implement the ESMF and to comply with the world bank safeguard policies. The borrower, 
the implementing agency, MAIL has experience with the WB safeguards implementation and will hopefully implement 
the relevant project safeguards at a satisfactory level.  
For each of the subprojects a site specific Environmental and Social Safeguards Action Plan (ESMP) would be prepared 
based on the project ESMF. Already two ESMPs for the two locations that will undergo rehabilitation have been 
developed. The borrower will mainstream relevant clauses in the relevant contract documents and will follow the 
Occupational Health and Safety as well as sanitation issues in project sites as well as in the project labor camps. During 
the implementation stage a PMP would be prepared and the outline of the proposed PMP is included as an Annex to 


5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, 
with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The main stakeholders are government agencies, local populations residing close to the silos facilities, donors, 
consultants, and private sector. Relevant citizen engagement tools  were used during preparation of the ESMF, and 
the ESMPs for the two already identified sites (the two silos which will be rehabilitated), once the other four locations 
have been identified during project implementation, site specific ESMPs will be developed. The ESMF and the site 
specific ESMPs as well as the PMP will all be disclosed on the Ministry Website as well as in the Bank Intranet system. 
Consultation and disclosure procedure is also illustrated in the ESMF. Already the executive summary of the ESMF 
have been translated to local language, and published. 
 
 

























































World Bank Document


Page 1 of 6

PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
ADDITIONAL FINANCING

Report No.:  PIDA21463

Project Name LVEMP APL-1 Additional Financing (P153466)
Parent Project Name Lake Victoria Environmental Management Project Phase II 

(P100406)
Region AFRICA
Country Africa
Sector(s) Agricultural extension and research (70%), General water, 

sanitation and flood protection sector (30%)
Theme(s) Water resource management (30%), Other rural development 

(30%), Other environment and natural resources management 
(20%), Biodiversi ty (10%), Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise 
support (10%)

Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P153466
Parent Project ID P100406
Borrower(s) East Africa Community, MINISTRY OF FINANCE, The National 

Treasury
Implementing Agency Lake Victoria Basin Commission (LVBC), Ministry of Water, 

Ministry of Environment, Water and Natural Resources
Environmental Category A-Full Assessment
Date PID Prepared/Updated 23-Mar-2015
Date PID Approved/Disclosed 23-Mar-2015
Estimated Date of Appraisal 
Completion

23-Mar-2015

Estimated Date of Board 
Approval

26-May-2015

Appraisal Review Decision 
(from Decision Note)

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate

I. Project Context
Country Context
Lake Victoria, with a surface area of about 68,800 km2, is the second largest freshwater body in the 
world. It is a transboundary resource shared by Kenya, Tanzania, and Uganda. Rwanda and Burundi 
are a part of the upper watershed that drains into Lake Victoria through the Kagera river. Its 
catchment area of 194,000 km2 is shared by five countries: Burundi (7 percent), Kenya (22 
percent), Rwanda (11 percent), Tanzania (44 percent), and Uganda (16 percent). The Lake is also 
part of the Nile River basin system, shared by ten countries: Burundi, the Democratic Republic of 
Congo, Egypt, Ethiopia, Eritrea, Kenya, Rwanda, Sudan, Tanzania, and Uganda. The population of 

the Lake Victoria Basin (LVB) is about 35 million people, and it represents approximately 30 
percent of the total inhabitants of the East African Community (EAC) Partner States – Burundi, 
Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania and Kenya. 
 
Lake Victoria is a major population and poverty center in AFR, and a trans-boundary natural asset 
of global importance. The Basin is home to around a third of those below the poverty line in the 
East African Community, living on around a ninth of its land surface.  The Lake supports the 
world’s largest freshwater fishery, with a total annual landed catch value estimated at around US
$0.5 billion, supporting the livelihoods of 3 million people, providing roughly 0.5 million tons of 
fish to local markets and generating US$0.25 billion in export revenues. The establishment of the 
Nile Perch fishery in the 1980s and 1990s provided a resource boom that drew in poor and 
disadvantaged people from the neighboring countries. Large rural poor populations are also 
dependent on the degraded lands in the upper basin, particularly in Burundi, Rwanda and the Kenya 
highlands. In addition, the waters of the Lake and its catchment provide 90% of Uganda’s hydro 
power, most of the hydro power for Rwanda and Burundi, and the water supply to major urban 
centers including Kampala and Entebbe.  Protected areas cover 25% of the Basin’s land area and 
include some of the most renowned wildlife attractions in Africa – Serengeti and Volcanoes 
National Parks. 
 
The Lake Victoria Basin has also become a global example of environmental degradation. 
Historically, the introduction of the Nile Perch was associated with a mass extinction of native fish 
species, but Perch stocks have now themselves declined to probably less than half of their peak 
levels due to increased fishing efforts and other environmental stresses. Environmental degradation 
within the Basin increasingly poses broader threats to livelihoods and welfare. Erosion of soils has 
chronic impacts on agricultural productivity as well as acute impacts where gullies destroy land, 
property and even lives. The flow of sediments and other pollutants into the Basin’s rivers and 
ultimately the Lake reduces the supply of potable water, and causes algal blooms that are 
unpleasant for lakeshore communities and limit the tourism potential of the region. One of the most 
striking indicators of poor ecological health is the rapid colonization of the Lake by water hyacinth. 
Infestations of this invasive floating plant periodically block access to kilometers of lakeshore, 
preventing use of the Lake for transport and fishing, as well as posing serious health and safety 
risks to local inhabitants.  
 
LVEMP aims to tackle the environmental challenges of the Lake Victoria Basin over the long-term 
and basin-wide, to improve the welfare of its inhabitants. It was designed as a regional Series of 
Projects (formerly APL) with three envisioned phases and informed by the studies and lessons 
generated from the original Lake Victoria Environmental Management Project (LVEMP I), 
financed by the GEF and implemented from 1996 to 2005. APL-1 (now SOP-1), covering the three 
riparian states (Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda) as well as a regional coordination and policy 
component (through the EAC’s Lake Victoria Basin Commission, LVBC), is due to close at the end 
of FY15, having already received a 2-year extension. APL-2 (SOP-2), covering Rwanda and 
Burundi, started later and is due to close at the end of FY17. APL-3 (SOP-3) was envisaged to 
extend the program beyond the end of the first project of the series. 
 
The Additional Financing of the LVEMP is for implementation of additional or expanded activities 
that scale up the project’s impact, i.e. additional watershed management subprojects in existing 
focal areas, construction of sanitation and sewerage facilities that were designed but not 
implemented under the original project due to funding constraints, and expansion and deepening of 



Page 3 of 6

cleaner production programs. The additional Additional financing Financing represents roughly 
20% of the original project financing, but is expected to increase most of the key quantitative 
results by around 30-40%. Under the Additional Financing Kenya and Tanzania will each receive 
US$10 million IDA credits, and a US$2 million IDA grant for regional activities under LVBC: 
Credit Nos 4530-TZ, 4531-UG, 4532-KE; GEF grant TF-94205, SIDA grant TF-95196). Pending 
donor approval, an additional grant of US$ 0.5 million from the Cooperation in International 
Waters in Africa trust fund is anticipated, of a total Additional Financing amount of US$ 22.5 
million.

  

Sectoral and institutional Context
The Lake Victoria and its ecosystems support a number of sectors important for economic and 
livelihood development in the Lake Victoria Basin: Fisheries - the Lake fishery contributes to the 
GDP of the riparian countries and provides employment for about 197,000 fishers and 
approximately 600,000 fish traders; Transport - the marine transport provided by the Lake is very 
important for supporting the trade and economic development of the LVB countries; Energy - the 
Lake is the source of hydropower in Uganda generating power exceeding a value of US$350 
million per annum; Water - Approximately five million people living in the major cities and towns 
around the Lake, depend on Lake Victoria for their domestic and industrial water supply.  
 
Governance of the Lake occurs at the regional scale through the East African Community and Lake 
Victoria Basin Commission (LVBC) under the auspices of the Protocol on Sustainable 
Development of the Lake Victoria Basin, and at the national scale by the country governments of 
the LVB through implementation of respective national strategies. Accordingly, the project 
implementation arrangements are based on a two-prong institutional set up provided in the Protocol 
on the Sustainable Development of the LVB, i.e. at the EAC/regional and at national levels. 
 
The Regional Policy Steering Committee (RPSC) - comprising permanent secretaries of various 
line ministries - serves as the EAC coordination committee for LVEMP II (and other regional 
projects in the Basin), and the LVBC serves as the secretariat for the RPSC. National Policy 
Steering Committees (NPSCs) are responsible for the sectoral coordination at the national level and 
for providing operational policy guidance in each country. National Focal Point Ministries 
(NFPMs) in each of the LVB countries serve as the secretariat for the NPSCs. NFPMs are 
accountable for the overall project implementation, which is carried out by National Project 
Coordination Teams in partnership with multiple key ministries and local government authorities.

II. Proposed Development Objectives
A. Current Project Development Objectives – Parent
The objectives of the Project are to contribute to: (i) the improvement of the collaborative 
management of the trans-boundarynatural resources of the LVB among the Partner States; and (ii) 
the improvement of environmental management of targeted pollutionhotspots and selected degraded 
sub-catchments for the benefit of communities who depend on the natural resources of LVB.

III. Project Description
Component Name



Page 4 of 6

Strengthening institutional capacity for managing shared water and fisheries resources
Comments (optional)
Activities under this component will focus on strengthening the existing institutions to improve the 
cooperative management of shared transboundary natural resources of the LVB. Its objectives are 
to: (i) improve the effectiveness of key regional and national institutions through harmonization of 
national policies, legislation, and standards; (ii) develop options for sustainable financing of the 
natural resources management interventions; and (iii) develop regional frameworks for the 
management of key transboundary natural resources – water and fisheries. The focus here is on 
capacity building of the regional, national, and local institutions responsible for coordination, 
research, management of resources, and enforcement of environmental standards.

Component Name
Point source pollution control and prevention
Comments (optional)
The main objective of this component is to reduce environmental stresses within the Lake and 
littoral zone, through the implementation of mitigation and prevention measures. It will finance 
investments aimed at reducing point sources of pollution in priority hotspots, identified during 
LVEMP I. These investments will complement on-going activities supported by other Bank-funded 
projects in water and sanitation. Major activities include (i) rehabilitation and improvement of 
wastewater treatment facilities; (ii) promotion of cleaner production technologies; and (iii) pollution 
risk management and safety of navigation.

Component Name
Watershed management
Comments (optional)
This component seeks to reduce environmental stresses from the Lake basin, through the 
implementation of non-point sources pollution mitigation and prevention measures. The reduction of 
the non-point sources of pollution (sediment loads, nutrients, and agro-chemicals) by scaling up 
successful models of watershed management practices piloted under LVEMP I and other related 
national projects will improve water-use efficiency, and generate positive downstream externalities. 
Watershed management is being implemented through community-driven investments as a means of 
scaling up management efforts, and also building capacity and ownership at the local level for 
watershed management.

Component Name
Project coordination and management
Comments (optional)
This component will provide resources necessary for the effective coordination and communication, 
and monitoring and evaluation of the project activities. At the regional level, these tasks will be 
carried out by the RPCT mainstreamed in the LVBC, while at the national level they will be the 
responsibility of the National Project Coordination Teams (NPCTs). Activities under this 
component are divided into (i) project coordination and communication; and (ii) monitoring and 
evaluation.

IV. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 22.50 Total Bank Financing: 22.00
Financing Gap: 0.00



Page 5 of 6

For Loans/Credits/Others Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT 0.00
International Development Association (IDA) 20.00
IDA Grant 2.00
Cooperation in International Waters in Africa 0.50
Total 22.50

V. Implementation
The implementation arrangements for the project will remain as they are, with National Project 
Coordinator Teams under the guidance of their respective ministries in each country, a Regional 
Project Coordination Team under LVBC, and the Regional Policy Steering Committee providing 
overall guidance to the program.     
 
As the scope of investment activities will be the same, there will be no changes in environmental 
category of the project or additional safeguard policies triggered.  The existing safeguards 
documents have been reviewed and remain fully relevant (see Social and Environment Analysis 
below).

VI. Safeguard Policies (including public consultation)
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖



























































World Bank Document


Page 1 of 14

COMBINED PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENTS / INTEGRATED 
SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET (PID/ISDS)  

ADDITIONAL FINANCING
Report No.: PIDISDSA20672

Date Prepared/Updated: 31-Jan-2017
I. BASIC INFORMATION

  A.  Basic Project Data

Country: Kosovo Project ID: P158710
Parent 
Project ID 
(if any):

P112526

Project Name: Kosovo Agriculture and Rural Development Project - Third Additional 
Financing (P158710)

Parent Project 
Name:

Agriculture and Rural Development (P112526)

Region: EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
Estimated 
Appraisal Date:

16-Jan-2017 Estimated 
Board Date:

28-Apr-2017

Practice Area
(Lead):

Agriculture Lending 
Instrument:

Investment Project Financing

Borrower(s): Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Rural Development
Implementing 
Agency:

Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Rural Development

Financing (in USD Million)
Financing Source Amount
International Development Association (IDA) 22.00
LOCAL  BENEFICIARIES 5.84
Total Project Cost 27.84

Environmental 
Category:

B - Partial Assessment

Appraisal 
Review 
Decision (from 
Decision Note):

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate

Other Decision:
Is this a 
Repeater 
project?

No
B.   Introduction and Context

Country Context
Over the past decade, Kosovo➢❨ s overall economic growth has been generally positive, 
averaging about 4-5 percent annually, driven mostly by massive donor-funded reconstruction 
efforts as well as remittances from its diaspora. The economy has demonstrated a considerable 
degree of resilience, with principal macro fiscal and financial indicators reflecting that the country 
has performed considerably better than any of its neighbors in the Western Balkans over the past 
decade. Kosovo is a potential EU candidate country and economic reforms are largely driven by 
the prospect of eventual EU accession. 
 
Despite the positive trend in growth and relatively stable and resilient economy, Kosovo remains 
one of the poorest countries in Europe. As of 2011, approximately 30 percent of its population of 
1.8 million lived below the national poverty line of ➢❪¬1.72 a day and about 10.2 percent were 
living in extreme poverty on less than ➢❪¬1.20 day. Unemployment is widespread, estimated at 
about 30 percent in 2013, the highest in South Eastern Europe. Unemployment among women is 
higher, estimated at 38.8 percent. Demographically, Kosovo is Europe➢❨ s youngest country, 
where the average age is estimated at 26 years.  Unemployment among the youth is especially 
high, estimated at 61.0 percent in 2014. 
 
The main driver of Kosovo➢❨ s economic growth has been consumption, fueled by remittances 
rather than income earned domestically. The steady consumption demand has been met mainly by 
imports given the country➢❨ s narrow, undiversified, and uncompetitive production base.  There 
is little export-orientation and imports remain large.  The current growth model based on large 
financial inflows is unsustainable and the main challenge for the country remains the 
establishment of conditions conducive to promoting self-sustained growth founded on increased 
domestic productivity and export competitiveness, within the framework of reducing high 
unemployment, improving human capital and building physical infrastructure. 
 
Kosovo➢❨ s location, EU membership prospects and free market access to the EU and Central 
European Free Trade Agreement (CEFTA) countries offer strong opportunities for sustained and 
rapid overall development. The government is committed to instituting reforms to promote 
sustainable economic development and is working to put in place the policies, institutions and 
investments that will help unleash the country➢❨ s growth and export potential. In this context, 
the National Development Strategy 2015-2020, adopted in January 2016, emphasizes four priority 
pillars: (a) human capital and employment; (b) good governance and rule of law; (c) competitive 
industries; and (d) infrastructure development.
Sectoral and institutional Context
Agriculture plays a significant role in Kosovo➢❨ s economy.  It is an important contributor to 
GDP, accounting for about 11.4 percent of GDP in 2014 (second only after wholesale and retail 
trade). Over 62 percent of the country➢❨ s population lives in rural areas and depends, directly or 
indirectly, on agriculture for its livelihood. The sector is the largest private employer, accounting 
for about 35 percent of total employment, although primarily on an informal basis.  Poverty in 
rural areas is especially high and over 40 percent of the rural population is unemployed. The lack 
of job perspective, especially among the rural young population is putting a strain on social 
cohesion and encouraging out-migration. Often, agriculture serves as a safety net for much of the 
population. 



Page 3 of 14

 
Despite a steady growth in the sector since independence, Kosovo is the largest importer of food 
per capita in Europe. The country is highly dependent on imports to meet its food demands and 
the export/import ratio has been steadily increasing over the past decade.  In 2011, the value of 
imports of agricultural products was approximately ➢❪¬561.4 million while the value of exports 
was ➢❪¬26.2 million. Exports of agricultural products thus generated revenues to pay for only 4.6 
per cent of the cost of importing such products. Agricultural products account for about 10 
percent of all imports; of this, 30 percent comprises food products. 
 
This is primarily because the sector faces several diverse and inter-related challenges that prevent 
it from meeting its productive potential and hinder commercialization. Before the 1990s, Kosovo 
was largely food self-sufficient with large quantities of agricultural products exported to the 
region. However, after the war, this trend was reversed so that today, agriculture is largely 
subsistent/semi-subsistent in nature. The sector is characterized by small, fragmented land 
holdings, with average land holding size ranging between 1.5 and 2.0 ha, often spread across an 
average of seven smaller plots. Lack of and/or limited access to, inter alia, modern technologies, 
good quality inputs, irrigation, post-harvest management and processing infrastructure, credit, and 
markets pose serious challenges to the development of the sector.  In its current state, agriculture 
attracts limited private investments which effectively inhibit commercialization of the sector and 
the realization of socio-economic gains thereof. 
 
Two areas that offer good opportunities for the development of Kosovo➢❨ s agricultural sector 
include the horticulture and livestock subsectors. Horticulture and livestock farming are 
traditional economic activities in Kosovo, representing a rural cultural identity and there is a 
strong preference among the farming communities to remain engaged in these subsectors for their 
livelihood. Over the past decade, demand for high value horticulture products has surged more 
than any other food category and there is a strong consumer preference for locally grown fruits 
and vegetables, both for fresh consumption and processing. Livestock farming is predominant in 
the mountainous and remote areas of Kosovo where it often serves as the primary source of rural 
livelihood. With increased productivity and production  there is good potential for: (i) promoting 
import substitution; (ii) boosting exports, especially to EU and CEFTA countries; (iii) generating 
employment in rural areas; (iv) creating economic opportunities for women in agriculture 
production and especially value-added processing activities; and (v) providing opportunities for 
young farmers to be gainfully employed in these remunerative value chains. 
 
To harness the potential of these subsectors, especially the horticulture subsector, there is a 
critical need for improving irrigation delivery and services. Rainfall patterns show high variability 
in Kosovo and there is a crucial need for supplementary irrigation, especially during drier spells. 
For fruits and vegetables, irrigation is essential for increasing yields and ensuring quality and 
timely production. It is expected that with irrigation small farmers would move to more high-
value crops and specialized markets, and away from near-subsistence agriculture. 
 
Ageing irrigation infrastructure and lack of maintenance are reducing the level of irrigation use 
and impacting development of agriculture.  Most of the irrigation schemes were built in the 1970s 
and are showing signs of ageing. Moreover, the war of the 1990s damaged or destroyed large 
sections of country➢❨ s irrigation infrastructure. This coupled with expansion of urban and 
industrial areas in recent years has sharply reduced actual irrigable area and jeopardized existing 
irrigation investments. The area equipped for irrigation fell from approximately 71,000 ha before 



Page 4 of 14

the war to approximately 43,900 ha in 2014.  The area of irrigation use is also far lower than in 
the past. Between 2006 and 2012, the average area irrigated was only about 12,000 ha - 4,000 ha 
in small schemes and 8,000 ha within the areas serviced by the country➢❨ s three regional 
irrigation companies in Kosovo: Iber-Lepenc, Radoniqi-Dukagjini and Drini i Bardhe. 
 
Recognizing the significant role of agriculture in Kosovo➢❨ s overall economic development, the 
government is undertaking critical measures to re-vitalize the sector. The objectives of the 
National Agricultural and Rural Development Plan (NARDP 2014-2020 are to undertake actions 
to overcome bottlenecks holding back sustainable rural development in the country and align 
Kosovo➢❨ s rural sector with the axes of the EU Instrument for Pre-accession for Rural 
Development (IPARD). The NARDP lays out several measures for implementation support over 
the next five years, including inter alia, investments in the physical assets of agricultural holdings 
as well as processing and marketing of agricultural and fishery products; agri-environmental 
measures and organic farming; farm diversification and business development; improvements in 
training, advisory services and vocational training; land consolidation; and  irrigation.  On the 
institutional front, the government is building the capacity of important institutional structures, 
such as the Managing Authority and Paying Agency, for improved performance of the agriculture 
sector as well as to approximate their functioning with EU requirements. These efforts are being 
carried out with assistance from several donors, including EU, DANIDA, Suisse Interco-
operation, USAID, Austrian Development Agency, GIZ and the World Bank (through the 
ongoing IDA-financed Agriculture and Rural Development Project).

C.  Proposed Development Objective(s)

Original Project Development Objective(s) - Parent
The development objective of the project is to assist the Recipient to promote competitiveness 
and growth in the livestock and horticulture sub-sectors over the next decade through 
implementation of selected measures of its agricultural strategy and institutionaldevelopment.

Proposed Project Development Objective(s) - Additional Financing
The development objective of the project is to improve productivity of and access to markets by 
project beneficiaries in the horticulture and livestock subsectors of Kosovo and strengthen 
institutional capacity of the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Rural Development.

Key Results 
The PDO-level Results Indicators comprise the following: (i) increased yields of key crops 
supported by the project ➢❨  tons/ha; (ii) increased yields of milk production per animal on 
livestock farms supported by the project ➢❨  liters/cow; (iiiu) increased sale of milk to processing 
companies; (iv) increased sales of horticultural products from farmers supported by aggregators; 
(v) increased number of farmers adopting improved agricultural technologies; (vi) preparation of 
Rural Development Grant Program (RDGP) sub-measures for investment support in line with 
EU-IPARD Guidelines

D.  Project Description

The Additional Financing, a US$22.0 million IDA credit, to be implemented over four years, 
would support the following activities: 
 
Component 1: Transferring Knowledge to the Rural Sector.  The AF will continue support for the 



Page 5 of 14

following sub-components: (a) Rural Advisory Service (RAS) Contracts under which training 
would be provided to potential applicants for the Rural Development Grant Program (RDGP) as 
well as to municipal advisors to assist the farming community in the preparation of such grant 
proposals as well as to national extension staff on technical topics; (b) Regional Knowledge 
Exchange under which the project will support the organization of study tours/visits to countries 
in the region to enable farmers and processors in the horticulture and livestock subsectors to learn 
and benefit from the knowledge and experiences of other agri-food producers and processors in 
the region; and (c) Institutional Strengthening of Rural Advisory Services. The AF will continue 
to support the municipal advisory service centers in delivering effective services to the rural 
community through the provision of training, equipment and select operating costs. 
 
Component 2: Enhancing Investments to Promote Sustainable Rural Development. The AF will 
support the following activities: 
(a) Rural Development Grant Program (RDGP). RDGP support will be provided to farmers and 
processors in the livestock subsector.  As under KARDP, the RDGP will be implemented at the 
national level ➢❨  for potential beneficiaries in all municipalities of Kosovo.  The Call for 
Proposals would be open to all farmers and processors residing on the territory of Kosovo. 
Implementation of RDGP would follow the same processes and procedures as under the ongoing 
project, including extra points for women applicants and additional co-financing for beneficiaries 
(both men and women) under the age of 40 as well as for climate friendly agricultural practices.    
 
(b) Promoting Development of the Horticulture Subsector. The objective of this component is to 
promote the development of the horticulture subsector by strengthening backward and forward 
linkages in the value chain of the subsector. The aim is to improve productivity, quality, value 
addition, and ma rket linkages within the subsector to enhance its competitiveness towards 
increased exports and import substitution as well as job creation, improved beneficiary incomes 
and increased economic opportunities for women and youth in the rural sector.  It will target 
support to small holder farmers that dominate the rural landscape and provide them opportunities 
for assured markets and  improved livelihoods while assisting the commercial and semi-
commercial agro-enterprises to reach both domestic and export markets, create jobs and improve 
incomes.  
 
The entry point for project support will be the Aggregators, i.e. private Collection Centers (CCs) 
and Agro-processors, handling or procuring horticultural produce.  The project will provide 
matching grants to qualifying Aggregators, who will: (i) promote and strengthen backward 
integration strategies through the provision of supply contracts and extension services to small-
holder farmers, thereby guaranteeing farmers markets for their produce as well as enabling them 
to enhance their productivity while improving quality (including meeting Global GAP 
certification requirements); and (ii) exploit the value addition potential of the sector through 
improved postharvest management by increasing their capacity for handling and processing.  
Thus the project will enable Aggregators to increase the intake of fresh produce from farmers 
(upstream) and increase their supply of fresh produce and processed products to domestic and 
export markets (downstream).  By introducing upgrades in the value chain - quality checks, 
packaging, labeling, etc, the project will reorient firms towards more lucrative export markets. 
 
Potential aggregators will be invited to prepare business plans and submit applications to enhance 
and expand their operations.  Funding for selected subprojects would be allocated through a 
competitive bidding process. The maximum size of the grant would be Ã¢➢❨ Â¬200,000.  The 



Page 6 of 14

submitted business plans will be reviewed, evaluated and scored against clearly defined criteria 
by an independent Evaluation Committee. Eligibility criteria and detailed arrangements for 
implementation of the matching grants will be elaborated in the Horticulture Development Grant 
Manual. 
 
(s) Institutional Capacity Building. The AF will continue to support capacity building of the 
Managing Authority and Paying Agency through the provision of training, personnel and 
equipment as needed. Project support will assist in approximating their functioning to EU 
requirements and contribute to their efforts towards EU accreditation.   The project will also 
support capacity building within the Kosovo Institute of Agriculture (KIA) to enhance its ability 
to promote food safety and quality standards in the livestock and horticulture subsectors of 
Kosovo through the provision of select equipment to strengthen capacity of the food testing 
laboratory. 
 
Component 3: Support for Irrigation. The AF would support rehabilitation works in the Radoniqi-
Dukagjini Irrigation Scheme, located in an area of high agricultural productivity.  Horticulture is 
the dominant economic activity in the region and with improved irrigation delivery and services 
there is a high likelihood of improved productivity of high value crops. Specific rehabilitation 
investments in the scheme will focus on, inter alia, lining and repair of main canal sections, 
replacement of moving parts; pipes, where necessary, aqueduct crossing on the Drini river, and 
the restoration of irrigation delivery in two blocks, namely the Janosh scheme in the upstream part 
of the system; as well as the Doblibare scheme which is currently dysfunctional. Minor dam 
safety actions (non-structural), as identified by the dam safety assessments, will be supported as 
well. Modernization will include selective automation of scheme monitoring to increase water and 
energy use efficiency. A technical study is underway to further specify the technical requirements 
and prepare bidding documents for scheme construction works as well as identify equipment and 
spare part requirements. 
 
In providing rehabilitation support to the scheme, the project will take a broader modernization 
approach and integrate managerial upgrading with the technical rehabilitation to improve both 
resource utilization and water delivery service to users, optimizing resource utilization and 
ensuring institutional and financial sustainability. This includes the support for a Management 
Information System, SCADA for improved operations, support for maintaining a strategic supply 
of spare parts and maintenance equipment; harmonization of planning and budgeting with 
municipal plans as well as water users➢❨  demands. 
 
Component 4: Project Management, Coordination, Monitoring and Evaluation. The existing 
Project Implementation Unit (PIU) within MAFRD will be responsible for the daily management, 
administration and coordination of the project's activities in accordance with Bank requirements, 
including procurement, financial management, monitoring and evaluation, and audits.  Its 
capacity would be enhanced through the hiring of an irrigation specialist who will be responsible 
for the implementation of the irrigation activity as well as additional short-term technical 
specialists as needed.

Component Name
Component 1: Transferring Knowledge to the Rural Sector.
Comments (optional)



Page 7 of 14

Component Name
Component 2: Enhancing Investments to Promote Sustainable Rural Development
Comments (optional)

Component Name
Component 3: Support for Irrigation
Comments (optional)

Component Name
Component 4: Project Management, Coordination, Monitoring and Evaluation
Comments (optional)

E.  Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis (if known)

The project will be undertaken throughout Kosovo.

F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

Bekim Imeri (GSU03)
Esma Kreso (GEN03)

II. Implementation
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
The project will be implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Rural Development 
(MAFRD).  A dedicated Project Implementation Unit, headed by the General Secretary, has been 
established under the ongoing KARDP for overall management of the project, including the fiduciary 
(procurement, financial management), monitoring, evaluation, training and administration 
requirements as well as coordination with donors and other government units.  The Rural 
Development Grant Program (RDGP) will be implemented by the Managing Authority (MA) and 
Paying Agency (PA). The  MA is responsible for identifying the measures for support under the 
RDGP and prepares the procedures for implementation of the selected RDGP sub-measures.  
Towards this, it establishes Working Groups with representation from the private sector and civil 
society.  The PA is in charge of administering the RDGP, including the selection, awarding, 
monitoring and disbursement processes for the sub-projects.

III. Safeguard Policies that might apply

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental 
Assessment OP/BP 
4.01

Yes Potential environmental impacts are anticipated under 
Component 2: Enhancing Investments to Promote Sustainable 
Rural Development and Component 3: Support for Irrigation. 
The major portion of Component 2 remains the provision of 



Page 8 of 14

grants which were also administered under the original project. 
The grants were awarded based on a screening criteria set forth 
in the ESMF prepared for the project in October 2010 and 
subsequently revised in 2015. This revision solely dealt with 
changes in the Kosovo environmental legislation and did not in 
any form alter the overall screening procedure within the 
ESMF. The screening criteria as set forth in the ESMF helps to 
screen out project activities corresponding to a category A, and 
to provide adequate due diligence on a case-by-case basis for 
the rural grants. The ESMF had undergone a slight revision in 
January 2017, where the irrigation activities have also been 
added in the project description and small changes were made 
to ensure that all activities even beyond grants are covered 
through the process in the ESMF. The screening and due 
diligence mechanisms remain the same as within the original 
ESMF from 2010.  
The approach outlined in the ESMF from January 2017 will 
apply to the rural grants, matching grants, irrigation rehab and 
any activity that would be proposed to be financed within the 
project or the subsequent AFs. Furthermore, any strategic and 
planning documents to be produced under Component 3(b) 
will also incorporate adequate safeguards requirements within 
the Terms of Reference for any proposed study or plan.  
The environmental impacts associated with the grants program 
and irrigation rehab should be readily mitigated through sound 
construction practices (dust and noise, waste management, 
material sourcing) while the operational impacts can be 
mitigated through environmentally friendly farming 
approaches (manure management, waste disposal, emissions 
from food processing facilities, improved water resource use).  
Under Component 3, rehabilitation of the Radoniqi irrigation 
scheme is foreseen which would lead to better management of 
water resources. This activity will potentially cause minor 
construction related impacts (noise, dust, waste generation).   
A full and robust ESMP will be prepared to address risks and 
impacts of implementation of this scheme, including assessing 
impacts to other water users. 
➢❨❫

Natural Habitats OP/
BP 4.04

No There are no implications on natural habitats foreseen.

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No There are no implications on forested areas foreseen.
Pest Management OP 
4.09

Yes Due to the fact that the project would more than likely lead to 
increased agricultural production, it is safe to assume that there 
would be an increased need for pest management. As such, an 
Integrated Pest Management Plan was part of the original 
ESMF (2010) andalso the revised ESMF (2015 and 2017).



Page 9 of 14

Physical Cultural 
Resources OP/BP 
4.11

No There are no activities involving physical / cultural resources 
foreseen.

Indigenous Peoples 
OP/BP 4.10

No There are no implications for indigenous people.

Involuntary 
Resettlement OP/BP 
4.12

No This safeguards will not be triggered because the potential 
works proposed for the scheme rehabilitation are as follows: 
 
(i) Lining and repair of main canal sections, replacement 
of parts such as valves, etc.   
(ii) rehabilitation of of irrigation delivery in two secondary 
sub-schemes  
(iii) minor works related to dam safety and the Drini river 
aqueduct 
 
Given the nature of rehabilitation works, there will be no need 
for land take although there might be some crop damages for a 
temporary period of time while the works are ongoing. The 
protocol defined in the ESMF addresses the crop damage 
compensation which will be operationalized with concrete 
ESMPs .

Safety of Dams OP/
BP 4.37

Yes Although the project will not build any dams, the Radoniqi 
Irrigation scheme depends upon the existing Radoniqi Dam for 
its effective functioning as the scheme draws its raw water 
directly from the Radoniqi reservoir controlled by a 61 meter 
high clay-core embankment dam. Several  Dam Safety 
Assessments have been carried out in the recent past for 
Radoniqi Dam, including in 2000, 2002, and 2006 under the 
WB supported Pilot Water Supply Project, and most recently 
in 2012 by the Water Task Force as part of a countrywide Dam 
Safety Review. While none of these reviews raise any concerns 
on imminent dam safety they make recommendations for 
operation and maintenance procedures and safety-related 
measures that are required to ensure an acceptable standard of 
safety. More precisely, this includes the need for critical 
documentation and information on dam safety, including 
geotechnical information, an update on and improvement of 
status of control instruments (inclinometers and piezometers 
are reported as largely dysfunctional) and electrical 
installations. Also, it is observed that there is no dam safety 
(monitoring) plan, although a letter from the dam operator 
states that geodetic measurements have been carried out to 
some extent over the past years. Most of the recommendations 
have not been fully implemented since. The project proposes to 
adopt a composite of the 2005 and 2012 recommendations, to 
be confirmed by a dam safety panel to be established, and to 



Page 10 of 14

finance those under the project. The following activities are 
envisaged to be included under the program: updated safety 
analysis, including full geodetic survey, rehabilitation of dam 
safety instrumentation and an emergency preparedness plan.

Projects on 
International 
Waterways OP/BP 
7.50

Yes Component 3 includes works on rehabilitation of the Radoniqi 
irrigation scheme, which is part of the trans-boundary Drini 
river basin. However, considering that the works will focus on 
better use and management of the existing irrigation scheme 
the team does not foresee any issues on water quality or 
quantity to downstream users. As such, an Exception to 
Notification was granted on December 16, 2016 by ECA VP.

Projects in Disputed 
Areas OP/BP 7.60

No The project will not be implemented in any disputed areas.

IV. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify 

and describe any potential large scale,  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Potential environmental impacts are anticipated under Component 2: Enhancing Investments to 
Promote Sustainable Rural Development and Component 3: Support for Irrigation. The major 
portion of Component 2 remains the provision of grants which were also administered under the 
original project.  The grants were awarded based on a screening criteria set forth in the ESMF 
prepared for the project in October 2010 and subsequently revised in 2015. This revision solely 
dealt with changes in the Kosovo environmental legislation and did not in any form alter the 
overall screening procedure within the ESMF. The screening criteria as set forth in the ESMF 
helps to screen out project activities corresponding to a category A, and to provide adequate due 
diligence on a case-by-case basis for the rural grants. The ESMF had undergone a slight revision 
in January 2017, where the irrigation activities have also been added in the project description and 
small changes were made to ensure that all activities even beyond grants are covered through the 
process in the ESMF. The screening and due diligence mechanisms remain the same as within the 
original ESMF from 2010.  
The approach outlined in the ESMF from January 2017 will apply to the rural grants, matching 
grants, irrigation rehab and any activity that would be proposed to be financed within the project 
or the subsequent AFs. Furthermore, any strategic and planning documents to be produced under 
Component 3(b) will also incorporate adequate safeguards requirements within the Terms of 
Reference for any proposed study or plan.  
The environmental impacts associated with the grants program and irrigation rehab should be 
readily mitigated through sound construction practices (dust and noise, waste management, 
material sourcing) while the operational impacts can be mitigated through environmentally 
friendly farming approaches (manure management, waste disposal, emissions from food 
processing facilities, improved water resource use).  
Under Component 3 rehabilitation of the Radoniqi irrigation scheme is foreseen which would lead 
to better management of water resources. This activity will potentially cause minor construction 
related impacts already described above that can be mitigated through a site-specific ESMP, while 
additional concerns include dam safety issues and also the potential for impacts on international 
waterways as the reservoir and the scheme are located within the Drini river basin. 
The overall project would lead to an increase in agricultural practices therefore having 



Page 11 of 14

implications on pest management, which should apply and follow the Integrated Pest Management 
Plan as prepared under the original ESMF.  There are no social safeguard related issues. The 
works proposed are rehabilitation of existing schemes. Rehabilitation of lining of open main canal 
and secondary pressurized (piped) schemes where necessary in two sections. There will be no need 
for neither land take nor establishment of right of way. Crop damages because of the rehabilitation 
works will be addressed in ESMFS and related ESMPS 
The Terms of Reference for Component 3(b): Strategy and Investment Framework for the 
Irrigation Sector, will incorporate safeguards requirements to ensure that there is due diligence of 
all potential safeguards aspects under the propsoed Strategy/Investment Framework.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities 
in the project area:
There are no long term or indirect impacts associated with the project, beyond the potential 
increase in agricultural production and therefore implications on pest management, where the  
Integrated Pest Management Plan as prepared under the original ESMF should apply.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse 
impacts.
There are no project alternatives considered. The screening mechanism for the grants would allow 
to either accept or deny a sub-project based on their associated impacts.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an 
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Borrower has applied the ESMF screening in the later grant calls, while some issues remained 
in the first call and the due diligence was carried out by an independent consultant retroactively. 
The borrower has also provided educational trainings and seminars on ESMF compliance and 
sound environmental practices in 2014. The Borrower has a dedicated M&E staff that also 
provides support to the implementation of the ESMF, and as required can hire an external 
consultant to be engaged in the implementation of the ESMF policies. The site-specific ESMP for 
the Radoniqi irrigation scheme will more than likely be carried out by a company or consultant 
outside the Borrower's team and will try to streamline the WB requirements and those of the 
Kosovo environmental legislation into one process. As for the grants, one of the requirements is 
that no grant is awarded without the environmental and social due diligence in place. This 
requirement is strictly supervised by all of the PIU and also by the World Bank team.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure 
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders include representatives of the Project Implementation Unit and the MAFRD, 
as well as the members of the local communities where projects will take place. As such, the 
ESMF was subject to public consultations and disclosure in 2010 (as documented in the original 
ESMF) while each of the subsequent ESMPs prepared for each specific project was subject to 
disclosure and public consultations. For small scale projects public consultations were replaced by 
consent forms signed by all of the neighbors. The revised ESMF (as of January 2017) will be 
disclosed through the MAFRD website and Bank's Infoshop prior to the Appraisal of the AF.

B. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank 15-Oct-2010

Date of submission to InfoShop 02-Dec-2010



Page 12 of 14

For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors

"In country" Disclosure
Kosovo 18-Jan-2017
Comments: The revised ESMF that would make it applicable also to the Irrigation scheme was 

disclosed on January 18, 2017.  
This revised version was also disclosed in Infoshop on January 19, 2017.

Pest Management Plan
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal? Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank 15-Oct-2010

Date of submission to InfoShop 09-Jan-2017
"In country" Disclosure

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Lao Agriculture Commercialization Project (P161473) 

 
 

  
Apr 13, 2017 Page 1 of 12  

     

 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 10-Mar-2017 | Report No: PIDISDSC21901 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Lao People's Democratic 
Republic 

P161473  Lao Agriculture 
Commercialization 
Project (P161473) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC Nov 06, 2017 Mar 30, 2018 Agriculture 

Lending Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Lao People's Democratic 
Republic 

Department of Planning and 
Cooperation 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase commercialization of selected value chains in the project areas. 

 

 Financing (in USD Million) 

 

Financing Source Amount  

Borrowing Agency    2.00  

International Development Association (IDA)   35.00  

Total Project Cost   37.00  

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B-Partial Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 
 
 
B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

 
1. Lao PDR has achieved good progress in economic growth and poverty reduction over the past decade. Average 
growth of the gross domestic product (GDP) in the past decade was around 8 percent per annum. Poverty declined from 
41.4 percent in 2002/03 to 28.8 percent in 2012/13. With a GDP per capita of around US$1,600 in 2014, Lao PDR has 
become a lower-middle income country.  
 
2. Despite impressive macroeconomic achievements, poverty still remains high, especially in rural areas and 
among ethnic groups. Over 80 percent of the poor are concentrated in rural areas. About 40 percent of Mon Khmer and 
Hmong ethnic groups are poor, compared to 15 percent of Lao-Tai people, and ethnic groups account for about two thirds 
of people having no access to formal education. Stunting is also pronounced among ethnic groups.   
 
3. In many rural areas of the country, a high prevalence of food insecurity and malnutrition is still a major problem. 
Rice shortage often takes place for about 3-4 months per year. Prevalent farming systems are largely subsistent and 
generally lack diversification. Although the country is able to achieve self-sufficiency in rice at the national level in the 
normal year, there are still challenges in addressing food security due to the instability of annual production resulted from 
poor farming practices, ineffective water management, and frequent natural disasters (i.e. floods and droughts). 
 

Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
4. Agriculture is an important sector in Lao PDR, but it is currently underperforming. The sector employs two-thirds 
of the country’s labor force, but generates only 22 percent of the GDP. In the last decade, agricultural growth averaged 
3.7 percent, which is less than half of the overall GDP growth. Agricultural farming is largely subsistent, producing one 
crop a year, mainly paddy with low productivity. Currently, irrigated agricultural land accounts for less than 15 percent of 
cultivated land and the remaining 85 percent is rain-fed. Recently, there have been emerging signs of agricultural 
commercialization and diversification (i.e. crop rotation or aquaculture with rice cultivation in low land areas; commercial 
production of maize in Xayabury province, and vegetables in Vientiane province). In the bigger context, however, these 
developments are still relatively scattered and small. 
 
5. Lao PDR’s agriculture sector is constrained by subsistent farming and small scale production with low level of 
commercialization, limited processing capacity, underdeveloped supporting infrastructure, and weak public services. 
Value chains of rice, maize, and vegetables are currently underdeveloped. There are good opportunities and potentials 
for improving their performance substantially through improving farm productivity and enhancing value chains. While the 
former could be realized by adopting quality seed/ farm inputs, improved farming technologies, upgrades of irrigation and 
improved water management, improved extension services/applied research, enhanced farming mechanization, 
improved harvest/postharvest facilities, and better farming diversification/crop rotation, the latter could be achieved by 
improved regulatory framework to facilitate trade and monitor quality standards, market analysis/research, 
transportation/ logistics, strategic support to agribusinesses, contract farming, and product branding and marketing. The 
recently completed project “Engaging the Private Sector to Develop the Lao Rice Industry” (EMRIP) demonstrated the 
readiness of the growing number of rice mills to modernize their facilities, engage in contract farming and develop 
marketing strategies.  

 
6. There are concerns related to the quality and sustainability of agricultural growth. Rice is the most important 
crop in the agriculture sector of Lao PDR. Rice production dominates agricultural land use, occupying nearly 56 percent of 


the total harvested area of all crops. More than 80 percent of the Lao rice crop consists of various types of glutinous rice. 
Maize, which constitutes about 12 percent of the harvested area, is the next most important crop. No other single crop or 
category of crops takes up more than around 5 percent of the cultivated land. In terms of the tonnage of crops produced 
at the national level, rice represents 81 percent of total weight of crops produced. Lack of diversification and heavily 
reliance on rice while there is an increasingly fierce competition in global rice markets are the key challenges to 
competiveness and sustainability of the agricultural growth of Lao PDR in the future. 
 
7. Addressing the risks and shortcomings of the sector will require re-organization of agricultural production and 
greater commercialization to support strategic value chains. According to the findings of the Project Identification 
Mission jointly carried out by Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry (MAF) and the World Bank in November 2016, three 
strategic value chains were identified, which include: (i) rice value chains in the selected low land provinces; (ii) maize 
value chains in Xayabury province; and (iii) vegetables value chains in Vientiane province and possibly Vientiane Capital. 
These value chains are currently operating far below their potentials due to: (1) weak agriculture knowledge and 
information system (i.e. weak research and extension and private sector linkages, inadequate/weak delivery of extension 
and training services, use of poor quality seeds, lack of agricultural diversification); (2) poor production infrastructure (i.e. 
lack/degraded irrigation canals, poor maintenance of irrigation infrastructure, poor feeder roads to facilitate in-scheme 
mechanization); (3) inadequate mechanization facilities and equipment (i.e. lack of mechanization for harvesting and post-
harvest drying and processing, lack of  equipment and facilities for quality testing and storage); (4) lack of access to finance 
(i.e. underdeveloped banking sector, low capacity of rice mills to prepare business plans and secure loans); (5) inadequate 
enabling environment (i.e. constraints to new business entry/ business licensing, quality control and certification, public 
services to promote trade); and (6) insecure agricultural land tenure (i.e. risks of conversion of agricultural land to other 
uses, reduced incentives to invest and manage land by farmers). These constraints not only result in low farm productivity 
but also are generic causes for the poor performance of the agriculture sector and slow process of agricultural 
commercialization. 

 
8. The Government has recognized the need to promote a substantial shift in the agriculture sector from 
subsistent farming to sustainable commercial agriculture following cluster development and value chain approaches. 
On November 18, 2016, the Government through Ministry of Planning and Investment (MPI) sent an Official Letter to the 
World Bank requesting the support on agricultural commercialization in order to improve the sector’s performance 
especially along the rice value chains. Yet, there is also an increasing attention of the Government to other crops such a 
maize, horticulture, beans and pulses, and aquaculture, to increase diversification and farm incomes, as well as to improve 
food security and reduce malnutrition. 
 

Relationship to CPF 
 

9. The proposed project is aligned with the National Agriculture Sector Plan to 2020 and Strategy to 2025, in which 
improving the commercialization and competiveness of the agriculture sector are the top priorities. The proposed 
project also supports several objectives of the Eighth National Socio-Economic Development Plan (NSEDP), namely 
Outcome 2.2 “Food security ensured and incidence of malnutrition reduced” and Outcome 3.3 “Reducing the instability 
of agricultural production caused by impacts of natural disasters.”  
 
10. The proposed project is consistent with the Systematic Country Diagnostic (2016), which placed an increase in 
agricultural productivity to support incomes among the top priorities to reduce poverty and boost shared prosperity in 
Lao PDR, and with the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) 2017-2021. It contributes to achieving its Objective 1.2 
“Making it easier to do business and create jobs” under the Focus Area 1 “Supporting Inclusive Growth” and Objective 2.1 
“Reducing the prevalence of malnutrition” under the Focus Area 2 “Investing in People.”     


 
11. The proposed project is closely aligned with the twin goals of ending extreme poverty and boosting shared 
prosperity and with the global Sustainable Development Goals, including Zero Hunger (Goal 2) and Climate Action (Goal 
13).   The project would directly provide benefits to local farmers in four provinces, namely Xayabury (those associated 
with maize value chains), Vientiane Province (vegetables value chains), and Bolykhamxay and Khammouane Provinces and 
Vientiane Capital (rice value chains). Most farmers in these provinces are practicing subsistent agriculture with low/ 
unstable productivity and low incomes. Generally speaking, rural farmers among poor groups in Lao PDR and some of 
them are living under extreme poverty. 
 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 

12. The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase commercialization of selected value chains in the project 
areas. 
 
Key Results (From PCN) 

 
13. The proposed PDO-level results indicators are:  
 

(i) Number of project beneficiaries (men and women; core indicator);  

(ii) An increase in productivity from those farmers adopting new technologies; 

(iii) An increase in the sale volumes (percentage) from those farmers adopting new technologies; 

(iv) An increase in the quality of the produce sold to agribusinesses through production alliances. 
 
D. Concept Description 

 
14. The proposed Agriculture Commercialization Project (ACP) seeks to enhance the competitiveness and 
sustainability of Lao PDR’s agriculture sector through technical and financial support to increase in agricultural productivity 
and commercialization in selected strategic value chains. The project would focus on: (i) the geographical areas with high 
agricultural development potentials; (ii) the farming systems with high potentials for commercialization (i.e. paddy, maize, 
vegetables); (iii) promotion of good agricultural practices and climate smart agricultural technologies and farming system 
diversification to enhance food and nutritional security; (iv) building capacity for farmers’ organisations, agribusinesses, 
public and private service providers; and (v) building on and developing synergies with other government/donor programs.  
 
15. Proposed project areas: In line with the above strategy, the project would select Provinces and Districts with: (i) 
high potentials for agricultural production (farm land and production volume); (ii) high potentials for commercialization 
and value chain development; (iii) availability of basic public infrastructure (i.e. irrigation, roads,  etc.); (iv) public services 
in place to support commercialization and diversification; and (v) availability of agribusinesses interested in inclusive value 
chain development. The list of target provinces is provisionally set as Vientiane capital, Vientiane province, Bolikhamxay, 
Khammouane, and Xayabury. The Provinces will be confirmed and districts will be identified before pre-appraisal mission. 
Three selected value chains could be initially selected for project preparation purposes – namely high value commercial 
rice (not subsistence), maize, and vegetables -- while allowing flexibility to add other, high-value crops during the life of 
the project. 

 
16. It is envisage that the Project would have three components: (A) Enhancing Productivity of Farming Systems; (B) 
Support for Improved Value Chains; and (C) Project Management. 

17. Component A: Enhancing Productivity of Farming Systems: This component would aim at enhancing productivity 
of farming systems and it would include the following activities:  

 
(i) Production organization and promotion of the use of good quality seeds;  
(ii) Research and extension to improve farming practices and farm machinery to promote good and 

sustainable agricultural production, diversification and commercialization;  

(iii) Upgrades of existing irrigation infrastructure and improvement of water management practices; 

(iv) Establishment and capacity building for farmer groups and their members; and  

(v) Mapping, demarcation, and registration of irrigation land/systems in the project area on a block basis (not 
for individual plots).  

 
18. Component B: Strengthening Agricultural Value Chains. This component would aim at strengthening and 
leveraging private sector investments in selected food value chains, and it would include the following activities:  
 

(i) Provision of matching grants to farmer groups and their members to promote investments in harvesting 
machines, drying and storage facilities to reduce pre/postharvest losses; 

(ii) Provision of matching grants and capacity building assistance to agribusinesses to strengthen their role in 
driving the value chain development; 

(iii) Upgrades of feeder access to production areas and farms;  

(iv) Training and consulting support to farmer groups and their members to build their management skills, 
business development and marketing of farm produce through adopting contract farming, value addition 
and product branding;  

(v) Support MAF, Ministry of Industry and Commerce (MOIC), their research institutes and technical agencies 
in conducting relevant market research, agricultural policy analyses, and improving intelligence and 
management skills; and  

(vi) Improving the enabling environment through strengthening capacity for quality control and standards 
certification (i.e. seeds, produce, mills, etc.) including improved inspection services, test kits and 
laboratory capacity to certify for clean and safe foods. 

 
19. Component C: Project Management. This component would provide equipment and incremental operating costs 
for project monitoring, financial management, and procurement activities, ensure compliance with the safeguards, 
support the short and long-term technical assistance to the project management team in selected areas, and support 
analysis and dissemination of findings related to the effectiveness and challenges associated with the different 
institutional and technical models being applied or piloted under the project.  
 
20. The project would establish and support linkages with ongoing and future interventions by other donors including 
ADB, IFC, NGOs, and government projects/programs. For instance, farmer groups and agribusinesses which received 
previous supports from the Netherlands Development Organization SNV’s Enhancing Milled Rice Production in Lao PDR 
(EMRIP) will be eligible for further support from this project in order to be more effective and efficient. The farmer groups 
and agribusinesses participating in this project would be well positioned to graduate and become potential clients of IFC 
in the future. This proposed project would seek to create complementary and enhance synergy of existing 
projects/programs in the areas. 


  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
The list of target provinces is provisionally set as Vientiane capital, Vientiane province, Bolikhamxay, Khammouane, and 

Xayabury. The Provinces will be confirmed and districts within identified before pre-appraisal mission.   
 
Component A (Enhancing Productivity of Farming Systems) would include production promotion of the use of good 

quality seeds, research and extension to improve farming practices and farm machinery to promote sustainable 
agricultural production, diversification and commercialization, upgrades of existing irrigation infrastructure and 
improvement of water management practices. Component B (Support for Improved Value Chains) would strengthen and 
leverage private sector investments in selected food chains. Component (Project Management) would support project 
management including monitoring and evaluation, financial management and procurement to ensure compliance with 
the fiduciary safeguards requirements. 
 
The project’s overall impacts are expected to be positive. Some negative impacts are envisaged to be limited, localized, 

manageable and reversible. It is anticipated that the following World Bank safeguard policies will be triggered: 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Pest Management (OP 4.09), Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10), Involuntary 
Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12), Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37), and International Water Ways (for irrigation rehabilitation). At 
present, there is insufficient information to determined if Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) and Physical Culture Resources 
(OP/BP 4.11) are triggered, hence it is classed as TBD. Mapping, demarcation, and registration of irrigation land/systems 
are not expected to cause changes in land use types and land ownership as they will be carried out a block basis (not for 
individual plots). Forced child labor and labor influx are not anticipated from the project. The project would comply with 
the three gender tags proposed by the World Bank Standards. This is to ensure that the project will address gender in 
terms of (i) analysis; (ii) action; and (iii) monitoring and evaluation framework. During project preparation, the project will 
develop specific/tailored measures to enhance equal access/opportunities for women to benefit from the matching 
grants and other project activities. 
 

 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
The project will be executed though the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry (MAF) with its provincial and district offices 

(PAFOS and DAFOs) in collaboration with Provincial Industry and Commerce Offices (PICOs) to be responsible for actual 
implementation of day-to-day activities. The capacity of MAF is assessed to be adequate as they had extensive experience 
in managing and implementing donor-funding projects, including those from the WBG namely Agriculture Development 
Project (ADP), 2004-2008, Rice Productivity Improvement Project (RPIP), 2009-2012 and Lao Upland Food Security 
Improvement Project (LUFSIP), 2010-2014. Some of PAFOs and DAFO staff had have previous experience with the World 
Bank-financed projects but some are new especially to safeguard policies. To mitigate residual risks, technical assistance 
will be recruited and in place to provide specific technical capacity for the implementing agencies involved in safeguard 
preparation and implementation. A staff from MAF and each of PAFOs and DAFOs will be appointed as focal points for 
safeguards. These safeguard focal staff will be responsible for impact assessment, consultation, and preparation of 
safeguard instruments, implementation and compliance monitoring and reporting with technical support from the 
consultants. Safeguard training and assistance will be also provided by the Bank safeguard specialists and the National 

University of Laos which delivers a safeguard training program supported through the ongoing Bank-financed Lao 
Environmental and Social Project II (LENSII). 
 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 
 

 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The project will finance irrigation and drainage 
refurbishment and upgrades and water management 
practices. Investments in harvested machines and 
storage and training, and equipment provision.  
 
The envisaged investments are typical to similar 
agriculture development projects and are not 
expected to have adverse and unprecedented 
environmental and social impacts. Implementation of 
irrigation and drainage infrastructure and land 
improvements investments on farmer fields under 
Component 1 are mainly rehabilitation by their nature 
and not expected to have significant negative 
environment and social impacts.  
 
Given that the scope and targets of the project are still 
to be determined during the project preparation, an 
Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) will be developed and applied by the project. 
ESMF will provide policy provisions, principles and 
process to address the environmental and social 
impacts. The policy framework will describe 
procedures for impact assessment, consultation, 
preparation of subsequent safeguard instruments and 
implementation arrangement. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 TBD 

It is expected that the project is only limited to areas 
of land already utilized for agriculture. NH will not 
likely be triggered as it is not anticipated at this stage. 
The project will have a ‘chance finds’ mechanism built 
into the ESMF to address the potential issues on NH. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No 

Forestry is not triggered as it is envisage that no 
project activities will take place on forest areas. The 
project would apply a screening process to eliminate 
subprojects which will impact on forests or involve 
forests in the early planning stage. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The project will develop a Pest Management Plan in 
line with Lao legal regulations and World Bank Policies 
on pesticide uses. A negative list of chemicals will form 
be included. The Pest Management Plan will be the 
part of the ESMF. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 TBD 

The project may impact on physical cultural resources 
although it is expected to be limited to areas of land 
already utilized for agriculture. The project will have a 
‘chance finds’ mechanism built into the ESMF to 
address the potential issues on PCR. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 Yes 

Target beneficiaries and project areas will be identified 
during project preparation. It is likely that the project 
will operate in areas where there is a presence of 
ethnic groups, belonging to Mon-Khmer and Hmong- 
Hmong – lu Mien ethno-linguistic families, that meet 
the four characteristics specified as defining criteria 
for indigenous people in the World Bank Policy on 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP4.10). The project would 
conduct a Social Assessment to inform the preparation 
of the Ethnic Group Policy Framework (EGPF) to 
ensure that free, prior and informed consultations 
would be conducted with affected ethnic groups 
leading to their broad community support, and that 
they receive project benefits in a culturally 
appropriate manner. The EGPF will be prepared as a 
standalone document in line with OP 4.10 
requirements, and will be finalized before the project 
appraisal. 
 
Due attention will be given to ensure that ethnic 
groups do not suffer adverse impacts and that they 
receive culturally compatible social and economic 
benefits. Necessary steps and procedures will be 
included to ensure that the cultures of the multi-
ethnic society are respected and that gender 
dimension are integrated at all levels and cycles of 
project implementation. A feedback and grievance 
resolution mechanism will be developed and applied 
under the project to provide affected ethnic groups a 
legitimate platform for monitoring and reporting on 
the safeguard policy compliance as well as on project 
implementation. 
 
The project will provide training to its staff, 
consultants and their partners on the EGPF to ensure 
that they are aware of and able to comply the policy 

requirements. Details of due diligence procedures will 
be described in the EGPF. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

Under Component A of the project: Enhancing 
Productivity of Farming Systems aiming at enhancing 
productivity of farming systems, minor land 
acquisition are envisaged from the rehabilitation of 
existing irrigation schemes. The civil works may 
involve expansion of intake, local reservoirs and 
irrigation canals.  These potential impacts can be 
avoided or minimized through proper design, impact 
assessment, consultation and application of mitigation 
measures. Given that the irrigation subprojects and 
areas to be covered are still unknown and to be 
identified during the project preparation, a 
Compensation and Resettlement Policy Framework 
(CRPF) will be developed and applied by the project 
which is in compliance with OP/BP 4.12 requirements.  
The CRPF will complement the EGPF and ESMF, 
especially in terms of implementation arrangements.  
If land or asset loss are unavoidable, the principles and 
procedures described in the RPF will be applied to 
address negative impacts.  Project staff, consultants 
and its partners will be provided with training and 
support to enable them to comply the policy 
requirements. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 Yes 

Although the project does not plan to include 
construction/rehabilitation of dams, it may include 
small scale irrigations which use or rely on dams. The 
project will prepare safeguard documents to comply 
with OP/BP 4.37 requirements. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

Yes 

The policy is triggered as the proposed project 
investments are located in areas that are part of the 
Mekong River Basin. However, the project targets 
rehabilitation and improvements of existing irrigation 
systems and the rehabilitation works will not involve 
any adverse impacts on the quality and quantity of 
waters in the Mekong River. The team will prepare for 
a notification process for downstream riparian nation 
states. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No The project will not be active in disputed areas. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Oct 31, 2017 

Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
The safeguard consultants will be recruited in April 2017. Draft safeguard documents will be available for review in June 

2017. Final safeguard documents will be available for disclosure in August 2017. 
 
 

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Women's Economic Empowerment Rural Development Project (P164443) 

 
 

  
Aug 29, 2018 Page 1 of 18  

     

      

 

Combined Project Information Documents /  
Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (PID/ISDS) 

 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 29-Aug-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSA24505 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Afghanistan P164443 Women's Economic 
Empowerment Rural 
Development Project 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

SOUTH ASIA 31-Aug-2018 28-Sep-2018 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Finance Ministry of Rural 
Rehabilitation and 
Development 

 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 

To increase social and economic empowerment of poor rural women in selected communities. 

 
Components 

Community Mobilization and Institution Development 
Building Access to Finance and Linkages with Financial Institutions 
Providing Technical Assistance and Improved access to Markets 
Project Management and Knowledge Management 

 
 

PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
   

SUMMARY-NewFin1  
 

Total Project Cost 100.00 

Total Financing 100.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 25.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 

 
   
DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 25.00 


          IDA Grant 25.00 

Non-World Bank Group Financing 

     Trust Funds 75.00 

          Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund 75.00 

    

Environmental Assessment Category 

B-Partial Assessment 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate     
 
B. Introduction and Context 

 
Country Context 

1. Despite notable progress in rebuilding the economy, strengthening institutions, and restoring 
infrastructure and basic services, Afghanistan faces tremendous challenges today. Afghanistan has relatively 
successfully managed the immediate challenges resulting from the political transition post-election of 2014.  The 
country has maintained macroeconomic stability and established the conditions for a slow recovery of the 
economy. Risks to the economy remain significant, however, and withdrawal of international security forces 
starting 2011, coupled with political uncertainties and declining aid, have resulted in deceleration of economic 
growth, while fiscal pressures increase as security threats mount. The latest numbers from the Afghanistan Living 
Conditions Survey (ALCS)1 released by the Central Statistics Organization (CSO) show that poverty in Afghanistan 
has increased from 38.3 percent in 2012-13 to 54.5 percent in 2016-17.2 With the population continuing to grow 
more than 3 percent a year, per capita GDP fell during the same period from US$ 669 to US$ 551, making it one 
of the poorest countries in the world. At the same time, private sector growth has fallen 9.4 percent in the period 
2003-2012 to only 2.1 percent between 2013 and 2016. Private sector development and diversification is 
constrained by political instability, weak institutions, inadequate infrastructure, widespread corruption, and a 
difficult business environment (Afghanistan was ranked 183rd of 190 countries in the 2017 Doing Business Survey 
and 177 out of 180 in Transparency International’s Corruption Perception Index)3. With a fresh election cycle 
approaching in 2018-19, it is vital that the Government focuses on private sector led growth and revitalization of 
the economy to fill up the void emerging from the declining donor inflows over the longer-term.  
 

2. A particularly concerning challenge is the low level of economic empowerment of Afghan women. The 
current level of women’s formal economic contribution to Afghan development is low. While women constitute 
47 percent of the estimated 34.65 million population of Afghanistan in 20164 the female labour force 
participation rate stands at only 26.8 percent (down from 29 percent in 2013-14). Among the working age 

                                                           
1 Source: ALCS 2016-17; available at https://cso-of-afghanistan.shinyapps.io/ALCS_Dashboard  
2 This is measured against a national poverty line of 2,064 AFN per person per month – approx. $1 a day in current exchange 
rate terms. 
3 Sources: www.doingbusiness.org/data and www.transparency.org/cpi  
4 Statistics in this section are taken from the ALCS 2013-2014, ALCS 2016-17, the World Bank development database; and the 
WEE-NPP Strategy paper, December 2016. 

women, only 29 percent are economically active and most are employed in the agricultural sector (70 percent) 
while 24 percent are in manufacturing. The share of women in wage employment in non-agricultural sector is 
only 10 percent. Only 19.9 percent of the female population is literate (versus 49.4 percent for men), although 
this figure nearly doubles to 38.7 percent if only the female population under 25 is counted, a significant 
testimony to the advances that have been obtained over the past decade. Women earn significantly less than 
men. For the same type of job, women earn 30 percent less than men on average. 

 

3. Women in Afghanistan face significant legal, regulatory and cultural challenges that hinder their ability 
to run businesses and access markets5.  While the Afghan Constitution clearly states that “the citizens of 
Afghanistan – whether man or woman – have equal rights and duties before the law”6 and while most commercial 
laws have no explicit gender-legal differentiations, there are implicit cultural barriers and lack of legal incentive 
mechanisms that reduce the ability of women to participate in the economy successfully. Likewise, there are 
numerous actual gender-legal differences when it comes to non-commercial laws (like the Marriage Law, Civil 
Code, Labor Law, etc.). These include differences in the legal age of marriage, mobility of women, ownership of 
property, and duration and types of work that women can undertake7. This lack of legal incentives for women to 
participate in formal business activities, has translated into very low levels of female entrepreneurship and 
women-owned businesses, although this number has increased steadily thanks to donor and Government efforts. 

 

4. Access to finance, particularly for rural women, is especially constrained. Financial inclusion is a core 
development challenge in Afghanistan – with only 10 percent of the population (and 3.8 percent of women) 
having accounts in formal financial institutions8. Microfinance has been a widely-used strategy in Afghanistan to 
address barriers to financial inclusion, with the Microfinance Investment Support Facility for Afghanistan (MISFA) 
serving as an apex institution channeling funding and technical assistance to the whole sector. While the sector 
has grown and consolidated over the last decade, the total number of clients of micro-finance institutions (MFIs) 
only stands at 0.22 million, of which only 0.13 million are active borrowers. The outreach of MFIs is limited to 80 
districts of 14 provinces, and only 12 percent of their active clients are from rural areas. Naturally, therefore, 
demand for microfinance services continues to far outstrips supply, especially in rural areas where financial 
markets have limited presence. The outreach of the banking industry is equally limited in rural areas. Currently, 
there are 15 licensed banks in Afghanistan including three state owned banks, nine private sector banks, and 
three foreign banks. The Banking sector has gradually been offering range of financial products and services but 
their services are mostly limited to urban areas. Most commercial banks have no branches outside Kabul yet, and 
a few are providing loans to local businesses, much less small rural businesses. 
 

5. There is hence tremendous potential to increase women’s participation in national development. 
Global evidence increasingly showcases that greater gender equality can enhance productivity, improve 
development outcomes for the next generation, and make institutions more representative.9 Actions to expand 
women’s economic activity in Afghanistan are constrained by a variety of cultural, institutional, and economic 
factors. Afghan women suffer discrimination that is multi-faceted, inter-related and self-reinforcing. But the 
current international perception that Afghan women are blocked from the economy is an unhelpful over-
generalization given the variation in cultural practices across the country. Furthermore, as in other parts of the 

world, cultural practices are more dynamic than often realized. As an economy grows and more opportunities 
arise, cultural beliefs about women’s ability to contribute to household income and their participation in 
economic activities will change. Moreover, addressing gender disparities and empowering women is essential 
for consolidating peace and security in fragile and conflict-affected societies. The imperative for investing in 
women’s economic empowerment (WEE) in Afghanistan can thus not be over-emphasized. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 

6. Recognizing this imperative, the Government of Afghanistan (GoIRA) launched the Women’s Economic 
Empowerment National Priority Program (WEE-NPP) on March 8th, 2017. The WEE-NPP forms the third pillar of 
the GoIRA’s Gender Strategy which is encompassed in the broader Afghanistan National Peace and Development 
Framework (ANPDF) – the country’s five-year development plan. The WEE-NPP aims to build poor women’s 
capacity to strengthen the economy of their households, communities, and the entire nation. It is structured as 
an umbrella program (rather than a stand-alone project/operation) that would operate through over a dozen 
line ministries (through ongoing or pipeline projects) and coordinated through a Program Coordination Office 
(PCO) in the Ministry of Labor, Social Affairs, Martyrs and Disabled (MOLSAMD). The latter would in turn provide 
start-up technical and financial resources to support women-owned businesses, and development of job skills, 
and financial literacy. The program would further help create an enabling environment for WEE through policy 
and planning reforms that will remove legal barriers to women’s economic participation; streamline and reduce 
regulatory barriers to women’s involvement in marketing; and improve the quality and use of gender statistics 
for planning and monitoring women's economic progress.   

 

7. The WEE-NPP builds upon and complements other initiatives of the GoIRA. The WEE-NPP builds on 
previous government-led initiatives to expand women's economic empowerment, including the gender elements 
of the Afghanistan Compact, the 2008-18 National Action Plan for the Women of Afghanistan (NAPWA), and the 
2008 Afghanistan National Development Strategy (ANDS). The GoIRA has also fully committed to gender equality 
and has backed this commitment with credible reforms to increasing the role of women in government, providing 
access to property, and implementing UN Resolution 1325. The WEE-NPP compliments these efforts and links 
closely to other NPPs – notably the Citizens’ Charter National Priority Program (CCNPP), the Agriculture NPP and 
the Human Development NPP. 
 

8. The WEE-NPP is comprised of six pillars. The WEE-NPP encompasses two domains of action. Facilitating 
activities (the first two pillars) include reforms that improve the regulatory and normative environment for 
women’s economic development, and investment activities (the last four pillars) include projects and programs 
that provide resources directly to women. In this way, the six WEE-NPP pillars focus on: (i) increasing the 
availability and analysis of gender statistics; (ii) removing legal and regulatory barriers to participation; (iii) 
training in literacy, business management, and labor skills; (iv) ensuring inclusive access to finance; (v) improving 
access to agricultural inputs, extension services, and markets; and, (vi) promoting access to creative economy 
markets. The activities under each of these pillars will be implemented by different ongoing and pipeline projects 
under various line ministries. 

 
9. The proposed women’s economic empowerment rural development project (WEE-RDP) will directly 
implement the last four pillars of WEE-NPP, while contributing to the others. It offers a national framework for 
women’s economic empowerment starting at the community level and with an explicit targeting of poor rural 
women. As acknowledged in the WEE-NPP document, past efforts at women’s economic empowerment have 
often focused on better-off, urban women. WEE-RDP reverses this approach. 

10. The project builds off the lessons from the ongoing Afghanistan Rural Enterprise Development Program 
(AREDP). The AREDP was approved by the ARTF Management Committee on April 11, 2010 with the objective of 
improving employment opportunities and income of rural men and women, and sustainability of targeted local 
enterprises. The project was successful in integrating the poorest segments of the population and empowering 
women who were the main direct beneficiary groups of all Project activities. AREDP’s operational activities have 
resulted in the strengthening of about 64,328 community members (56 percent women) including marginalized 
groups, IDPs and Returnees through a community-driven savings and enterprise model for income and 
employment generation. More than 5,193 SGs (54 percent women), 1,336 EGs (841 EGs managed by women) 
and 505 VSLAs were established and supported. Community Saving Groups have saved US$4.2 million (US$2.2 
million by women), where US$4 million of loanable savings are in circulation at any given time. Additionally, the 
program supported 657 SMEs to strengthen backward/forward linkages with the rural economy and utilized 
them as business service providers for the newly established community enterprises. A recent Bank funded 
analytical study ‘Jobs from Agriculture and Rural Development Operations in Afghanistan’ found that the 
employment effects of AREDP on female beneficiaries were significant. Participation of women in program 
activities has emerged as one of key strengths of AREDP as over 60% program beneficiaries are women. The 
impact of the project on the local economy and its catalytic effect on social inclusion facilitate its transition into 
a programmatic and women-oriented operation under the WEE-NPP.  
 

11. The project will leverage the social mobilization and outreach of the Citizens’ Charter program. Most 
successful women’s empowerment programs are built on a community platform which also provides access to 
basic services and enables trust. This is why the WEE-NPP conceived the WEE-RDP to leverage the institutional 
structure of the Citizens’ Charter National Priority Program (CCNPP). The CCNPP emerged from the foundation 
of the highly successful National Solidarity Program (NSP), which introduced a community-driven development 
(CDD) approach towards rural infrastructure and service delivery and reached approximately 35,000 
communities over the past 14 years. The Citizens’ Charter Afghanistan Project (CCAP) which implements the first 
phase of the CCNPP aims to deliver core infrastructure, emergency support, and social services to participating 
communities through strengthened Community Development Councils (CDCs). By helping to improve services, 
especially for the poor and most vulnerable through the CDCs, it also ensures social inclusion. The CCAP was 
planned to be a major contributor to building strong and accountable institutions especially by strengthening the 
capacity of CDCs to plan and monitor local service delivery and hold government and service providers 
accountable. The CCAP can thus provide an umbrella body for women’s groups and help women access critical 
social infrastructure. 

 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

12. To increase social  and economic empowerment of poor rural women in selected communities. 

 

13. The project defines “social empowerment” as participation in community level women’s institutions, with 
an implicit theory of change that such participation leads to social empowerment. These institutions will be 
provided seed capital, technical assistance, and in turn be linked to formal financial institutions and markets so 
as to enable economic empowerment. “Economic empowerment” is defined in this project as having both the 
resources to advance economically and the power to make and act on economic decisions. Economic 
empowerment starts with fair and equal access to markets and institutions, but women also need agency and 
control over resources to ensure they benefit from economic activities. Economic empowerment also 


encompasses financial inclusion, which increases women’s access to products and services to exercise control 
over money.  

 
PDO Level Indicators 

14. Following the focus of the project on social, financial, and economic inclusion and empowerment, the 
proposed PDO level indicators are as follows: 

(a) Number of direct beneficiaries (of which female)  
(b) % of women self-help group (SHG) members from poor or vulnerable households  
(c) Number of beneficiaries reached with financial services (Corporate Results Indicator) 
(d) % of women EGs/PAs showing increase in volume of sales 

 
D. Project Description  

15. Based on the rural goals outlined in the WEE-NPP, the WEE-RDP has three core intervention tracks – one 
around social mobilization to develop community institutions and federating them to higher levels; the second 
dedicated to providing inclusive access to finance, and the third focusing more on enterprise development and 
value chain/market linkages. These would be supplemented with program support that would also link back to 
both the WEE-NPP and the CCNPP. This ‘institutional approach’ to empowerment of women has proven very 
successful in rural livelihoods projects in other South Asian countries, notably in India, since it harnesses the social 
capital of poor women and uses this to develop both financial and economic capital. The overall approach and 
functions are similar to what existed under the AREDP, but the fundamental shifts would be (i) specific design 
features to promote participation of poor women; (ii)a more prominent role of social mobilization (with a goal of 
‘saturating’ as many women into savings/self-help groups as possible, of which a subset would receive enterprise 
support); and (iii) a much stronger focus on building sustainable community institutions for women’s agency and 
empowerment. Keeping this core design model in mind, each of the project components is described below.  
 

COMPONENT-1: Community Mobilization and Institution Development (est. US$ 30 million) 

16. Overall focus: The first component of the WEE-RDP aims to build sustainable community institutions 
through social and economic mobilization of rural women. This is perhaps the most critical component of the 
project, since it lays the institutional foundation on top of which the rest of the activities will depend. The 
formation of sustainable institutions would build the social capital of women in the rural areas and serve as the 
first stage of their economic empowerment. The core community institutional framework envisaged under the 
project are women’s savings groups (WSG or simply SGs) which would be federated into VLSAs. From these would 
emerge community level enterprise groups (EG) which in turn would be aggregated to producer associations (PAs). 
The project will heavily draw on the mobilization efforts undertaken by CCAP and leverage the network of CCAP 
facilitating partners (FPs) working with the program.  
 

Component 2: Building Access to Finance and Linkages with Financial Institutions (est. US$ 38 million): 

17. Overall approach: The second component will facilitate empowering of both community institutions i.e. 
SGs/VSLAs and its members to develop as sustainable financial institutions at the community level and eventually 
establish direct linkages with financial service providers including MFIs and commercial banks. Evidence from past 
experiences in Afghanistan as well as other countries demonstrates that this is a long-term process that has to be 
approached in phases. The key focus of WEE-RDP would be to strengthen the ‘demand side’ by creating an 
ecosystem of women savings groups that are built on mutual trust and respect to support their livelihoods and 


federate to VSLAs for sustainability. This would prepare the women groups to link with MFIs and make them 
bankable. In this way, there would be three stages in the access to finance:  

(a) the first stage is to develop an own savings culture through SHGs and federate them into VLSAs.  
(b) In the second stage, the project will inject seed capital, which will support transforming VSLAs to 

the next level in terms of scale as well as operational and financial sustainability.  
(c) Finally, the third stage would be to link the VSLAs to MFIs and Banks. 

 

18. The component will have a strong focus on ensuring the financial and operational sustainability of VSLAs 
and will work with MFIs and commercial banks to create an enabling environment for investment in the 
livelihoods of rural women by increasing their access to sustainable financial services. 
 
19. Financial Intermediation. Given the above, the project complies in general terms with OP 10.00 para 15 
on financial intermediation. However, there is a significant reason for concern about how loan contracts can be 
enforced, and how VSLAs will be sustainable when relying on ad hoc profit sharing arrangements (under Islamic 
finance) instead of predictable interest rates. There are also major security concerns in rural areas that could 
make the financial intermediation activities difficult to implement on the ground. An additional concern is how 
risks will be covered, including force majeure risk and credit risk (on loans to SHGs by VSLAs, and on loans from 
microfinance institutions and commercial banks to VSLAs in the future).  Given that VSLAs are supervised by the 
Ministry of Rural Rehabilitation and Development, a new arrangement for supervision will be necessary as they 
take on a financial intermediation role. Mature VSLAs managing grants and a growing loan portfolio may be 
supervised by the Central Bank, while others will require technical assistance and supervision from another 
agency.   It would also be critical to have a certification process to insure basic practices and systems are in place 
before seed capital is provided. For VSLAs that initially meet requirements and later do not, there needs to be a 
decertification or strengthening process in place – and this would have ripple effects for groups who have 
provided their savings. As for the eventual participation of MFIs, there is no law in place yet, which might limit 
their role. However, efforts are underway to pass a law to provide clear legal status and supervision 
arrangements. 
 
20. Component 3: Providing Technical Assistance and Improved access to Markets (est. US$ 18 million):  
This component aims to finance common assets of public goods nature based on business needs and assessment 
of market failures using the ‘maximizing finance for development’ (MFD) cascade principle (see figure 6 below) 
in order to provide catalytic support for the growth of viable economic activities and leveraging more private 
sector investments. These investments are expected to be catalytic, helping individual level investments reach 
economies of scale through increased coordination. This will be supplemented with technical assistance, business 
development support, as well as market exposure and linkages.  

 

21. Approach: Groups of women with homogeneous economic activities under the project will be enabled 
and incentivized to come up with business ideas that will provide the rationale for partnership and formation of 
Enterprise Groups (EGs) and Producers Associations (PAs). 10 Any support under this component will be against 

                                                           
10 Enterprise/Producers Groups (EGs or PGs) are primary economic interest groups consisting of members from same village 
working on common enterprise/production systems. This could be in the areas of farm; non-farm or off farm activities. Members 

of an EG normally ranges from 8-20 depending upon nature of economic activities. Producer’s Association (PAs) would be a higher 

order, secondary organization i.e. Federations of EGs/PAs. EGs/PGs from multiple villages engaged in common economic or 

income generating activities could be federated at a cluster level i.e. 10 to 20 villages. While, EG and PG would be an informal 

 
robust Business Plan with a ceiling of $ 2000 per EG, which may also be aggregated for the larger assets 
/infrastructure at the PA level depending upon specific business case and project requirements. The committee 
reviewing the business plan would have members of commercial banks/MFIs and representatives from industries 
and private sector, who could also choose to co-finance the proposal. The project is also considering contracting 
an independent third party to verify and validate the Business plan in terms of feasibility, fiduciary process and 
inclusion. It is expected that this build-up process will help women to increase their productivity, 
competitiveness, which would in turn improve the job opportunities for women and contribute to their economic 
empowerment. The component builds on the existing successful framework of AREDP on enterprise 
development which has proven effective in developing women enterprises and supporting them on capacity 
building, business skills and linkage to markets. EGs will be encouraged among all SHG members engaged in 
common economic activities. Thus, the component would help both individual and collective women enterprises 
to participate in organized and competitive supply chains, which would be identified through provincial 
situational analysis and other related studies. The focus will be on pro-poor, high value commodities such as 
vegetables, horticulture, milk, poultry, ship; fish; goat; carpet; honey, handicrafts etc. where women participation 
tend to be higher. Overall, only a sub-set of total households and geography having growth potential and are 
part of either economic clusters or value chains would be specifically supported under this component. This 
component will also facilitate EGs access to credit from VSLAs to support building of a healthy portfolio for the 
VSLAs and hence contributing to their sustainability. This component will also seek to draw partnerships and 
synergy with other ARTF, bilateral donor funded, and NGO run programs and projects that work on similar 
themes11. Investments made under this component would be largely/mostly of public in nature. 
 
22. COMPONENT 4: Project Management and Knowledge Management (est. US$14 million): Under this 
Component, the project will finance salaries of project staff, consultancies, training programs, office equipment, 
and incremental operational costs of set up under MRRD and provincial units. The component will also support 
project coordination, implementation, monitoring and evaluation (M&E) at the national and provincial levels, 
Management Information System (MIS), financial management (FM), procurement, human resource 
management, knowledge management and communication systems as well as environmental and social 
safeguards management, and running of the grievance redress mechanism. The project will leverage the existing 
institutional infrastructure available in the CCAP program at the MRRD level for various project management 
activities including procurement, FM and communications. A detailed M&E plan will be prepared to align project 
activities and tasks with the key results and the related PDO level results indicators and the intermediate level 
indicators at the component level. There will be systematic internal monitoring of activities and results that will 
be fed into the preparation of Implementation Status report and Annual Progress reports. An M&E/ MIS system 
will be established to collect and process appropriate information that will enable determination of the progress 
towards the achievement of the project development objective, tracking of progress at each phase of the results 
chain, and if required, adjustments will continuously be made and at Mid-Term. Baseline information will also be 
collected as part of the project preparation activities. 
 

23. Other areas of support under the component include the following: 
(a) Technical assistance to inform implementation and policy development, and capacity building of 

some of the MRRD directorate/cell/units to mainstream and ensure long term adequate staffing 

                                                           
organization, efforts would be made to convert PAs as formal community based organization registered as co-operatives or 

companies. Membership of PAs could range from 50 to 500 depending on the value chain.  

11 In this respect, the project is exploring a formal partnership with the “Women in Economy” program run by USAID. 

as part of exit strategy; 
(b) Partnership arrangements with some of the projects in India/Pakistan e.g. JEEViKA, Bihar in India 

or PPAF, Pakistan for overall technical assistance and implementation guidance; 
(c) Overall training and capacity building of staff/community professionals; identification, 

development and deployment of CRPs; organizing study tours and field learning trips; exchange 
of knowledge etc. could be also supported as part of this component. 

 
E. Implementation 

 
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 

24. The WEE-RDP will be implemented by the Ministry of Rural Rehabilitation and Development (MRRD) 
under the overall framework of WEE-NPP. Although, MRRD is going through an structural changes, which will 
evolve during the course of 2019, as per the latest thinking, it is proposed to restructure the Ministry into three 
operational general directorates, each covering the main functional pillars of MRRD’s operations. These are – (a) 
Community Development (covering the Citizen’s Charter Afghanistan Project (CCAP) as well as supporting public 
goods/infrastructure projects such as the Afghanistan Rural Access Project (ARAP)); (b) Sustainable Economic 
Growth (covering the livelihoods/private goods related operations such as AREDP); and (c) Balanced Growth and 
Border Areas (covering specialized cross-border programs targeting these geographies as well as specific 
populations). Common functions (such as HR, procurement, finance, etc.) would be centralized at the Ministry 
level. The WEE-RDP, given its livelihoods and private sector goods focus, would be situated under the second 
pillar (Sustainable Economic Growth). However, WEE-RDP would work closely with CC General Directorate as 
well as balanced growth pillars at both the national and sub-national levels and would leverage existing 
implementation architecture set up under different programs, particularly CCAP.  
 

25. The existing WEE-NPP Steering Committee will provide overall strategic guidance and oversight. The 
High-Level Steering Committee established under the WEE-NPP will be used for the overall co-ordination, 
guidance, setting up direction for program implementation and to enable leveraging of resources and drive 
synergies among various related programs of these Ministries for the overall socio-economic empowerment of 
women in Afghanistan. The steering committee will also be an avenue to move forward with any policy reforms 
and legal provisions that may be needed to facilitate the program (e.g. registration of VSLAs, or easing the process 
of issuing national IDs to women, etc.). The WEE-RDP directorate at the national level will coordinate its activities 
with the other programs being implemented under the aegis of the WEE-NPP through other related Ministries, 
such as the Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Livestock (MAIL); Ministry of Commerce and Industries (MoCI); 
MoLSAMD; and Ministry of Women Affairs (MoWA) so as to ensure synergy and coordination.  
 

26. At the national level, the existing AREDP PIU, will be re-modelled for WEE-RDP and positioned within 
the new Sustainable Economic Growth Directorate. The Directorate/PIU will be fully staffed with technically 
competent multi-disciplinary team of senior professionals, consultants and sector specialists to implement & 
manage the enterprise development, access to finance, access to market and economic empowerment elements 
of the program. WEE-RDP will utilize MRRDs common resources/systems for program support services related 
to HR; Finance Management, Procurement, and other technical units like communication; gender; Grievance 
redressal; Governance and Accountability etc. as part of the proposed Ministry restructuring. Only a lean team 
of complementary skills set with WEE-RDP will be maintained at the WEE-RDP directorate level for overall co-
ordination; policy/guidelines formulation; and for building partnerships with various public & private 
development organizations/institutions. 


27. At the sub-national level, the WEE-RDP structure will be merged with the existing institutional 
arrangements for the CCAP to avoid duplication. The WEE-RDP would therefore piggy back on the provincial 
management units (PMUs) and District Offices that have been set up under CCAP. The latter would be 
supplemented with one District Coordinator (DC) for each of the 76 districts under WEE-RDP coverage and the 
program would also establish seven regional offices for coordination across the provinces under them. 
Additionally, a team of 3 SOs (two female and one male) would be hired for every 30 CDCs covered for the first 
two years, which would then be reduced to 3 SOs per district in the remaining three years of implementation 
once the speed and scale of the program had increased sufficiently and most of the VSLAs were formed. Likewise, 
a team of 3 VFs (again two female and one male) would be deployed for every 10 CDCs for 2 years and 
subsequently for every 20 CDCs in Years 3-5. This same implementation model would be proposed for the FPs 
(who would be asked to on board VFs as well) so that at exit there is a common implementation architecture for 
the program. Selection of the sub-national positions will be done through a competitive process managed by 
MRRD at the provincial level. 

 
 
 
 .    
F. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 

Based on the AREDP experiences and lessons learnt, the proposed project, WEE-RDP is designed to be a 
more women centric program that is in better alignment with the WEE-NPP objectives. It will cover a total 
of 76 districts across all 34 provinces in the country with an average of 2 districts covered per province. 
More than two thirds of these districts overlap with the ongoing CCAP and therefore the WEE-RDP will 
benefit from the community mobilization and capacity building (including a range of participatory analysis 
and tools) that have been done as part of the former. At this stage it is envisaged that, the environmental 
and social adverse impacts will be insignificant, minor and reversible in nature. The environmental impacts 
may include issues with health, safety and labor hygiene as well as concerns on handling and disposal of 
agro-based wastes. However, given the scope and scale of planned businesses, the impact are minor and 
easily manageable. The environmental and social safeguards issues will be managed through a framework 
approach, and if required the framework will include necessary provisions to spell out with additional 
safeguards tools and plans which will be used throughout the project life.  


SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 is triggered. 
The access to finance under compoent-2 and the 
provision of seed capital (revolving fund) for VSLAs 
under subcomponent 3 and  may cause some 
adverse environmental and social impacts including 
occupational health and safety issues. The 
environmental and health and safety concerns may 
arise from different enterprises including agro-
businesses, food processing machinery, chicken 
farms, carpets weaving and other handcraft 
industries etc.  
Similarly, the project has also triggered Pest 
Management OP/BP 4.09 to ensure address safe 
utilization of pesticide and other associated risks 
related to agri-business. A ToR for Pest Management 
Plan (PMP) has been prepared by the client . The 
project has adopted a framework approach, as the 
specific locations and details of activities will only be 
determined by the borrower during project 
implementation.  The Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) prescribes 
directions and procedures that would avoid, 
mitigate, or minimize adverse environmental and 
social impacts and it will also spell out the policies, 
guidelines and procedures including mitigation plans 
to minimize and mitigate the likelihood of envisaged 
negative impacts. The ToR for preparation of the 
PMP is annexed in the project ESMF.   
The ESMF was prepared, consulted, cleared and 
disclosed before project appraisal and the required 
mitigation plans for sub-project and businesses 
activities under WEERDP will be identified during 
implementation.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No 

The project is owned, designed and will be 
implemented and supervised by the MRRD, which is 
a Government Agency and therefore the OP/BP 4.03 
is not triggered. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 No 
OP/BP 4.04 is not triggered since; the scope of the 
project will not pose any risk to the natural habitats. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No 
OP/BP 4.36 is not triggered since; the scope of the 
project will not pose any risk on Forest. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

OP 4.09 (Pest Management) is triggered, since under 
component-3 the project operations will lead the 
EGs (Enterprise Groups) to use pesticides for 
Agricultural related works and agri-business related 
activities.  
 
The Client will prepare an Pest Management Plan 
(PMP) during project implementation stage. The 
PMP will be subject to review by the Bank, consulted 
and disclosed. 
 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No 

OP/BP 4.11 is not triggered because there are no 
activities that will impact the quality of physical 
cultural resources as defined under the policy. 
However, the ESMF will also comprise guidelines for 
Chance Find Procedures according to national laws. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 

This policy is not triggered as there are no 
Indigenous Peoples that meet the criteria of OP/BP 
4.10 in the country that could potentially benefit or 
be adversely affected by the Project’s activities. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 No 

The World Bank’s operational policy on Involuntary 
Resettlement (OP 4.12) is not triggered, since the 
project will not have land acquisition and 
resettlement, in case of land requirement, the ESMF 
will provide guidelines and provisions on land 
acquisition through willing buyer-willing seller 
approach, or the Government provides government 
land to the community for sub-project 
implementation, requiring no resettlement and/or 
compensation for losses, and the land should be free 
of squatters and any dispute.  
The RSA concurs on the proposal not to trigger OP 
4.12 given that there is no physical footprint; land 
acquisition or subsequent impacts of physical or 
economic resettlement or loss of access to resources 
are not anticipated. The ESMF includes a section on 
land acquisition through willing buyer-willing seller 

=
method, if that should occur during project 
implementation. 
 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 
The Project does not have any activity involving 
dams. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
The Project does not involve any activity that will 
affect international waterways. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
The Project does not involve any activity in any know 
disputed area. 

 
 

KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
OP/BP 4.01 is triggered for the project hence the project is an Environmental Safeguards Category-B. The project 
under component 2 and 3 is intended to develop WSGs/VSLAs/EGs and PAs who would be provided with access to 
funds by multiple agencies. The funding would lead to village/community level businesses in various selected 
provinces. Although, the scope and nature of these businesses are not known at appraisal stage, however it is 
predicted that such businesses may have minor health and safety issues. The environmental and social safeguards risk 
rating for WEE-RDP is thus Moderate: due to insignificant negative impact on health, safety and environmental aspect 
from the project related operations.  
 
OP/BP 4.09 on Pest Management is also triggered as agricultural activities supported under Component 3 could lead 
Enterprise Groups (EGs) and Producer Associations (PAs) to use pesticides for agriculture related works and 
agribusiness related activities. The client will prepare an Pest Management Plan (PMP) during implementation to 
mitigate the risks from this. The PMP will be subject to review by the Bank, consulted, and disclosed during 
implementation. 
 
Likewise, activities under the project are not expected to have major adverse social impacts.  Systematic involvement 
of the local community throughout the planning and implementation of sub-projects will underpin the identification of 
potential negative social impacts and corresponding mitigation measures to be included in the ESMPs. Given the 
economic activities under the EGs and PAs, there is a potential risk of child labor. The project will therefore update 
and refine the ‘child labor’ strategy that had been used under AREDP. Training on labor safety will also be part of the 
training modules for EGs/PAs. Similarly, as global evidence shows, there can potentially be an enhanced risk of gender 
based violence (GBV) when working on women's economic empowerment. Although, there hasn’t been any evidence 
of increased GBV under AREDP as a result of engaging male community members, especially village elders and 
Mullah’s, this could be a potential risk to beneficiaries given that the focus now is only on women. To mitigate this 
risk, the project as part of its mobilization activities will discuss the importance women economic empowerment from 
Islamic point of view (the fact that women are given Mahr is to ensure their access to finance and making them 
empower financially) as well as highlight the good practices in Islam (wife of prophet being a merchant). Furthermore 
as part of capacity building and training activities under each component, the project will train women on soft skills 
including their wellbeing and how to manage/resolve conflict within family and community. The VSLA and SHGs will 


also serve as a safe-space to discuss/tackle potential GBV issues. 
 
As the project is owned, designed, implemented, and supervised by the MRRD (a Government Ministry), the OP/BP 
4.03 on Performance Standards for Private Sector Activities does not apply. 
 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
The project is not expected to have any harmful indirect or long-term impacts due to anticipated future activities in 
the project area. 
 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. 
Not applicable. 
 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower 
capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
To manage the environmental and socials safeguards (ESS) issues during the project implementation stage, the client 
has adopted a framework approach and prepared an environmental and social management framework (ESMF), 
which is consulted with stakeholders. Clearance has been obtained from the WB and disclosed officially. The ESMF has 
necessary provisions to prepare required safeguards mitigation measures including an Environmental and Social 
Management Plan (ESMP) and checklist to affectively address risk related issues during project implementation. Based 
on the experience of similar projects, notably AREDP that was managed by the same Ministry and team, most of the 
communities in the selected villages have no capacity/awareness to tackle risks associated with the day to day 
businesses under planned SGs/VSLAs. However, MRRD as an implementing agency has years of experience with 
similar projects and is therefore expected to provide the required technical assistance and capacity building to ensure 
that the provisions in EMSF are implemented. The project will hire an ESS focal officer at HQ level, as well as appoint 
safeguards focal points at each provincial level, the terms of references (TOR) for whom will need to be approved by 
the Bank before recruitment. The ESMF will guide the preparation of any Social Impact Assessments (SIA) and ESMPs, 
if required. The ESMF has been translated and disclosed in-country at Ministry’s Website and the World Bank’s 
external website on August 25, 2018. The ESMF contains the terms of reference for the proposed pest management 
plan. The PMP will be prepared and disclosed during project implementation. 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, 
with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are the communities and rural women who will be the beneficiaries of the project. The project 
will undertake a range of training and capacity building efforts with the target groups under each of the Components 
of the project. This will include awareness raising with regards to the ESS provisions in the ESMF. The project will also 
leverage similar efforts and capacity building done for CDCs through the Citizens Charter Afghanistan Project (CCAP). 
The ESMF has been translated and disclosed in-country at Ministry’s Website and the World Bank’s external website 
on August 25, 2018. 
 
 



 
























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Moldova Climate Adaptation Project (P155968) 

 
 

  
Feb 01, 2017 Page 1 of 16  

     

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Project Information Document/ 
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 01-Dec-2016 | Report No: PIDISDSC18811 

  BASIC INFORMATION 
     

  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Moldova P155968  Moldova Climate 
Adaptation Project 
(P155968) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA Feb 21, 2017 May 04, 2017 Environment & Natural 
Resources 

Lending Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency GEF Focal Area 

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Finance Ministry of Environment Land degradation 

 

 Financing (in USD Million) 

 

Financing Source Amount  

Global Environment Facility (GEF)    2.00  

International Bank for Reconstruction and Development   18.60  

International Development Association (IDA)    1.40  

Total Project Cost   22.00  

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B-Partial Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

  

Other Decision (as needed) 
 

Click here to enter text 
 
B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
 

Moldova is a landlocked country between Romania to the west and Ukraine to the north, east and south; the country 

has a surface area of 33,840 km2, and is home to 3.6 million people. Moldova’s rich soils and mild climate are ideal 

for farming, and agriculture has traditionally been a key sector in Moldova’s economic structure. The sector 

represented about 13 percent of Moldova GDP in 2014 with a value of about 14.5 billion MDL (about US$1.05 

billion). Agriculture employs nearly a third (28 percent) of the country’s population, and agro-food exports account for 

roughly 50 percent of the country’s total exports. In spite of its large size and significant contribution to the economy, 

the average agricultural sector growth rate performance has been low at 3.6 percent per annum over the last 10 years, 

mainly due to the sector’s vulnerability to the weather. 


In the context of overall economic growth, Moldova has made significant progress in reducing poverty and boosting 

shared prosperity. The economy was growing at 5 percent annually after 2000, and the national poverty rate (below $5 

per day) dropped from 68 to 11.4 percent between 2000 and 2014. Public and private transfers, namely pensions and 

remittances, as well as labor markets had an important role in reducing poverty. The Moldovan economy, however, 

moved into recession in 2015 (-0.5 percent growth in GDP) because of weaker external flows, large-scale banks fraud, 

and a drought. Economic troubles in Russia and Ukraine, together with Russia’s restrictions on agro-food imports from 

Moldova sharply reduced remittances from and halved Moldova’s exports to Russia. Further, a banking crisis brought 

on by massive fraud in three banks has lowered confidence in the banking sector, leading to significant interest rates 

and reduced credit to the private sector. The monetary and fiscal resolution of the three insolvent banks (12 percent of 

GDP) has led to higher public debt and lower foreign exchange reserves, damaged business confidence and reduced 

macroeconomic buffers to sustain economic shocks. 

 

Political instability became more marked between 2013 and 2015, manifesting itself as frequent changes of governing 

coalitions. There were seven prime ministers or acting prime ministers and three periods without a Government 

between September 2014 and January 2016. The November 2015 Public Opinion Barometer (bi-annual poll measuring 

political, social and economic sentiment) showed that 88 percent of Moldovans thought that the country was moving in 

the wrong direction. Corruption and governance indicators have also worsened markedly. Moldova fell from the 30th 

to the 20th percentile for Control of Corruption between 2012 and 2014 (2015 World Governance Indicators). The 

Business Environment and Enterprise Performance Survey shows a fourfold increase in the percentage of firms that 

rate the bribing of both officials and members of parliament during 2005-13 as negatively impacting the business 

environment. 

 

Moldova remains one of the poorest countries in Europe. Poverty is largely a rural phenomenon as rural national 

poverty stands at 19 percent compared to 5 percent for urban areas. With 57 percent of the population living in rural 

areas, 84 percent of the poor are concentrated there. Those in rural areas, poor and non-poor, rely more on agriculture 

and remittances for income sources than their urban counterparts who derive more income from non-agricultural 

employment. Therefore, rural areas felt the shock of the 2007 drought much more than urban areas, with poverty ($5 

per day) increasing from 31 percent in 2007 to a peak of 36 percent in 2009. Stocks of agricultural products vanished 

in many rural households, and prices and expenditure in households’ budgets for food and energy rapidly grew. A 

severe summer drought in 2015, along with lower remittances and higher inflation, has further pushed the poverty rate 

up to 41.9 percent. Climate change impacts, if not properly managed, could undermine progress made in poverty 

reduction, and adversely impact food security and economic growth in vulnerable rural areas.  

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 

Despite being landlocked and therefore having no exposure to sea-level rise, the ND-GAIN  methodology ranks 

Moldova as the most climate vulnerable country in Europe, based on a range of social and economic indicators. 

Temperature and rainfall have increased in Moldova over the last century. Climate models predict future mean 

temperature rises exceeding 20 by mid-century, and a slight increase or significant decline in precipitation, depending 

on region. Extreme climatic events and other climate-related challenges are expected to worsen in the future, with 

important implications for economic growth, and especially for the rural poor, who are more dependent on natural 

resources and more vulnerable to climate-related shocks. 

 

In 2014, the Government of Moldova, through the Ministry of Environment and with support of UNDP and the 



Government of Austria, developed and approved a National Climate Change Adaptation Strategy, reviewing climate 

change vulnerabilities in the six sectors considered most vulnerable, agriculture, water resources, forestry, human 

health, energy and infrastructure. The strategy included an initial action plan to 2020, at an estimated budget of 

US$155 million, based on institutional and investment activities recommended within each sector. More recently, the 

Bank has supported the Government to carry out a more systematic analysis of the costs of inaction on within each of 

these sectors, and the potential volumes and cost-benefit of physical investments for climate adaptation. Given the 

importance of the sector, a parallel climate-smart agriculture profile was prepared through collaboration with CIAT. 

The studies identified key current investment needs in warning and response systems to extreme climate events, in 

resilient land management through improved agricultural practices and forestry, and in water resources management, 

and findings are summarized below (see annex 3 for more detail). 

 

Agriculture: For most crops, yields in Moldova are around a quarter to a third lower than other Eastern European 

countries. Only around 1% of land is irrigated, and droughts occur every few years, and results in estimated annualized 

costs of around $20 million. The most severe droughts, such as that of 2007, have significant impacts on GDP and 

food security. Crop losses are also incurred from flooding, late frosts, hail and windstorms. Climate change is expected 

to reduce the productivity of most current crops by 10-30%, as well as increasing the frequency and intensity of most 

extreme events, and presenting new pest and disease challenges. Annual crops will be more severely impacted than 

perennials, with typical conditions for fruit orchard and vineyards potentially even improving under climate change, 

but recent trends have seen an increase in annual cropping over perennials due to a lack of investment in rejuvenating 

orchards and vineyards when they reach the end of their productive lives. 

 

With rural finance only available at high interest rates, lack of investment is a general problem in the sector. Around 

43% of agricultural land and 80% of pasture land (which is mostly communally managed under local government 

authorities) is degraded to some degree, which makes the land even more vulnerable to climate variability and change. 

The productivity of pasture land has been estimated at 20-50% of its potential. The annual opportunity cost of inaction 

in the agriculture and livestock sectors is estimated to be around $240 - $480 million at present and to rise significantly 

over coming decades. Scaling up adoption of irrigation and a range of other climate-smart and sustainable agricultural 

technologies will be critical to the productivity and resilience of the sector. 

 

Forests: Moldova has the lowest forest cover in Europe at only 11.4 percent. Forests tend to occur in hilly areas with 

the majority of them located in the central part of Moldova, slightly less in the north and even fewer in the south. Tree 

species are mainly broad leafed - oak, ash, hornbeam, black locust and poplar being the most significant. Moldovan 

forests are already fragmented and stressed, and climate-related changes in species growth and composition are being 

observed. Climate change is expected to reduce the productivity of natural forests and change pathology patterns. 

Annual opportunity costs of inaction are estimated to be around $40 million, and to increase marginally over coming 

decades. Areas for immediate interventions are ecological reconstruction of the present forest estate and the expansion 

of forest vegetation, including the creation of new forest shelter belts, which play an important role in protecting crops 

from high winds, desiccation and uneven snow cover. 

 

Water Resources: Most of Moldovan territory lies between two main rivers (the Nistru and Prut) which originate 

outside its territory, but surface water resources are limited in much of the area in between. About 65 percent of the 

population use water abstracted from groundwater supplies. Utilization of water resources is already much lower than 

during Soviet times. Only around 6% of the previous area is currently under functional irrigation, and irrigation and 

potable water supply from ground water is a problem within many rural areas owing to decreased water level and its 

quality. Even with the potential for slightly increased rainfall in some areas, overall water availability is expected to 

decrease with climate change due to the combined changes in precipitation and temperature. Despite low levels of 

current use, total water availability is expected to fall below total demand within a couple of decades, as demand grows 

but supply falls, and Moldova is among countries predicted to have high water stress in 2040. The most populated and 

economically important regions are the most vulnerable to expected climate change, and some regions are already 

facing water shortages. Addressing deficits in these regions will be critical for supporting a sustainable economic 

recovery. The costs of water shortages could be measured in the hundreds of millions or billions of US$ by the 2040s, 

and investments in improving the efficiency of water usage and additional storage will be needed to avert them. The 

current project would make its contribution reducing water deficit for farmers by providing access to irrigation 

schemes, by promoting better and more adapted to climate changes agricultural practices, as well as by conducting 

large-scale information dissemination and demonstrational activities in this regard. 

 

Climate knowledge and emergency response: Moldova suffers from a range of natural disasters, most of which are 

weather related. Current annualized costs of flooding are estimated to be around $60 million, and to increase to several 

times that over coming decades as flood frequency and the volume of assets at risk increase. The World Bank has 

already invested in disaster response management through the Disaster and Climate Risk Management Project, 

DCRMP (2010-16; US$12 million), which is assessed to have had a significant effect on reducing economic losses. 

Nevertheless, recent hail and rain storms (June 2016) showed that the country is not as well prepared for natural 

hazards as it aims to be. In particular, and as recently highlighted by the Prime Minister, local delivery and translation 

of early warning to early action, as well as effective response, need further strengthening. This requires not only 

bolstering of sub-national command structures and facilities/equipment, but also ensuring that local first responders, 

authorities, public services and businesses are better prepared.  

 
Relationship to CPF 
 

The proposed project is fully consistent with and anticipated in the FY14-17 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) that 

was approved on August 9, 2013. Specifically, the project combines two operations anticipated in the CPS - on 

sustainable forest management and climate adaptation - contributing to the third pillar on “promoting a green, clean 

and resilient Moldova.” Through the proposed project, the Bank will support the country in identifying and 

implementing interventions for improved environmental practices and natural resource management, and greater 

adaptation to the impact of climate change. The project also aims at ensuring that poverty reduction and shared 

prosperity are delivered in an environmentally sustainable manner, while also reducing the vulnerability of rural 

households, which represent a disproportionately high share of the bottom 40 percent and largely rely on self-produced 

foods, to the vagaries of extreme weather events. As described in the CPS, the project will assist in improving under-

developed weather mitigation instruments as part of adaptation efforts, which leave the rural population, farmers in 

particular, highly vulnerable to adverse weather events, thus compromising their food supply. All these efforts are 

expected to support the Bank’s major emphasis on increasing resilience to climate related risks and disasters.  

 
 

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)        
 
The PDO is to enhance adoption of climate-smart agriculture and forestry practices in targeted landscapes and 
strengthen national disaster management systems. 

 

Key Results (From PCN) 
 
- Area of agricultural land with increased productivity; 

- Number of farmers adopting new agricultural management practices promoted by the project; 

- Area of degraded land restored (of which forest, of which pasture); 

- Number/% of at risk population covered by effective early warning and response systems); 

- Direct beneficiaries (of which female, of which poor).  

 
D. Concept Description 

 
The emerging findings of the Climate Adaptation Technical Assistance show that there are substantial needs for (i) pro-

poor and complementary adaptation investments across a range of sustainable land and water management activities and 

(ii) cross-cutting climate information and emergency response. Accordingly, the Moldova Climate Adaptation & Forestry 

Project (CAFP) is proposed to focus on a mutually reinforcing set of investments that help to address several key 

adaptation issues and target the most vulnerable through: 

 

i. An integrated approach to supporting resilient rural landscapes through investments in on-farm irrigation and other 

adaptation activities, and forest-based restoration of degraded lands. 

 

ii. Strengthening of climate knowledge and disaster-risk management systems to improve understanding of climate 

impacts, and preparedness and response mechanisms, that will benefit a range of sectors. 

 

Project structure and key activities: 

 

Component 1: Resilient rural landscapes [$32 million indicative] 

 

Rural productivity in Moldova is lower than regional standards, and agriculture, livestock and forest systems are 

vulnerable to climate pressures. Only around 6% of the area covered by soviet-era schemes and less than 1% of 

Moldova’s arable land is under functional irrigation, and crops are vulnerable to flooding, late frosts, hail, windstorms and 

snow accumulations, as well as droughts. Many forests and pasture lands are degraded, and faced with intensifying 

climate-related threats such as fire and pests/disease. Particularly lands managed by local public authorities are degraded  

due to weak management capacity of the LPAs. Improving the management of these systems in unison is mutually 

reinforcing as it will support diversified rural incomes (thereby increasing resilience to individual climate shocks) as well 

as reducing vulnerability and increasing productivity through synergistic ecological services- e.g. the role that forests play 

in sheltering fields and protecting soil and water sources. 

 

The component would rely on investments in the following complementary activities within one or more target 

landscapes. 

 

Subcomponent 1.1: Support to the Agricultural Sector [$10 million indicative] 

 

The project would support the up-scaling of activities that have been previously tested through donor-supported pilot 

projects and have demonstrated successful mitigation and adaptation measures with potential for larger scale 

interventions. A number of resilience practices have been tested, generating locally-tuned models, farmer experience, and 

implementation-service delivery capacity has been created. stimulated emulation by the neighboring farmers. Discussions 

with producers confirm that these programs have been well-received and that there is a degree of emulation by 

neighboring farmers, but there is still considerable scope and need for upscaling. 

 

While on-going analysis indicates that access to irrigation represents the highest-return option for increased resilience of 

Moldovan agricultural production systems, the project will not focus on the rehabilitation of large-scale irrigation systems. 

These are not likely to be feasible in the context of the existing financing envelope for the project and current institutional 

constraints in the sector. Instead, the project would focus on building upon the results of the Millennium Challenge 

Corporation’s institutional and investment efforts in the rehabilitation of 10 large irrigation schemes, to provide further 

capacity building and/or investment resources to emerging water users associations/farmer groups for the sustainable use 

and expanded up-take of irrigation services. 

 

The project will provide financing for:   

 

a) Upscaling adoption of irrigation through assisting groups of farmers to access existing large-scale pumped systems 

rehabilitated by MCA, and by providing access to small-scale irrigation in the hinterlands through investments in shared 

equipment and infrastructure (e.g. rehabilitation of existing and construction of new water harvesting ponds). Both 

potential categories are likely to be located in the central and southern regions of the country. The potential ‘ready’ 

demand is assumed at around 15 percent of the potentially equipped irrigated area i.e., 30 000 hectares @ 15% = 4500 

hectares. The irrigated areas are used mostly for high value vegetable crops (tomato; cucumbers; onions; peppers; 
eggplants, etc.) and orchards. Based on the previous experience in the country the proposed activities do not 

cause any risks and impacts related to child and forced labor. 
 

b) Upscaling demonstration activities on climate smart agriculture technologies: i.e. integrated climate resilient practices 

and investments such as drip irrigation, greenhouses, minimum and no-till agriculture, UV/hail nets, etc. The project 

would aim to support around 100 producers, leading to at least 200 demonstration events and to around 3000 knowledge 

beneficiaries. 

 

c) Extension and knowledge dissemination on lower-cost on-farm adaptation practices: multi-cropping, inter-cropping, 

silage, climate smart herd management, introduction to organic farming, etc. The project would aim to support 

compilation of existing knowledge into publications and practical guidelines, with more on-hands delivery of knowledge 

to around 1000 farmers in dedicated workshops. 

 

The project would support the upscaling investments mentioned in (a) and (b) above with matching grant financing. 

Matching grants would not exceed 30% of the overall cost for any particular climate smart investment, as well as be under 

US$50,000, and would be provided on a competitive basis (in transparently held calls of proposals), against clearly 

established eligibility and performance implementation criteria, including a public good element, such as associative 

collaboration between farmers and/or a public demonstration element. Demonstration investments will be subject to 

commitments for inclusion in a demonstration plot circuit and allowing access by agri-consultants and interested farmers. 

 

Support for these activities is likely to be delivered to local communities and farmers through the country’s National Rural 

Development Agency (ACSA) for the proliferation of climate smart agriculture practices and technologies (through 

demonstration plots, farmer schools and climate-informed extension), and through the involvement of ACSA and of the 

Millennium Challenge Account Unit for irrigation activities. The spatial focus of these interventions, given the relatively 

uniform levels of vulnerability of agricultural production systems throughout the country, is likely to be widespread and 

responsive to local demand and proactivity, but the menu of interventions would be fine-tuned to local agro-climatic 

conditions. 

 

Subcomponent 1.2: Forest and pasture management [indicative US$22 million indicative] 

 

In forest and pasture land management, project activities will aim at supporting ecological reconstruction, new forest belts 

and riparian buffers and restoration of degraded land. The precise selection of activities will be conditioned on progress on 

institutional restructuring in the forest sector. 


Specific activities are in line with national forestry plans and could include: 

 

Institutional strengthening ($0.5 million) to support the implementation of the Forest Institutional Reform Strategy of 

Moldova (FIRSM, prepared in 2012 with support from ENPI-FLEG I program) through building capacity (equipment, 

enhancing professional and institutional capacity, etc.). 

 

Ecological reconstruction and improving the genetic diversity of state forests ($12 million) are high priorities. The aim is 

to consolidate existing forest resources by focusing mainly on the Central region where most forests are concentrated and 

to a lesser extent in the South. The project would support ecological reconstruction in an area of 5,000 to 10,000 ha 

depending on the intensity of presumed intervention ($9.5 million).This includes investments in the forest agency 

Moldsilva’s afforestation capacity along with financing forest reconstruction activities such as sanitary cuttings and 

selective cutting/clearing of nonnative species, as well as afforestation activities. For all areas proposed for ecological 

reconstruction a specialized design institute/agency will design a concrete scheme for such activities which will be 

preliminary reviewed and approved by the State Ecological Inspectorate in order to avoid any potential impacts on critical 

or important natural habitats with high biodiversity values. This will be done during the initial stage of project 

implementation and before contracting implementing agencies for these activities. 

 

Provision of appropriate seeds and seedlings material to support regeneration of native forests (mainly comprising oak 

species) would be addressed by investment in the National Centre for Forest Genetics and Seeds (NCFGS) under 

Moldsilva. Native seedling production would be enhanced through investments in irrigation and capacity for containerized 

seedlings production at the NCFGS ($2.5 million). Knowledge gaps in ecological reconstruction of forests would be 

addressed through a training program on the ecological reconstruction for the Moldsilva staff ($0.25 million). 

 

Agricultural shelterbelts, riparian buffers and afforestation on Local Public Authorities’ land ($6.5 million). This would 

include reconstruction of degraded shelterbelts on 1,000 ha ($0.75 million), creation of new forest belts on 1,000 ha ($1.5 

million) and riparian buffers on 1,000 ha ($1.5 million), as well as afforestation of around 1,500 ha of degraded land ($3.0 

million). These interventions would mainly target land owned by Local Public Authorities (LPAs). 

 

Improved management of LPA forests and pastures ($4 million) would increase the capacity of LPAs for managing 

communal land resources (mainly forests and pastures) in a participatory, planned and integrated way. This will support 

management planning for all forests that belong to LPAs but which do not have management plans yet (appr. 40,000 ha). 

The project would also support rehabilitation of degraded communal land, through improved pasture (and livestock) 

management, and silvo-pastoral approaches. 

 

Feasibility of activities on state lands currently managed by Moldsilva depend on if and when the FIRSM is implemented. 

The reforms are expected to be launched in fall 2016. If, however, they are delayed, more project resources will be 

allocated to management of locally administered lands. This alternative allocation of investments is represented in the 

table below. 

 

Private landowners have not yet been active in re/afforestation or production of e.g. for wood energy. This is due to 

fragmentation of private land ownership (average private property is about 1.2 ha) and due to very few degraded lands 

being privately owned. If feasible, the project may look at options (e.g. incentives or extension services) to promote wood 

production on private lands. 

 

Component 2: Disaster preparedness [$15 million indicative] Strengthened disaster management systems are needed to 

support a wide range of sectors with risk management planning and response to extreme hydrometeorological events. The 

Emergency Situations and Civil Protection Service (ESCPS) of the Minister of Internal Affairs has identified three 

priority investment areas that the project will seek to support, building on advances achieved during the DCRMP: 

 
(i) Establishment of two regional Emergency Command Centers. The DCRMP successfully established a modern national 

Emergency Command Center (ECC) in Chisinau. DCRMP’s scoping and feasibility studies indicated that to deliver 

effective management of emergency situations and preparedness across the country, two regional ECCs are also needed in 

the north and south of the country, in Balti and Cahul respectively. The project will therefore complete the national 

integrated risk management technical strategy by establishing the two regional ECCs. This will ensure better quality of 

services nationally at the local level, improve efficiency of support for remote locations, better support tactical field 

operations, and increase redundancy for critical ESCPS infrastructure. Cost is estimated at US$4 million, to be 

implemented over 5 years. 

 

(ii) Improving preparedness and emergency response capacity. Much of the equipment that ESCPS deploys to respond to 

climate and disaster emergencies is outdated and inefficient. For example, 90% of fire response equipment, which is used 

to manage both property and wildfires, is over 20 years old. Older equipment is also not compliant with modern 

environmental management approaches, often leading to negative environmental impacts during deployment. The project 

will therefore improve ESCPS’ preparedness and response capacity through investments in modern equipment, including 

but not limited to fire and rescue vehicles, extreme winter conditions access capacity, temporary flood management 

modules, electricity and heat generation, and equipment to support preparedness activities during non-crisis times. Base 

cost is estimated at US$3 million to be implemented over 3 years, scalable depending on financing availability. 

 

(iii) Establishment of a national training center. Currently Moldova does not have a national training center properly 

equipped for capacity building in theoretical and practical management of emergency situations. This prevents the state 

institutions, local public institutions of level I and II, the private sector and the public to effectively understand and 

manage disaster risk. Such a national training center would help ensure state and public preparedness for disaster and 

climate risks, improving risk management and awareness. The project will establish an ESCPS national training center, 

equipped for capacity building in both theoretical disaster risk management and practical training through simulations of 

emergency situations. The center will train ESCPS staff and first responders, as well as local leaders/authorities, managers 

of critical infrastructure (hospitals, schools, etc.), private sector leaders and the public. A location has already been 

identified and secured, with the cost estimated at US$5 million to be implemented over 5 years. 

 

Component 3: Providing immediate response to an eligible crisis or emergency as needed. A zero-budget contingent 

emergency response component (CERC) will enable funds to be rapidly reallocated to disaster response in the event of an 

eligible climate-related incident during the lifetime of the project. A crisis or emergency is defined for CERC eligibility in 

the same way as it is defined in World Bank OP/BP 10.00: an event that has caused or is likely to imminently cause a 

major adverse economic and/or social impact associated with crises or disasters due, in the case of this project, to 

hydrometeorological hazards. While the World Bank provides the Immediate Response Mechanism (IRM) to consolidate 

CERCs across national IDA projects for potentially larger multi-sectoral response financing, the preference is currently 

for a standalone CERC limited to funds under this project. Global experience has shown that standalone CERCs are more 

flexible and quicker to trigger ex-post. An IRM would require restructuring of existing projects to add CERCs to them. 

The Republic of Moldova would need to adopt a CERC Operations Manuals (OM), describing the actions to be taken 

when a crisis or emergency occurs, as well as the monitoring, evaluation and reporting arrangements of the emergency 

response. 

 

Component 4: Project coordination and management [$3.5 million indicative] 

This component will support knowledge and project monitoring systems, as well as overall project administration, 

including coordination across implementing agencies. As a member of the Intergovernmental Board on Climate Services 

(IBCS), Moldova has endorsed the Global Framework for Climate Services (GFCS). The GFCS strives to develop and 

incorporate science-based climate information and prediction into planning, policy and practice through close partnership 

between providers and users of climate information. The GFCS Partner Advisory Committee (PAC) has identified 

Moldova as one of six pilot countries. While through separate mechanisms the Bank and other development partners aim 

to support overall pursuit of GFCS at the national level, the project will provide technical assistance to strengthen the 


production and use of climate information as a tool for coordination and management within certain sectors: 

 

(i) Climate information services. The State Hydrometeorological Service (SHS) carries a national mandate to deliver 

information services specifically on weather, climate and water hazards. However considering complementary ongoing 

and planned support from the Bank and other development partners, the project will not directly invest in SHS. The 

project will provide technical assistance to support future climate investment, including: 

 

a. Supporting institutional reform processes (including vision, strategy, restructuring, etc) of Apele Moldovei (or any 

successor water resources management agency), informed by modelling of climate-related water resources challenges and 

investment needs, and analysis of constraints to irrigation development, for example land fragmentation and markets, rural 

finance, drought compensation, moral hazard and crop insurance. Costing approximately US$1 million, this will lay the 

basis for potential future irrigation (and storage) investments. (including potentially as a basis for discussion of future 

World Bank financing). 

 

b. Facility/challenge fund for additional analytical/modelling work on climate impacts, for example health effects, 

analysis of crop potentials, etc., estimated to cost US$1 million. 

 

(ii) Overall project administration. Includes coordination across implementing agencies and project monitoring systems, 

expected to cost approximately US$1.5 million. 

 
 

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)       

 
While the project activities will be implemented country wide, the main focus of the sub-component 1.a and 1.b will be 
implemented in the most vulnerable Southern part of the country which is one of the most affected by climatic 
changes region. The proposed activities would not generate any significant environmental and social risks as no major 
civil works or large scale ecological reconstruction activities in the forests will be supported. Some adverse 
environmental impacts might occur during afforestation activities which might affect the biological diversity and 
existing natural habitats, as well as some environmental risks and issues related to construction of the regional 
Emergency Command Centers and of the Emergency Training Center (solid waste management; air and water 
pollution; labor safety). 

 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies       

 
The project activities will be coordinated by an inter-ministerial steering committee chaired by the State Minister. The 
Ministries of Environment (MoE), and of Agriculture and Water Resources, Moldsilva, State Hydro-meteorological 
Service, and Department of Emergency Situations will be part of the steering committee, and will be implementing the 
some components of the project. 
 
Fiduciary arrangements, incl. safeguards, will be managed by the Project Management Team (PMT) in MoE. The PMT 
supported implementation of the Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs), and is currently supporting implementation of 
the Disaster and Climate Risk Management Project. These projects have financed, to a large extent, similar activities as 
the proposed project, in particular agricultural climate adaptation. The PMT staff has substantial experience in 
implementing environmental and social safeguards and the PMT EA capacity have been qualified as satisfactory. In the 

last AMs for the Disaster and Climate Risk Project the project environmental management is satisfactory. Civil works 
were in compliance with the EMP and EMP Checklists for hydro-meteorological stations and for Department for 
Emergency Situations Command Center. The PIU has integrated environmental clauses in the bidding and contract 
documents. The EMP environmental requirements are followed and there were no complaints from the HS and DESCP, 
or supervising Engineers. All construction and refurbishing activities are reported as being consistent with national 
environmental and construction requirements and permits. Under the pilot activities for the consolidation of the 
agricultural sector’s resilience to adverse weather effects the PIU has assessed from environmental point of view all 
selected grants and checked if they have relevant environmental permits and authorization, including approvals from 
environmental inspectorate.  It is expected the matching grant program of the Project will be implemented via Agency 
for Interventions and Payments in Agriculture (AIPA)  which has also experience in conducting environmental screening 
and assessment of the grants. Analysis of AIPA’s EA capacities and if needed, capacity building activities, will be done 
during the project design phase. 
 
For the project implementation the PMT will hire safeguards specialist responsible for both environmental and social 
safeguards; if needed, WB Environmental Specialist will provide adequate on the job training. 
 

 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team       

 
Arcadii Capcelea, Mohamed Ghani Razaak 

 
D. Policies that might apply       

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The proposed project activities (production of forest 
reproductive material for climate resilience; 
ecological reconstruction of priority degraded forests; 
rehabilitation and establishment of shelter belts to 
protect fields and riparian buffers to protect water 
bodies; afforestation of degraded land; community-
based pasture management; matching grant facility 
which would support investments in drainage of 
waterlogged areas, in irrigation infrastructure 
rehabilitation and modernization, in on-farm water-
harvesting structures and efficient small-scale 
irrigation, anti-hail net systems, agroforestry, soil and 
water conservation techniques; improving emergency 
prevention and preparedness training by constructing 
a training and/or two regional Emergency Command 
Centers; etc.) might generate a series of various 
environmental and social impacts related to the 
following: (a) biodiversity degradation; (b) increased 
pollution of ground and surface waters due to soil 
erosion; (c) health and environmental risks due to 
inappropriate pesticides handling; and (d) noise, dust, 
Air and water pollution, health hazards and labor 
safety issues during the civil works; etc. The 
anticipated social impacts of such activities include 
issues around (a) labor and working conditions, (b) 
information disclosure and stakeholder engagement, 
(c) community health and safety, (d) land acquisition, 
physical and economic displacement, lost access to 
natural resources. All of identified adverse impacts 
are expected to be typical for afforestation, 
agricultural production and irrigation activities as well 
as for small scale construction/rehabilitation works, 
temporary by nature and site specific and can be 
easily mitigated by applying best agro-forestry and 
construction practices or relevant mitigation 
measures.  
To address these impacts the client will prepare an 
Environmental and Social Assessment Framework 
which will guide the project activities and matching 
grants EA once identified. The ESMF would be 
targeted at specifying the set of mitigation, 
monitoring measures, timeframes and institutional 
responsibility measures to be taken during the 
project activities and matching grants to eliminate 
adverse environmental and social impacts, offset, or 
reduce them to acceptable levels. The documents 
should cover the following: rules and procedures for 
environmental screening; guidance for conducting 
activities/matching grants EIA and/or preparing 
simple EMPs as well as the EMP Checklist; possible 
mitigation measures for different proposed activities 
and matching grants to be supported by the project; 
requirements for monitoring and supervision of 
implementing of EIA/EMPs requirements. The ESMF 
will also provide a brief assessment of the associated 
to the project recently rehabilitated under the US 
“Compact Program” large irrigation pumping stations 
and schemes, in particular in terms of their 
compliance with the WB OPs. The project will require 
a framework for public consultation and information 
disclosure identifying all relevant, affected and 
interested stakeholders and will develop inclusive 
and meaningful ways of their involvement in the 
project design and implementation. This Public 
Consultation and Information Disclosure Plan or 
Stakeholder Engagement Plan will contain a section 
planning for continuous engagement, outreach to 


communities and stakeholder and information 
disclosure with respect to the project timelines and 
implementation. The PCID or SEP will be designed to 
reach out for both male and female audiences and 
provide opportunities for them to voice their opinion, 
concerns or comments about the project and its 
implementation. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 TBD 

At this stage of project design it is not known if this 
OP will be triggered. The NHs might be triggered first 
of all in the case of implementing ecological 
reconstruction activities. If the project will support 
such activities then the ESMF will provide detailed 
guidance for EA of such activities and areas. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes 

While the project will not support any commercial 
wood harvesting this OP is triggered as the project 
will support afforestation activities along with the 
forest reconstruction activities in the degraded 
forests.  In order to make sure the project activities 
will not affect natural habitats and biodiversity 
conservation the ESMF will specify the rules and 
procedure for environmental screening and 
assessment of land plots given for afforestation or for 
creating forest shelterbelts as well as of the degraded 
forests selected for reconstruction activities. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

While the project will not finance purchasing and/or 
application of pesticides, it might support purchasing 
special equipment and would provide training on pest 
management in the forestry sector and thus the 
project triggers this OP. To address these issues the 
ESMF will include measures to raise awareness and 
educate foresters regarding safe pesticide handling 
and use of Integrated Pest Management to enhance 
sustainability and reduce human and environmental 
exposure to pesticides. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No 
The project will be implemented on agricultural lands 
and in forest areas and will not generate impacts on 
PCRs. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No N/A for Moldova 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

The OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement is also 
triggered. Although it is expected all 
activities/subproject will be implemented on public 
lands, in some cases the proposed activities might 
affect private households or restrict access of the 
local population to the afforested lands or to 
pastures to be improved. To address the involuntary 
resettlement issues including impacts on livelihoods 



on protected lands, and   restriction to access to 
natural resources, the client will prepare separate 
Resettlement Policy Framework that also includes a 
Process Framework.  For that the client will conduct a 
Social Impact Assessment (SIA) and a Gender 
Assessment that, based on what will be designed the 
RPF. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No N/A 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

Yes 

The proposed upscaling irrigation through assisting 
groups of farmers to access existing large-scale 
pumped systems rehabilitated by MCA, and by 
providing access to small-scale irrigation in the 
hinterlands through investments in shared 
equipment and infrastructure (e.g. rehabilitation of 
existing and construction of new water harvesting 
ponds) will not change the volume of 
extraction/discharge water or quality of water of the 
Prut and Dniester Rivers (which are international 
rivers) and its tributaries, but rather will lead to more 
efficient irrigation and drainage. Based on that the 
project team will seek a waiver from VP on not 
required notification of riparian parties. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No N/A 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan        

 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 


























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Moldova Economic Governance Development Policy Operation (P156963) 

 
 

  
April 17, 2018 Page 1 of 5  

     

 

      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   

Program Information Document  
 (PID) 

 
 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 17-Apr-2018 | Report No: 125879 

 
BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Moldova P156963 
Moldova Economic 
Governance Development 
Policy Operation 

 

Region 
Estimated Board Date 
 

Practice Area (Lead)(s) Financing Instrument 

EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA June 19, 2018  
Development Policy 
Financing 

Borrower(s) Implementing Agency 

Moldova Ministry of Finance 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 

The proposed EGDPO supports ongoing reforms to enhance the transparency and sustainability of the public sector and 
to level the playing field for private sector development. They enjoy coordinated support from the EC, the IMF and the 
World Bank, including by targeted technical assistance.  

  
 
 Financing (in US$, Millions) 

FIN_SUMM_PUB_TBL 
SUMMARY 
 

Total Financing 30 million 

 
   
DETAILS-NewFin3 

  
Source: IDA 
 

 
Decision 
 

Following the Corporate Review, the decision was taken to proceed with appraisal and negotiations. 
   
 
 
 

B. Introduction and Context  
 
Moldova’s recent macro-economic performance has been characterized by consumption-led growth and low fiscal 



deficits. In 2016-17, GDP growth resumed reaching 4.5 percent on account of strong agricultural output and robust 
private consumption growth largely driven by remittances and public and private wage increases. At the same time, 
credit growth remains negative reflecting the limited pass-through of the monetary policy stance to commercial 
interest rates and tighter prudential standards in the banking sector.  The fiscal deficit is estimated to reach 0.8 
percent in 2017, lower than the deficit forecasted at budget stage and public debt remains sustainable under 
different stress-test scenarios. In 2018, growth is expected to remain robust and reach 3.8 percent but to moderate 
over the medium term. The inflation rate is expected to re-enter the target corridor due to base effects and lower 
regulated prices. Fiscal deficits are projected to remain under control.  
 
In a context of slowing growth over the medium term, addressing the structural impediments to efficient public and 
private sector governance is paramount for igniting new sources of growth. As a large share of the population is 
already living and working abroad, and the attachment of subsequent-generation migrants to Moldova declines along 
time, Moldova needs to search for new drivers of growth reliant on higher private sector investments and in this 
context, remove barriers to private sector access to and use of resources. Moreover, governance challenges undermine 
the efficiency of public resource use and constrain competition among businesses.  

 
 
 

Relationship to CPF 
 

In line with the World Bank FY18-21 Country Partnership Framework and the Moldova National Development 
Strategy, the proposed Economic Governance Development Policy Operation (EGDPO) supports Moldova’s transition 
towards a more sustainable and inclusive growth model. It builds on the progress achieved under the previous DPO by 
supporting actions to enhance the transparency of the banking sector and recent analytical work, which identifies 
strengthening the rule of law and the accountability of economic institutions as one of the top three constraints that are 
holding back economic growth and prosperity in the country.  
 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 

This operation supports reforms to strengthen economic governance in Moldova linked to the management of fiscal 

risks (Pillar A) and private sector development (Pillar B).  

D. Program Description   
 

This stand-alone Economic Governance Development Policy Operation (EGDPO) supports reforms to reduced fiscal risks 

and level the playing field for private sector development. The authorities are committed to restore investors’ and 

citizen’s trust in the integrity of the public sector by developing transparent and stable economic institutions and 

improving equity in access and use of resources. Reforms under the first pillar focus on reducing fiscal risks by reforming 

the pensions system, strengthening tax collection form tobacco taxation, pre-empting potential conflicts of interest of 

high level officials, and improving the reliability of SOEs and municipal enterprises’ financial information.    Reforms under 

the second pillar aim at removing bottlenecks in obtaining licenses, authorizations, and certificates and in accessing key 

agriculture inputs (seeds, seedlings, fertilizers, and pesticides), and at improving the governance regime in the banking 

and energy sector.  

 


E. Implementation  
 

The Ministry of Finance will steer the administration of this operation, as the main body responsible for financial aid 

coordination and management. The Ministry of Finance has recently assumed this role and will be responsible for the 

supervision for the monitoring of progress in the policy areas supported by the operation.  

 
F.  Poverty and Social Impacts and Environment Aspects 
 

The operation is not expected to have adverse impacts along poverty, social, gender or environmental dimensions. 
Some of prior actions could have positive impacts on poverty and equity. The pension and tax related reforms promote 
social sustainability, reduce privileges that do not benefit large segments of population, especially poor, and incentivize 
healthier lifestyle. The pension reform and higher tobacco taxation contribute to the reduction of gender gaps in income 
and non-communicable diseases.  
 
G.  Risks and Mitigation 
 
Risks to the program implementation are moderate to substantial. Macro, sector strategies and technical design risks 
are considered substantial and are partially mitigated by the reforms supported by this operation, the recent record of 
Moldova’s prudent fiscal policy, the IMF program which serves as a macro-fiscal stability anchor, and the technical 
assistance (TA) provided by the World Bank Group (WBG) which will help continue the reform agenda. 

 . 
























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Montenegro Second Institutional Development and Agriculture Strengthening Project (P164424) 

 
 

  
Nov 15, 2017 Page 1 of 18  

     

 

 
 
      

 

Combined Project Information Documents /  
Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (PID/ISDS) 

 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 20-Nov-2017 | Report No: PIDISDSA23780 
 
 
 
 
 
 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Montenegro P164424 Montenegro Second 
Institutional Development 
and Agriculture 
Strengthening Project 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA 17-Nov-2017 30-Jan-2018 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Finance Ministry of Agriculture 
and Rural Development 

 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
The Project Development Objective is to improve the competitiveness of agriculture and fisheries in Montenegro 
through enhanced delivery of government support in alignment with EU accession requirements. 
 
Components 

Strengthening MARD agriculture, rural development and fisheries program 
Support for the Food Safety, Veterinary and Phytosanitary Services 
Modernization of the Fisheries Sector 
Project Management 

 
 

Financing (in USD Million) 

 

Finance OLD 

Financing Source Amount  

International Bank for Reconstruction and Development   34.89  

Total Project Cost   34.89  
    
 

Environmental Assessment Category 

B - Partial Assessment 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the preparation to continue     
 
 



Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
 
Montenegro, a small, upper middle-income country, gained its independence in 2006 and is making big strides 
towards negotiating its accession to the European Union (EU). With a population of only 0.6 million, and a 
Gross National Income (GNI) per capita of US$7,320, Montenegro is the smallest country in the Western 
Balkans. It started negotiations with the EU in June 2012 and strives to join by 2020 ahead of the other countries 
in the Western Balkans. Of the 35 negotiations chapters, three have been provisionally closed and twenty-four 
have been opened. Good progress towards EU alignment has been made in areas such as free movements of 
goods, agriculture and rural development, food safety, veterinary and phytosanitary policy, energy, employment 
and social policy, regional policy and preparation for structural instruments. In the latest Progress Report on 
Montenegro (November 2016), the European Commission (EC) notes that the country is at early stages of 
preparation regarding budgetary and financial provisions, environment and climate change, and more needs to 
be done to improve competitiveness, as well as economic and monetary policy. Strengthening the 
administrative capacity for ensuring the application of the acquis communautaire remains a substantial 
challenge for Montenegro. 

 

Montenegro has followed a steady path of economic growth, but not without challenges. The economic boom, 
from 2000 to 2008, was triggered by a large inflow of capital that stimulated aggregate demand, led to a steady 
increase in Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth, and a fall in the unemployment rate. During the boom, there 
was a steady decline in the percentage of households below the poverty line and an increase in the income of 
households in the bottom 40 percent, most of them in rural areas. After experiencing a double-dip recession due 
to the 2008 global financial and the 2012 Eurozone debt crises, Montenegro’s economy slowed down to 1.8 
percent in 2014 and recovered to 2.5 percent in 2016, continuing its recovery path (with 3.2 percent in 2017) 
due to investments in road infrastructure and robust tourism activity. However, the unemployment rate remains 
high at 17.3 percent in early 2017. Large fiscal deficit and growing fiscal debt have prompted the Government of 
Montenegro to adopt a set of fiscal consolidation measures aimed at reducing public spending.   

 

Montenegro’s overarching development goal is to achieve smart, sustainable and inclusive growth. Montenegro’s 
development plan is outlined in three separate, but complimentary strategies: the EU Accession Program 2014-2018, 
the Montenegro Development Directions (MDD) 2015-2018, and the Montenegro Economic Reform Program (ERP) 
2016-2018. Montenegro’s EU Accession Program was adopted in December 2013 and represents the main strategic 
document regarding European integration. It focuses on measures required for completing alignment with the acquis 
communautaire. The MDD, aligned with the Europe 2020 strategy, was adopted by the Government in July 2015. The 
MDD identifies four driving sectors, namely tourism, energy, agriculture and rural development, and manufacturing, 

Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here. Please delete this note when 

finalizing the document. 

 


towards achieving the objective of “smart, sustainable and inclusive growth.” The ERP complements these efforts by 
tightening fiscal spending and reducing public debt. 
 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
Agriculture is an important sector for the economic development of Montenegro. In this predominantly 
mountainous country, agricultural land represents 38 percent of total land area, two thirds of which is covered 
by pastures. Agriculture and food production play an important role in the economy, contributing 12 percent of 
GDP (with the primary sector contributing 10 percent, and agro-food processing and fisheries contributing 
around two percent). With agricultural exports increasing by around four percent annually during the last eight 
years, agricultural imports have been increasing much faster (around 16 percent annually) leading to the 
worsening of agricultural trade deficit from US$166 million in 2005 to quadrupling by 2014.  

 

Agriculture contributes to income and job creation, but much of it is not accounted for. Agriculture is the 
largest economic activity in rural Montenegro; close to 50,000 families (roughly a quarter of the country’s 
population), with an average holding of 4.5 hectares, derive their income partly or entirely from agriculture. 
Despite its small size, the agro-climate and landscape varies dramatically from the north to the south and coastal 
areas of Montenegro. Olive and citrus fruit production dominate in the coastal region; early vegetable 
production and vineyards - in the center and in proximity of the larger agglomerations of Nikšić and Podgorica; 
and, extensive livestock production - in the north. According to MONSTAT, in 2010 there were 2,347 people 
formally employed in agriculture. Yet according to the 2010 Agricultural Census, the equivalent of 46,473 Annual 
Work Units were employed in agriculture, suggesting that only around five percent of agricultural employment is 
formal.  

 

Montenegro agriculture is characterized by constraints similar to those that prevail in Southeast Europe. 
Among them: (i) inability of agricultural producers to adopt modern technologies due to limited access to 
finance; (ii) small average farm size and an incomplete land use planning; (iii) slow uptake in development of 
aggregators that could improve collecting, storage, packaging and marketing of produce; and (iv) the effects of 
climate change, especially increased weather-related natural disasters such as droughts and floods that have a 
major negative impact on productivity, water supply and land erosion. 

 

With an extensive coastline, the fisheries sector of Montenegro has an enormous potential that has not yet 
been capitalized on. The fisheries sector has not yet developed to its full potential. According to recent stock 
assessments, marine living resources are currently under-exploited by the domestic fleet, which could safely 
increase in size. Today Montenegro is a net importer of fish products. In 2014, for example, 3,316 tons of 
fisheries products were imported into Montenegro, of which 2,000 tons of fresh, frozen and fileted products, 
whereas a mere 11 tons of fisheries products were exported. With current marine catch estimated at around 
900 tons a year, Montenegro has the potential to substantially increase its production to meet domestic 
demand (leading to an ultimate phase-out of imports), a large share of which will be absorbed by the growing 
tourism sector. The capacity of the fisheries sector, however, is currently constrained by outdated equipment, 
lack of adequate infrastructure (landing sites and dedicated access in existing ports) and an underdeveloped 
value chain.   

 

The Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MARD) has a cross-cutting mandate that covers not only 
agriculture, rural development, and the food system, but also encompasses water, forestry and fisheries. 



While the focus of the past 10 years has primarily been on agricultural production and to a lesser extent on food 
safety, the Ministry recognizes the need to strengthen the performance of other sub-sectors, i.e. food safety and 
fisheries, for which little policy orientation or support has been provided. The MARD has recently taken 
important steps to address this matter by adopting legislation that provides a new framework for food safety 
and establishes the Administration for Food Safety, Veterinary and Phytosanitary Affairs (AFSVPA). Further, it 
has functionally separated the Directorate for Agriculture and Fisheries into two Directorates to focus on 
supporting each sub-sector individually.  

 

Agriculture is an important sector in the EU accession agenda of Montenegro. Montenegro has made 
significant progress in establishing the required institutions and systems, and has developed capacity to 
implement the EU Instrument for Pre-Accession and Assistance for Rural Development (IPARD). However, 
further work is required as the country has committed to align its national agricultural policy to the Common 
Agricultural Policy (CAP) of the EU by the date of accession. To this end, the country is required to have all the 
necessary systems in place in order to manage and receive funding from the EU and to make payments to 
Montenegrin beneficiaries in accordance with EU rules and procedures. An Integrated Administration and 
Control System (IACS), along with other tools, are necessary for the efficient utilization and monitoring of 
support funds, and for the harmonization of the national direct payment measures with those currently 
implemented in the EU. EU membership brings important benefits to the country both at the macro and micro 
levels. It has been found to increase GDP per capita by approximately 12 percent. Trade liberalization has 
increased the flow of goods and services and has put competitiveness at the forefront of market integration. In 
agriculture, EU membership unlocks significant assistance and direct payments to farmers under the EU’s CAP, 
yet it also imposes stricter food safety and other trade-related requirements to agricultural production. 
 

Montenegro is making good progress towards alignment to EU food safety legislation.  A number of rulebooks, 
decrees and bylaws have been adopted. A new AFSVPA has been established under the oversight of the MARD, 
which also incorporates inspection services that previously operated autonomously. Several advances have been 
made in veterinary policy. The Animal Identification and Registration system, which already included large and 
small ruminants, was extended to pigs, and it has been completed. The multiannual program for the eradication 
of rabies has continued and routine monitoring and testing of ruminants for transmissible spongiform 
encephalopathies (TSEs) are being introduced. The implementing legislation on food safety rules was adopted in 
various fields but enforcement remains a challenge mainly due to shortage of human and material resources. As 
the country moves towards EU accession, the MARD would need to continue improving its administrative 
capacity, in particular for inspection services and laboratories, as well as upgrading food safety establishments. 

 

Montenegro’s preparations for the fisheries sector are at an early stage, but important progress has been 
made. The country’s Fisheries Strategy of 2015-2020 provides an overall guidance for the development of the 
Montenegrin sector and its administration in line with the Common Fisheries Policy (CFP), including steps 
required to fully align and harmonize the national fisheries policy with the EU acquis communautaire. Steps 
must be taken to inform fishermen, traders and processors about the requirements they will face prior to and 
upon accession of Montenegro to the EU. The strategy identifies some of the sub-sector’s key areas for potential 
growth, including improved resource exploitation and connecting production from capture fisheries to the 
tourism sector and processing, thus ultimately increasing the added value of fish products. To reach this 
potential, adequate support will be required to increase fisheries production – including number of boats, 
improvement of fisheries coastal infrastructure, and enhancement of the control and surveillance system to 
address illegal, unregulated and unreported (IUU) fishing. It is important to note that after EU accession, 


production capacity will be capped because of overall EU policy for the preservation of marine living resources. 
As a new EU member, Montenegro’s vessel capacity will be frozen as to the date of entry, without possibility of 
future expansion of the fleet.  

 

Since the early stages of Montenegro’s EU accession process, the EC and the World Bank (WB) have closely 
coordinated their activities to support Montenegro’s authorities and the agricultural sector towards unlocking 
access to the IPARD. Funded by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) and the 
Global Environment Facility (GEF), the Montenegro Institutional Development and Agriculture Strengthening 
Project (MIDAS) was launched in July 2009

1
 and has made important contributions to compliance with the IPARD 

requirements. The country’s authorities have put considerable efforts into setting up the required legal and 
institutional framework to meet EU pre-accession requirements. To this end, the MIDAS project has contributed 
towards (i) the establishment and capacity building of the Directorate for Rural Development (future Managing 
Authority) and preparation of the IPARD 2014-2020 Program and of the Code of Good Agricultural Practices; (ii) 
the establishment of the Directorate for Payments (future Paying Agency), including setting up its infrastructure 
that meets accreditation’s requirements, and establishment of the Farm Registry and of the Reference Price 
Database; (iii) provision of grants to agriculture holdings to promote their development and modernization 
along with familiarization of both farmers and Montenegrin authorities with the IPARD rules and principles; and 
(iv) enhancing food safety through investments in the national reference laboratories (Veterinary Lab and 
Institute of Marine Biology), as well as building and equipping the first Border Inspection Post (BIP) in Bar and 
strengthening the sector’s legal and regulatory framework.  
 

Montenegro received the EU’s “Entrustment of budget implementation tasks for EU IPARD funds.” 
Specifically, the entrustment was received in October 2017 for Measure 1 (Investments in physical assets of 
agricultural holdings) and Measure 3 (Investments in physical assets concerning processing and marketing of 
agricultural and fishery products) of the IPARD II Program. To this end, Montenegro’s IPARD II Program for 2014-
2020 (approved by the EU and adopted by the Government of Montenegro in September 2015) is conceived as a 
multi-annual development program for rural areas and proposes seven measures to be co-financed by EU and 
implemented by the Government, for which the Sectoral Agreement between Montenegro and the EU has been 
signed and ratified.  

 

Montenegro has opened negotiations with the EU on Chapter 11 (Agriculture and Rural Development) in 
December 2016, while negotiations for Chapter 12 (Food Safety), and Chapter 13 (Fisheries) were opened in 
June 2016. The opening benchmarks for these chapters have all been met and negotiations positions adopted by 
the Montenegrin Government. MIDAS activities have actively contributed in supporting the country in reaching 
the EU pre-accession negotiation opening benchmarks for Chapters 11 and 12. In this context, the MARD has 
requested the Bank to continue its support to the Ministry with meeting the closing benchmarks of these two 
chapters and provide additional support towards meeting the closing benchmarks for Chapter 13. 
 
 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
Development Objective(s) (From PAD)  
The Project Development Objective is to improve the competitiveness of agriculture and fisheries in Montenegro 
through enhanced delivery of government support in alignment with EU accession requirements. 

                                                           
1
 The MIDAS is scheduled to close on March 30, 2019 

Key Results 
 
 
D. Project Description  
 

The project will include the following components: 
 

Component 1: Strengthening MARD agriculture, rural development and fisheries program (EUR20 million). 

The component will: (i) increase and diversify income generation opportunities for productive units, and 

contribute to the creation of jobs, and (ii) support Montenegro for meeting Chapter 11 closing benchmarks. 

The grant program is expected to address most of the constraints faced by the country’s agricultural sector, 

including: (i) enabling access to finance to grant beneficiaries to adopt modern technologies; (ii) development 

of aggregators to improve collection, storage, packaging and marketing of produce; and (iii) implementation of 

agro-environmental measures to improve resilience to climatic pressures. 

 

Sub-component 1.1: Increasing and diversifying income opportunities through grants for agriculture, rural 

development and fisheries. This sub-component will support the development of agriculture, rural 

development and fisheries through the provision of grants. The design of the grant program will follow the 

implementation experience gained through the MIDAS project, where “the learning by doing” approach has 

been successfully tested with the core principle of IPARD. Investments are pre-financed by the beneficiaries, 

with reimbursement received upon successful completion and on-spot verification of the investment, and 

according to the share of support to total cost of investment (normally between 50 and 65 percent of the total 

investment); four-eye principle both for administrative control and on-spot control, coordination with 

Technical Bodies as appointed for verification of compliance with relevant national legislation. 

 

The grant program will be targeted at: (i) piloting further IPARD-like measures, including farm diversification 
and on-farm processing, that have not been previously implemented in order to develop the capacity of both 
institutions and beneficiaries while stimulating economic growth in rural areas; (ii) implementing direct 
support for rural development measures, including agro-environment measures, that will support MARD’s 
policy objectives towards harmonization with the CAP; (iii) support to production and processing 
associations/collections centers (including for milk, fruit and vegetables, etc.); and (iv) fisheries grants to 
enhance the capacity of the sector in preparation for the implementation of the European Maritime Fisheries 
Fund. The grant program is expected to leverage private sector investment and beneficiaries’ contribution, as 
well complement public sector investment in the modernization of the fisheries sector under Component 3. 
Detailed criteria, procedures, and related safeguards requirements of the grant program will be described in 
the Grant Operational Manual (GOM), satisfactory to the Bank, which will be prepared during project 
implementation prior to each call. 
 

Sub-component 1.2: Strengthening the MARD toward fulfilling EU accession requirements.  This sub-

component will provide investments to strengthen the DfP (future Paying Agency) management capacity 

through the development of the IACS components required for the management and control of payments to 

productive units, as well as the implementation of the European Agriculture Guarantee Fund, functionality of 



which constitute one of the closing benchmark of Chapter 11. The project will support the development of 

several modules necessary for the operational system of integrated controls, strengthen the regional offices 

for Advisory Services, and build the Paying Agency system at the regional level, which will be part of the final 

structure of a fully functional Paying Agency.  For logistical and accessibility purposes, the two services could 

be hosted in the same building but in different offices, however, the roles and responsibilities of the Advisory 

Services and Paying Agency will be well defined and fully separated from each other. To this end the project 

will finance refurbishing and equipping of existing offices, and purchasing the required hardware and software 

infrastructure. The project will also strengthen capacity of the DfRD, DfA, and DfP through provision of 

technical assistance (TA), training and study tours to assist with the policy design towards the EU CAP, and to 

assist with the design required to finalize the IACS and its various applications.  

 

Component 2: Support for the Food Safety, Veterinary and Phytosanitary Services (EUR3 million). This 

component will develop capacity for food safety, veterinary and phytosanitary services as part of the creation 

of an integrated food quality system which is consistent with EU requirements. Promoting safer agricultural 

products, including the prevention and control of animal and plant diseases are essential for improving the 

competitiveness of Montenegro’s agricultural production both domestically and abroad. It will also help 

producers to introduce cross-compliance requirements to receive IPARD funds. This component will support: 

(i) the establishment of an official, comprehensive control system for the safe disposal and/or processing of 

animal by-products (ABPs); (ii) strengthening of the diagnostic capacity of the phytosanitary laboratory; and 

(iii) strengthening of the capacity of the inspection services. The following set of activities will be financed 

under this component: 

 

Sub-component 2.1: Safe management of animal by-products (APBs). The project will support the 

establishment of a comprehensive system for the processing and/or disposal for ABPs which will be identified 

and documented in the National Strategy and Action Plan for the Management of ABPs scheduled to be 

adopted by the MARD in late-2017 or early-2018. Specifically, the project will provide TA for the design of a 

control system for the safe management of ABPs. The design will include a business plan for a disposal facility, 

detailed technical specifications and cost estimates for a housing facility. The project will also support the 

gradual operationalization of the official control system for ABPs along the entire chain (production, 

separation, storage, transport, and disposal and/or processing), including training of inspectors and business 

operators, establishing documented procedures and check lists for the approval of establishments and 

inspection thereof, aligning and completing the legal and regulatory framework in line with the current and 

relevant EU acquis and launching a public information and awareness campaign addressed to the associated 

food production/processing industry.  

 

Sub-component 2.2: Strengthening the diagnostic capacity of the phytosanitary laboratory. The project will 

assist the NRL housed at the Bio-Technical Faculty of the University of Montenegro with construction of new 

laboratory facilities (vertically extending an existing site), procurement of laboratory equipment and fixed 

laboratory furniture to support official controls. The project will also provide targeted TA aiming to ensure 

efficient inter-agency collaboration between the AFSVPA and the NRL by means of a Memorandum of 

Understanding, and pave the way towards accreditation of priority tests and methods as per ISO standard 

17025. 



Sub-component 2.3: Support to inspection services. To enable the inspectors of the unified AFSVPA to 

implement effectively the enhanced official control regime arising from alignment of national legislation with 

EU legislation, and the risk-based annual official control and sampling plan, the project will provide new 

vehicles and equipment for collection, cold storage and transport of samples, IT equipment, protective 

clothing, official uniforms, and other items.  

 

Component 3: Modernization of the Fisheries Sector (EUR6 million).  This component will finance public 

sector investment aimed at achieving two objectives: (i) enhancing the productive capacity of the sector with 

investments in basic infrastructure and equipment that will provide fishermen regulated safe, and sanitary 

landing facilities and access to port, and (ii) strengthening the institutional capacity in the sector to apply the 

CFP upon EU accession, as well as substantially strengthen administrative, inspection, and control capacity. 

This component will finance the following interventions: 

 

Sub-component 3.1: Development of a network of landing sites (both in ports and other locations) with 

enhanced access to auxiliary services. Sub-component. A national coastal urban planning strategy is currently 

being elaborated at various levels of government (both national and local), though it is not expected to be fully 

finalized before 2019. This planning process incorporates the designation of several locations for landing sites, 

including in the country’s six coastal cities, where accommodations can be designed for fishing activities in 

existing ports and in new landing sites to be developed. The port towns of Bar (in the far South of the 

country’s coastline), Herceg Novi (the far North of the country’s coastline) and a network of other sites along 

the coastline will be subject to infrastructure improvements and specific sites for construction and 

reconstruction activities will be identified by the Government. The project will finance TA for the preparation 

of designs and technical specifications required for equipment and infrastructure. The project will also finance 

civil works, including construction of facilities for landing, catch data collection, weighing and access to market 

for landed catches in sites that comply with World Bank norms. In addition, and where appropriate, 

improvements will be made in certain locations for access to water and fuel, and operational support (boat 

and gear maintenance).   

   

Sub-Component 3.2: Capacity Building for the Directorate for Fisheries, and support to Associations of 

Fishermen. The MARD Directorate for Fisheries already benefits from the various regional programs 

supporting the sustainable management of marine living resources. Scientific support is provided mainly by 

the Institute of Marine Biology in Kotor, while the Directorate itself is receiving support in the development of 

rules and regulations pertaining to the sector converging towards the full application of the CFP. The project 

will support training and equipment for fisheries inspectors to enable them to meet EU requirements.  

Significant TA support will be provided to Associations of Fishermen, which will be the direct beneficiaries of 

resources from the European Maritime Fisheries Fund (EMFF) designed mainly to cover the added expenses 

incurred by fishermen in application of CFP rules and regulations.  

 

Component 4: Project Management (EUR1 million). This component will cover the costs for project management 
related to staffing, consultancies, and equipment costs, as well as implementation of the Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF), monitoring and evaluation of all project activities in line with the Results Framework, 



adequate fiduciary (procurement and financial management), audits and accountability mechanisms for oversight, 
including a grievance redress mechanism.   
 
E. Implementation 
 
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 
 

The MARD will be the lead Implementing Agency and will have overall responsibility for project management 
and implementation. Following the project implementation structure established under the ongoing MIDAS 
Project, relevant Directorates and Administrations within the MARD will be responsible for the technical 
implementation (i.e. preparing terms of reference and technical specifications, preparing training programs, 
supervising consultants and advisors, participating in procurement evaluation committees, etc.) of project 
activities. Specifically, given the extensive experience on implementation of Bank-funded projects, the General 
Director of the Directorate for Payments (DfP) will be appointed as a Project Coordinator. The Director for 
Rural Development (DfRD) will be responsible for the implementation of Component 1; the Director for the 
AFSVPA will be responsible for the implementation of Component 2; and the General Director of the 
Directorate for Fisheries will oversee Component 3 of the project.  

 

An existing, experienced and well-performing Project Management Team (PMT) established to implement the 
MIDAS Project, will also manage MIDAS2. The PMT is currently housed in the DfP premises, and consists of the 
Project Coordinator (General Director of DfP, civil servant), Project Manager, Civil Engineer, IT specialist and 
Safeguards Specialist. Up to the closing date of the MIDAS Project, i.e. March 30, 2019, the proposed Project 
will continue to be supported by the current PMT staff. Thereafter, sufficient resources will be allocated to 
retain a Project Manager and other staff as required. The project implementation team will also continue to 
rely on a part-time environmental and social specialist, who will take active participation in the screening of 
the grants and direct payments as per the ESMF. The specialist’s tasks will include desk reviews, training and 
guidance of the applicants, and site visits to review compliance with both the World Bank safeguards policies 
and relevant Montenegrin laws. In addition, a Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist and other specialists in the 
field of fisheries and civil engineering will be recruited to support MIDAS2. Details of the above-mentioned 
arrangements will be provided in the Project Operational Manual (POM). 
 

A Project Steering Committee (PSC) will be established and maintained throughout the life of the Project to 
ensure overall coordination and strategic guidance functions. The PSC will be chaired by the Minister of 
Agriculture and Rural Development and will include the Project Coordinator (DfP General Director); General 
Directors of Directorate for Rural Development (DfRD), Directorate for Agriculture (DfA), and Directorate for 
Fisheries (DfF); Director of  the Administration for Food Safety, Veterinary and Phytosanitary Affairs, Advisory 
Services, Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Transport and Maritime Affairs, Morsko Dobro, Biotechnical 
Faculty/Phytosanitary Laboratory Director; and representatives of beneficiaries (civil society, local institutions, 
private sector).  

 

Fiduciary responsibilities, including procurement and financial management and disbursement, will be carried 
out by the existing central Technical Services Unit (TSU) under the Ministry of Finance. The TSU will be 
responsible for the preparation of quarterly unaudited financial reports and annual audited financial 
statements. Expenses incurred by the TSU will be financed out of the loan on a pro rata basis with other World 
Bank-financed projects in Montenegro. 


 
 

 
 
 .    
F. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 

The project will be implemented throughout Montenegro, including the activities targeting the fisheries 
under Component 3 in the coastal part of Montenegro. The activities on grants and direct payments will 
follow the well established screening procedure from the original MIDAS project, and will help screen out 
activities that may have additional safeguards implications. 

 
 
G. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 
 

Vera Dugandzic, Social Safeguards Specialist 
Esma Kreso, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 

 
 
 

SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The project activities on direct payments and grants 
under Component 1 will finance a diverse series of 
activities aimed at improving the agricultural 
practices in country. However, some of these 
activities, as evident from the support provided 
under the original MIDAS project, could have 
environmental impacts and implications. This 
includes, but is not limited to, small scale 
construction of barns, farm facilities, manure 
management platforms, traditional katuni huts, etc. 
The environmental screening procedure has been 
implemented for the original project and will 
continue to be applicable to these activities; the 
procedure has been slightly revised to reflect the 
envisaged project activities including support to the 
fisheries sector, in the form of an ESMF.  
 Furthermore, the ESMF addresses the construction 

and reconstruction activities under Component 3, 
aimed at improving the pier facilities for the 
fisheries.  There are no major environmental impacts 
anticipated at this stage except for the dust and 
noise, material sourcing, and waste management 
with regards to Components 1 and 3. For 
Component 2, the technical assistance provided will 
help establish a sound management system of the 
animal byproducts as a follow on to the strategic 
planning documents to be developed by the client 
towards the end of 2017. These activities will be 
supplemented by adequate due diligence 
documentation prepared based on the final 
management solution of ABPs.  
 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 No 
The activities will be carried out on already 
established farms on agricultural land and there will 
be no activities involving natural habitats. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No 
There are no activities involving forests foreseen 
under the project. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The project will support increase and improvement 
in agricultural practices, and may indirectly lead to 
an increase in the pest management practices. The 
project will not support directly purchasing or 
supplying of pest management materials, but the 
project’s ESMF includes a precautionary section on 
PMP. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No 
There are no activities involving cultural resources 
foreseen under the project. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 
There are no activities involving indigenous peoples 
foreseen under the project. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 No 

The original project triggered the Bank’s Policy OP 
4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement as it was expected 
that the project would finance the construction of 
the Paying Agency building and that land may be 
required to be expropriated for that purpose. The 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) document was 
developed, approved and disclosed in November 
2008. However, the implementing Ministry of 
Agriculture and Rural Development decided not to 
construct a new building but rather opted to use the 
existing state-owned building. To date, no land 
acquisition took place under the MIDAS and 
associated IPARD-like grants. As stated in the Grant 
Operational Manual (GOM), only activities that do 



not trigger the application of Bank’s OP 4.12 policy 
on Involuntary Resettlement are eligible for grant 
funding. The Grant scheme support program under 
the proposed project will follow the same eligibility 
criteria which clearly state that the activities which  
may result in displacement of any third party 
formally or informally occupying or using the land on 
which the activity is to be implemented will be 
excluded from financing. Only activities that are 
located on the farmer’s own land or on land for 
which the grant applicant has written consent from 
the owner to use the land will be eligible for funding. 
Additionally, no land acquisition will take place 
under the sub-component on development of the 
landing places (piers) and their auxiliary services in 
the ports of Bar and Herceg Novi as the civil works 
will be carried out in public maritime domain. In 
brief, project will not support any activities which 
might involve involuntary taking of land or physical 
or economic displacement of squatters, scavengers, 
or any other third party formally or informally 
occupying or using the land. 
 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 
There are no activities involving dams foreseen 
under the project. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 

The activities under Component 3 aimed at 
supporting and improving the docking facilities for 
fisheries may pose a risk to international waterways, 
i.e. the Adriatic Sea. However, due to the scope of 
works there is very little potential to impact the 
quantity and quality of water to riparians.In 
consultations with LEGEN it was determined that the 
activities are not of such scope or scale that would 
require triggering of this policy. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
 

 
 

KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The potential environmental and social impacts that are foreseen for the activities financed under the project are not 
large scale, significant or irreversible. The activities financed under the project can be broadly grouped into three 

groups, per project components: the grants and direct payments scheme, the support to the fisheries sector through 
small scale infrastructure interventions and the technical assistance towards establishment of a management system 
of animal byproducts (ABPs). The grant scheme activities will be screened using an ESMF and a mechanism established 
under the original MIDAS 1 project. The procedure will screen out activities that correspond to a Category A or that 
trigger additional safeguards policies. For activities that correspond to a World Bank Category B adequate due 
diligence will be prepared. The ESMF also sets up the monitoring and follow up activities that the PMT will undertake. 
The activities supporting the fisheries component will be subject to a Checklist EMP for simple infrastructure works, 
since all of the works anticipated are of a limited scope and to be carried out within the existing marine areas 
designated for reception of the fisheries fleet. Support provided under the animal byproducts Technical Assistance, 
will be supplemented with the adequate environmental and social due dilligence documentation, that would be 
adapted to the final selection of the methods and treatment chosen for safe management of ABPs. 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
There are no indirect or long term impacts anticipated in the project area due to the project financed activities. All of 
the activities are limited in scope and localized to a given location. 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. 
No alternatives have been considered. The ESMF will screen out activities based on the associated impact and 
activities corresponding to a Category A or triggering additional safeguards policies will not be financed. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower 
capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Client has a well established PMT with a part time environmental and social specialist in place. The key staff have 
attended multiple World Bank environmental safeguards trainings and have a good track record along with the 
experience of implementing multiple rounds of grant calls and screening of all received applications. The PMT has 
strong ownership over the screening process and have used each subsequent call to additionally fine-tune the 
screening procedures, and to also conduct environmental awareness raising trainings for all applicants. The Client has 
prepared a revised ESMF coupled with the Checklist EMP for the fisheries component and a precautionary Integrated 
Pest Management Plan and has disclosed this document with the public consultations held on November 10, 2017 in 
Podgorica. 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, 
with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are the project beneficiaries, that is the farmers and agricultural and fisheries workers, along 
with the neighbors and adjacent plots that could be impacted by the supported activities. Additionally, the 
stakeholders that may be involved include the different institutions supporting the development and operations of the 
agricultural sector in country, including government institutions, academia and  non-governmental institutions. The 
client has publically disclosed the ESMF with an announcement made on their website and through the local media for 
the public consultations that were held on November 10, 2017in Podgorica. In addition to the public consultations of 
the ESMF, each of the ESMPs that will be produced under the ESMF procedure will also be subject to public disclosure 
and consultations, as well as the Checklist EMPs for the fisheries infrastructure. Overall, the project has an established 
grieveance redress mechanism where each of the affected parties can communicate directly with the designated 
contact person through established email and telephone contacts. 
 
 
























































World Bank Document


COMBINED PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENTS / INTEGRATED 

SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET (PID/ISDS) 

Additional Financing 
. 

                                                                                                          Report No.:  PIDISDSA21555 

Date Prepared/Updated: 6-May-2017 

I. BASIC INFORMATION 

 A. Basic Project Data 

 Country: Haiti Project ID: P163081 

  Parent Project ID : P126744 

 
Project Name: Relaunching Agriculture: Strengthening Agriculture Public Services 

II Project - Additional financing (P163081) 

 
Parent Project Name: Relaunching Agriculture: Strengthening Agriculture Public Services 

II Project (GAFSP - IDA) (P126744) 

 Region: LATIN AMERICA AND CARIBBEAN 

 Estimated Appraisal Date: 02-May-2017 Estimated Board Date: 14-Jun-2017 

 
Practice Area (Lead): Agriculture Lending Instrument: Investment Project 

Financing 

Borrower(s) Ministry of Economy and Finance 

Implementing Agency Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources and Rural Development 

 Financing (in USD Million) 

     Financing Source Amount 

 International Development Association (IDA) 0.00 

 IDA Grant from CRW 35.00 

 Financing Gap 0.00 

 Total Project Cost 35.00 

 Environmental Category B-Partial Assessment 

 Decision  

 Other Decision (as needed)  

 Is this a Repeater project? No 

 
Is this a Transferred 

project? (Will not be 

disclosed) 

No 

. 

 
 

 
. 

B. Introduction and Context 


 Country Context 

 

Haiti’s geography, people, and history provide it with many opportunities.  The third largest Caribbean 

nation by area and population (10.4 million), Haiti shares the island of Hispaniola with the Dominican 

Republic. In addition to an illustrious early history, as the first independent nation in the region and the 

first nation in the world to be led to independence by former slaves, Haiti benefits from proximity and 

access to major markets, a young labor force, a dynamic diaspora, and substantial geographic, 

historical, and cultural assets. The country possesses untapped markets and a pent-up demand for the 

private sector to explore, including agribusiness, light manufacturing, and tourism. 

 

However, almost 60 percent of Haiti’s population, or 6.3 million people, remain poor, and 24 percent 

or 2.5 million, extremely poor, with poverty highest in rural areas.  The poorest regions, which are also 

the furthest from the capital, show extreme poverty rates exceeding 40 percent and very limited access 

to basic services. Like poverty, inequality is high with a Gini of 0.6 (highest in the Americas). 

 

Natural disasters have hindered the country’s ability to overcome these poverty levels. On January 12, 

2010 a magnitude 7.0 earthquake struck Haiti, causing the death of 230,000, displacing 1.5 million 

people, and resulting in damages and losses equivalent to 120 percent of its GDP.  In the months 

following the earthquake, cholera spread throughout the country infecting 800,000 people and cusing 

9,500 deaths. Nevertheless, in the aftermath of the earthquake, Government, Partners and private 

actors together invested approximately US$3 billion in Official Development Assistance and much 

more from private flows. Over 1.2 million people returned to more permanent housing. Collapsed 

infrastructure and many affected neighborhoods have been rebuilt, education services have been re-

established and extended, and deaths from cholera driven down to below 1 percent of cases (though 

resurgences of the disease remain).  The 2015 Poverty Assessment undertaken jointly by the 

Government and the World Bank shows that the percentage of extremely poor Haitians (those who 

cannot fulfill their nutritional needs) fell from 31 percent to 24 percent between 2000 and 2012, mostly 

in urban areas and especially in the capital. 

 

On October 4, 2016, category 4 Hurricane Matthew struck Haiti, affecting over 2 million people, about 

20 percent of the country’s population. The Government of Haiti (GoH)’s Directorate of Civil 

Protection (DPC) reported  546 deaths, 128 missing, 439 injured, 175,500 people living in temporary 

shelters, and immediate humanitarian assistance needs for 1.4 million people (about 12.9 percent of 

the population).  The GoH has requested CRW support in light of the large scale of damages, losses 

and reconstruction needs, and the deep poverty of the affected region. The hurricane also caused the 

first round of Haiti’s long postponed Presidential elections to be rescheduled to November 20, 2016. 

Haitians elected Mr. Jovenel Moise, the candidate from former President Martelly’s party, in one 

round, with over 55 percent of the vote. The Electoral Council confirmed these results on January 3, 

2017. President Moise was sworn in on February 7, 2017. 

 

Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraint 
Hurricane Matthew made landfall on October 4 at 7a.m. on the south-west coast of Haiti.  The 

hurricane caused maximum wind speeds of 230/km/h and rainfall of over 600mm in less than 24 

hours, and a rise in sea levels of two to three meters in the departments of Grande-Anse, Nippes and 

Sud. This is the first hurricane of this magnitude to make landfall in Haiti in 52 years.  The hurricane’s 

high wind speeds, heavy rainfall, and devastating storm surge resulted in flooding, landslides and 

extensive destruction of critical infrastructure and livelihoods, including large sections of road 

networks and bridges, with some key roads and bridges washed away.  The southern departments of 

Grande-Anse, Nippes, and Sud were especially affected, where 80 percent, 66 percent, and 65 percent 

of people respectively are poor (under the national poverty line of US$2.41 per day) and 36 percent, 

30 percent and 26 percent are extremely poor (under the national extreme poverty line of US$1.23 per 



day).  Lesser damage was seen in coastal areas in other parts of the country. 

 

On October 4, 2016, Haiti’s interim President called for an immediate emergency response in the face 

of the national crisis and humanitarian emergency. The Government appealed to the international 

community to fund US$120 million in humanitarian assistance to provide relief to 750,000 severely 

affected people. The United Nations launched a flash appeal for that amount on October 10, 2016.  On 

October 13, 2016, the Minister of Finance requested support from the World Bank and the Inter-

American Development Bank (IDB) in undertaking a Rapid Damage and Loss Assessment (DaLA).  A 

team immediately set to work. The Rapid Assessment results became available on October 26, 2016, 

showing a massive impact on the Southern regions.  The Bank also participated in the subsequently 

launched Post-Disaster Needs Assessment (PDNA). 

 

Total damages and losses were initially estimated by the DaLA Rapid Assessment at US$1.9 billion, 

the equivalent of 22 percent of GDP, and later to the equivalent of US$32% by the PDNA, with 

impacts largely concentrated in areas with poverty rates higher than the national average (Grande-

Anse, Nippes, and Sud departments).  The agriculture and housing/urban sectors were the hardest hit. 

Up to 90 percent of crops and livestock were lost in coastal areas, including stable food crops, but also 

cash and tree crops such as coffee, cocoa and vetiver.  Thousands of structures were damaged and 75 

percent of structures in the heaviest hit communities in Grande-Anse were entirely destroyed. More 

than 100,000 houses were heavily damaged or destroyed, half of which were Grande-Anse. 

 

Given the magnitude of the disaster, the GoH requires significant support to respond”, and to enhance 

the country’s overall resilience to disasters.  In the wake of Hurricane Matthew, emergency funding 

was sought from the IDA17 Crisis Response Window (CRW) in the amount of US$100 million toward 

recovery and reconstruction. of which US$35 million for the Agriculture Sector.  will support the 

country’s recovery needs under the Project.  Given the urgency to respond to the disaster, the Project 

would be processed invoking the Condensed Procedures set out in para 12 of OP 10.00 (Projects in 

Situations of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints). The Safeguards Action Plan 
setting forth the sequence for the preparation of the relevant safeguards instruments is annexed to the 

project paper.  

 Sectoral and Institutional Context 

 

Haiti remains extremely vulnerable to natural disaster with 96 percent of the population at risk. On 

October 4, 2016, Hurricane Matthew, a category IV hurricane, landed in Haiti and caused a large scale 

disaster affecting over 2.1 million people (almost 1/5 of the population) and leaving almost 1.4 million 

people in need of lifesaving assistance in the southern part of the country. Winds speeds up to 140 

mph and torrential rain for 48 hours (around 1,016 mm) triggered widespread flooding and numerous 

landslides and caused severe damage to all sectors - water, electricity, education, health, food security, 

and livelihoods - particularly in the Departments of Sud, Grande-Anse, and Nippes. It is estimated that 

Hurricane Matthew caused losses and damages equivalent to 22 percent of the Gross Domestic 

Product, killed 500 people and triggered humanitarian assistance for 1.4 million people (12.9 percent 

of the population). The impact of Hurricane Matthew on the agricultural sector is estimated at 

US$603.0 million, including US$213.0 million in losses and US$390.0 million in damages, making 

Hurricane Matthew one of the most devastating events of the past decades. 

 

Agriculture plays a significant role in the Haitian economy, contributing to more than 25 % of the 

country’s GDP. The sector employs about 57% percent of the active population, while providing 66% 

of employment in rural areas and 75% of employment to low-income rural households, thus 

representing the main source of income in rural areas. National agricultural production provides about 

50% of food availability, which is complemented by commercial imports (45%) and food aid. The 



departments struck by Hurricane Matthew had under cultivation 85% of the national production of 

maize and 37% of the national fruit production. These areas also accounted for about one third of the 

country’s stock of cattle, pigs and goats and poultry. 

 

In urgent need of assistance because of a natural disaster, the approval of this Additional Finance 

would allow to quickly mobilize the resources needed to provide much needed support to farmers in 

the areas affected by Hurricane Mathew. The task team has discussed alternatives to the proposed AF 

with the GOH and it was agreed that the proposed RESEPAG II AF is the most appropriate 

mechanism for a rapid mitigation response.  Indeed, the activities will primarily target areas already 

covered under the original project, the same profile of producers and tools to engage these producers, 

and use identical delivery mechanisms.  It will also be possible to use the current institutional 

arrangements and staff already in place. 
. 

C. Proposed Development Objective(s) 

 Original Project Development Objective(s) - Parent 

 

The PDOs are to strengthen the Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources and Rural Development's 

(MARNDR) capacity to define and implement the National Agriculture Extension Strategy, to 

increase access of small farmers to agriculture extension services and training on animal and plant 

health in priority regions, and to provide financial assistance in the case of an agriculture sector 

emergency. 

 Current Project Development Objective(s) - Parent 

 

The development objectives of the Project are to: (a) reinforce the capacity of the Ministry of 

Agriculture, Natural Resources and Rural Development to provide or facilitate access to services in the 

agricultural sector; (b) increase market access to small producers and food security in Selected Areas; 

and (c) provide financial assistance in the case of an Agriculture Sector Emergency. 

 Proposed Project Development Objective(s) - Additional Financing 

 

The new proposed PDO is: to (a) reinforce the capacity of the Ministry of Agriculture, Natural 

Resources and Rural Development to provide or facilitate access to services in the agricultural sector; 

(b) increase market access to small producers and food security in Selected Areas; (c) improve 

livelihood in areas affected by Hurricane Matthew and (d) enable the Government to respond promptly 

and effectively to an eligible emergency. 

 Key Results  

 
The proposed AF would allow to support 41,000 households affected by the hurricane. It would bring 

the total number of beneficiaries of the project (parent and AF) to 60,000, of which 40% of female.  
. 

  

 

D. Project Description 
 
Following the devastation caused by Hurricane Matthew, the project expects to receive US$35M 

Additional financing (AF) from the IDA Crisis Response Window to help restore productive assets 

lost, rehabilitate damaged or destroyed infrastructures, and support livelihoods to victims of Hurricane 

Matthew. The AF would (i) provide emergency assistance to allow more than 8,000 farmers to carry 

out winter 2016 and spring 2017 planting campaigns to secure food production; and to increase the 

number of beneficiaries of the pre-existing voucher schemes by 7000 (increasing from 8,000 to 15,000 

farmers) while fostering more resilient production systems; and (ii) introduce new activities to 

restore/rehabilitate irrigation systems through cash-for-work programs and larger infrastructure civil 



works allowing at least 3,500 hectares of agriculture land to recover access to irrigation and providing 

temporary jobs to at least 21,000 persons; and help restock part of the small animals lost by around 

6,000 poor households. 

 

In the Proposed AF, the emergency assistance and extension of the voucher scheme program activities 

would remain in the department of Sud, although more municipalities would be targeted. Irrigation 

works would be also conducted in the department of Sud, and would be closely related to the voucher 

schemes areas to ensure the adequate access to irrigation services of farmers benefiting from voucher 

schemes. Lastly, activities related to livestock restocking would concern the western areas of the 

department of Sud and Grande-Anse. 

 

Changes to the original project as part of the level 1 restructuring include: (i) Revision of the Project 

Development Objective (PDO) wording to reflect activities in the affected areas and an increase in 

scope of the Emergency Response Contingency (ERC); (ii) Activation of the Involuntary Resettlement 

Policy (OP/BP 4.12) to anticipate the possibility of an involuntary resettlement in the affected areas; 

(iii) Upgrading of the Results Framework to reflect adjusted outcomes and targets, and emerging good 

practices in climate resilience; (iv) Extension of the original grant closing date of to align it with the 

closing date of the Additional Financing; and (v) a reallocation between disbursement categories. 

 

The AF will trigger Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). While the implementation of RESEPAG 

II has thus far not involved any resettlement of families or economic restrictions, rehabilitation of 

irrigation and water management infrastructure may result in involuntary resettlement. A Resettlement 

Policy Framework (RPF) will be prepared in accordance with OP4.12 to ensure application of the 

appropriate safeguard policies. The completion of social safeguards instruments was deferred to the 

implementation stage in line with the flexibility afforded by OP 10.00 paragraph 12.  Consultation in 

the affected areas will include outreach to main stakeholders and the affected communities to the 

extent possible.  Once sites where project activities will be implemented are identified, Resettlement 

Action Plans (RAP) or Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plans (Abbrev. RAP) will be prepared 

consulted and disclosed for sites with resettlement impacts in accordance with the policy. Any 

compensation or livelihood restoration efforts that may be needed will be completed prior to 

commencement of the works. 

 

Closing Date 

 

The proposed AF would extend the current closing date of the original Grants from 30-June-2018 to 

31-Dec-2019. The Financing Agreement of the parent project would be amended accordingly.  This 

extension would allow for the completion of the activities under the Parent project so as to allow for 

emergency recovery and reconstruction activities as described under the components listed below and 

in more detail under the Project Paper. 

 

Component Name 

 

The project will maintain its structure around four components: Component 1: Agricultural support 

services; Component 2: Direct support to producers and associations; Component 3: Emergency 

Response Contingency Reserve; and Component 4: Institutional strengthening, monitoring and 

evaluation, project management and studies. 

 

The proposed AF will finance the scale up and the implementation of new field activities under 

Component 2 only, which will increase in cost by US$28.7M; Component 3 will receive an additional 

allocation of US$ 2.4M to compensate for expenses already incurred immediately after the Hurricane, 



and Component 4 will receive and additional allocation of US$ 3.9M to account for additional 

operational and monitoring costs. 

 

PHCOMP  

Component Name: 

Component 1 Agricultural Support Services (Total: US$ 11, IDA-H7410 US$ 1, GAFSP TF-11396 

US$ 10, US$ 0 IDA/AF). 

Comments ( optional) 

This component will not change. 
 

 

PHCOMP  

Component Name: 

Component 2: Direct Support to Producers and Associations (Total: US$ 54.2, IDA-H7410 US$ 

25.5, GAFSP TF-11396 US$ 0, US$ 28.7 IDA/AF). 

Comments ( optional) 

The activities planned under the Parent project (voucher schemes and matching grants) will not be 

modified. The Additional financing will (i) scale up the provision of vouchers under this 

component;  it will broaden the current geographical scope for this activity (Centre and Sud) with 

the inclusion of new municipalities within the Department of Sud and it will use the same delivery 

mechanisms as the Parent project reaching an additional 7,000 beneficiaries; (ii) add two new sub-

components: (a) Animal Husbandry and (b) Irrigation Rehabilitation and Micro-catchment 

protection. 
 

 

PHCOMP  

Component Name: 

Component 3: Emergency Response Contingency Reserve (Total: US$ 3.9, IDA-H7410 US$ 1.5, 

GAFSP TF-11396 US$ 0, US$ 2.4 IDA/AF). 

Comments ( optional) 

This component will change in title to “Emergency Response Contingency (ERC)”. Through this 

component uncommitted project funds, rather than an established upfront reserve amount, will be 

channeled to facilitate a timely response in case of an eligible emergency. 
 

 

PHCOMP  

Component Name: 

Component 4: Institutional Strengthening, Monitoring and Evaluation, Project Management and 

Studies Services (Total: US$ 11, IDA-H7410 US$ 7.1, GAFSP TF-11396 US$ 0, US$ 3.9 

IDA/AF). 

Comments ( optional) 

This component will not change in its design. However, to take into account the increased technical 

and geographical scope, and the increased in financial resources, additional allocation are being 

considered for equipment, vehicles, staff and consultancies. 
 

 
E. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if 

known) 

 

Parent Project 

Component 1, 3 and 4 activities are conducted nationwide. Component 2 activities are implemented in 

specific areas located in the Sud and Centre department for the voucher schemes; and Sud, Nord and 

Nord-Est departments for the matching grant schemes. 

 

Additional Financing (AF) 

The Haitian government carried out a Post-Disaster Needs Assessment (PDNA) identifying the areas 

most affected by Hurricane Matthew, and prioritized the most pressing interventions to ensure food 

production in the season following the disaster. The emergency assistance program and extension of 

the voucher scheme program activities would remain in the Sud department, although more 

municipalities would be targeted. Irrigation rehabilitation works would be also conducted in the 

department of Sud, and would be closely related to the voucher scheme areas to ensure optimization of 

benefits. Lastly, activities related to livestock restocking would concern the western areas of the 



department of Sud and Grande-Anse. 

 

Salient physical characteristics relevant to environmental and social safeguards under the RESEPAG 

II AF relate to high variability of landscapes, biodiversity and climatic zones, extreme weather, 

advanced deforestation, earthquake activity and climate change. Alternating topography of mountains 

and valleys create variability in rainfall varying from 550 mm on leeward slopes to 2,700 mm on 

northern and windward slopes. The heterogeneity of the territory is a determining factor for crop types, 

cropping season, land use and forest cover. 

 

Haiti is subject to extreme weather events such as droughts, hurricanes and tropical storms.  

Deforestation and steep slopes have intensified these risks. Loss of forest to charcoal and timber 

production and to agriculture since colonial days has reduced forest cover from 75% to 1.5%. 

Deforestation has contributed to high runoff, erosion, landslides, flooding, dust, loss of agricultural 

productivity, reduced rainfall, siltation of waterways and degradation of coral reefs and mangroves. An 

estimated 36 million tons of topsoil are lost in Haiti annually. 

 

Haiti is seismically active as it sits astride two shallow fault lines; it is vulnerable to earthquakes, 

especially in built-up areas. 

 

Although degraded, Haiti’s natural environment still contains areas with notable concentrations of 

globally or regionally threatened species, including numerous endemic ones. These Key Biodiversity 

Areas (KBAs) occur throughout Haiti. 

 

With predicted climate change, temperatures are projected to increase and rainfall is projected to 

decrease, which is likely to intensify droughts in the center of the country. Sea level is projected to rise 

between 0.13 and 0.56 m by 2090, which would threaten coastal zones. Future increases in number 

and intensity of tropical storms and hurricanes are likely, with associated increases in highly erosive 

rainfall, floods and storm surge levels. 

 

The project expands access to agricultural extension services and promotes environmentally friendly 

investments and practices in agriculture. The project aims to have a positive impact on agriculture, 

resource use and surrounding landscapes. It does not support any activities that have large-scale, 

significant or irreversible adverse impacts on the environment. The project provides agricultural 

extension services to existing agricultural lands, and will discourage the clearance of new lands.. 
. 

 F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 Asli Gurkan( GSU04 ) 
 

 Felipe Jacome( GSU04 ) 
 

 
Nicolas Kotschoubey( GEN04 ) 

 
 

II. IMPLEMENTATION 

The proposed AF will be implemented under the same institutional arrangements of the parent 

project. The closing date of the proposed additional grant would be December 31, 2019 to 

ensure that all additional planned activities would be satisfactorily completed in accordance 

with the revised and updated implementation plan. The date of the original grant would also be 

extended to December 31, 2019. 
 

. 



III. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 

4.01 
Yes This policy will continue to be triggered under 

the AF as original activities under the parent 

project will not change; and animal husbandry 

and rehabilitation of irrigation canals activities 

will be added. 

 

Environmental impacts under the Parent 

Project have been low, and safeguards 

performance has been satisfactory. The project 

was designed to avoid the financing of 

activities with significant environmental 

impact and promote environmental good 

practice such as reforestation and soil 

conservation.  In the control of agricultural 

pests, the project has focused on integrated 

pest management. 

 

In summary, impacts observed include 

inadequate sanitation in sub-projects (poor 

design of latrines and septic tanks) in several 

sub-projects, as well as limited clearing of 

existing land of trees and shrubs for market 

gardening, as expected in an agricultural 

project. Poor sanitary practices in food 

production (e.g., dairy production) also posed 

potential risks, although no incidences of 

contamination has been recorded. 

 

Several positive activities were financed under 

the project, including use of biological control 

methods against the mealybug, a parasite of 

pea, bean and groundnut; planting of trees as 

part of productive landscapes (for cover as 

well as for fruit production); and planting of 

mangroves to compensate losses resulting 

from expansion of salt ponds. 

 

E&S impacts were adequately managed using 

the Environmental and Social Management 

Framework (ESMF) and Integrated Pest 

Management Plan (IPMP) prepared for 

RESEPAG II. No new, significant impacts are 

expected under the AF. 

 

The MARNDR will make minor updates and 

modifications to the ESMF and IPMP, to 

identify and manage the potential adverse 



impacts under the AF, which include:  

(i) animal husbandry, mostly small scale, 

resilience-oriented, mixed agriculture-

livestock systems, with very limited inputs, to 

around 6,000 households: includes training, 

production of forage, preparation of 

enclosures (for goat keeping), provision of 

beehives and protective equipment (for bee-

keeping). Impacts would be limited and 

include production of waste (animal waste), 

cutting of vegetation (for feed), overgrazing, 

and damage to riparian habitat. Mitigation will 

include effective waste management, control 

of water discharges, prevention of animals’ 

access to surface water bodies and prevention 

of free-grazing by raising animals in closed 

systems and provision of feed via forage tree 

planting and harvesting; and 

(ii) Irrigation Rehabilitation and Micro-

catchment protection: cash for work for small-

scale rehabilitation works (off-farm 

infrastructures); and civil works on river 

intakes, rivers embankments, sections of 

canals and drains, protection of infrastructure 

(mainly bridges and access roads). Impacts are 

likely to include health and safety of workers, 

construction waste (cement, metal and timber 

scraps, etc.), noise, dust, water quality 

(turbidity). Mitigation will include generic 

workplace design good practice, providing 

adequate protection equipment to workers, 

adequate waste management systems, etc.  

 

The project was rated category B because 

potential adverse impacts on the environment 

were moderate and easily identified, mitigated 

and managed. The project will remain 

Category B. 

 

Social risks and impacts: On the social side, 

no major safeguards risks are expected. 

Potential risks may include delays in 

compensation related to land acquisition or 

lack of appropriate consultations on relevant 

project information. The project will avoid or 
minimize land acquisition based on lessons 

learned. The RPF will include measures to 

deal with such potential delays in payments 

should land acquisition be necessary.  The 

communication activities will particularly 



target matching grants and voucher schemes 

activities, which may be open to speculation 

of corruption and unfairness unless the project 

team clearly explains the rules and procedures 

for distributing project benefits.  Risks linked 

to labor influx are expected to be limited. 

They will be mitigated by prioritizing local 

labor and ensuring clarity on where laborers 

coming from outside will be hosted through 

their stay in the host community and ensuring 

that contracts are consistent with ESMF and 

RPF provisions. The revised ESMF will 

include an annex with a social assessment 

targeted to new locations and sub-projects to 

be covered under the AF. 

 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes This policy will continue to be triggered under 
the AF as original activities under the parent 

project will not change; and animal husbandry 

and rehabilitation of irrigation canals activities 

will be added. 

 Because the project focuses on capacity 

building and provides agricultural extension 

services to existing agricultural lands, it does 

not support the clearance of new lands and 

such activities are not eligible for direct 

support. No agriculture activities that require 

the clearing of forested land or that damage 

freshwater habitat are supported. 

Nevertheless, because of the potential for 

indirect impacts on natural habitats, 

particularly if some agricultural activities are 

carried out around protected areas or KBAs, 

this safeguard policy has been triggered.  

 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes This policy will continue to be triggered under 
the AF as original activities under the parent 

project will not change; and animal husbandry 

and rehabilitation of irrigation canals activities 

will be added in the revised ESMF. 

 Because of the project’s potential to indirectly 

influence the management of natural forests, 

particularly in silvo-pastoral landscapes, this 

safeguard is triggered. A section in the ESMF 

requires the development of a Forest 

Management Plan (FMP), should any project 

activities affect such forest landscape.  

 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes The project supports investments related to 
agricultural extension services. These 

investments include the procurement, 

handling, storage and use of pesticides for plot 



demonstration and emergency interventions of 

insect pest outbreaks. Only approved 

pesticides under national or international law 

(including World Health Organization – 

WHO) will be supported under project 

financing. A list of pesticides that fall under 

these categories or are otherwise ineligible for 

support are included in the IPMP. 

 

In line with the approach taken under 

RESEPAG II, activities under the AF will 

avoid the intensive use of pesticides and 

instead will support an approach that includes 

IPMP: (a) avoiding the use or promotion of 

pesticides in WHO toxic categories I (Ia and 

Ib) or II (except under strict supervision of a 

trained and certified “Pest management 

Specialist”); (b) reduce reliance on synthetic 

chemical pesticides; (c) promote the use of 

biological or environmental pest control 

methods based on prevention, surveillance and 

monitoring; (d) favoring the use of multiple 

strategies (e.g. crop rotation, cultural 

practices, host plant resistance, biological 

control methods, chemical control); (e) pest 

control that increases natural enemies of 

parasites; (f) applying products only when 

infestation levels are critical; (g) avoiding the 

use of herbicides and pesticides near water 

sources and their contamination with pesticide 

residues when cleaning the equipment used; 

and (h) training producers, technicians, and 

farm workers to responsibly manage pesticide 

products, equipment, and containers to avoid 

their own contamination or that of livestock 

food or produce. 

 

Under the AF, the project will continue to 

implement the IPMP developed under the 

guidance of the ESMF, including screening 

criteria to exclude pesticides that are 

prohibited under the Bank’s policies. A 

specific plan is included in the IPMP to 

provide for screening, no-objection and 

monitoring during the procurement of 

pesticides. The IPMP also includes guidelines 

on the relevant aspects of integrated pest 

management that are part of the extension and 

training services provided under the project. 

 Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP No This policy will not be triggered since the new 



4.11 activities (irrigation) will not have additional 
impact on physical cultural resources. 

 
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No The policy is not triggered because there are 

no groups in Haiti who meet the definition of 

IPs of OP 4.10. 

 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes This policy was not triggered in the original 
project as no involuntary displacement of 

people or land acquisition was foreseen. 

 

The AF will trigger Involuntary Resettlement 

(OP/BP 4.12). While the implementation of 

RESEPAG II has thus far not involved any 

resettlement of families or economic 

restrictions, rehabilitation of irrigation and 

water management infrastructure may result in 

involuntary resettlement. 

 

A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will 

be prepared, consulted and disclosed at project 

implementation stage in accordance with 

OP4.12 to ensure application of the 

appropriate safeguard policies. The deferral of 

the completion of safeguards instruments to 

the implementation stage was granted in line 

with the flexibility afforded by OP 10.00 

paragraph 12. This will ensure adequate time 

to prepare, consult, and disseminate the RPF 

and other safeguard-related documents 

following the Safeguards Action Plan annexed 

to the Project Paper. 

 

Consultation in the affected areas will include 

outreach to main stakeholders and the affected 

communities to the extent possible.  Once 

sites where the project activities will be 

implemented are known, Resettlement Action 

Plans (RAP) or Abbreviated Resettlement 

Action Plans (Abbrev. RAP) will be prepared 

consulted and disclosed for sites with 

resettlement impacts in accordance with the 

policy.  Any compensation or livelihood 

restoration efforts that may be needed will be 

completed prior to commencement of the 

works. 

 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No This policy will not be triggered since no 
dams, nor will irrigation systems dependent on 

dams, per the WB definition, be restored or 

rebuilt. 



 

Projects on International Waterways 

OP/BP 7.50 
No This policy will not be triggered since neither 

the parent project, nor any activities under the 

AF, will take place on international 

waterways, per the WB definition. 

 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 

7.60 
No This policy will not be triggered since neither 

the parent project, nor any activities under the 

AF, will take place in disputed areas, per the 

WB definition. 
. 

IV. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 

 A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 

 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and 

describe any potential large scale,  significant and/or irreversible impacts: 

 

Safeguards Implementation under the Original Project 

 

Component 1, SPS activities: impacts from handling and use of testing material, disposal of 

animal carcasses, disposal of syringes from vaccination campaigns and occupational health 

and safety concerns were adequately managed.  

Component 2, Support to Producers: the project targets improved, environmentally friendly, 

climate smart agriculture. The voucher program which has not started field-based activities 

had no impact. Impacts from inadequate sanitation in sub-projects under matching grants 

(e.g., poor design of latrines, septic tanks), cutting trees and shrubs for land clearing for 

market gardening, poor sanitary practices in food production (e.g., milk production), were low 

and properly managed. In addition, an integrated pest management plan waste management 

plan was prepared to manage agrochemicals. 

 

Components 3 and 4 had no recorded adverse impacts. 

 

The Social safeguards ratings under the Parent project have been consistently satisfactory. OP 

4.12 was not triggered under the Parent project and there were no resettlement impacts or any 

other major social risks or issues that occurred to date. Under the Parent project, an 

involuntary resettlement screening form has been used to properly detect and exclude any 

investments with OP 4.12 related impacts.  Under RESEPAG I, a social assessment was 

carried out based on extensive consultations with both Ministry of Agriculture (MARNDR) 

staff and community members in the pilot areas as well as a stakeholder analysis. The results 

of this assessment have served as the basis for the design of RESEPAG II. Under the AF, the 

ESMF update will include an annex with a social assessment targeted to new localities and 

new activities covered by the AF. MARNDR has started  to consult with people that would be 

potentially affected by the future AF activities.  

 

A gender review has been carried out during RESEPAG I. Consultations with women during 

the project preparation phase ensured women’s inclusion at the policy and program levels. A 

resultant just-in-time grants series “Fostering Economic Empowerment for Women 

Agricultural Producers in Haiti” is working to integrate gender, particularly women’s issues, 

within the Ministry of Agriculture. A collaboration between the gender specialist and the 



Ministry of Women Condition allowed to consider gender inclusion during the design of 

RESEPAG II. The Ministry of Agriculture has also hired a gender specialist to ensure that 

gender is being respected in the different parts of the project implementation. The Ministry of 

Women Condition has been a key stakeholder in the implementation of the matching grant 

component allowing the project to reach almost 50% of women participation. Under the 

Additional Financing the inclusion of women will remain important to at least 40% with some 

of the activities reaching 80% notably with the livestock packages. 

 

In terms of capacity for managing social safeguards,  the project team has a good presence in 

the field and is regularly in contact with the project beneficiaries. The project team has been 

holding consultations about the project activities and preparing minutes of these consultations.  

There is no social safeguards specialist under the parent project. However, the environmental 

specialist have attended several safeguards trainings. He is familiar with the OP 4.12 

requirements and have used screening forms to detect any resettlement related impacts. Under 

the AF, a second safeguards specialist will be hired, to be in charge of monitoring social risks 

and impacts. The person hired by the PIU will have documented social expertise, particularly 

given the fact that resettlement action plans may have to be implemented under the project. 

 

Additional Financing to Respond to Hurricane Matthew 

 

Under the AF, most of the planned activities would restore or improve pre-existing 

agricultural production conditions, and therefore are not expected to create any significant 

additional adverse environmental or social impact. However, (i) animal husbandry and (ii) the 

rehabilitation of damaged irrigation canals, water intakes, and water reservoir infrastructures 

may imply some minor environmental and social impacts related to: (i) additional waste 

(animal waste), vegetation harvesting, overgrazing, damage to riparian habitat, etc. Because 

the production systems in Haiti to be supported by the AF are of very small scale, point 

source pollution of wastewater, ammonia, odor, nuisances, etc., typically associated with 

intensive production systems, are not expected to be encountered; and (ii) construction, 

especially around water bodies (streams, canals) may impact health and safety, and result in 

waste production, noise, reduced water quality (turbidity), increase level of dust, or result in 

loss of vegetation cover, etc.). These potential negative impacts are however expected to be 

moderate, localized,  and can be mitigated through (i) for animal husbandry system promoting 

enclosure of goats, training and technical assistance that goes with the livestock will be the 

principal vehicle to effective management of waste, wastewater, preventing animals’ access to 

surface water bodies, production of forage trees for feed,  etc.; (ii) for irrigation rehabilitation, 

mitigation will be through the application of good construction and management practices and 

with close supervision of contractor performance by field engineers and in close consultation 

with local communities. The potential impacts and mitigation measures will be identified and  

included in  the ESMPs (and RAPs when relevant) for each subproject. 

 

The AF triggers the Involuntary Resettlement Policy (OP 4.12) as works along riverbanks and 

irrigation systems may require a minimal degree of land acquisition and cause economic 

impacts, such as impact on fruit trees or damaged crops. These works will not be large-scale, 

significant or have irreversible adverse impacts on the population. Because of the deferral of 

preparation of the safeguards instruments, the project will prepare, consult and disclose a 



Resettlement Policy Framework at project implementation stage. 

 

Lessons learned on social safeguards from RESEPAG II: 

 

Lesson 1:  It is important to have a dedicated social specialist as part of the PIU to track and 

document social issues and impacts. Under the AF, there will be a second safeguards 

specialist hired to focus on social safeguards and social issues at large. 

Lesson 2:  A well-functioning Grievance Redress mechanism is needed to keep track of 

beneficiaries’ concerns and provide timely response. Under the parent project, there is a 

hotline established under the Ministry of Agriculture. 10 complaints were received, mostly 

coming from agricultural producers whose proposals were not accepted. Under the AF, the 

hotline will be coupled with a communication strategy focusing some specific social risks. 

(Eg.to explain to the farmers the eligibility criteria, targeting strategy and the voucher system 

that the project is implementing). The Ministry of Agriculture will designate one focal point 

from the Ministry in each Department to act as liaison for managing safeguards-related issues 

and address grievances. The Focal Points would resolve issues, and escalate them to the staff 

in Port-au-Prince as needed. Meetings will be held every two months between staff in capital 

city and the regional Focal Points to exchange information. 

Lesson 3:  Even in projects that have not triggered OP 4.12, the involuntary resettlement 

screening form is a useful tool as part of ESMF to detect potential resettlement risks upfront. 

Under the AF, this practice will continue as part of first environmental screening and a RAP 

will be prepared when potential impacts are detected. No activities will be able to start before 

the RAP is effectively implemented and the project affected people have received their 

compensation. The safeguards specialists under AF will receive a refresher training on OP 

4.12 as well as how to screen out social impacts beyond resettlement. 

 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in 

the project area: 

 

The project has potential indirect impacts on natural habitats if some agricultural activities are 

carried out around protected areas or Key Biodiversity Areas (KBAs). Also, the project has 

the potential to indirectly influence the management of natural forests, particularly in mixed 

land use landscapes (forestry and grazing). 

 

However, the project is designed to avoid the financing of activities with significant 

environmental impact and promote environmental good practice such as reforestation and soil 

conservation.  The ESMF has provisions to prepare a Forest Management Plan (FMP) should 

any project activities affect such forest landscape. 

 

In the control of agricultural pests, the project has focused on integrated pest management: 

use of approved pesticides only; reduce reliance on synthetic pesticides; promote biological 

pest control; utilize multiple strategies (crop rotation, resistant varieties, and biological 

control); natural predators of parasites; critical use of products; protect water sources; and 

training operators. 

 

Furthermore, the ESMF and the capacity building provided to the Environmental Cell in 

MARNDR will enhance the ability of the Ministry to optimize environmental outcomes in the 



project area. 

 

No potential indirect or long term social impacts are expected. Resettlement, land acquisition 

and loss of economic livelihood are unlikely. The project will avoid or minimize land 

acquisition based on the lessons learned regarding delays and complications with land titles. 

RPF will include measures to deal with such potential delays in payments should land 

acquisition be necessary.   

 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse 

impacts. 

 

The project design is broad and includes many components. It takes into consideration the 

role played by the agricultural sector in employment (57% percent of the active population; 

66% of rural employment; and 75% of employment to low-income rural households); the 

variability of the topography and climate; environmental degradation; and social vulnerability. 

Project design considered the current alternative, which avoids funding activities with a 

significant environmental impact, commercial crops, monoculture and export-oriented crops, 

but promotes good environmental practices such as reforestation and soil conservation at the 

micro-producer level. 

 

Most of the planned activities under the AF are not expected to create any significant adverse 

environmental or social impact, as they will be restoring or improving pre-existing 

agricultural production conditions, and will put a particular emphasis on the quality and 

resilience of these structures and systems. As the proposed project would support the 

rehabilitation of damaged irrigation canals, water intakes, and water reservoir infrastructures, 

including river embankments, this may imply some minor temporary environmental and 

social impacts. These civil works are expected to be mostly of small size, and efforts will be 

placed on minimizing any possible negative effect through solid preliminary studies allowing 

to clearly identify areas of interventions, avoiding if possible to modify any previous canal 

routes, and ensuring the adequate design, use of appropriate construction materials, and 

construction techniques etc. Clearing canals and areas of interventions may produce some 

solid wastes that could present disposal issues. Adequate management of waste and debris 

would be embedded in the Terms of reference and contractual obligations for the contractors.  

 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an 

assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 

 

Parent Project 

 

The Borrower has prepared all the required safeguard instruments (ESMF and IPMP). The 

ESMF is the instrument used to identify when additional Environmental and Social 

Management Plans (ESMPs) are necessary and includes a procedure to screen out projects 

that will (i) negatively impact critical natural habitats; (ii) adversely affect the management of 

natural forests, or (iii) an IPMP that will address an increase in the use of, or the storage of, 

application or handling of, pesticides in categories I and II of the WHO Recommended 

Classification of Pesticides. The project design emphasizes the adoption of environmentally-

friendly technologies and others that favor increased productivity over simple land expansion. 

 

The MARNDR is experienced in implementing donor-funded projects (including World 



Bank, the IDB and IFAD) and managing the requisite safeguard actions. To strengthen their 

capacity, the MARNDR with the support of the RESEPAG II project has created an 

Environmental Cell within the Ministry to manage environmental risks within the agricultural 

sector more broadly. The project is supporting the development and operationalization of this 

Cell. The preparation, implementation and oversight of safeguard actions will continue to be 

provided by this Environmental Cell during implementation. 

 

To assist the Environmental Cell, the ESMF includes indicators to monitor compliance as 

well as a training and dissemination program to build capacity within the Cell and to build a 

constituency for environmental awareness in the agricultural sector more broadly. The Bank 

(external consultant) will closely monitor environmental compliance to identify opportunities 

to enhance environmental outcomes and better manage adverse impacts. 

 

The environmental and social capacity of the RESEPAG II project team has been largely 

adequate; it consists of an environmental specialist/agronomist; an economist/social specialist; 

and a social/gender specialist, who work on safeguards issues on a part-time basis.  

RESEPAG II staff is acquainted with the Bank´s policies after attending several safeguards 

workshops organized in country. 

 

Additional Financing to Respond to Hurricane Matthew 

 

Under the AF, the ESMF, and its attached IPMP, will be updated to reflect the new 

components added to the project; reference will be made to the World Bank Group ESHS 

guidelines.   

 

Under the AF, given that OP 4.12 is being triggered to address potential involuntary 

resettlement, the project concluded that the capacity of the PIU will need to be enhanced and 

that an additional specialist would be required to complement the current team. The Task 

Team recommended that the MARNDR/RESEPAG II hire a full-time, entry-level socio-

environmental specialist to complement the team, to be in charge of monitoring 

environmental and social risks and impacts, and receive training by the team on an ongoing 

basis. Given the urgency of the emergency works the environmental specialist at the PIU will 

be trained to screen works for potential involuntary resettlement. The Bank will assist the 

MARNDR in preparing the TORs and in selecting the socio-environmental specialist. 

 

The Project will also hire the services of a second Socio-Environmental Specialist in the 

coming months to prepare a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to ensure the compliance 

of involuntary resettlement safeguards, as well as a social assessment annex to the ESMF. 

  

Social safeguards rating under the Parent project has been satisfactory. OP 4.12 was not 

triggered under the Parent project and there were no resettlement impacts or any other major 

social risks or issues that occurred to date. Under the Parent project, a rubric in the ESMF 

screening form covering involuntary resettlement has been used to properly detect and 

exclude any investments with OP 4.12 related impacts. 

 

In terms of capacity for managing social safeguards, the project team has a good presence in 



the field and is regularly in contact with the project beneficiaries. There is no social 

safeguards specialist under the parent project. However, the current environmental specialist 

have attended several safeguards trainings. He is familiar with the OP 4.12 requirements and 

have used screening forms to detect any resettlement related potential risks. Activities likely 

to cause involuntary resettlement were excluded. 

 

In the event that involuntary resettlement cannot be avoided by the necessary works, the Bank 

team will support the PIU to develop and implement Resettlement Action Plans. The Bank 

Task Team will provide an additional safeguards training for relevant PIU staff before the 

beginning of AF activities. A second training will be provided 6 to 10 months into the 

implementation of the AF. 

 

The AF will reinforce the existing Grievance Redress Mechanisms (GRM) established by the 

Parent Project. The GRM ensures that complaints received are promptly reviewed in order to 

address project-related concerns. Additionally, communities and individuals who believe that 

they are adversely affected by a World Bank (WB) supported project may submit complaints 

to existing project-level grievance redress mechanisms or the WB’s Grievance Redress 

Service (GRS). 

 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on 

safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 

 

The rural population depending on the Agricultural sector for their livelihood in Haiti is 

estimated to be around 5 million. The main stakeholders are the segment of this population 

who live and work in the regions supported by this project. Among this population, the project 

will pay special attention to women. Studies from RESEPAG I show that while women 

undertake a large part of agricultural activities and participate in many productive 

organizations, they are disadvantaged compared with the men in terms of decision-making, 

control over resources, and access to economic benefits. Other stakeholders include the 

Ministry of Agriculture central and regional staff, local government officials, extension 

service providers, both public and private, as well as the general public who will benefit from 

improved agricultural output (in quantity and quality), as well as from the reduced risk of 

disease transmission through improved plant and animal health safety. 

 

The Project team will conduct consultations in beneficiary communities affected by Hurricane 

Matthew areas to inform beneficiaries of project activities, opportunities to participate, 

potential adverse short-term impacts, and the grievance redress mechanism available to them. 

These consultations will be key in engaging the population in the emergency response 

programs, reconstruction works and cash-for-work activities. Specifically, the content of 

voucher programs will be consulted and validated with the beneficiaries; the beneficiaries of 

livestock replacement will be identified through community participatory engagement; 

irrigation infrastructure will be identified through community mapping; and cash-for-work 

schemes will be established through participatory processes. People affected by involuntary 

resettlement will be consulted on compensation and resettlement policies in accordance with 

OP4.12. 
. 

























































World Bank Document


PROGRAM INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
APPRAISAL STAGE 

September 26, 2017 

Report No.: 120537  
 

Operation Name Benin - First Fiscal Reform and Growth Operation 

Region AFRICA 

Country Benin 

Sector Central government administration (40%); General energy sector 
(30%); General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (30%) 

Operation ID P160700 

Lending Instrument Development Policy Lending 

Borrower(s) Government of Benin 

Implementing Agency Ministry of Economy and Finance 

Date PID Prepared September 26, 2017 

Estimated Date of Appraisal October 11, 2017 

Estimated Date of Board Approval November 28, 2017 

Corporate Review Decision Proceed to Appraisal/Negotiations 

 

 Key development issues and rationale for Bank involvement  
 
1. Benin is one of the world’s least-developed countries, with an annual per capita income of 
approximately US$820 in 2016. Poverty remains widespread, with a poverty rate of at about 50 
percent ($1.90 a day poverty line – 2011 PPP) in 2015.  With an average per capita GDP growth rate of 
1.3 percent (2005-2015) driven primarily by the services sector, poverty reduction has been limited, 
highlighting the need to ensure a broad-based and stronger growth. There are significant regional 
disparities in poverty rates and rural poverty rates are higher than those in urban areas. Fewer female-
headed households fall below the national poverty line than male-headed households.  
 
2. Benin’s economic growth has been satisfactory over the past decade (averaging about 4 percent) 
but the country’s economic performance has been hampered by low competitiveness and high 
informality.  Following the temporary slowdown experienced in 2015, economy activity rebounded 
driven by the recovery of private consumption. Economic performance was supported by increased 
cotton production, strong activity at the Port of Cotonou, and rising telecommunications and transport 
sector activity. Despite the satisfactory growth rates, economic performance in Benin is hampered by a 
weak business enabling environment. The high cost and unpredictable supply of electricity is a key 
constraint for private sector development. Agriculture’s export is concentrated in the cotton sector, and 
agriculture suffers from supply chain deficiencies, including in the provision and distribution of inputs as 
well as on the marketing side. Approximately 90 percent of the labor force is engaged in the informal 
sector – agriculture, informal commerce and other services activities. 
 
3. The first pillar of the Fiscal Reform and Growth series on fiscal consolidation is justified given the 
Government’s effort to create fiscal space and improve the efficiency of public spending. In the run-up 
to 2016 Presidential elections, increases in the wage bill and out-of-budget expenses led to significant 
increases in public debt (up by almost 20 percent of GDP) and in the fiscal deficit (up from 2.1 percent of 
GDP in 2014 to 8 percent in 2015). The Government contained expenditures in 2016 to face the drop of 
tax revenues and managed to reduce the fiscal deficit from 8 percent of GDP in 2015 to 6 percent of 

GDP in 2016.  The DPO series will support the authorities’ effort to create fiscal space by improving 
revenue collection and managing more efficiently public expenditure, with an emphasis on wages and 
transfers.  In addition to the DPOs, the Government program is supported by an ECF program with the 
IMF approved by the IMF Board on April 7, 2017, providing macroeconomic and fiscal anchors that will 
support the implementation of the reforms. The first review of the Program, carried out in September 
2017, confirmed that the authorities are committed to responsible fiscal management. 

 
4. The second pillar aims at promoting agricultural productivity and strengthening the power sector 
which is a Government’s priority to create productive formal jobs and support inclusive growth. 
Agriculture employs over 50 percent of the population and is the economy’s leading formal sector 
foreign exchange earner. The country has a large endowment of arable and fertile land and adequate 
water resources. However, Benin’s comparative advantage in agriculture remains largely unexploited as 
the governance structure and relatively low food-safety standards had a negative impact on the sector’s 
competitiveness. Also, the inconsistent supply of electricity is frequently noted as a leading constraint to 
private sector growth, particularly in the light manufacturing and agricultural processing sectors. 
Strengthening the financial viability of the power sector and promote private sector participation is 
essential to increase electricity production capacity in a sustainable way. Focusing on these important 
real sectors will help improve productivity, create higher paying jobs and livelihoods, and enhance the 
country’s effort to reach the World Bank’s twin goals of poverty reduction and shared prosperity. 
 

 Proposed Objective(s) 
 
5. The overarching goal of the proposed FRGC series is to boost real economic growth, reduce poverty 
and increase opportunities for the poorest in the population. The program development objectives of 
this FRGC series are to: a) support macroeconomic stability by strengthening fiscal management; and b) 
promote economic growth by increasing the productivity and competitiveness of the agricultural sector 
and strengthening the power sector’s financial viability and production capacity.  
 

 Preliminary Description 
 
6. The first pillar of the DPO series will focus on supporting macroeconomic stability by strengthening 
fiscal management. Not only is adequacy of the macroeconomic and fiscal framework a prerequisite for 
sustainable economic growth but budgetary and debt sustainability is necessary to the delivery of 
effective public services that maximize the impact of available revenues on beneficiaries, including the 
poorest segments of the populations. In addition, increasing fiscal space will help relax fiscal constraints 
to accommodate the financing of needed infrastructure projects.  
 
7. The second pillar will seek to promote economic growth by increasing the productivity of the 
agricultural sector and strengthening the power sector’s financial viability and production capacity. 
This series focuses on measures aimed at increasing the productivity of the agricultural sector by 
supporting a policy, regulatory, and institutional framework that strengthens agriculture value chains 
and enhances diversification, promotes higher quality standards for agricultural products and supports 
greater access to credit in the primary sector. Moreover, the measures supported by the operation 
strengthen the financial viability of the power sector that is necessary to attract private sector 
participation and, thus, increase electricity production capacity, including in renewables, and access to 
electricity in a sustainable way. 

 

 Poverty and Social Impacts and Environment Aspects 



 
Poverty and Social Impacts 
 
8. The FRGC series is expected to have a positive impact on poverty reduction. Measures to increase 
revenue and to strengthen public expenditure efficiency are expected to ensure ongoing fiscal space for 
the delivery of essential public services and to contribute to a macroeconomic environment conducive 
to economic growth and private sector employment creation.  
 
9. The supported measures aimed at increasing agricultural productivity and diversification are 
important in achieving the Government’s stated poverty reduction and equitable growth goals. 
Results from the Poverty Assessment indicate that while agricultural growth has contributed strongly to 
overall growth, the impact on poverty reduction has been limited. Diversifying production into more 
valuable crops, focusing more resources on export-oriented crops, and raising productivity should boost 
incomes among the large share of the population, especially the poor population, involved in 
agriculture. 
 
10. Initial results from the 2014 Poverty Assessment note the strong link between unemployment, 
underemployment and poverty. Gender-specific results and recommendations from the assessment 
have informed the policy dialogue with the Government. Gender disparities are especially pronounced 
in the credit market, where improving access to credit has had an important impact on women’s 
economic empowerment. Support for reforms designed to improve credit to agriculture sector and, 
enhance private-sector competitiveness and build a more diversified and resilient economy will have 
positive effects on employment creation and poverty reduction. 
 
11. Supported electricity sector reforms, should they meet their objective of encouraging increased 
access to electricity and more cost-effective provision of electricity, should have a direct and positive 
impact on the poor. Increased and more reliable access at affordable prices should also have a 
significant impact on firm creation, firm growth and resultant employment opportunities, particularly in 
the higher productivity formal sector. 
 
12. A Poverty and Social Impact Assessment (PSIA) has been carried out to assess the potential impact 
of electricity pricing reforms in Benin. The PSIA concluded that improving the financial situation of the 
SBEE and thus reducing the gap between SBEE’s service unit cost and revenues per kWh are 
prerequisites for the expansion of SBEE operations throughout the country and greater access for poor 
households to electricity. The PSIA study also concluded that the current social policy of subsidizing the 
tariff for the poor is not effective and suggested some possible options to strengthen the policy 
including adopting a tariff policy based on usage and eliminating fixed costs for small customers. 
 
Environment Aspects  
 
13. The policies supported by the proposed DPF are not likely to have negative impacts on the 
country’s natural assets. All the actions supported throughout the first operation are policy-oriented; 
they do not support direct investment in environmentally impactful investments or involve policy 
actions with significant environmental consequences.  The measures supporting domestic resource 
mobilization and efficient management of public expenditure pose no risk to the environment. 
Measures designed to strengthen economic competitiveness are also largely environmentally neutral.  
 



14. Strengthening the financial viability of the power sector will support increased access to electricity 
and is expected to have a positive environmental impact. Households in Benin, particularly rural 
households, are highly dependent on biomass for their daily energy requirements. The reform program 
supported under the energy sector is likely to have positive environmental impacts and would help in 
the reduction of greenhouse gases occasioned by the predominance of fuel biomass (fuelwood, charcoal 
and plant wastes). The prior action of strengthening the financial viability of the power sector is likely to 
produce climate change mitigation co-benefit, since strengthening the financial viability of the sector is 
likely to promote the development of new energy efficient production capacities.  In the agricultural 
sector, measures intended to diversify agriculture away from a reliance on cotton could have a 
potentially positive environmental effect as agriculture becomes less mono-culture based and 
increasingly diversified. 
 
15. Over the last 20 years, the Government has made significant strides in mainstreaming 
environmental sustainability in projects. EIA is a legal requirement and it is widely applied to all 
developmental projects.  Environmental assessment is a necessary condition to obtain the approval to 
implement any development project. It has been set up in the Law N° 98-30 relating to the 
environmental framework and in the Decree N° 2001-235 relating to the environmental assessment 
procedures. The national environmental protection agency (ABE) has the capacity to implement, 
monitor, and report on mitigating measures and/or environmental and social management plans; and 
have been working in direct collaborations with the environmental and social specialists of the Bank 
funded projects. 
 
 
 

 Tentative financing 
 

Source: ($m.) 
BORROWER/RECIPIENT 0.00 
International Development Association (IDA) 40.00 
Borrower/Recipient  
IBRD 
Others (specify) 

 

 Total 40.00 
 


























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Guinea Integrated Agricultural Development Project (GIADP) (P164326) 

 
 

  
Jul 23, 2017 Page 1 of 16  

     

 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 05-Dec-2017 | Report No: PIDISDSC22885 


BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Guinea P164326  Guinea Integrated 
Agricultural 
Development Project 
(GIADP/PDAIG) 
(P164326) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA Apr 02, 2018 May 08, 2018 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Republic of Guinea West Africa Agricultural 
Productivity Program 
(WAAPP) Project 
coordination unit 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The Project development objective is to increase productivity, processing and market transactions between producers 
and other actors participating in targeted agricultural values chains in the project areas. 

 

 Financing (in USD Million)      

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B-Partial Assessment  Track I-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

Finance OLD 

Financing Source Amount  

International Development Association (IDA)   40.00  

Total Project Cost   40.00  

    
 
 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
 



B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

 
1. Guinea is fortunate to possess considerable agricultural and mining resources. It possesses the world’s richest 

deposits of bauxite and iron as well as abundant agricultural land and water resources (“water tower” of West Africa). 
However, Guinea has yet to take advantage of this endowment to achieve sustainable economic growth and poverty 
reduction. Guinea remains one of Africa’s poorest countries and is classified among the Low Income and Food Deficit 
Countries by the World Bank. Per-capita income was approximately US$490 in 2016, less than one third of the regional 
average (US$1,505), and the majority of the population continues to live in extreme poverty. According to UNDP’s 
2015 Human Development Report1, Guinea ranks 182th out of 188 countries in terms of the Human Development 
Index (HDI). Guinea’s HDI of 0.411 is below the average for countries in the low human development group (0.505) 
and also for countries in Sub-Saharan Africa (0.518).  

 
2. Guinea past economic growth has been too slow and too inconsistent to reduce poverty. Since the mid-80s, 

economic growth increased due in part to the implementation of the Programme de Redressement Economique et 
Financier (Financial and Economic Redressing Program - PREF)2. Annual economic growth averaged 4.5 percent during 
the 1990-97 period, outpacing population growth (3.1 percent). Poverty declined and most social indicators 
improved3. However, these gains were short-lived. After 2000, the country experienced a series of internal political 
crises, and was negatively impacted by conflicts in neighboring countries (Liberia, Sierra Leone and Cote d’Ivoire)4. 
Economic growth slowed and poverty increased from 49 percent in 2002 to 53 percent in 2007 and more than 55 
percent in 2012. As is typical for many Sub-Saharan African countries, most of the poor are living in rural areas with a 
poverty rate of 65 percent against 32 percent in urban area (2012). Per recent detailed surveys of food security in 
Guinea5, close to a third of the country’s households (30.5 percent) are food insecure. 

 
3. Economic growth resumed after 2010 following the presidential elections that resulted in a return to constitutional 

order. Macroeconomic policies improved, structural reforms were carried out in key sectors and the country’s 
cooperation with external partners improved. Guinea reached the Highly-Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Completion 
Point in 2012 with the cancellation of two-thirds of its external debt. However, growth again faltered in 2013-2015 
with the Ebola outbreak which had a devastating impact on economic activity6. Economic growth dropped drastically 
to 2.4 percent in 2013, then 1.1 percent and 0.1 percent respectively in 2014 and 2015. GDP per capita declined 
accordingly to -0.9 percent, -2.1 and -2.2 over those years. The Ebola crisis took a heavy toll on the agriculture and the 
food sectors. Guinea like other African countries is highly vulnerable to internal and external shocks that can wipe out 
hard-earned development gains, and worsen already entrenched poverty. However, in 2016 strong growth was 
recorded (6.7 percent) driven by a strong harvest and the mining sector. 

 
4. Mining and agriculture are the dominant sectors in the country. The agriculture sector represents 20 percent of GDP. 

The mining sector currently consists of industrial-scale mining of bauxite, alumina and gold, and accounts for about 

 
1 2015 Human Development Report (HDR) Work for Human Development; UNDP 2015. 
2 Supported by the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, focusing on macro-economic stabilization and the liberalization 

of the economy. 
3 Between 1985 and 1997, primary school enrolment increased from 29% to 51%; access to primary health care from 10% to 40%; 

access to drinkable water from 28% to 55%. 
4 Guinea recorded more than half-a million refugee.  
5 “Evaluation de la sécurité alimentaire en situation d’urgence », PAM, July 2015; and « Guinea, Nutritional Assessment », Feed the 
Future, USAID, 24 November 2015. 
6 The World Bank estimates Ebola economic impact to 0.7 -2.3 % of GDP during 2014-2015. 


20 percent of GDP, 80 percent of foreign currency earnings and 20 to 25 percent of government revenue. However, 
the extractive industries do not create enough direct jobs opportunities. Secondly, strong investment and policies 
from the Government are a condition to diversify the economy. Thirdly, the sector increases governance risks and the 
potential for corruption. There is a strong risk that Guinea’s economy could become subject to the “resource curse” 
resulting from an overreliance on extractive industries. Such undesirable developments can be avoided by increasing 
investment in agricultural values chains to increase productivity and competitiveness, as well as investing in transport 
and marketing infrastructure and energy to facilitate economic diversification, inclusive private sector development 
and job creation. 
 

Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
5. The economy of Guinea is not sufficiently diversified, and structural transformation is incomplete. The agricultural 

sector is, along with the mining sector, the main engine of the economy7. Contrary to mining, which provides most of 

the country’s export revenues but creates little employment, agriculture still occupies approximately 80 percent of 

the active population. As a result, sustainable agricultural development is central to Guinea’s economic and social 

development agenda.  

6. Guinea is richly endowed with natural resources: 6.2 million ha of cultivable land, abundant rainfall and varied agro-

climatic conditions favorable to the production of a wide variety of cash and food crops. This considerable potential 

is largely underutilized. Only 25 percent of cultivable land is cultivated (including fallow land, with less than 10 percent 

cropped every year). Only 32,000 ha have been developed for irrigation out of a potential of 360,000 ha (less than 10 

percent).8 Agricultural productivity is very low, using extensive, rainfed agricultural and livestock farming systems. 

Farms are small and produce primarily for household consumption, with very little marketed surplus. The main food 

crops are cereals (rice, maize and fonio), root crops (cassava, yam, sweet potato and potato) and groundnut. Rice is 

by far the main crop representing more than two thirds of all cultivated land, and produced by 80 percent of 

agricultural households. It is also the main food import of the country. Women play particularly a key role in rice 

production, processing and marketing. The main cash crops are coffee, cotton, cashew, oil palm and rubber. Their 

importance in Agricultural GDP is negligible and exports are low despite the potential and market opportunity.  

7. Guinea's agriculture is key for poverty reduction, job creation and food security. The country has not been able to 

build on its natural advantages and on the traditional expertise of its farmers. Agriculture in Guinea is entangled in a 

vicious circle starting from lack of investment, and distorted incentives and interference in markets, leading to low 

productivity and competitiveness. Producers face high costs of factors and inputs, as well as high costs of 

transformation and commercialization. Unable to invest in quality, their products are sold at low prices, and face 

significant challenges reaching domestic and export markets.  

8. As a result, Guinean agriculture is missing the positive outcomes that would have been generated from oversea 

trade and market-oriented agribusiness, while other countries in the region have become world exporters of cash 

crops. Agriculture in Guinea represents 11% of exports and 17% of imports (PNIASA 2012). Agricultural exports are 

declining. In 2013, only five agricultural products were exported overseas: coffee, cocoa, rubber, cashew and mango. 

Cotton and banana, once Guinean major exports, have disappeared from overseas market. Guinean fruits and 

vegetables, as well as palm oil and rice are sold in neighboring countries, that are less demanding in terms of quality. 

 
7 20% for agriculture, 41% for the industrial sector (of which 15%for the mining sector) and 34%for the service sector. 
8 Of which 9 000 ha of bottom land (20% of potential), 15 000 ha of mangrove (13%), 8 000 ha of flood plains (6%). 

To break the spell, a holistic approach to agriculture is needed, focused on markets, and enhancing upstream and 

downstream linkages. 

9. Agricultural growth has been driven by the increase in cultivated land estimated at 3% per year, consistent with the 

increase in rural population. Agriculture suffers from very low productivity constrained by a combination of limited 

use of improved technologies, failures in input, output and financial markets, and land tenure issues. Subsistence 

farmers, who account for 95 percent of the cultivated area, use very few agriculture inputs (e.g. improved seeds, 

fertilizer, pesticides, irrigation, and mechanization). Improved seeds are used on less than 8 percent of cultivated land 

with only 7 kg of fertilizer used per hectare, per year (among the lowest use in Africa). Yields are very low and have 

been stagnant for many years at less than 1t/ha for rainfed rice and 5 tons/ha for cassava. Many production areas are 

cut off from markets for part or most of the year, access to financial institutions is nearly non-existent and post-harvest 

losses are high (rice: 10 percent, maize: 15-20 percent, roots and tuber: 20-45 percent, fruits and vegetables: 30-60 

percent) due to poor cultural practices and post-harvest handling, the lack of storage and deficient transport services.  

Processing is negligible and mostly small-scale. The project would be instrumental in addressing these challenges.  

10. Animal husbandry is an important activity for the rural population. Guinea has a large herd of mostly local breeds, 

hardy and trypanotolerant9. Animal husbandry accounts for approximately 20 percent of Agricultural GDP and 4 

percent of total GDP. It provides revenues to approximately 30 percent of agricultural households. It also provides 

much needed animal protein to the population, and thus contributes to food security and nutritional status. Livestock 

systems are mostly traditional, extensive and with low productivity. The country has significant advantages for 

livestock production possessing large tracts of natural pasture land, water resources and ample availability of 

agricultural sub-products. Thus, despite very low public investment (less than 5 percent of public investment is in the 

agricultural sector), Guinea has registered reasonable long-term growth (3.8 percent per year). However, competition 

for land with agriculture is increasingly causing conflict, and constraining prevailing extensive, transhumant cattle 

raising systems. National production cannot keep up with demand, and the country has experienced a significant 

increase in livestock imports, mostly poultry and milk.  

11. Over the last few decades, increasing population pressures have been responsible for an accelerating degradation 

of the natural resource base, most visible in mangrove areas along the coast and in Guinée Forestière. These anthropic 

factors have been amplified by climate change. Data since 1960 show a continuous increase in temperature and 

decline in rainfall, together with an increased variability in the start of the agricultural season and more frequent dry 

spells and floods. Although difficult to predict with any precision, it is anticipated that these trends will continue in 

the future, with important negative impacts on ecosystems and agricultural production with a decrease in crop yields 

estimated at 10 to 25 percent by 205010. To mitigate these adverse developments, Guinea has prepared its Programme 

d’Action National pour l’Adaptation aux Changements Climatiques (National Action Program for Climate Change 

Adaptation - PANA, 2007) which identifies preventive and adaptation measures such as development of irrigation, 

development and dissemination of drought-resistant varieties, protection of forests and watersheds, improved soil 

and water conservation practices, environmental education, etc.  

12. Regarding institutional context, the Government of Guinea has long recognized the critical role of agriculture for 

economic growth and poverty reduction. It has prepared and implemented a series of strategies and plans. The most 

recent are: (i) the Plan National d’Investissement Agricole et de Sécurité Alimentaire (National Agricultural and Food 

 
9 Estimated in 2012 at 5.5 million cattle, 4.0 million small ruminants, 105.000 pigs and 24 million poultry. 
10 Various models forecast a decline in rainfall of 100-to-400 mm and an increase in temperature of 1.5 to 3.0 degrees by 2050.  



Security Investment Plan - PNIASA, 2013-2017), (ii) the Programme Accéléré de Sécurité Alimentaire et Nutritionnelle 

et de Développement Agricole Durable (Accelerated Program of Food and Nutritional Security, and Sustainable 

Agricultural Development - PASANDAD, 2016-2020), and (iii) the Plan National de Développment Economique et Social 

(National Economic and Social Development Plan – PNDES, 2016-2020). PASANDAD is a strategy, an orientation 

framework and a program fully integrated in the PNDES and aiming at improving food and nutrition security, 

accelerating agricultural production (crop, animal, fish and forestry), improving commercialization, storage and 

processing, and reducing foods imports. PNDES is targeting a primary sector growth rate of 8.1 percent by 2020 

horizon by setting up agro-poles across the districts focusing on the development of values chains with high value-

added, a core component of PASANDAD. Also, PASANDAD is seeking to spur implementation of PNIASA which will be 

completed on December 31, 2017.  

13. A detailed analysis of PNIASA achievements has been initiated in the context of preparation of the successor 

program (PNIASA 2) for the 2018-22 period. This assessment is on-going and preliminary results from 2015 showed 

clearly that, although some positive results were achieved, most of PNIASA’s strategic objectives will not be met: 

▪ Actual growth in the sector has been lower than the PNIASA annual 6 percent growth target with 5.1 percent in 

2013, 2.7 in 2014 and 4.1 in 2015. Like most of Sub-Saharan African countries, Guinea did not meet the ECOWAS 

and CAADP 6 percent agricultural growth goal;  

▪ About rice production, the objectives - a 300 percent increase in production through increased use of irrigation, 

a doubling of yields (from 1.2 to 2.45 t/ha) and the elimination of rice imports - will not be achieved. Rice 

production continued to increase at about 3% per year, largely through the expansion of cultivated areas, and rice 

imports have increased;  

▪ Regarding food crop diversification, while satisfactory results have been achieved with maize and fonio 

production which has exceeded PNIASA’s objectives, the production of cassava has not; 

▪ With respect to cash crop production and exports, there has been no significant increase, as the current business 

environment related to access to markets, inputs and services is still not conducive to large private investments 

in agricultural sector;    

▪ Concerning livestock production, despite very little public support with less than 2 percent of the agricultural 

budget, the sector continued to show reasonable annual growth of about 4 percent on the strength of its 

traditional extensive systems and also of the development of peri-urban poultry production;  

▪ Regarding development of infrastructure, only 1,400 km of rural roads have been rehabilitated through 2015, 

against an objective of 3,000 km (47 percent), and only 10,000 ha brought under irrigation to date against the end 

of the Plan target of 110,000 ha. 

 

14. The disappointing results registered so far are due in part to the impact of the Ebola epidemic, as well as a large 

shortfall in the PNIASA financing plan. The financing plan suffered from two clear weaknesses: (i) an extreme 

dependency on external sources (approximately 90 percent of financing); and (ii) the low level of financial resources 

mobilized at the start (less than 25 percent). In fact, annual budget allocations for the sector averaged 5 percent, much 

lower than anticipated by PNIASA’s financing plan and the Maputo objective of 10% public spending on agriculture. 

As lessons learnt from PNIASA underperformance, it is worthy to have ambitious development objective, but 

mobilization of required resources and its efficient distribution and use across the activities driving growth are critical 

to meet it. Also, whatever the agricultural potential and opportunities offered by the country, private sector could be 

attracted if and only the business environment is favorable. 

15. Like the new PNDES approved in June 2017 by the Parliament, PNIASA 2 will be consistent with the African Union’s 

Agenda 2063 for the structural transformation of Africa, the Paris Agreement (COP 21) on climate change and the 

UN’s Universal Program for Sustainable Development.  PNIASA 2 will also be based on the main principles of the 

Malabo Declaration (2014) which reaffirms that agriculture is at the heart of Africa’s economic and social development 

while enlarging governments’ commitments to areas, such as rural infrastructure, natural resource management and 

nutrition which, are critical for agricultural growth and poverty reduction.  

16. Realigning its interventions to the PASANDAD, World bank will support the development of value chains and the 

emergence of commercial agriculture, complementing ongoing operations with (i) the proposed IDA operation 

focusing on selected staple crops for domestic and regional market, (ii) an IBRD-enclave operation focusing on 

potentially exportable crops for international market, (iii) another IDA operation on rural mobility and connectivity, 

and (iv) a Development Policy Operation (DPO) supporting structural reform in the governance of the sector and 

particularly the agricultural subsidy program for more targeting, transparency and efficiency. In addition, a review of 

the agricultural sector and the Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) are being completed. The proposed project will 

draw heavily on findings from these analytical works.  

17. Progress is being made by the Agriculture Sector Support Project (PASA-G) on strengthening institutional capacity 

and by the West Africa Agricultural Productivity Program (WAAPP) on reinforcing research, regional transfer of 

innovations and improved technologies to farmers, and rebuilding seeds production systems. Building on these 

achievements, to pave way for structural agricultural transformation for inclusive economic growth and poverty 

reduction, Guinea needs to: (i) increase agricultural productivity through a climate-smart intensification and 

sustainable mechanization of the production systems to create jobs, leveraging on WAAPP; (ii) develop and integrate 

agricultural values chains and food systems to increase value addition; (iii) improve competitiveness and develop 

agricultural markets seizing upon growing domestic, regional and international food demand; (iv) reinforce basic 

production infrastructure and logistics to enable irrigation, connection, connectivity or mobility, storage and agro-

processing for a better agri-business environment more attractive to the private sector. Also, a special attention 

should be paid to finding ways to attract youth to modern agribusiness including access to water and land-efficient 

technologies, modern labor-saving irrigation and agro-processing technologies, and advisory and financial services. 

The project will be instrumental in contributing to this development agenda. 

Relationship to CPF 
 
18. The last closing Guinea Country Partnership Strategy (CPS, 2014-2017) focused on: (i) improving governance and 

service delivery, (ii) stimulating growth and economic diversification, and (iii) strengthening human capital. A 

Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) is being completed. The SCD identified two hypotheses and the five most critical 

binding constraints and opportunities facing Guinea in achieving the World Bank Group’s twin goals of ending extreme 

poverty and boosting shared prosperity. The first hypothesis arguing that poor political and economic governance is 

at the center of Guinea’s development difficulties, leading to natural resources mismanagement, institutional 

fragmentation, and ineffective public investment. The second hypothesis is that low levels of structural transformation 

are affected by unproductive agriculture and poorly planned urbanization. Guinea’s position regarding agriculture is 

interesting since Guinea is performing significantly below its potential despite abundant rainfall and agricultural land. 

For a variety of historical reasons, agriculture was not given prominence in Guinea, and the potential for agricultural 

development remains largely underexploited. The three critical binding constraints related to agriculture are the 

following. First, although resilient, Guinea’s agriculture is underperforming, partly due to farmers’ limited access to 

quality inputs (fertilizer, seeds, and equipment). Second, Guinea’s poor infrastructure (road, ports and logistics 

services, power and telecommunications) is a major obstacle to private sector development. Finally, access to finance 

is difficult for smallholders and entrepreneurs and low levels of private investment and undercapitalization are 

manifest. Taken together, the improvement in these constraints will be able to help Guinea move forward. The project 

will be instrumental in addressing most of these constraints in the agricultural sector by improving productivity, value 

chain diversification and integration, market development and competitiveness, infrastructures and logistics to enable 

agribusiness development and create job. A multisector approach will be used bringing Agriculture, Trade and 

Competitiveness, and Transport Global Practices to team up. The project will support anticipatively the 

implementation of the upcoming CPS which will be guided by findings from the SCD. The project is also consistent 

with the Africa Regional Strategy. 

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
19. The Project development objective is to increase productivity, processing and market transactions between producers 

and other actors participating in targeted agricultural values chains in the project areas. 

Key Results (From PCN) 
 
20. The proposed PDO level performance indicators are: i) Number of Farmers reached with agricultural assets or services 

of which female (at least 40%) and youth (at least 10%); ii) Increase in productivity (ton/ha) of targeted agricultural 

commodities by direct beneficiaries; (iii) Volume of targeted agricultural commodities processed with the new 

facilities (t); and (iv) Increase in volume of market sales of targeted agricultural commodities by Project-supported 

beneficiaries (%). A detailed result monitoring framework and indicators would be developed during project 

preparation.  

21. It is expected that the project would result in increased productivity and production coupled with reduced post-

harvest losses, more integrated agricultural systems, improved product range and quality, more efficient processing 

with a better access to facilities, and improved marketing and mobility, thereby generating additional incomes for 

producers and other operators in the targeted value chains. The preliminary selected value chains are rice, maize, 

horticulture (vegetables and fruits), livestock (poultry in particular) and aquaculture (fresh, dry and smoked fish) for 

which market opportunities exist and productivity gains are achievable through better water control and adoption of 

proven technologies leveraging on WAAPP. These commodities present potentially profitable business opportunities 

that can attract youth and the private sector and contribute directly to rural poverty reduction as production is 

dominated by poor smallholders. The project will be gender-sensitive targeting both men and women as key players 

of the value chains. It is expected also that the project would develop an innovative business model for youth insertion 

in agribusiness replicable throughout the region. 

22. The project would contribute to integrated agricultural development to improve food security, income and youth 

employment. This would be achieved by improving productive infrastructure, integrating values chains, and 

developing agribusinesses and markets. An integrated approach would be used vertically along the targeted values 

chains and horizontally across the selected agricultural subsectors including crops, livestock and aquaculture.  

 

D. Concept Description 


23. The design of the proposed project would build upon the achievements and lessons learned from the 

implementation of on-going or closed projects and programs in Guinea and elsewhere in the region. Close 

coordination and synergy would be sought with ongoing or upcoming projects and programs, and approaches would 

be harmonized to leverage support in critical areas, optimize development outcomes and avoid duplication. In 

particular, partnerships would be sought with (i) the project financed by Agence Française de Développement (French 

Development Agency - AFD) and the European Union (EU) for developing rice-cum-fish production; (ii) the forthcoming 

AFD-financed rural road project; (iii) the Third Village Community Project (PACV) financed by IDA and AFD; (iv) the 

West African Agricultural Productivity Program (WAAPP) financed by IDA; (v) the Agriculture Sector Support Project 

(PASA-G); (vi) the Agricultural Services Support Project financed by USAID under its « Feed the Future » Program; (vii) 

the Growth Pole Project under preparation for funding by the Abu Dhabi Development Fund; (viii) the upcoming rural 

mobility and connectivity project financed by IDA; and (ix) the future IBRD-enclave project.  

24. The design of the project considers the growing need for Guinea to transformits agriculture sector by increasing 

substantially productivity and resilience against climate change, integrating values chains, developing markets, 

improving competitiveness, and reinforcing infrastructure to foster economic growth, improve food security and 

nutrition, and contribute to end extreme poverty. With the increasing concern for youth employment, it is more than 

ever critical to enable agriculture to offer attractive business opportunities for youth. The project will focus support 

on (i) a selected number of value chains that are both important in terms of food and nutrition security, and have 

significant development potential to respond to market opportunities; (ii) a selected geographical area to resolve the 

binding constraints on productivity, quality, value-addition and market linkages. 

25. The proposed project would consist of four interconnected components structured as follows: 

Component 1:  Supporting productive infrastructure and logistics systems 
 

26.  This component would support critical public and private infrastructure and logistics systems required to better 
valorize land and water resources to improve productivity and competitiveness of agricultural value chains. It would 
consist of three sub-components: 
 

27. Subcomponent 1.1: Water control and management. This subcomponent would consist of improving water 

management and small scale irrigation systems within existing irrigation schemes to be rehabilitated or developed. 

Land planning and water management are critical in strengthening resilience and increasing productivity and 

competitiveness. This would enable the expansion of cropped areas, the mechanization of production systems and 

production two to three times a year and consequently, yield increases. Increasing the cropping intensity is yet an 

opportunity to be exploited for Guinea agricultural development. Less than 10% of the irrigable land estimated at 

360,000 ha is developed. Also, the project would contribute to restore and develop under-used low-land (9,000 ha 

out of a potential of 180,000 ha) and flood plains (8,000 ha out of a potential of 200,000 ha). A master planning study 

on irrigation is underway and will inform the interventions areas and perimeters to be targeted. By targeting some 

works with no or limited environmental impact such as catchment weirs and drainage networks, supporting small-

scale irrigation systems and promoting the adoption of efficient water and land management technologies, the project 

would contribute significantly to developing irrigated agriculture in line with PANSANDAD priorities. It would support 

the use of improved labor-saving irrigation systems to modernize horticultural production, alleviate women’s 

irrigation burden and attract youth to this business. It would finance water user associations and develop management 

procedures and guidelines to ensure the sustainability of irrigation infrastructures. The project would aim at a 

substantial increase in yield in the irrigated perimeters, leveraging on WAAPP for producer access to improved 

certified seeds and technologies.  

28. Subcomponent 1.2: Storage, conditioning and logistics systems. This subcomponent would address the lack of 

agricultural machinery, storage, conditioning and logistics assets that prevent value chain development. It would seek 

to improve postharvest management facilities to improve quality, lower costs and enhance competitiveness, 

particularly for domestically produced rice and horticultural crops. In particular, the project would finance: (i) storage 

facilities for adequate conservation of the harvest; (ii) agro-processing equipment to reduce post-harvest losses and 

allow processing and packaging of agricultural produces for value addition; (iii) production and processing facilities for 

livestock (poultry and milk) and fish produces (smoked and dry); (iv) agricultural market infrastructure; and (v) 

processing platforms in targeted large production zones and in partnership with the upcoming IBRD-Enclave 

operation. Investment selection would be based on selection criteria including economic analyses. Investments would 

require a business plan, a mechanism for sustainable operation, and be tied to market demand.  Private sector 

involvement in those investments could be structured either through direct investment, joint ventures or PPP projects.  

29. Finally, the project would work closely with the Rural Mobility and Connectivity project under preparation to unlock 

production areas, connect farmers to markets, and attract private sector investment in agricultural values chains.  The 

required roads to be built in the targeted areas would be jointly identified. 

Component 2: Increasing agricultural productivity 
 

30. Subcomponent 2.1: Access to quality inputs and machinery. The project would leverage on WAAPP to enable the 

wide diffusion of improved technologies including certified seeds of improved varieties, fertilizers, best and 

environmentally-friendly practices for the intensification of production systems. The project’s emphasis would be on 

supporting appropriate and sustainable agricultural mechanization through the transfer of improved motorized 

machinery developed throughout the region leveraging on WAAPP, the development of machinery services and 

leasing systems. The project would provide financial and technical assistance for entrepreneurs developing 

agricultural machinery and using appropriate technology to develop prototypes and systems.  It would engage these 

entrepreneurs via business plan competitions and matchmaking with regional and international incubators for 

innovation and appropriate technology.  

31. Subcomponent 2.2: Institutional strengthening. Leveraging on WAAPP, the project would provide support to the 

national extension service, the Agence National de la Promotion Rurale et du Conseil Agricole (National Agency for 

Rural Promotion and Agricultural Council - ANPROCA), strengthening its institutional capacity through financial and 

logistic support, and capacity building. Efforts would be put on connecting and articulating agricultural extension 

services to research to enable dissemination of improved technologies and agricultural advisory services. 

Component 3: Developing and integrating agricultural values chains  
 

32. Subcomponent 3.1: Capacity building and value chain coordination. Under this sub-component, the project would 

strengthen the technical and management skills of producers’ groups including youth and women’s groups, 

cooperatives, professional associations and other stakeholders benefiting from the project. With support from agro-

processing research institutes, more sophisticated agribusiness firms, NGOs and entrepreneurship incubators, training 

would focus on improving and upgrading agro-processing technologies. Training may concern packaging and 

compliance with food safety standards for quality assurance while promoting artisanal agro-processing. Training in 


accounting, operations, using technology for business, financial management and marketing may be provided. The 

project would develop, adapt and/or deliver training on a range of business and technical subjects. Innovative personal 

initiative training that encourages entrepreneurial thinking and problem solving may also be delivered. Building on 

WAAPP experiences, innovation platforms may be created or reinforced for some value chains to develop partnerships 

among stakeholders. These efforts would build on, and may form partnerships with past and present training and 

capacity building efforts of World Bank Group partners, and other donors and organizations. IFC’s Agribusiness team 

may help replicate its Agribusiness Leadership Program which aims to professionalize producers/cooperatives by 

improving their technical and managerial capacity, and supporting them to access finance. The project may collaborate 

with IFAD’s program (Plan National d’Appui aux Acteurs des Filières Agricoles) whose objective is also to provide 

capacity building to farmer’s organization in the same value chains targeted by this project. FAO and AFD have similar 

programs in different value chains. Finally, for coordination of all initiatives on farmer’s professionalization, the project 

may work within the local Market Ecosystem Alliance (AMEA) platform, under creation by the IFC’s Agribusiness 

advisory team, which aims to standardize tools and mechanisms for farmers’ professionalization. For SMEs, more 

involved at the middle of value-chains (processing, packaging, storage, transportation), the recently-created SME 

Business center under Guinea MSME Project has the potential to become a robust platform to provide technical and 

management capacity to SME. The project would take stock of the SME Business Center’s development with an aim 

to partnering with it to deliver technical assistance and services.  

33.  Subcomponent 3.2: Access to finance for agribusiness development. This subcomponent would promote youth 

entrepreneurship and private sector investment in agribusiness through a matching grant mechanism to be defined 

in consultation with stakeholders. The project would support development of Micro, Small and Medium Agribusiness 

Enterprises (MSMAEs) to increase domestic production and processing of high-quality rice, horticultural produces 

(mango, pineapple, banana, potatoes etc.), and livestock, particularly for poultry and dairy products, and fish 

(aquaculture, dry and smoked fish etc.). The percentage of cost sharing required by beneficiaries would be determined 

during the project design phase. The matching grants may be disbursed through one or more windows each targeting 

specific types of beneficiaries, kinds of financial support or objectives. Training and capacity building activities would 

be made available to complement financing. The project would develop relationships with financial institutions to 

encourage co-financing of beneficiaries’ activities. Under this subcomponent, support would be given to the creation 

of integrated aquaculture-poultry-rice firms leveraging experience developed in Nigeria under the West and Central 

Africa Council for Agricultural Research and Development (CORAF/WECARD) Multi-Donor Trust Fund.  In addition, this 

subcomponent would support the development of agricultural machinery services led by youth groups or producers’ 

organizations.   

34. Subcomponent 3.3: Formation of productive alliances for cash crops. The productive alliance is an economic 

agreement between a group of organized producers and a buyer (intermediary, wholesaler, agro-processor or 

processor, international mining company) in which all parties assume risks, provide resources, and share the benefits, 

such that the agreement can continue over the medium and long term. The subcomponent’s main output would be 

the implementation of subprojects with clearly defined and sustainable goals, and cost sharing accompanied by 

technical assistance and business development services. It would help build productive alliances between rural 

producers and their buyers (intermediaries, wholesalers, processors or exporters) for cash crops value chains, and 

finance part of joint business plans. By formalizing relationships among value chain actors, the project would facilitate 

access to finance and expand opportunities for investment in cash crop value chains ultimately increasing the revenues 

of producers and industrial firms, improving the quality of Guinean products, and increasing exports and value added.  



35. This subcomponent would leverage past and ongoing efforts in Guinea to study and develop productive alliances. The 

World Bank and the IFC have undertaken studies to identify potential sectors and potential value chain participants 

for productive alliances. This effort would be linked to IFC’s network of more sophisticated agribusinesses that may 

be interested in buying from producers’ associations associated with the project. This subcomponent would link with 

IFC and World Bank work with financial institutions to de-risk, identify opportunities and increasingly lending to 

agribusinesses. Furthermore, the project would leverage ongoing IFC initiatives supporting the development of the 

local content in the mining sector specifically to overcome obstacles to selling food to the mines.  

36. Subcomponent 3.4: Provision of the market information system: This subcomponent would finance collaboration 

with producers’ and marketing associations to provide agribusinesses with the information they need to plan their 

operations and transact with their customers. The project would build upon pre-existing IT solutions in place where 

possible, or create new systems that are responsive to the needs of agribusinesses, their suppliers and their 

customers, and managed by market-oriented organizations. The goal would be to link producers to customers in 

markets in urban areas in Guinea and in neighboring countries, build business relationships between buyers and 

sellers, and facilitate transactions. A survey of market information systems initiatives and use, and an action plan 

would be prepared during project preparation.  

37. Subcomponent 3.5: Support to investment promotion in agricultural value chains. Through a results-based 

Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with the Investment Promotion Agency (APIP), this subcomponent would 

finance experts, targeted Technical Assistance (TA), consulting services, trainings, and IT development and equipment 

to facilitate private investments in agribusiness and cash crop value chains. Support for APIP under the Guinea MSME 

Development Project has increased the Agency’s capabilities, but agribusiness investing is and requires special 

attention. The new project would continue to support APIP so that it can attract and retain agribusiness investors, 

both foreign and domestic. This subcomponent would also fund efforts to improve public-private dialogue to inform 

policy decisions that take stock of the needs of agribusiness investors. The project would use the World Bank-

developed framework, “Enabling the Business of Agriculture,” to identify business environment constraints to 

investment support activities to overcome them.  

 

Component 4: Project implementation and coordination 
 

38. This component aims to ensure that the project is efficiently managed, monitored, and that performance and impacts 

are carefully tracked. It would: (i) finance the incremental expenses incurred in implementing the project through the 

project implementation unit (PIU) and the participating field implementing agencies and various service providers; (ii) 

provide technical assistance through consultancies, audits, and training to enhance implementation capacity of the 

PIU; (iii) finance communication and outreach activities; (iv) finance monitoring and evaluation of project outcomes 

and impacts; (v) support institutional strengthening to ensure sustainability of the project; and (vi) provision funds to 

address emergency demands arising from natural disasters or other shocks.  

39. Finally, the project may finance the agricultural census in partnership with others donors.  
 

  

  SAFEGUARDS 

 

A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 
Activities with a physical footprint includes water control and management, building or rehabilitating storage facilities 

and establishment or development of Micro, Small and Medium Agribusiness Enterprises (MSMAEs) to increase domestic 
production and processing capacities for staple crops including high-quality rice, horticultural produces (mango, 
pineapple, banana, potatoes etc.), livestock and particularly poultry and dairy produces, and fish produces (aquaculture, 
dry and smoked fish etc.). The physical locations and specific details of the proposed project interventions are not as yet 
known. 
 

 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
This preliminary Borrower’s institutional Capacity for Safeguard policies will be completed during the project preparation 

to complete the information that are not yet available. The preliminary assessment considers:  
(i)-Policy framework:  
Article 19 (3) of the constitution states that: "the People has the right to the preservation of his heritage, culture and of 

its environment ".  Therefore, the environmental policy framework is rooted in the provisions of the Constitution. The 
Environment code was published on May 28, 1987. In November 8, 1989 the government published a Decree Regulating 
Impact Studies. 
(ii)-Operationalization of policy framework:  
The national Environmental and Social Assessment and ESIA review process is under the responsibility of the Ministry of 

the Environment through the Guinean Bureau of Studies and Environmental Assessment (BGEEE). It is part of its functions 
to monitoring and preserving the quality of the environment and advising the Government on the environmental issues. 
Since March 2013, the Government adopted a General Environmental Assessment Guide that provides project 

developers with technical support to carry out environmental and social impact studies necessary for a better analysis of 
their projects.  
(iii)-Resourcing 
In general, the ministry of environment and other state institutions in charge to handle environmental and social issues 

including BGEEE are poorly staffed.  
At the institutional level, environmental and social units are set up in the main sectors (agriculture, livestock and 

fisheries). At the decentralized level, the environmental monitoring committees (CPSE) exist.  
At the concept stage of the project, the structure that will host the PIU is not yet found.  Once defined, an in-depth 

assessment will be conducted and an action plan defined. The Unit will hire full time Environmental and Social 
Development Specialists during project preparation and implementation period.  
(iv)-Practice/outcomes/track record 
BGEEE statistics are not published yet annually  confirming that a robust archiving system will be necessary.  Despite the 

past experience with the WB safeguards policies implementation (WAAPP, PASAG, PRAO…) the borrower capacity to 
ensure the safeguards implementation in the in the satisfactory manner remains low and more capacity building will be 
needed including the logistic support to BGEEE. 
 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The proposed project is categorized as B under this OP 
because its potential social and environmental risks 
are expected to moderate and mostly site specific, 
with no significant or long-term negative impacts. The 
potential environmental impacts are related to 
components 1, 2 and 3 activities ( Water control and 
management, building or rehabilitating storage 
facilities and establishment or development of Micro, 
Small and Medium Agribusiness Enterprises (MSMAEs) 
to increase domestic production and processing 
capacities for high-quality rice, horticultural produces 
(mango, pineapple, banana, potatoes etc.), livestock 
and particularly poultry and dairy produces, and fish 
produces (aquaculture, dry fish etc.).   An ESMF will be 
prepared and disclosed prior appraisal to guide the 
way that potential negative environmental and social 
impacts of future sub-projects (following the positive 
list) will be identified and mitigated during the project 
implementation. In the meantime, specific sites will be 
identified during the project preparation and 
ESIAs/EMPs prepared for the first year of the project 
implementation. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 TBD  

Forests OP/BP 4.36 TBD 

The decision to trigger or not this policy will be taken 
prior appraisal. Nevertheless, the project activities will 
avoid any negative impacts on the health and quality 
of forests. The project will avoid financing any activity 
that should have any negative impact in the natural 
forests. The ESMF will include sections relevant on 
how. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The project activities will likely increase the use of 
chemical pesticides which could have negative 
environmental and health impacts. A pest 
management plan will be prepared to mitigate this 
risk. Moreover, the Project will support the diffusion 
of best agricultural practices environmentally-friendly 
including  integrated pest management practices 
combining chemical and biological control of pest and 
disease to support sustainable agriculture. 



Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 

The proposed operation will involve excavations and 
movement of earth for the building facilities. During 
the development of the ESMF physical cultural 
resources will be taken into consideration and 
baselines defined.  The ESMF will include clear 
procedures that will be required for identification, 
protection of cultural property from theft, and 
treatment of discovered artifacts, and will be included 
in standard bidding documents. The ESMF will also 
provide procedures for handling with “chance finds” 
during implementation project activities. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No  

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

Involuntary Resettlement is triggered in the vent that 
sub-projects should involve involuntary resettlement 
as the Project will finance construction/rehabilitation 
of processing facilities; and infrastructures that may 
imply land acquisition in the covered areas. A RPF will 
be prepared that will guide the management of such 
situations should they arise during project 
implementation. RAPs will be prepared as and when 
necessary. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No The project is not anticipating financing any dam. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
The project does not anticipate any wide activity that 
could impact international waterways. only small 
irrigation scheme will be rehabilitated or developed. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
The project does not anticipate any disputes in the 
targeted area. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Feb 15, 2018 
 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Terms of reference for consultants in charge of safeguard-related studies will be completed in October 30, 2017 and 

consultants will be hired by November 30, 2017. 
 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), Pest Management Plan (PMP), and Resettlement Policy 

Framework (RPF),) will be delivered by January 30, 2018. 
 
 



























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
PNG Agriculture Commercialization and Diversification Project (P166222) 

 
 

  
May 28, 2018 Page 1 of 14  

     

      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 29-Apr-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSC24937 
     

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Papua New Guinea P166222  PNG Agriculture 
Commercialization and 
Diversification Project 
(P166222) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC Sep 03, 2018 Jan 31, 2019 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Department of National 
Planning and 
Monitoring,Independant 
State of Papua New Guinea 

Department of Agriculture 
and Livestock 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
To increase the productivity and access to markets of target smallholder farmers and small and medium enterprises 
(SMEs) for selected agricultural value-chains, in selected economic corridors. 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 40.00 

Total Financing 40.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 40.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 40.00 

          IDA Credit 40.00 

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B - Partial Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 
 
 
 

INTRODUCTION AND CONTEXT 

 
 
 
A. Country Context 
 

The Independent State of Papua New Guinea (PNG) is one of the most culturally diverse countries in the world with over 
800 languages and 1,000 ethnic groups1. It has a total land area of approximately 460,000km2 comprised of 600 islands 
of various sizes, and hosts a remarkably varied number of species and ecosystems. The country is separated into four 
regions – Highlands, Islands, Momase and Southern – and 21 provinces. In 2017, its population was estimated at close to 
8 million2. Of this, over 80 percent live in rural areas and the rest in small urban centers with populations of under 
30,000.    
 
PNG is a relatively stable democracy and had an average GDP growth of 6.85 percent between 2005 and 2010, however 
like other resource-dependent countries, it is feeling the impacts of the fall in global commodity prices, with GDP growth 
estimated at 2.4 percent in 2016 and projected for 2.1 percent in 20173 and real GDP per capita growth in 2016 was 0.3 
percent, down from 10.1 percent in 2014. The country is dominated by two main sectors: the formal, capital-intensive 
mining and energy sector which relies heavily on the country’s rich natural resources and accounts for most of the 
export earnings, and the agriculture sector which, while largely informal, employs an estimated 80 percent of the 
population and accounts for approximately 27 percent of GDP3.  
 
Despite considerable natural wealth and reasonable economic performance over the past decade, PNG’s rural 
population continues to face significant challenges. The disparity between rural and urban living conditions is 
exacerbated by the country’s difficult terrain which increases hardship, poverty, and isolation in rural areas, and limits 
access to basic services, infrastructure and economic markets. Less than 20 percent of rural households have access to 
electricity, 60 percent lack access to safe drinking water, and an estimated 80 percent lack access to improved 
sanitation2.    
 
The 2010 Household Income and Expenditure Survey (HIES) noted that in 2009, approximately 38 percent of the 
population lived below the extreme poverty line of US $1.90 per day, about the same proportion as in 1996.  PNG’s 
Human Development Index (HDI) ranking was 155 in 2010 and improved by one place to 154 in 2015, the second lowest 
in the Pacific2. It has the fourth highest child stunting rate in the world. An estimated 28 percent of children are 
underweight and 5-15 percent are wasted. The highlands region has the highest rates of stunting at 61.5 percent, and 

the island region has the highest wasting and underweight rates at 19 percent and 29.2 percent respectively. The 
economic cost of undernutrition is high, in 2015-2016, it was estimated to have cost the economy 2.81 percent of 
annual GDP (equivalent to US$ 508 million)4.   
 
Gender-based violence (GBV) is widespread in PNG, and the country ranks 158 out of 188 countries in the 2014 Gender 
Inequality Index3. GBV severely affects women’s ability to contribute to the economy, participate in business activities, 
and support family livelihoods. Violence and crime are high along the country’s transport corridors where much of the 
rural population are engaged in agriculture, trade, and the transportation of goods. 
 
PNG’s road network is highly fragmented and poorly maintained with only about 35 percent of national roads sealed2 
and no roads connecting most provinces and ports. PNG’s vulnerability to climate risks and hazards due to climate 
variability and complex geography further exacerbate problems with the transport network resulting in an estimated 75 
percent or more of the road network – national, provincial and district – becoming impassable at some point during the 
year2. The country is subject to both El Niño and La Niña events and both can have significant impacts such as severe 
droughts, landslides and flooding from increased rainfall5. The World Risk Report 2016 ranks PNG 10th, with a risk index 
of 16.43%, due to the country’s high exposure to natural disasters and its high social and economic vulnerability to these 
events6. The February 2018 magnitude 7.5 earthquake and aftershocks affected 544,368 people across five provinces of 
Hela, Southern, Enga, Western and Gulf provinces. In the Southern Highlands and Hela provinces alone, it is estimated to 
have killed over 100 people, displaced 18,200 and left 270,442 people in need of immediate humanitarian assistance. It 
has also left 32% of health facilities closed and, of those that are open, only a third are undamaged7. 
 
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
Sectoral context:  
PNG is characterized by its diverse agro-ecological environments (highlands, lowlands, islands), favorable climate and 
fertile soils allowing the farming of many different agricultural products, including both cultivation of cash and staple 
crops, as well as livestock production. While PNG’s export economy is presently dominated by minerals (gold and 
copper) and oil, the contribution of agricultural exports in the renewable resources sector is significant, at around 
23.1%. The main agricultural exports of the country include cocoa, coffee, copra, palm oil, rubber, and tea. The 
predominant mode of farming is in smallholder farms of less than 5 ha. Village agriculture, which supports over 80 
percent of the population, remains dominated by subsistence food production. It generates little cash income and is 
characterized by low productivity. Despite good intentions, governments, commodity boards and agencies have 
provided village farmers with little help to raise their productivity in order to improve food and nutrition security, and to 
enable them to participate more effectively in commercial activities. Translation of new knowledge to business and 
commercial opportunities has been lacking for many years. Major crops, except palm oil, have historically been 
marketed by statutory marketing boards. These arrangements as well as measures in the past such as stabilization funds 
for selected commodities (coffee, cocoa, and coconuts) have not been efficient, with over regulation of major 
commodities perhaps impeding agricultural development. In the past, labor-intensive plantation estates of some 50-150 
hectares have grown tree products for export, especially palm oil, coffee, cocoa, coconut, tea, and rubber, but except 
for palm oil, their production share is decreasing to the benefit of smallholder farmers. 
 
Coffee and cocoa are key cash crops. Papua New Guinea is considered a small coffee producer in the international 
market, but the high quality of its coffee and cocoa is recognized and sought after. Nearly 30 and 20 percent of the total 

       
     

labor force in the country is engaged in the production of coffee and cocoa, respectively. The majority of coffee is under 
the production of smallholder farmers with low productivity, and diseconomies of scale, and the main constraint is the 
limited capacity of the country to reliably meet market demand in quantity and quality. The development of coffee and 
cocoa production as an agribusiness for smallholder farmers is limited due to several constraints. These include: high 
transaction costs due to diseconomies of scale, limited market access, lack of access to information and technologies 
due to poor extensions services, poor rural infrastructure, and lack of access to rural finance. 
 
A robust internal fresh food and livestock products market exists. However, value chains are not well developed. 
Livestock production, except for pigs and poultry, remains static or on the decline since the 1970s. Meat consumption in 
PNG on the other hand, has increased steadily over the last two decades, and is predicted to increase at a conservative 
rate of 5% per annum. Increased demand for meat is met by meat imports, and is influenced by population growth rate, 
urbanization, changes in disposable income of citizens, and changes in people’s eating habits. 
 
Agriculture has under-performed. This is due primarily to low productivity, largely reflecting inadequate research and 
development, poor application of technological improvements and lack of scale economies inherent in smallholder 
farming. Other major constraints include inadequate transport and marketing infrastructure facilities, unreliable and 
expensive utilities, poor extension and veterinary services, prevalent crime and lawlessness, and insecurity of land 
ownership and tenure. However, some reasons for hope exist. For instance, the World Bank funded Productive 
Partnerships in Agriculture project (PPAP – P110959) is demonstrating in the coffee and cocoa sectors that the 
productive partnership model can help overcome some of the bottlenecks and facilitate the integration of smallholder 
farmers into effective supply/value-chains and link them to markets, which remains a priority for the Government of 
PNG (GoPNG). In the PPAP model, farmers join a partnership coordinated by a “Lead Partner (LP)” (the private sector in 
70 percent of cases, although sometimes an NGO or academic institution) through paying a small fee (contribution to 
the planned activities). The LP access a grant from the project to purchase tools and seedlings (including innovative 
cocoa clones) to be distributed to farmers, renovate processing facilities or organize training on a broad range of topics; 
technical (coffee or cocoa on-farm good practice), gender, HIV-AIDS, nutrition, etc. This increased proximity between LPs 
and the smallholder farmers has greatly contributed to: (i) increasing their on-farm productivity (over two-fold as of the 
time of writing), and (ii) link them to a potential buyer and therefore the markets.  
 
In December 2014, the World Bank completed a piece of analytical work studying the role of women in the agriculture 
sector in PNG8, notably related to coffee, cocoa and fresh produce. The main finding was that women provide 
substantial labor in both coffee and cocoa cultivation, and they dominate in the fresh produce sectors. More important 
than the amount of labor women provide, analysis of these supply chains indicated that the specific tasks women 
undertake have a direct bearing on the quality of the final product. However, different labor dynamics, gender-specific 
barriers to access key services (extension and financial) and insecurity (violence limiting women’s ability to serve in the 
field as researchers and extension agents) affect this potential outcome. In early 2018, a more specific gender time-use 
study among PPAP farmers9 highlighted that there is an imbalance between men and women’s time-use with possible 
discrimination against women which negatively impacts crop productivity and household welfare. Beside household 
awareness-raising and training on gender dynamics, reducing the domestic work burden for women before they can 
engage in more value-added agricultural activities should be a priority. 
 
Institutional context:  


The GoPNG’s Vision 2050 details the long-term development strategy for PNG.  Launched in 2009, the document sets 
out a vision for transforming the country by 2050 towards a top 50 ranking in the HDI10. It leverages seven strategic 
pillars – human development, wealth creation, environment and climate change, planning, systems and institutions, 
security and international relations, and partnerships with churches – to build this vision and realign the country’s 
economic focus away from the mining and energy sectors which currently dominate development, to new growth 
bases in agriculture, fisheries, forestry, manufacturing and eco-tourism.   
 
Vision 2050 acknowledges both the importance of subsistence agriculture to the rural economy and the cultural lives of 
many, as well as the significant challenges faced by the sector including limited markets, poor infrastructure, ineffective 
extension services, and security and safety concerns.  
 
The previous GoPNG’s National Agriculture Development Plan (NADP) 2007-2016 (currently being updated) recognized 

the importance of the agricultural sector in developing the economic potential of the country, sustaining the basic 

livelihoods of its population, increasing social wellbeing, and providing food security for all. However, its 

implementation has faced several challenges relating to the limited capacity of the Department of Agriculture and 

Livestock (DAL) to enhance implementation performance and monitor progress of outcomes in the sector. 

 
The GoPNG’s Alotau Accord II operationalizes the National Strategy for Responsible and Sustainable Development 
through the Medium-Term Development Plan (MTDP) III reflecting the principles of the PNG Vision 2050 and the PNG 
Development Strategic Plan 2010 - 2030. High on the list of priorities is the adoption of a national population policy 
aimed at accelerating economic growth by using economic stimulus packages in the non-minerals sector (agriculture, 
tourism, fisheries and forestry) to keep pace with a population currently increasing at a growth rate of about 3 percent 
annually.  
 
The government has placed greater emphasis on growing the agriculture sector by giving it greater prominence in its 
2018 budget allocation. To emphasize this commitment, the government held the first ever National Agriculture 
Summit in November 2017 to exchange experiences on successful models. The key priorities from the summit are to: (i) 
grow the economy; (ii) promote import substitution; (iii) promote more accessible and affordable credit; and (iv) place 
greater focus on institutional strengthening. 
 
C. Relationship to CPF 
 

The 2017 PNG Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) is under preparation and is scheduled for Board approval in early 
May 2018. The SCD recognizes the World Bank Group’s long-standing history of support to the agriculture sector in PNG, 
currently led by the Productive Partnerships in Agriculture Project (PPAP). Since 2011, the PPAP has been providing 
support to smallholder coffee and cocoa farmers with the aim of improving their livelihoods. Important lessons have 
emerged from the implementation of the PPAP which could assist the SCD to identify opportunities for inclusive growth 
in the agriculture sector in PNG, and support the World Bank Group’s twin goals of ending extreme poverty and boosting 
shared prosperity. The third Pillar of the draft SCD (Enabling private sector development for inclusive job creation and 
growth) recognizes the central role played by agriculture in providing opportunities for inclusive growth and bolstering 
food security. The SCD recommends an “extension of PPAP-type programs to more districts and regions and more crop-
types” – which is exactly what the PACD intends to do. 

PROPOSED PDO/RESULTS 

    

 
A. Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 

To increase the productivity and access to markets of target smallholder farmers and small and medium enterprises 
(SMEs) for selected agricultural value-chains, in selected economic corridors.  

 
B. Key Results 
 

Progress will be measured against the following PDO-level indicators: 
 

(a) Increased farm yields of crops and livestock in target value-chains 

(b) Increased volume of sale of selected value-chains at both farm gate and processing SMEs levels 

(c) Total number of beneficiaries, disaggregated by gender 

 
A detailed results framework will be developed during preparation. Specific gender and citizen engagement indicators 
will be added in this results framework.  
 

PROJECT CONTEXT 

 
A. Concept 
 
1. Description 

 
The Productive Partnerships in Agriculture Project (PPAP P110959 + PPAP AF P146003) is scheduled to close on June 30, 
2019 and has delivered significant benefits to PNG’s cocoa and coffee sector farmers. In order to build on and 
consolidate PPAP’s achievements, the PNG Agriculture Commercialization and Diversification Project (PACD) would 
continue to support the cocoa and coffee sectors, and may also add the following commodities: small livestock, spices, 
rubber and coconuts. The additional commodities to be supported under the new project will be narrowed down to 2 
or 3 commodities based on criteria, including level of preparedness of the value-chain and possible return on 
investments11. Further stock-taking will be required during the project preparation, including, if the need is identified, 
specific value-chain analysis to help the decision-making process. DAL has already started this work which should be 
completed prior to pre-Appraisal. The FAO Investment Center will support the DAL and the WB Task Team in this stock-
taking exercise and commodity final selection. 
 
Beneficiaries: GoPNG’s emphasis is on agriculture to accelerate economic growth and generate revenues, this may 
require a targeted approach towards farmers willing to move from subsistence to semi-commercial or commercial 
farming (therefore being less inclusive than in the case of PPAP). However, the smallholder farmers remain the primary 
direct beneficiaries of the new project, together with the groups and cooperatives formed by those better-off and 
willing to address common issues collectively. While building on PPAP, considerations around the possibility of looking 
at a complementary window targeting more progressive farmers and those who are ready to take risks and form more 

                                            
11 Agreed criteria comprise: (i) competitiveness and existence of a market justifying good return on investments, (ii) availability of technical advisory and 
extension services for these specific commodities, whether of public or private origin, (iii) tradition of integrating the selected commodities in cocoa and 
coffee farming system, as a diversification strategy, (iv) importance of women participation in the specific commodities, (v) share of the value-chains’ 
income remaining with the smallholder producers, (vi) size of the population involved or benefiting from the selected commodities, and (vii) commitment 
of different level of Government (including Provincial and District) to it. 

commercial alliances under a common set of constraints and opportunities will be explored. Additional direct 
beneficiaries will be SMEs (mainly micro- and small private enterprises) involved in agri-business activities (storage, 
processing, marketing, inputs supply). DAL and Commodities Board staff will also benefit from capacity building 
interventions. 
  
Regarding the geographical scope, the MTDP identifies ten “Economic Corridors” for priority services delivery, defining 
zones for development of public transport and utilities network, social services and integration of economic plans 
including agriculture. The PACD will align its geographical scope to this GoPNG strategy and support some of these 
economic corridors, based on transparent selection criteria to be defined during preparation. 
 
The PNG Agriculture Commercialization and Diversification Project (PACD) -  interventions will be delivered through five 
components:  

 
Component 1: Institutional capacity building 
The project will address institutional capacity gaps at (i) the central level - DAL, statutory bodies in charge of 
commodities targeted under the project (Cocoa Board, Coffee Industry Corporation, Spices Industry Board, the 
Livestock Development Corporation (LDC) and the Rubber Board – list to be confirmed as per commodities selected 
under the project) and links with the private sector – and, (ii) the decentralized level – provincial and district capacity to 
deliver services: extension, advisory and veterinary services, access to inputs. Research needs may also be included and 
will depend on further discussion during preparation.  
  
This first component will also support the GoPNG in reviewing and, if required, reforming their policy and regulatory 
framework, notably on climate-smart agriculture, extension and veterinary services, quality standards and food safety. 
 
Component 2: Infrastructure networks and logistics 
The infrastructure network, including roads and storage/processing facilities, remains a major bottleneck to farmers’ 
capacity to access markets. This project should contribute to its improvement, with a focus on infrastructure that has a 
public good nature and is essential to the selected value chains. Examples of such infrastructure include feeder roads, 
municipality-managed small-scale slaughterhouses (ensuring better food safety and waste management / pollution 
reduction) or laboratories (for safety and quality tests). As per the PPAP model, feeder roads will be designed and 
constructed to be resistant to heavy rains occurring during the rainy season: they will be slightly curved, include large 
concrete gutters on the side and small log-bridges on water stream sites – therefore adapted to heavy rains which are 
increasing and longer-lasting due to climate change. 
 
Component 3: Productive Partnership-like interventions 
Integrating smallholder farmers into effective supply/value-chains and linking them to markets remains a priority for 
the GoPNG. For this, the Productive Partnerships’ model implemented under the PPAP has been successful and should 
be a strong building block to scale-up. However, additional focus should be put on approaches that promote the 
establishment and capacity building of farmers’ cooperatives that will strengthen the sustainability of the model, 
among other lessons learned.  
 
This component will promote access to services and markets by facilitating the establishment of Productive 
Partnerships, and their access to finance (Matching Grants; involvement of financial institutions) that could finance 
small collective infrastructure (e.g. small storage and processing facilities like community-managed cocoa 
fermenteries), and the introduction of innovative technologies, notably on climate smart agriculture (agro-forestry, 

water collection and micro-irrigation, drought resistance varieties, intensification of small livestock production such as 
poultry and pigs, and bio-digesters). This will be done through establishing two windows for financing:  

(i) one focusing on on-farm productivity (garden regeneration, innovative technologies, etc.) and more inclusive 

regarding smallholder farmers willing/unwilling to join partnerships – this window will expand on the PPAP 

model where a Lead Partner (often from the private sector) can aggregate smallholder farmers and channel 

support to them (advisory services, training, inputs); and  

(ii) one focusing on value-addition and marketing of products, and targeting better-off farmers willing to address a 

common issue (storage, agro-processing, marketing, access to inputs, etc.) collectively through groups and 

cooperatives who become the recipient of the funds. 

 
Component 4: Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation:  
This activity would support all PCU activities required to manage IDA funds, procure IDA-funded goods and services, 
conduct project M&E including Iterative Beneficiary Monitoring (IBM),12 and comply with safeguard mitigation 
measures.  It would provide training and equipment to modernize DAL operations (computer hardware and software, 
office furniture, vehicles, and so on) at the central level and in the field as needed for project activities. It would also 
support the development and implementation of a communications strategy, as well as general awareness and 
sensitization campaigns about project activities. 
 
Component 5: Contingency Emergency Response Component (Total Cost: US$0):  

Following an eligible crisis or emergency, the government of PNG may request the Bank to re-allocate project funds to 
support emergency response and reconstruction. This component would draw from the uncommitted grant resources 
under the project from other project components to cover an emergency response. These activities would be carried 
out, as needed, to ensure continued achievement of the project development objective. This component will only be 
used in the event that an emergency response is required. 
 
    

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
Target provinces and districts are yet to be confirmed. The project is likely to support core coca production areas in the 

province of East New Britain, the autonomous Region of Bougainville (tropical island regions) and East Sepik (Momase 
Region), and coffee production areas in the provinces of Eastern Highlands, Western Highlands and Simbu (highlands 
regions). The project may expand its geographical coverage with potential support in the livestock, spices, rubber and 
coconut sectors in the same areas.  
PNG is characterized by diverse agricultural and ecological environments, tropical climate and fertile soils. Physical 

characteristics vary considerably between regions and will be described once project location and sectors are confirmed. 
 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
The project will be implemented by the Department of Agriculture and Livestock (DAL - lead agency) through a Project 

                                            
12 This activity would monitor beneficiaries of the project starting at the beginning of the implementation with the objective to improve project 
efficiency and increase beneficiary satisfaction and beneficiary engagement. IBM collects information on project implementation, even in insecure 
settings. It is light, low-cost, and rapidly complements project supervision. The approach is problem-oriented and provides feedback to project 
teams through different iterations with the aim of catalyzing improvements in project implementation. IBM collects data directly from beneficiaries 
but keeps data collection efforts to a minimum by relying on few research questions and small samples. 



Coordination Unit (PCU), with specific Project Management Units (PMUs) established for each selected commodity. The 
Department of Works (DOW) will be designated responsibility for infrastructure networks and logistics activities related 
to rural feeder (not paved) roads. 
 
Capacity for implementing safeguard policies is currently weak in each of these agencies. The DAL lacks specific 

safeguard resources. The current World Bank financed PPAP has addressed safeguard capacity constraints within the 
cocoa and coffee PMUs however capacity remains limited and confined to these sub-sectors. DOW has an Environmental 
Management Unit (EMU) however this unit is under-resourced and relatively inexperienced. To address these constraints, 
the PACD will establish a core safeguards team consisting of senior environmental and social specialists within the PCU to 
ensure the effective implementation of safeguard policies across all project activities. The PACD will also finance 
additional environmental and social specialists within DOW to oversee safeguard requirements for project infrastructure 
network and logistic activities related to rural roads. 
 

 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 
Thomas John Callander, Social Safeguards Specialist 
Nicholas John Valentine, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 
Nathalie Suzanna Noella Staelens, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 

 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The project is proposed as Category B. The proposed 
investments are small-scale and potential adverse 
impacts can be managed. There are no potential large-
scale, significant or irreversible impacts associated 
with the project. 
 
The project will finance small collective infrastructure 
for partnerships (Component 3) including innovative 
technologies, notably on climate smart agriculture 
(agro-forestry, water collection and micro-irrigation, 
drought resistance varieties, intensification of small 
livestock production (poultry, pigs) and bio-digesters) 
that have the potential for positive impacts on the 
environment. Negative environmental and social 
impacts associated with these activities are expected 
to be minor, localized and temporary primarily 
because of their small-scale and 
household/community focus. 
 
The project will invest in infrastructure networks to 
improve access to market (Component 2). This will 
involve the rehabilitation of feeder roads and the 
development of small-scale community infrastructure 



 
The World Bank  
PNG Agriculture Commercialization and Diversification Project (P166222) 

 
 

  
May 28, 2018 Page 11 of 14  

     

(e.g. small-scale slaughter house and laboratories). 
These small-scale investments have the potential to 
cause some minor adverse environmental and social 
impacts however these are readily managed through 
standard mitigation measures. 
 
An Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) is proposed as the safeguards instrument given 
that the specific locations of the investments are not 
known and these will be determined through the 
partnership/grant process. The ESMF will incorporate 
the requirements of the World Group’s 
Environmental, Health and Safety Guidelines (EHSGs) 
and industry specific guidelines for agribusiness, food 
production and pesticides management. 
 
The project also includes a Contingency Emergency 
Response Component to support emergency activities 
that ensure continued achievement of the project 
development objective. The ESMF will outline the 
approach and principles for managing potential E&S 
impacts and risks of the CERC including a screening 
process in accordance with the World Bank’s Rapid 
Response to Crises and Emergencies: Procedural 
Guidelines. 

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No  

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 No 

The project will not finance any activities that 
significantly convert or degrade any protected areas or 
natural habitats as the screening procedures in the 
ESMF will exclude all subprojects with these impacts. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes 

Potential project target sectors including cocoa, spices 
and rubber are frequently associated with agro-
forestry in PNG, often in a positive way. No adverse 
impacts on forests are anticipated. The ESMF will 
contain measures to properly manage the risk of any 
unforeseen adverse environmental impacts of these 
activities. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The project will support the sustainable use of 
chemical fertilizers and pesticides within an holistic 
farm management model and integrated pest 
management approach. The client will review and 
update the current PPAP Integrated Pest Management 
(IPM) following the standards and requirements set 
forth in OP4.09 and the World Group’s Environmental, 
Health and Safety Guidelines (EHSGs) for agribusiness 


and food production. The project will include 
measures to strengthen the institutional capacity for 
implementing IPM in project areas. This will include a 
stronger focus on health and safety. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No 

The project will not finance any activities that will have 
impacts on physical cultural resources. Screening and 
chance find procedures will be included in the ESMF to 
exclude all subprojects with these impacts. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 Yes 

The project is likely to be located in areas where 
Indigenous Peoples are the sole or the overwhelming 
majority of direct project beneficiaries. Accordingly, a 
separate Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework 
(IPPF) is not proposed. Rather, in accordance with the 
provisions of OP 4.10, the elements of an IPPF is 
included in the overall project design.  
 
The ESMF will outline steps for ensuring free and prior 
informed consultation are undertaken and broad 
community support is achieved for each Partnership 
and Infrastructure activity under Components 2 and 3 
respectively. This will include a Beneficiaries 
Partnership Framework and Consultation Guidelines. 
 
A Social Assessment will be conducted across target 
sectors/provinces during project preparation to inform 
project design and will include consultations with 
farming communities, local level government 
representatives, grower associations and 
cooperatives, youth and women’s groups, extension 
workers, the private sector, and other relevant 
stakeholders. 
. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

At present, no involuntary land acquisition is expected 
under the project. The majority of sub-projects will be 
undertaken on customary land with the voluntary 
participation of grants scheme recipient landowners. 
The only exception will be the siting of collective 
infrastructure facilities which will be either on 
Government-owned land or land secured via voluntary 
land donation. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) 
will be prepared to address these potential scenarios. 
The RFP will include a voluntary land donation 
protocol to ensure that this approach is properly used, 
verified and documented. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 
The project will not finance any dams as defined under 
OP 4.37. 


Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
The project does not impact or relate to any known 
international waterways as defined under the policy. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
The project is not located in any known disputed areas 
as defined under the policy. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Aug 31, 2018 
 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
The PPAP PCU is in charge of coordinating the preparation of the proposed PACD. Safeguards specialists working for the 

PPAP, together with the support of external safeguards consultants, will conduct the social assessment and consultations 
across target sectors/provinces to inform project design and the preparation of ESMF and RFP. 
 
A Project preparation Advance (PPA) will be processed once the Concept Note is approved and the procurement process 

for these consultants will start after. Therefore, first drafts of these studies are not expected before end of August 2018. 
 

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Jamaica Rural Economic Development Initiative-Second Phase (P166279) 

 
 

  
Oct 05, 2018 Page 1 of 16  

     

 
 
      

 

Combined Project Information Documents /  
Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (PID/ISDS) 

 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 29-Nov-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSA24700 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Jamaica P166279 Jamaica Rural Economic 
Development Initiative-
Second Phase 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

LATIN AMERICA AND CARIBBEAN 12-Nov-2018 26-Feb-2019 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Jamaica Jamaica Social Investment 
Fund (JSIF), Ministry of 
Finance and Public Sector 

 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 

To enhance access to markets and to climate resilient approaches for targeted beneficiaries. 

 
Components 

Climate Resilient Agriculture and Community Tourism Investment Subprojects for Rural Enterprises 
Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building of Public Sector Entities 
Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation 
Contingent Emergency Response 

 
 

PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
   

SUMMARY-NewFin1  
 

Total Project Cost 42.00 

Total Financing 42.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 40.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 

 
   
DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) 40.00 



 

The World Bank  
Jamaica Rural Economic Development Initiative-Second Phase (P166279) 

 

 

  
Oct 05, 2018 Page 3 of 16  

 

Non-World Bank Group Financing 

     Counterpart Funding 2.00 

          LOCAL: BENEFICIARIES 2.00 

    

Environmental Assessment Category 

B-Partial Assessment 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate     
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
B. Introduction and Context 

 
Country Context 

1. The Jamaican economy has historically been characterized by low growth and high public debt, but 
fiscal and structural reforms launched in 2013 are helping to reverse the trend. Real gross domestic product 
(GDP) per capita grew by only 0.5 percent on average per year between 1990 and 2016. Fiscal restraints, higher 
tax revenue, and well-timed liability management operations have reduced the debt-to-GDP ratio by around 25 
percentage points. GDP growth has seen a modest acceleration since the start of reforms, rising to 1.4 percent 
in 2016. The informal sector continues to be large in relative terms, accounting for 43% of official GDP according 
to an ILO 2014 study. The economy remains vulnerable to external shocks.  

2. Rural poverty has remained consistently higher than urban poverty, with an increasing urban-rural gap. 
The national incidence of poverty for 2015 was 21.2 percent, with an urban-rural gap of 14 percentage points 
(28.5 percent in rural areas1 compared to 14.3 percent in the Kingston Metropolitan Area). Socio-economic 
disparities for women and youth continue to contribute to the higher level of rural poverty. If Jamaica is to 
achieve “Developed World” status, as is the goal of the GOJ’s Vision 2030 plan, development of rural areas needs 
to keep pace with development in urban areas. The tourism and food/agriculture sectors hold significant 
potential for rural growth and development because of their importance to the economy overall as well as their 
potential reach into rural areas. 

3. Jamaica is highly vulnerable to climate change and faces significant environmental threats due to its 
geographical location. Between 2004 and 2008, five major storm events caused damages and losses estimated 
at US$1.2 billion. Evidence suggests that Jamaica will likely see increases in severe weather events, such as 
droughts, extreme precipitation, flooding, and increases in the intensity and frequency of hurricanes2. 
Additionally, Jamaica’s vulnerability to sea level rise is more pronounced than in other regions due to the 
potential impact of storm surges from tropical storms and hurricanes on the coast. 

            
Sectoral and Institutional Context 

Agricultural Sector 

4. The agricultural sector is an important contributor to the country’s economic development and is 
recognized as a priority in the GOJ’s mid-term plans. The agricultural sector accounts for 8.0 percent of Jamaica’s 
GDP, and employs 18.7 percent of the active population (of which 44.7 lives in rural areas). Agriculture and agro-
processing in Jamaica are characterized by a few sub-sectors with relatively tight value chains and high-quality 
standards serving export markets and the tourism industry, along with domestic production sub-sectors serving 
local parish markets and supermarkets. Traditional export crops (sugar, bananas, coffee, and citrus) are in 
decline. The “non-traditional” export sector showing strong growth and market potential includes agricultural 
products such as preserved fruits (e.g. ackee) and sauces, condiments, and mixed seasonings (e.g. jerk sauces). 
Jamaica is a net importer of livestock commodities (dairy and meat products). 

5. The small-scale agricultural and food products sector exhibits significant potential for growth, but 
significant challenges remain to be addressed.  Small-scale agriculture has ample potential for serving domestic 
markets but needs to become more competitive with respect to imports by increasing land and labor 
productivity, the quality and reliability of distribution, and climate resiliency.  Small-farmers and micro and small-
sized agri-businesses enterprises tend to be at a comparative disadvantage in accessing higher value markets due 
to lack of market information, inefficient production practice, outdated technologies, lack of value addition, 
diseconomies of scale, and high logistics costs. Limited access to financing is among the key challenges to 
agriculture competitiveness and related MSMEs. Weaknesses in the connectivity of rural areas is also limiting 
marketing opportunities and access to potentially attractive inland tourism sites.   

6. The natural environment exposes the agriculture and food sector to frequent weather shocks and high 
levels of climatic variability – further exacerbated by climate change.  Climate change has caused a trend of 
rising temperatures, worsening rainfall variability, and droughts, and here the frequency and intensity of extreme 
events is likely to rise in the future.  This will make soil and crop management more difficult, especially in coastal 
areas, which are threatened by a decline in fertility or being washed away. Crops need to be able to withstand a 
more extreme and diverse set of environmental challenges, including worsening of pests and disease occurrence. 
In the livestock sub-sector, these weather trends may put additional strains on cattle, adding to the vulnerability 
of livestock facilities.    

Tourism Sector 

7. Tourism is also a critical driver of the Jamaican economy.  The tourism sector accounted for 9.3 percent 
of the national GDP in 20163.  This sector is considered mature, with international arrivals still growing more 
rapidly than elsewhere in the region. Jamaica’s tourism strategy4 sets a target of 5 percent annual growth for the 
sector for the years 2017 to 2022, as well as 5 million visitors with US$3.5 billion in total earnings annually from 
visitor spending. The goal is also to reduce significantly the amount of leakage that results from the large amount 
of imports used in the sector. Jamaica retains about 30 percent of every dollar spent by tourists, while the target 
set by The Ministry of Tourism (MOT) is 50 percent. As such, Tourism has the potential to be strongly linked to 
agriculture and small-scale production: Sandals Resorts in Jamaica reports that 90 percent of produce purchased 
in Jamaica annually are locally produced by a network of around 180 farmers5.   

        

8. Jamaica’s tourism market has traditionally focused on the “sun, sea and sand” concept model but more 
diversification is being pursued. Attempts are being made by the GOJ and the private sector to provide a more 
diversified visitor experience through new product offerings targeted to wider groups of visitors.  The MOT 
intends to move towards a more inclusive tourism model to spread the benefits of tourism, provide more 
entrepreneurship opportunities, and deepen economic linkages in rural areas. This policy is laid out in the 
National Community Tourism Policy and Strategy, which was funded under the previous REDI project. Many 
challenges to the further development of community tourism in rural areas remains They include: (a) excessive 
licensing and standards that are too complex for small NGOs and Community Tourism Enterprises (CTEs) to 
manage; (b) low levels of available capacity and resources for expanding community tourism operations; and 
(c) poor marketing support and inadequate connections to the tourism supply chain, operators, and hotels.  

9. Climate resilience is also important for the tourism sector. More severe storms and hurricanes, rising sea 
levels, droughts, and heatwaves can degrade tourism assets such as coral reefs, shorelines, freshwater supply, 
and ecosystems, and can damage tourism infrastructure and destination communities with potentially 
significant losses to GDP and employment.  Changing weather conditions and milder winters in various parts of 
the world may also affect tourist demand, underscoring the need for sun, sea, and sand destinations to diversify 
their offerings.  

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
Development Objective(s) (From PAD)  
To enhance access to markets and to climate resilient approaches for targeted beneficiaries. 
 

Key Results 
10. The results of the proposed Project will be measured through the following set of outcome indicators: 

• Percentage of participating rural enterprises that have accessed new markets;  

• Percentage of participating rural enterprises operating on or above the projections (gross sales value) 
of their corresponding business plan; and 

• Number of targeted beneficiaries reached with climate resilient approaches supported by the project 
(of which number of rural enterprises and public institutions). 

 
D. Project Description  

 
11. Enhancement to the REDI I approaches. Building on the experience and results of REDI, the new Project 
will focus on strengthening value chains6  and tourism clusters development, placing emphasis on the linkages 
between producers/service providers and buyers, to improve economies of scale for small agricultural and 
tourism enterprises and to mainstream climate resilience.  

A. Project Components 

12. Component 1. Climate Resilient Agricultural and Community Tourism Investments Subprojects for Rural 
Enterprises (Total US$ 28.0 million, IBRD US$26.0 million).  The objective of this component is to promote the 
development of agricultural/community tourism enterprises that are better integrated in productive 

         
 liances" and operate more competitively in selected value chains, with more reliable linkages 
with buyers and markets and increased capacity to manage climate risks.  

13. This component will finance consulting and non-consulting services, good, works and operating costs 
(through matching grants) for demand-driven and competitively selected agriculture/fisheries or community 
tourism subprojects presented and implemented by participating rural enterprises to increase their production 
and to capture and/or increase their market share and level of profits.  Financed activities will support the 
promotion, identification, design, feasibility, and implementation of competitive and climate resilient 
investment subprojects for business ventures established by beneficiary enterprises (small farmer/fisher 
associations – cooperatives, friendly or benevolent societies, or any formal form of legally established 
associations – as well as, agribusinesses, community tourism operators, and related entrepreneurs such as craft 
makers).  

14. Investments proposals will be prepared in response to calls for proposal and submitted by the beneficiary 
rural enterprises. They will be appraised and competitively selected for project support and funding considering 
pre-established criteria assessing, inter-alia: market demand, product quality, technical and financial feasibility, 
environmental and social sustainability; approaches to enhance climate resiliency and the potential for local 
impact; and the level of participation by women and youth.  It is estimated that a total of 90 investment 
subprojects will be supported through this component, benefitting directly around 200 rural enterprises. As 
such, around 20,000 individual members of these rural enterprises will benefit directly from these investments 
(of which 40 percent will be females and 30 percent youth).  

15. Component 2.  Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building for Relevant Public Entities (IBRD 
US$8.0 million).  This component aims to strengthen the capacity of relevant public-sector institutions (MICAF, 
MOT, and JSIF) and associated entities (RADA, TPDCo, and others) to provide public infrastructure and quality 
services needed to promote inclusive rural development (based on the agriculture and tourism nexus) and to 
ensure the sustainability of the rural enterprises and productive partnerships supported by the project. It is 
organized in the following two subcomponents: (i) 2.1 –Public Infrastructure Investments (IBRD US$ 6,0 million) 
will finance civil works, goods, and consulting services for priority public infrastructure investments (new or 
rehabilitated) that are needed for improving the efficiency and climate resilience of targeted agri-food and 
tourism value chains; and (ii) 2.2: Technical Assistance and Capacity Building (IBRD US$2.0 million. will finance 
technical assistance (consultant and non-consultant services, goods, training, workshops, and study tours) to 
strengthen the capacity of relevant national organizations and other relevant partner entities responsible for 
assisting the agricultural and community tourism enterprises.  

16. Component 3. Project Management (IBRD US$6.0 million).  This component will finance incremental 
costs associated with the management, supervision, and monitoring and evaluation of project implementation 
by JSIF and its technical Project Management Team (PMT) for REDI II. Cost to be financed include technical 
expertise (agriculture, tourism, business development, monitoring and evaluation, etc.), staff training, annual 
audits, vehicles, office equipment, and other operating costs. This component will also ensure that effective 
safeguards, fiduciary, and M&E arrangements are in place during implementation.   

17. Component 4.  Contingent Emergency Response (US$ 0).  This component will allow for a reallocation of 
loan proceeds from other components to provide emergency recovery and reconstruction support following an 
eligible crisis or emergency at the national or sub-national level. Considering the Project design, the CERC is 
expected to be operationalized through a reallocation from component 1 to provide emergency recovery and 
reconstruction support.  To ensure that there is capacity, the Project Operations Manual includes a CERC annex 
applicable to eligible disasters, detailing fiduciary, safeguards, monitoring and reporting, and any other 

necessary implementation arrangements. 

E. Implementation 
 

Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 

18. Implementing Agency for REDI II.  Building on the REDI I experience, the Jamaica Social Investment Fund 
(JSIF) will be the lead implementing agency for REDI II and will work in close coordination and under the technical 
leadership of the Ministry of Industry, Commerce, Agriculture and Fisheries (MICAF), ,the Ministry of Tourism 
(MOT), and their respective operational agencies RADA and TPDCo. JSIF will have overall responsibility for the 
coordination and management of project implementation. JSIF will establish a Project Management Team (PMT) 
that will be responsible for overall technical implementation and will coordinate with all relevant national 
institutions on component implementation. The implementation period is expected to be six years. 

19. Project Oversight: Inter-Ministerial Project Steering Committee. This committee will be responsible for 
ensuring that the Project is in line with national development priorities.  The Committee will be chaired by the 
Planning Institute of Jamaica (PIOJ) with membership to include representatives from MICAF and MOT and other 
relevant agencies i.e. Office of the Prime Minister, Rural Agricultural Development Authority (RADA), Tourism 
Product Development Company (TPDCo), JSIF, and Ministry of Finance and Public Service (MOF&PS). 

20. Beneficiary Rural Enterprises in the agriculture and community tourism sectors will be eligible for 
subproject financing and responsible for the operating, maintenance, and sustainability of the corresponding 
investments. 

 .    
F. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 

The project will take place nationally in Jamaica and specifically in rural agricultural and tourism landscapes. 
Specific location details are unknown at this time because the sub-projects will be demand driven. 

 
 
 
 

SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 
The project is rated as a Category B in terms of its 
risk profile.  
 



 

The World Bank  
Jamaica Rural Economic Development Initiative-Second Phase (P166279) 

 

 

  
Oct 05, 2018 Page 8 of 16  

 

Component 1 will finance rural agricultural and 
tourism subprojects that support revenue 
generating activities including support to rural 
producers (inputs, equipment, seeds, water access, 
drip irrigation, greenhouses etc.) as well as support 
to tourism operators and enterprises (marketing, 
small renovations such as painting and refurbishing 
guest housing, equipment for craft making, etc.). 
Component 2 finances small scale public 
investments aimed at improving the efficiency of 
priority value chains for selected products (e.g., 
storage facilities, cold chain supply infrastructure 
equipment at the regional level as well as at 
airports/ports, fresh products grading, clearing hubs, 
agricultural research and development, 
seeds/seedling production and certification 
activities}.    Most of the impacts related to the 
implementation of Component 1 and 2 are minor, 
short-term and highly localized and thus easily 
mitigated. No cumulative impacts are expected. Any 
impacts are therefore easily mitigated through 
standard mitigation measures. .    
 
Subcomponent  2.2:  Technical Assistance and 
Capacity Building will finance TA and capacity 
building for key organizations and agencies that 
deliver support services in agriculture and rural 
tourism at the local level. While the TA activities 
themselves do not have direct adverse 
environmental or social impacts, the Bank team will 
integrate environmental and social principles and 
objectives as an integral part of the terms of 
reference and supervision of the TA.   
 
JSIF has prepared an Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) that outlines 
potential risks and guidelines to mitigate potential 
impacts, outlines roles and responsibilities of key 
actors, provides budget and costs for mitigation and 
training (where needed) and gives guidance to 
contractors and PIU environmental specialists in 
terms of managing contracts with firms.  The ESMF 
also serves as the guiding document for any site-
specific Environmental and Social Management 
Plans (ESMPs).  This document has been reviewed 
and cleared by the bank and was recently disclosed 



to stakeholders in Jamaica and on the Bank's 
website. A separate integrated pest management 
plan was prepared and also disclosed similarly under 
the project. Institutional arrangements outlined 
within the document will guide the use of pesticides 
according to OP 4:09.  During implementation, each 
subproject will be screened to determine its risk 
profile and, accordingly, it will be determined 
whether further documents (ESMPs) will need to be 
developed to manage these risks.  Any activity that is 
rated Category A will be screened out.  
The ESMF points to additional guidance, as 
applicable, in the General EHS Guidelines and the 
Industry Sector Guidelines specifically guidelines for 
AGRIBUSINESS/FOOD PRODUCTION and FORESTRY 
http://www.ifc.org/ehsguidelines.  

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No This is not a private sector activity. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

Given the scale of the activities, it is unlikely that 
natural habitats will be impacted.  However, the 
locations are unknown and are in the rural areas of 
Jamaica, which has significant natural resources. For 
this reason, the OP is triggered as a precaution.  
However, every effort will be made to avoid working 
in or impacting critical natural habitats. The ESMF  
includes measures to avoid/mitigate the alteration 
of critical or sensitive areas. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes 

The project activities are highly localized and are 
unlikely to impact forests but the project will 
operate in a rural landscape and therefore it is 
possible that some activities may impact tree 
clusters. For this reason, OP 4.36 is triggered as a 
precaution.  All subprojects will  be screened and 
any impacts on forests, or tree clusters, quantified.  
Alternatives will be considered as a means to avoid 
negative impacts on any forests or significant tree 
clusters. The ESMF includes specific screening tools 
to identify any potential negative impacts on forests 
or tree clusters. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

Given that support is provided to producer 
organizers, pesticides may be supported.  However, 
World Bank guidance regarding the use of pesticides 
and  IPM will be observed, and a pesticide 
management plan has been prepared. 



 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No 

This OP is not triggered because the project will not 
operate in culturally sensitive areas.  However, 
during implementation, small rehabilitation works 
and minor mitigation works may result in the chance 
find of culturally significant objects. The ESMF 
includes procedures to address chance findings of 
archeological and cultural resources during 
construction works. 
  

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 
The policy is not triggered because there are no 
groups in Jamaica who meet the definition of IPs 
under OP 4.10. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

The policy will be triggered for activities under 
Component 2. The activities under Component 1 are 
small in scale and scope and therefore unlikely to 
have long-term or cumulative impacts. The JSIF 
evaluation found no sub-project activity financed 
under the REDI I that required physical involuntary 
resettlement. The CDD-type of activities/sub-
projects proposed under Component 1 will exclude 
Involuntary Resettlement as a result of land take 
and/or the physical relocation of households as the 
costs and complexity could easily outweigh the 
benefits and costs of the sub-projects project.  
Under Component 1 a negative list will be developed 
in the ESMF including clear criteria for excluding 
Category A high-risk activities. 
 
While OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement was not 
triggered for REDI I there may be investments under 
REDI II Component 2: Support to Critical Public 
Infrastructure that could result in involuntary 
resettlement through land acquisition. Component 2 
finances medium scale public investments aimed at 
improving the efficiency of priority value chains for 
selected products. There is scope within the project 
to also finance other public investments that are 
outside the scope of agriculture or tourism yet are 
needed to improve competitiveness and enhance 
access to markets in the two sectors.  Specific 
location details are unknown at this time and sub-
projects will be demand driven. As a result, a 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been 
prepared to guide the selection and compensation 
aspects under Component 2 which will be disclosed 




prior to appraisal. The project has also prepared 
guidelines for Voluntary Land Donation.  Upon 
identification of cases of involuntary resettlement, 
resettlement action plans (RAPs) will be prepared, 
consulted on, and disclosed in accordance with the 
policy. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 

This policy will not be triggered because the project 
will not support the construction or rehabilitation of 
dams nor will it support other investments which 
rely on the services of existing dams. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
This policy will not be triggered because the project 
will not affect international waterways as defined 
under the policy. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
This policy will not be triggered because the 
proposed project will not intervene in disputed areas 
as defined under the policy. 

 
 

KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The possible activities to be financed are small in scale and scope and therefore unlikely to have long-term or 
cumulative impacts. Any impacts would be short-term, highly localized, and therefore easily mitigated through 
standard mitigation measures.  The ESMF prepared by the Government has been reviewed by the Bank and has been 
found satisfactory.  That document outlines the procedure for minimizing risks within the project.  For Component 1 
which has many subprojects (e.g. greenhouses, water harvesting, expansion of efficient irrigation methods, integrated 
pest management, introduction of new crop varieties, development of integrated landscape models, improvement in 
stock breeding, and small group marketing infrastructure) the ESMF outlines a screening mechanism to categorize 
each subproject according to its risk profile.  ESMPs will also be developed for certain higher risk subprojects (cleared 
by the Bank and disclosed publicly) prior to implementation of the subcomponent.  For Component 2 which supports 
critical public infrastructure negative impacts will include construction related impacts such as   noise, occupational 
health and safety risks, waste management issues and so on.  In terms of safeguard however, these impacts are all 
small scale and reversible.  None of the project's activities in Component 1 are likely to result in large scale, significant 
or irreversible  impacts. 
 
There may be investments under REDI II Component 2: Support to Critical Public Infrastructure that could result in 
involuntary resettlement through land acquisition. Component 2 finances medium scale public investments aimed at 
improving the efficiency of priority value chains for selected products. These could include building storage facilities, 
processing areas, cold chain supply infrastructure equipment at the regional level as well as at airports/ports, fresh 
products grading, clearing hubs, agricultural research and development, seeds/seedling production and certification 
activities. There is scope within the project to also finance other public investments that are outside the scope of 
agriculture or tourism yet are needed to improve competitiveness and enhance access to markets in the two sectors.  


Specific location details are unknown at this time and sub-projects will be demand driven. As a result, a Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF) has been prepared to guide the selection and compensation aspects under Component 2 and 
has been consulted upon and disclosed. Upon identification of cases of involuntary resettlement, resettlement action 
plans (RAPs) will be prepared, consulted on, and disclosed in accordance with the policy. 
 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
Most of the impacts related to the implementation of the project are anticipated to be minor, short-term and highly 
localized and thus easily mitigated through standard mitigation measures.    
 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. 
The project has already been able to examine alternatives through lessons learnt from REDI which was the previous 
project that supported similar activities.  The successful aspects of the first project have become a core aspect of the 
current project. Safeguard implementation under the first project was deemed very successful due, in part, to a 
trained PIU- the same PIU that will manage this current project. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower 
capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Borrower capacity is relatively high.  The JSIF will establish a Project Management Team (PMT) that will be responsible 
for overall implementation and will coordinate all the actors involved in the Project’s execution. The JSIF will be 
responsible for financial management, procurement and compliance with safeguards. The JSIF managed the recently 
closed project (Jamaica REDI (P10522)) and the ICR noted that its management of safeguards was highly satisfactory.  
In terms of social implementation, some activities may be undertaken on land that has been donated voluntarily from 
the state (through a lease and nominal peppercorn rent) or though private individual (s). Voluntary Land Donation 
(VLD) will be applied according to good global practice and in line with the World  Bank guidelines on VLD including 
that VLD applies directly to project beneficiaries and that impacts are minor.  The protocols and guidelines to be 
applied to the Voluntary Land Donation (VLD) are included in the RPF. The project has also prepared a Worker's Code 
of Conduct for all workers and contractors working on the project and a Grievance Redress Mechanism.  
 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, 
with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The ESMF has been completed, reviewed by the Bank and disclosed in Jamaica (November 12th, 2018) and on the 
Bank's website (November 15th, 2018).  Consultations were held with the relevant Government officials and Ministries 
and a with a subset of the project's estimated 50,000 beneficiaries.  Disclosures in Jamaica have occurred on relevant 
websites including JSIFs and further disclosures will occur through discussions during the launch meetings and follow 
up meetings with project beneficiaries. The Ministry of Tourism (MOT) and TPDCo will be a lead partner with JSIF.  
The RPF has been completed, consulted upon and disclosed in country on November 12, 2018 and on the Bank's 
website on November 20, 2018. 
 

 

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Climate Resilient Agriculture and Productivity Enhancement Project (P162956) 

 
 

  
Jan 04, 2018 Page 1 of 18  

     

 
 
      

 

Combined Project Information Documents /  
Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (PID/ISDS) 

 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 28-Feb-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSA23460 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Chad P162956 Chad – Climate Resilient 
Agriculture and 
Productivity Enhancement 
Project 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA 26-Feb-2018 26-Apr-2018 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Republic of Chad Ministry of Agriculture, 
Irrgation and Equipment 

 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to “promote the adoption of improved technologies leading to 
increase productivity and enhance the climate resilience of agricultural production systems in the areas targeted by 
the Project”. 
 

 
Components 

Institutional support for sustainable agriculture development and climate resilience 
Supporting adoption of demand driven technologies and climate-smart agriculture 
Contingency Emergency Response 
Coordination. Knowledge management and Monitoring and Evaluation 

 
 

Financing (in USD Million) 

 

Finance OLD 

Financing Source Amount  

IDA Grant   41.00  

Total Project Cost   41.00  
    
 

Environmental Assessment Category 

B - Partial Assessment 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the preparation to continue     



 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
B. Introduction and Context 

 

Country Context 

1. Chad is a vast and landlocked country in Central Africa characterized by land degradation and 
erratic climatic conditions. It has a total land area of 1,284,000 km2 that encompasses three agro-
ecological zones: Saharan, Sahelian, and Sudanian. Out of a total population of over 14 million people, 47 
percent live below the poverty line. Chad ranked 186 out of 188 on the 2016 Human Development Index 
(HDI, 2016), making it one of the poorest and most deprived countries in the world. Chad remains largely 
rural, with over three-quarters of its population living in rural areas where they depend on subsistence 
farming for both household food and income security. The country is also beset with high unemployment, 
particularly among the youth. 

2. The economy continues to underperform, due to impacts from two main exogenous shocks: 
low oil prices and elevated regional insecurity. The oil and agricultural sectors were Chad's main growth 
drivers until the fall of the world oil price in 2014. Since then, Chad has experienced a sharp economic 
slow-down, with a fall in government revenue, resulting in a significant reduction in public expenses 
negatively impacting GDP growth (from 6.3% in 2014 to 0.2% in 2017)1,  leading the economy into deeper 
recession.  This difficult economic situation has been exacerbated by the prevailing serious threat to 
security in the region (including civil conflict and low-level insurgencies in the neighboring countries of 
Sudan, Nigeria, CAR and Libya), which has caused economic disruption in Chad and forced the Government 
to reprioritize its spending to defense, hosting of refugees and internally displaced persons. It also had an 
impact on cross-border trade, leading to the collapse of internal and external trade, especially for 
livestock, and a major disruption of the trade routes of imported products, especially in the Sahel.  

3. The short and medium-term outlooks remain challenging, with projected GDP growth for 2019 
of 3.15 percent. The situation has led the Government of Chad to prioritize diversification of the economy, 
focusing more on the non-oil sectors. The most important of these is the agricultural sector, which 
employs 80% of the Chadian workforce and accounts for 52% of GDP. It is also the second largest source 
of export income, after oil. In its 2016 – 2020 national development plan, the Government has, among 
other actions, prioritized the industrialization of agriculture, with the aim of boosting exports in order to 
diversify the economy to reduce its dependence on oil exports and increase tax revenue. 

4. The country is also experiencing rapid population growth (6.3% annually from 2010 to 20152), 
with a large youth cohort – more than 65% of the population is under the age of 25. The majority of the 
population remains rural, deriving their incomes from subsistence farming and herding activities, relying 
on traditional extensive production techniques, with limited access to markets and services (Systematic 
Country Diagnosis - SCD, 2015). Women engaged in agriculture and/or living in rural areas face 
considerable barriers: Chad ranks 140 out of 144 on the Global Gender Gap Index. Adult female literacy 
rate is 13.9% per UNESCO, about half that of men, and women are often confined to producing 

       

subsistence crops and traditional farming, with little access to advisory services and inputs (mainly 
captured by men). As a result, they are financially more vulnerable.  

5. Food insecurity is a big concern that is likely to be exacerbated by climate change. It is estimated 
that one out of 10 Chadians, or 1.4 million people, are chronically food-insecure, meaning they are unable 
to meet their basic food requirements even during “good” years of crop harvest. The situation worsens 
during “bad” years – characterized by limited availability of and constrained access to food – where 
millions more can easily and quickly fall into transitory food insecurity. Difficulties in access to food are 
partly attributed to the poor performance of the important crops and livestock sub-sectors, which are 
characterized by sluggish productivity growth due to multiple factors. Such factors include lack of and 
limited access to promising technologies, underinvestment in new technologies, as well as climate-related 
constraints. Crop and livestock production are highly dependent on rainfall, making these sub-sectors 
extremely vulnerable to climate shocks (in particular the scarcity and poor distribution of rainfall over 
time and space). This situation is aggravated by the country’s vulnerability to climatic risks, both short-
term risks associated with its inherent climatic variability and long-terms risks associated with climate 
change. The National Action Program of Adaptation (NAPA, 2010) reported that the main short-term 
climate risks are associated with droughts, floods, poor spatial and temporal distribution of rainfall, 
extreme heat, and strong winds. 

 

Sectoral and Institutional Context 

6. Chad has enormous unrealized agricultural potential. The country has a total agricultural area of 
more than 49 million hectares, of which only 6 percent is currently cultivated. Similarly, the available 
water resources remain largely untapped, with only 9 percent of this potential being used. Less than 1 
percent of the agricultural land is under irrigation in Chad. The main Agro-Ecological Zones (AEZ) in Chad, 
from North to South, are the Saharian (up to 200 mm average annual rainfall), the Sahelian (200-700 mm) 
and the Sudanian (over 750 mm) AEZ. These distinct AEZs provide a unique opportunity to diversify 
agricultural production and to develop dynamic and complementary crop and livestock value chains. 
While other projects are already targeting livestock systems in the Sahelian AEZ, the proposed project will 
focus on the higher potential Sudanian AEZ where smallholder farmers are engaged mainly in traditional 
rainfed cereal-based (sorghum, millet and berbéré and associated pulses) farming systems, but including 
also some small livestock production. This zone is also a transit zone for livestock herds as they move 
southwards from the Sahelian AEZ during the dry season, causing some farmer-livestock herder conflicts. 

7. Despite its vast potential, the agriculture sector continues to underperform. Yields of key cereals 
are far below the averages for sub-Saharan Africa (SSA), and yield gains have not kept pace with the yield 
gains achieved in other countries. For example, sorghum yields average stand between 720 and 785 
kg/ha3 respectively for Sahelian and Sudanian zones of Chad, against an average of 980 kg/ha in the 
ECOWAS4 region.  

8. Average rainfall ranges between 800 to 1250 mm in the Sudanian Agro-Ecological Zone (AEZ), but 
the distribution increases in variability, in both inter-annual quantities and geographic distribution, when 
moving from the south towards the north. The main crops are cereals (sorghum, berbéré, maize and rice), 

mostly intercropped with legumes, and roots and tubers, mainly grown for household consumption. 
Farmers also cultivate cotton for cash. Unfortunately, production of cotton is in sharp decline due to weak 
value chain organization. The Sudanian AEZ area is also classified as a cattle husbandry (and 
transhumance) area. Finally, collection of wild fruits and plants remains common, especially collection of 
shea nuts. 

9. The 2017 Agriculture Sector Review Report (ASRR) described how Chadian agriculture is going 
through a deep crisis. The sector is struggling to modernize and remains largely dependent on weather 
conditions. However, the report emphasized the potential for development of family farming in terms of 
productivity, profitability and resilience to shocks and its potential to meet the national and external food 
demand and improve the welfare of the rural populations.  

10. Several related factors explain the low productivity of Chadian agriculture: 

▪ Weak research and extension services as well as low overall institutional capacity constrain 
innovation and slow the rate of technical change. The agriculture research and development 
(AR&D) system is weak, with limited human and infrastructure resources and lack of continued 
programmatic support. In addition, the limited reach of public and private agricultural extension 
and advisory services significantly affects the dissemination and adoption of promising 
technologies.  

▪ The use of low yielding agricultural technologies and poor and unsustainable traditional 
agricultural practices are the main characteristics of Chadian subsistence farming. Farmers lack 
access to improved agricultural technologies, as well as to the know-how needed to improve 
productivity. For example, less than 5% of farmers are currently using improved seeds (Agriculture 
Sector Review, May 2017).  

▪ The growing population is increasing pressure on existing fertile production resources and hence 
rendering the practice of extensive subsistence agriculture and traditional livestock management 
systems more challenging over time. Increased competition for the shrinking natural capital often 
results in tensions between diverse user communities with at times conflicting interests. As a 
result, the increasing pressure on natural resources, particularly in marginal areas and their fragile 
eco-systems, are leading to lower soil fertility levels, soil erosion and degradation. 

▪ Climate shocks are exacting an increasing toll on Chadian agriculture. The Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) categorizes Chad as one of the countries highly vulnerable to the 
impacts of climate change. Vulnerability in Chad is characterized by increasing scarcity of available 
natural resources, fragile and substantially degraded soils, high level of food security and poverty, 
and lack of infrastructure, which hinder the capacity of local population to adapt to severe 
weather conditions. Indeed, the Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC) of the 
Republic of Chad (September 2015) indicates that over the past decades, the Saharan and 
Sahelian climatic zones of Chad have progressed southwards by 150 km.  

▪ Weak or lack of policies also lead to cumbersome administrative and organizational procedures in 
Chad. The Agriculture Sector Review Report (ASRR) highlighted the persistent lack of concrete 
measures to address effectively the major factors that impact food and nutritional security. In 
practice, efforts to address those factors are very limited, and often questioned. As an illustration, 
the ASRR proposed a process for  setting up a pastoral code, which has not moved forward even 
though there has been a resurgence of conflicts related to the access and control of natural 


resources by different users. This situation of land insecurity is still limiting private investment 
and the sector’s performance. 

11. To address these constraints, the 2017 Agriculture Sector Review Report has identified improving 
productivity and strengthening resilience of family farming as effective and appropriate means of reducing 
poverty in rural areas. 

12. The Project will coordinate closely with other IDA-financed projects and projects being 
implemented by other partners to ensure effective synergies on the ground. For example, the Project will 
rely on the Chad Hydrological and Meteorological Services Modernization Project (P164256) to strengthen 
the capacity of the National Meteorology Agency (ANAM) to provide effective agro-meteorological 
services in support of the Project’s activities, including training and acquisition of digital solutions for data 
collection and analysis and weather forecasting (e.g. remote sensing application and GIS products). The 
Project will also complement interventions in pastoralism management being supported under the 
Regional Sahel Pastoralism Support Project (PRAPS – P147674). The Project will support mixed crops and 
livestock systems in agro-pastoral zones, while PRAPS will target purely pastoral zones. The Project will 
establish strategical and operational linkages with the Rural Mobility and Connectivity Project (P164747) 
which will be implemented in two out of the three targeted regions. This Project will to improve road 
access to selected agricultural production basin and markets in the Project area. Technologies to be 
introduced by the Project would also be used in the irrigation schemes developed by the Chad’s 
Component of the Sahel Irrigation Initiative Project (P154482). The is aligned with the Sahel Alliance 
Initiative which objective is to improve the support and coordination of development partners in the 
region to contribute effectively and more broadly to the stabilization and eradication of poverty, by 
developing rural areas, creating employment for youth, improving energy infrastructure and 
strengthening governance.  

 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 

13. The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is “to promote the adoption of improved 
technologies leading to increase productivity and enhance the climate resilience of agricultural 
production systems in the areas targeted by the Project.”  

 
Key Results 

 

14. The PDO-Level Results Indicators are:  

i. Number of direct Project beneficiaries – or farmers/producers/processors reached with 
agricultural assets or services (of which 40% female and 50% youth); 

ii. Total land area under improved technologies (in hectares) disseminated by the Project 
(including % in CSA technology - proxy for climate resilience technologies/practices); 

iii. Increase in average yields of the direct beneficiaries compared to average yields in the 
Project area (% of baselines for targeted crops in the project area); and 

iv. Share of targeted beneficiaries with rating ‘Satisfied’ or above on Project interventions 

 

D. Project Description  
 
The total project amount is the equivalent of USD 44.6 million (IDA grant of USD 41 million and beneficiaries contribution 
of USD 3.6 million) over a period of 5 years. The project consists of four components, namely: (A) Institutional support 
for sustainable agriculture development and climate resilience; (B) Supporting adoption of demand driven technologies 
and climate-smart agriculture; (C) Contingency emergency response; and (D) Coordination, knowledge management and 
monitoring, evaluation, and learning (MEL). 
 
COMPONENT A: INSTITUTIONAL SUPPORT FOR SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURE DEVELOPMENT AND CLIMATE RESILIENCE: 
This component is designed to strengthen institutional capacities for Agricultural Research & Development (AR&D) and 
climate change adaptation at national level. It includes the following sub-components : (A1) Strengthening the agricultural 
research and development (AR&D) system;  (A2) Strengthening of national support services for sustainable agricultural 
development and climate resilience and  (A.3) : Strengthening the framework for sectoral strategies and reforms 
preparation and monitoring    
 
COMPONENT B: SUPPORTING ADOPTION OF DEMAND DRIVEN TECHNOLOGIES AND CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE: 
This component will support the adoption of high productivity potential and climate resilient technologies /practices. It 
is sub-divided into three sub-components: (B.1) Improving the effectiveness of agricultural support services in the 
targeted areas; (B.2) Accelerating adoption of improved technologies and innovations; and (B.3) Implementing climate-
smart agriculture plans.  
 
COMPONENT C: CONTINGENCY EMERGENCY RESPONSE 
This component will create a mechanism for financing emergency works in case of another disaster event by including a 
“zero-dollar” Contingency Emergency Response Component (CERC). Should this component be activated, it will allow 
rapid disbursement of funds to help reduce damage to infrastructure, ensure business continuity, and enable early 
rehabilitation. Following an adverse event that causes a major disaster, the GoC will be able to request that the Bank to 
channel resources from other components into an Immediate Response Mechanism (IRM). The IRM will enable the use 
of a portion of uncommitted funds from the overall IDA portfolio to respond to emergencies. To mobilize resources from 
the component, it will use the “Immediate Response Mechanism Operational Manual.”  

 

COMPONENT D: COORDINATION, M&E AND KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT 
This component is to support the Project on: (i) coordination and management, including human resources, financial 
management and procurement; (ii) M&E, gender impact evaluation and technical studies, (iii) knowledge management 
and communication; and (iv) safeguards and citizen engagement. The project will pilot the “Iterative Beneficiary 
monitoring” (IBM) System which is a simple low cost, high frequency feedback mechanism elaborated to inform regularly 
on what is not working during the project implementation and help to improve project results gradually and quickly 
without need of lengthy and expensive evaluations. 
 
E. Implementation 

 
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 

15. The project will be implemented under the supervision of the Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation 
and Agricultural Equipment (MAIEA).  It will be supported by a National Steering Committee for all 



 

The World Bank  
Climate Resilient Agriculture and Productivity Enhancement Project (P162956)  

 

 

  
Jan 04, 2018 Page 8 of 18  

 

projects/programmes in the Agricultural sector, chaired by the Ministry’s General Secretary, whose 
composition and mandate will be specified in a MAIEA decree5. 

16. By Ministerial Decree, dated 05 October 2017, all new projects/programmes under the MoA are 
under a unique Project Coordination Department (CCP). The CCP mandate are to ensure: (i) the alignment 
of agricultural projects/programs with national and regional policies and strategies; (ii) the development 
of synergies and collaborative frameworks between agricultural projects/programs funded  by different 
donors; (iv) monitoring the progress of projects / programs by updating the MoA’s indicators dashboard; 
(vi) knowledge management and communication on the projects and programs achievements ; (viii) the 
organization of capacity building activities and exchange between the different projects/programs; (xi) 
the recruitment of the (external) financial auditor in accordance with the provisions of the Financing 
Agreement and monitoring of the implementation of the recommendations; and (x) support for the 
release of counterpart funds for sector projects/programs.  

17. The day to day project management and coordination will be under the responsibility of a 
Technical and Fiduciary Coordination Unit (UCTF).  As agreed with MAIEA, the UCTF will be the 
implementation unit for all new World Bank funded operations in the agriculture sector. Reporting to the 
CCP, the UTCF main functions of this unit are to: (i) coordinate all projects of the agricultural portfolio of 
the Bank and their relations with the technical departments of the Ministry; (ii) the preparation and 
signing of the various memoranda of understanding, agreements and contracts linking the project (s) to 
the various partners and service providers; (iii) Financial Management (FM) and procurement activities in 
accordance with the provisions of the Credit Agreement between IDA and the Government and the 
procurement and FM guidelines;  (v) Terms of reference preparation, recruitment and management of 
support staff and technical units of Bank / IDA (UTPs) agricultural projects; (vi) preparation of annual work 
plans , budgets and progress reports and presentation of these documents to the PSC in relation with the 
CCP; (vii) daily liaison with all national partners, including communication on agricultural projects / 
programs funded by the World Bank; and (viii) the organization of supervision missions, mid-term and 
final evaluations of WB agricultural program projects. 

18. The UCTF will be headed by a National Programme Coordinator. It will include the following staff: 
an Internal Auditor, an Administrative and Financial Officer, an Accountant, one Procurement Officer, an 
Environmental Specialist, Gender and Social Development Specialist, a Monitoring and Evaluation and 
knowledge management Officer, and support staff. 

19. At field level, a Regional Technical Support Unit (RTSU) will be set up in Sarh for the field activities 
coordination and follow up. The TSU will be reporting to the UTCF.  The TSU will be a light structure that 
will work closely with the regional rural development delegations. The TSU mandates are to: (i) ensure 
and support the project activities implementation within its coverage area; (ii) providing technical and 
management support to project beneficiaries; and (iii) ensuring the compliance of the various subprojects 
to the operational rules and procedures. 

 
 .    
 

F. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 

The proposed Project will primarily target the Sudanian Agro-Ecological Zone of Chad, considered as high 
potential for agro-pastoral activities, but where the risk of food and nutritional security and rural poverty 
are of serious concern. The project's activities will be implemented in three (03) administrative regions, 
namely Salamat, Middle Chari and Mandoul located in the south-eastern pole of Chad. The project areas are 
home to about 1.55 million people, representing over 11% of the total population. Targeted regions are 
further characterized by high poverty rates of 70.9% in Mandoul, 61.4% in Middle Chari, and 48.4% in 
Salamat. In these communities, the average rate of fertility is estimated at about 6.5. In terms of natural and 
human resources, the targeted areas have significant agricultural potential, representing the Sudanese AEZ 
with annual average rainfall ranging between 800 to 1250 mm. However, the rainfall is highly variable in 
both inter-annual quantitates and in geographic distribution when moving from the south towards the 
north. Wooded Sudanian savanna constitutes the main vegetation in these areas, while relatively poor 
leached tropical ferruginous soils (on hills) and richer floodplains soils favorable to the culture of rice and all-
season vegetable production dominate the main soil types. 

 
SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The Project is classified as category B project.   
As part of the project’s aim of improving agricultural 
productivity, the project will support the use of 
improved agricultural inputs including fertilizers, 
improved seeds, irrigation agriculture and pesticides 
that will require environmental assessment to 
ensure potential adverse effects are mitigated.  The 
project is expected to be beneficial to the 
environment given the aim is to ensure the impact 
of climate change is mitigated, adaptation measures 
implemented and resilience is built in to the 
production landscape.  The project will ensure that 



 
modern efficient utilization of pesticide and fertilizer 
will be introduced and farmers trained in their 
applications that will have a positive impact on the 
environment compared to the status quo. Further, a 
strict control mechanism will be put in place to avoid 
potential adverse impacts such as pollution from 
agricultural runoffs. An Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared by 
the borrower given that the exact detailed footprint 
types and locations of project activities and their 
respective sites have not yet been identified. The 
ESMF will be consulted upon and publicly disclosed, 
both in-country and at the InfoShop before 
appraisal.  In addition, for subprojects that are 
expected to be identified during preparation, an 
ESIA will be prepared by appraisal.   

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 No 
The project is not expected to intervene in any 
critically natural habitats 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No The project will not support forest exploitation . 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

OP 4.09 is triggered based on project’ s activities to 
increase agricultural productivity which is expected 
to result in increased use of agrochemicals, such as 
pesticides. Any use of pesticides will be justified 
under the Integrated Pest Management (IPM) 
approach that will be promoted by the project. An 
Integrated Pest Management Plan (IPMP) will be 
developed, consulted upon by the borrower and 
publicly disclosed thereafter, both in-country and at 
the InfoShop before appraisal. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 

Due to potential impacts on Physical Cultural 
Resources associated with civil works, the ESMF will 
include provisions of “Chance Finds” approach to 
ensure that these aspects will be taken into account 
in ESIAs/EMPs to be developed under the ESMF. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 
There are no Indigenous Peoples People, as per the 
policy definition,  in the project area. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

This policy is triggered because the project 
investments may support interventions that could 
entail land taking or limiting access to land and other 
resources. Since details of the subproject footprints 
are still unknown at this very juncture, an RPF will be 
developed by the borrower, consulted upon and 
publicly disclosed, both in-country and at the 
InfoShop, before appraisal. Where and when 
warranted Full Resettlement Action Plans (FRAPs) or 



 

The World Bank  
Climate Resilient Agriculture and Productivity Enhancement Project (P162956) 

 

 

  
Jan 04, 2018 Page 11 of 18  

 

Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plans (ARAPs) will 
be prepared, reviewed, cleared and disclosed. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No The project is not building dam (big and small). 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
The Project is not intervening on International 
Waterways. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No Non applicable 

 
 

KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The environmental and social impacts and risks of the project activities are expected to be moderate to low, mostly 
site-specific and easily manageable to an acceptable level, typical of Category B projects. The potential negative 
environmental and social negative impacts and risks of the proposed project are associated with the implementation 
of Component 1 an 2, which are designed to support various activities for strengthening the agriculture research 
system and productive and resilient technology dissemination. These include: soil erosion due to agricultural 
developments; the spread of waterborne disease vectors and health risks associated with pesticide use, risks of 
increased prevalence of HIV/AIDS and other SCDs due to foreign workers on construction sites, the risk of pollution 
and environmental degradation byfertilizers and pesticides, reduced vegetation and pasture due to agricultural 
developments, etc. At the social level, though the project does not anticipate to physically display people, some of its 
proposed activities may require acquisition of land plots or restriction of access to productive natural resources, and/ 
or loss of incomes and livelihood resources without proper precautionary measures taken on time, could potentially 
lead to the involuntary resettlement of project affected persons (PAP). 
 
The proposed project triggers are OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment), OP 4.09 (Pest Management),  OP/BP 4.11 
(Physical Cultural Resources); and OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement). In conformity with the World Bank' 
requirements and the Government's Environmental Impact Assessment legislation, an ESMF was prepared, amply 
consulted upon, along with a RPF, and a PMP. These were approved by the Ministry of Environment through a 
national validation workshop, cleared by the Bank and publicly disclosed both in-country and at the World Bank 
website prior to appraisal. 
 
No large-scale or irreversible adverse impacts and risks haves been identified during the participatory ESMF, IPMP and 
RPF analysis conducted. 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
No adverse long term impact and risk haves been identified during the EA process. Instead, the project is expected to 
deliver significant environmental and social benefits to hundred thousands of Chadians’ beneficiaries whose main 
livelihoods depend largely on agriculture crops and value. The adoption of improved technologies, the sustainable 
management practices of land and water as part of the formulation and implementation of climate-smart agriculture 
plans are expected to increase the productive capital of the land and the net carbon stock; and to increase the 
resilience of agro-sylvo-pastoral systems to climate risks. However, project activities to increase agricultural 



productivity could potentially induce indirect, but manageable impacts associated with increased use of 
agrochemicals, such as pesticides. These issues are addressed in the Pests and Pesticides Management Plan (PMP). 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. 
N/A 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower 
capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The proposed project will be implemented by an new PIU under the Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Agriculture 
Equipment. The Ministry has some experience in implementing the Bank’s safeguards policies as it has implemented 
the Agriculture Support Production Project (P126576). The Government of Chad (GoC) has completed the preparation 
of an ESMF, an PMP and a RPF to address issues related to the safeguard policies triggered. 
 
The ESMF outlines an environmental and social screening process for future sub-projects to ensure that they are 
environmentally sound and socially equitable, sustainably implementable, and in line with GoC and World Bank 
operational safeguards policies and guidelines on environmental and social impacts and risks management. The 
implementation cost of the ESMF is estimated at FCFA 502 million, is proposed to be included the overall project 
budget. 
 
A Pests and Pesticide Management Plan (IPMP) has been prepared based on project activities to increase agricultural 
productivity which is expected to result in increased use of agrochemicals, such as pesticides. The PMP action plan aim 
to ensure safe pests and pesticides management. It includes: (i) promoting the use of alternative pest management 
strategies in the project areas; (ii) strengthening of controls during importation of phytosanitary products; (iii) capacity 
building of key actors on the rational use of pesticides; (iv) sensitization of producers on good pesticide management 
practices (transport, storage, applying, safety measures);  (v) environmental monitoring of the physico-chemical 
quality of water resources (groundwater and ponds); (vi) health monitoring of pesticides users and management of 
empty containers; and (v) a coherent budget of FCFA 328.5 million proposed to be included in the overall project 
budget. 
 
The RPF sets forth the basic principles and procedures to be followed once the physical footprints of project activities 
are known in details to properly mitigate any potential adverse social impacts (i.e. preparation of site specific 
resettlement action plan-RAP, etc.). The RPF includes specifics such as valuation of assets, public consultation and 
participation, institutional arrangement, capacity building, monitoring and evaluation, grievance redress mechanism, 
budget and source of financing. CFA 192.5 million are proposed to support resettlement (RAP preparation, 
sensitization and training of key stakeholders), and to be included in the overall project cost. These do not include 
compensation costs which will be borne by the Government 
 
A 2-person team of Social and Environmental Safeguards Specialists (SESS) will be established at the PIU level to 
adequately handle the implementation of social and environmental recommendations. The SESS will work in tandem 
with the WBG safeguards specialists to ensure due compliance with core safeguards policies requirements. 
 
All bidding documents for civil works will have embedded environmental and social clauses (ESC), in order to enable 
contractors to follow up on environmental and social due diligence and to mitigate the anticipated negative risks and 
impacts. Depending of the type, scope/nature and size of construction, a supervising engineer (Bureau de contrôle) 
will be hired by the project to oversee the construction works (including implementation of environmental and social 
measures by the constructor) on behalf of the PIU. For small size construction type, the PIU will rely on the 
 

deconcentrated technical services like Génie Rural, Regional Directorate for Environmental, as well as local level Socio-
environmental Specialist, etc. to ensure due diligence on safeguards as described in the ESC. Regular Environmental 
Assessment and Pollution and Nuisance Control Directorate (DEELCPN) patrols will inspect the construction sites if the 
construction activities are in compliance with the approved site specific safeguards documents.  
 
The Borrower has some experience with the World Bank Safeguards policies’ requirements through several past and 
ongoing Bank funded projects. The proposed project will build on this experience and the 3 standalone safeguards 
instruments (ESMF, IPMP & RPF) include provisions to further strengthen the capacity of the various stakeholders. 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, 
with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders identified are:  
• The Steering Committee (SC) : The Steering Committee will monitor the registry and budgeting of the 
environmental and social due diligence from the Work Plan and Annual Budget (WPAB) ; 
• The Project Management Unit (PMU):  The PMU will ensure that environmental and social aspects and issues 
are taken into account in the implementation of project activities. The PMU should benefit from capacity building in 
the implementation of the project;  
• The Environmental Assessment and Pollution and Nuisance Control Directorate (DEELCPN): it will review and 
approve the environmental classification of sub-projects and also approve  the Environmental and Social Impact 
Notices (ESIN). It will also participate in the external monitoring; 
• The research institutions will provide technical manuals of research findings and ecological monitoring of 
some activities. They will also participate in the preparation of manual of good agricultural practices. 
• The National Agency for Rural Development Support (ANADER) will be responsible for extension of good 
agricultural and environmental practices in the area; 
• The Department of Fisheries and Aquaculture Development will take care of the environmental and fish 
production monitoring; 
• Decentralized Technical Services (DTS or « STD » in French) : The STDs are composed by the Regional an 
Departmental Directorates of Ministries in charge of agriculture, of animal resources, of Health, of Environment. These 
regional and departmental directorates of the project's intervention zones will be associated to all activities 
implemented in their range and zones of action during and after the Project;  
• Municipalities :They will participate in environmental and social monitoring through their municipal technical 
services ; 
• The Regional Committees of Actions (CRA), the local Committees of Actions (CLA), the Departmental 
Committees of Actions (CDA), the National Council of Concertation of Rural Producers of Chad (CNCPRT), Asssociations 
of Farmers, Breeders and Fishermen. All these structures will also be involved in the implementation of the ESMF of 
the Project (identification of sub-projects, screening, etc.); 
• Construction companies :  They will be responsible for the implementation of the Site-ESMFs and the drafting 
of implementation reports of these ESMFs through their Environmental Expert ; 
• Owner’s Engineer : The Environmental Expert within their organization will be responsible for the day-to-day 
monitoring of the implementation of the site-ESMF and the drafting of an environmental and social monitoring report 
to submit to the Project Management Unit (PMU); 
• NGOs: In addition to social mobilization, they will participate in the sensitization of populations and the 
monitoring of the implementation of the ESMF interpellation of the principal actors of the Project. 
  
Throughout the entire process of project preparation, transparent and engaging stakeholder participation 
consultations were organized in the project intervention areas. The key concerns raised by the local stakeholders are 

 

related to land degradation issues that affect their livelihood, mainly the reduction of arable lands due to water 
erosion and silting of lowlands, lack of access to finance, and need for capacity building to improve agricultural 
practices. They have been incorporated in the project design (protection of watersheds from erosion and secure 
irrigation potential, Farmers 
Field School program, matching grant facility, etc.). Since stakeholder consultation and participation is an iterative 
process, it will be pursued and sustained throughout the project lifespan. 
As part of the ESMF, the IPMP and the RPF, in addition to the series of intensive local stakeholder meetings (open 
and/or focus groups discussions), a national stakeholders’ workshop was organized by the Client on to share the 
results of the safeguards instruments, mainstream ownership and seek inputs from the stakeholders. The 3 
standalone safeguards instruments, approved by the DEELCPN as result of this national stakeholders’ workshop, have 
been submitted to the Bank for final approval. They have been disclosed both in-country (Feb 23, 2017) and at the 
InfoShop (Feb. 22, 2018) prior to appraisal. The ESMF describes a comprehensive consultation and participation 
mechanism and disclosure during subprojects 
preparation. 
 
 

























































World Bank Document


Page 1 of 11

COMBINED PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENTS / INTEGRATED 
SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET (PID/ISDS)  

ADDITIONAL FINANCING
Report No.: PIDISDSA21270

Date Prepared/Updated: 08-Feb-2017
I. BASIC INFORMATION

  A.  Basic Project Data

Country: Benin Project ID: P160029
Parent 
Project ID 
(if any):

P115886

Project Name: Agricultural Productivity and Diversification Additional Financing (P160029)
Parent Project 
Name:

Agricultural Productivity and Diversification (P115886)

Region: AFRICA
Estimated 
Appraisal Date:

07-Feb-2017 Estimated 
Board Date:

08-Mar-2017

Practice Area
(Lead):

Agriculture Lending 
Instrument:

Investment Project Financing

Borrower(s): MInstry of Economy and Finance
Implementing 
Agency:

Minist#re de L Agriculture de L Elevage de la P#che (MAEP)

Financing (in USD Million)
Financing Source Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT 0.00
International Development Association (IDA) 45.00
Total Project Cost 45.00

Environmental 
Category:

B - Partial Assessment

Appraisal 
Review 
Decision (from 
Decision Note):

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate

Other Decision:
Is this a 
Repeater 
project?

No

B.   Introduction and Context

Country Context
Benin is a low-income country of about ten million people (2013 population census) with a per 
capita income of US$820 in 2014.  The economy is driven by agriculture and services, 
particularly import/export activities through the Port of Cotonou. Agriculture accounts for 25 
percent of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) and 47 percent of the country's employment. Cotton is 
the primary export commodity. The informal sector, including subsistence agriculture, contributes 
up to 56 percent of GDP and engages over 90 percent of the labor force. Informal re-export to 
Nigeria contribute Â¼ of the government revenue (a part of that activity goes through formal 
channels for it to be able to generate so much of the government revenue). The country was able 
to maintain macroeconomic stability, which laid the foundation for accelerating growth. Real 
GDP grew by 4.6 percent in 2012; 6.9 percent in 2013; 6.5 percent in 2014; is estimated at 5.0 
percent in 2015; and is projected at 4.5 percent in 2016; which is higher than the previous 5-year 
average of 3.7 percent. Steady gross domestic product (GDP) growth of about 5 percent during 
the period (2012-2015) was partially offset by rapid population growth averaging 3.5 percent per 
year, which led to a modest and unequal increase in household consumption.  As a result, poverty 
levels grew from 36.2 percent in 2011 to 40.1 percent in 2015 . Growth was particularly modest 
in agriculture, which employs almost half the labor force. The economy remains poorly 
diversified and vulnerable to external shocks. This vulnerability underscores the need to promote 
economic diversification (including exports) as recommended in the 2013 Country Partnership 
Strategy (CPS) for Benin. Poverty reduction has been enshrined in successive poverty reduction 
strategies, but results have proven erratic and difficult to sustain. There are significant regional 
disparities in poverty rates, and while female-headed households have typically experienced 
lower poverty levels, women continue to suffer from a lack of economic opportunity, are 
underrepresented in politics and in other decision making positions, and are more susceptible to 
falling into poverty (Table 1). 
 
The disconnect between economic growth and poverty reduction during the last five years has 
been reinforced by the fact that higher growth stemmed mainly from more capital-intensive 
sectors like banking, telecommunications and the port. In contrast, agriculture, which employs 
half of the labor force, only grew at 4 percent per annum, with its growth derived from more land 
and more labor, but with modest increase in productivity. In addition, population growth has 
limited per capita growth and its impact on poverty reduction. Furthermore, Nigeria➢❨ s 
economic slowdown and policy changes have led to decreased opportunities for informal trade, 
both in the gas sector, where gas flows informally from Nigeria to Benin, and in the broader 
consumer goods sector, where rice, chicken, edible oil, used cars, used clothing etc., flow from 
Benin to Nigeria. For instance, the suppression of subsidies in Nigeria➢❨ s oil sector affected 
negatively the informal Beninese gas trade in areas adjacent to Benin➢❨ s border with Nigeria 
(Adjarra), where poverty increased from 34.8 percent in 2011 to 50.4 percent in 2015.
Sectoral and institutional Context
The agricultural sector in Benin is subject to the vagaries of climate and price fluctuations. 
Increase in productivity for major crops, including cotton has remained modest over time. Overall 
agricultural growth is around 4 percent, which is often offset by the relatively high population 
growth (3.5 percent). Yet, agriculture will remain one of the main source of growth and 
employment for the near future in the country. This will require higher and faster growth.  The 
past performance of 4% was insufficient to drive meaningful poverty reduction, due to the very 
high population growth. The agricultural production systems rely on an extension of cropped area 
and family labor, with no or limited use of improved inputs, production methods, and farm 



Page 3 of 11

equipment. Access to financing is limited outside the cotton system. The country➢❨ s agricultural 
trade performance is generally weak, with a persistently negative agricultural trade balance. 
Agricultural exports are concentrated on three groups of products: cotton, fruits (pineapple), and 
nuts and oilseed (cashew, soy and cottonseed). To meet the needs for a growing urban population, 
Benin continues to import a large share of horticultural products from neighboring countries (such 
as Burkina Faso and Nigeria), rice from Asia, wheat, frozen meat and milk from Europe, and 
frozen poultry products from Brazil. The sector faces the triple challenges of diversifying exports 
(consolidating cotton exports and increasing export volume for pineapple and cashew nut), 
increasing food production, and sustainably increasing farm and post-harvest productivity. These 
challenges must be addressed by taking into account the structural vulnerability of the 
country➢❨ s agricultural production system to floods and occasional droughts.  
 
Improving productivity and strengthening diversification are on the top of the agenda of the 
agricultural and overall development strategy in Benin. The agriculture sector strategy in Benin is 
defined within the broader framework of the Comprehensive Africa Agricultural Development 
Program (CAADP) by which the country commits to achieve a 6 percent growth in agriculture 
and to allocate at least 10 percent of the national budget to agriculture as recommended in the 
Maputo declaration . The country➢❨ s long-term development strategy (Benin 2025 - Alafia) 
establishes the long-term vision of the country and gives clear directions in relation to the 
promotion of agricultural value chains. The vision is that the country must move towards a greater 
diversification of agricultural production in order to become a major exporter of agricultural 
products by 2025. The achievement of this vision would require a sound public and private 
financing of agriculture and financial sector reforms that would support the promotion and 
implementation of specialized financing instruments for accelerated productivity growth and 
sustainable diversification in the agriculture sector.

C.  Proposed Development Objective(s)

Original Project Development Objective(s) - Parent
The Project Development Objective of the Agricultural Productivity and Diversification Project 
(PADA) is to restore and improve productivity and value addition for selected value chains in the 
Recipient's territory.

Key Results 
The key performance indicators will remain unchanged, although targets will need to be adjusted 
where necessary and new indicators will be introduced to account for the new activities and 
changes in corporate indicators. These new indicators include: (i) Number of farmers reached 
with assets or services  of whom 40 percent are women; (ii) Farmers adopting improved 
agricultural technology; (iii) Number of micro projects transformed into SMEs. The end date for 
all targets will also be extended to February 28,2021, in line with the proposed revised Closing 
Date of the original project. .

D.  Project Description

The proposed Additional Financing (AF) will be used to support the government of Benin in 
consolidating and scaling-up the achievements of the initial project, and to strengthen the project 
focus on income generating activities for poor households as well as improving their nutritional 
status.



Page 4 of 11

Component Name
Component 1. Adoption of Improved Technologies
Comments (optional)
Like for the initial project, the objective of this component is to improve productivity and quality 
standards along the promoted value chains.  The component will continue supporting adoption of 
improved technologies for the development of the food security (aquaculture, rice, poultry, sheep 
and goat,) and export-oriented value chains (cashew and pineapple) to boost productivity and 
improve producers➢❨  incomes.

Component Name
Component 2 Development/rehabilitation of Production and Market Infrastructures
Comments (optional)
This component focuses: on (i) promoting small-scale irrigation systems for pineapple and 
cashew plantations to improve productivity; (ii) further supporting small-scale irrigation of rice 
production to maintain and expand productivity gains; and (iii) supporting the construction of 
market infrastructure (warehouses, drying areas, cold chambers, etc.) to reduce post-harvest losses 
and facilitate access to markets

Component Name
Component 3. Value Chain Coordination and Access to Finance for Private Initiatives
Comments (optional)
This component has two sub-components: (i) value chain coordination and (ii) facilitation of 
access to finance in support of private initiatives.

Component Name
Component 4. Sector Program Coordination and Project Management
Comments (optional)
This component has two sub-components: (i) capacity building of value chain coordination 
institutions, including strengthening the capacities of civil society and producers➢❨  
organizations as well as of MAEP in coordinating the implementation of the new agriculture 
sector program, and (ii) supporting Project management and monitoring and evaluation.

E.  Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis (if known)

The project is nationwide and will be implemented in the 12 Departements (Atacora, Donga, 
Atlantique, Littoral,  Borgou, Alibori, Mono, Couffo, Oueme, Plateaux, Zou, Collines).

F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

Abdoul Wahabi Seini (GSU01)

Abdoulaye Gadiere (GEN07)

II. Implementation
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
There will be no major change to the implementation arrangements. The Project Coordination Unit 



Page 5 of 11

(PCU) is currently composed of staff who have been recruited based on the skills needed for the 
various positions. Given the nature of the scaling up and new activities, the PCU will include an 
additional animal production specialist. In addition, given the strategic orientation of the Programme 
Cadre-ProCAD  that hosts the PCU, some additional staff will be recruited with cost sharing between 
PADA and WAAPP: (i) an operations officer; (ii) a finance controller; (iii) a computer and 
information management specialist; (v) a logistics management specialist; (iv) an accountant; and (v) 
two administrative assistants.  
 
Financial Management (FM). The proposed AF will build on the existing institutional and fiduciary 
arrangements of the Project Coordination Unit of PADA under oversight of the Ministry of 
Agriculture. The overall performance of the PADA in financial management is Satisfactory. Staffing 
is adequate but needs to be strengthened with a Financial Controller and proper books of accounts 
and supporting documents have been kept in respect of all expenditures. The PCU is familiar with 
the Bank FM requirements and has demonstrated solid technical and fiduciary capacities to manage 
Bank-financed Projects. The audit for the year ended December 31, 2015 for the PADA was 
submitted on time, and was unqualified. The interim un-audited financial reports (IFR) are prepared 
every quarter and regularly submitted to the Bank on time.  
 
The overall FM risk of the Agricultural Productivity and Diversification Project including the 
proposed additional financing is rated Moderate. It is considered that the financial management 
satisfies the Bank➢❨ s minimum requirements under OP/BP 10.00, and therefore is adequate to 
provide, with reasonable assurance, accurate and timely financial management information on the 
status of the project required by the Bank.  
 
Procurement. The New Procurement Framework (including Procurement Regulations for Borrowers) 
that apply to projects with PCN held after July 1st, 2016 will normally apply. Given the fact that 
waiver has been obtained from CPO to apply the old procurement Guidelines, procurement 
arrangements of the original project will remain largely the same under the proposed Additional 
Financing in accordance with: (a) the World Bank➢❨ s ➢❨ Guidelines: Procurement of Goods, 
Works, and Non-Consulting Services under IBRD Loans and IDA Credits and Grants➢❨  dated 
January 2011; revised July 2014, and (b) ➢❨ Guidelines: Selection and Employment of Consultants 
under IBRD Loans and IDA Credits and Grants by World Bank Borrowers➢❨  dated January 2011, 
revised July 2014.  Although procurement on PADA has been quite challenging, the PCU has 
conducted procurement activities for the original project in a satisfactory manner.  
 
Environmental and Social Safeguards. The AF triggers: OP/BP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment; 
OP4.09 on Pest Management; OP/PB4.11 On Physical Cultural Resources and OP/BP 4.12 on 
Involuntary Resettlement. The original project was rated as environmental assessment Category 
➢❨ B➢❨  so as the proposed AF. The environmental and social impacts of the Project are expected to 
be moderate, site specific, and manageable. The Project is expected to have a positive environmental 
impact through its support for agricultural technologies that promote the better use of land and water 
resources. Potential environmental risks could include point and nonpoint pollution of water sources, 
and other issues associated with the use of agricultural chemicals, and negative environmental 
impacts associated with the rehabilitation of irrigation or small-scale civil works. The parent 
project➢❨ s safeguards documents (Environmental and Social Management Framework-ESMF, Pest 
Management Plan-PMP and Resettlement Policy Framework-RPF) have been adapted and updated to 
include activities planned under the AF. Thereafter, all the three safeguard instruments have been 
consulted upon and disclosed in-country on February 03, 2017 and at the Infoshop on February 03, 



Page 6 of 11

2017. The latest implementation support mission (December, 2016) rated the safeguard compliance 
Satisfactory, based on review of progress reports and project site visits. The Project Management 
Unit has an extensive experience in Bank➢❨ s safeguards policies and a dedicated team has been 
appointed to follow up on environmental and social issues; especially the implementation of the 
safeguards instruments. In addition, the national body in charge of environmental and social 
management plans (ESMPs) implementation monitoring (ABE Agence Beninoise pour 
l➢❨ Environnement) will ensure the compliance with national legislation while Bank➢❨ s safeguards 
specialists guide and provide guidance to the PIU through regular supervision missions.

III. Safeguard Policies that might apply

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental 
Assessment OP/BP 
4.01

Yes The ongoing Additional Financing intends to finance small 
equipment to ensure proper use of irrigation facilities (sub-
component 2-1). More specifically, the project under sub-
component 2-2, will also fund the construction and 
rehabilitation of critical market and storage infrastructures: (i) 
cold chamber for pineapple packaging and storage before 
export; (ii) construction of centers of bulking up in pineapple 
production areas and distribution centers of pineapple to 
expand domestic marketing of pineapple; (iii) construction of 
25 warehouses to support the bulk marketing of cashew nuts; 
(iv) construction and equipment of 10 cashew apple juice 
processing units to support income-generating activities for 
women based on good results of the initial phase; (v) 
construction of 100 threshing and drying areas for rice to 
improve quality and marketability of the final product; and (vi) 
construction and equipment of fresh fish distribution centers. 
These several civil works will potentially impact 
environmental and social components. However, the exact 
locations of these investments were not determined with 
certainty an Environment and Social Management Framework
(ESMF) has been developed, reviewed, consulted upon and 
disclosed within the Benin on February 03,2017 and at the 
World Bank➢❨ s Website on February 03, 2017

Natural Habitats OP/
BP 4.04

No This policy is not triggered as there will be no potential impact 
on natural habitats.

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No The project is not expected to have any impact on forests.
Pest Management OP 
4.09

Yes The Additional Financing of PADA aims also at increasing the 
agricultural productivity. By this way, it is expected that 
farmers use fertilizers to improve soil fertility and pesticides to 
fight against pests and predators. To handle in a proper manner 
the potential use of these chemical products, the borrower has 
prepared a Pest Management Plan (PMP). After its preparation, 
PMP has been reviewed by the Bank, consulted upon and 
disclosed within Benin on February 03, 2017 and on the 
Bank➢❨ s website on February 03, 2017.



Page 7 of 11

Physical Cultural 
Resources OP/BP 
4.11

Yes The civil works associated with activities will unquestionably 
involve excavations within the framework of the construction 
of new infrastructures with the probability to discover cultural 
resources. However, no specific safeguard instrument is 
required. The ESMFthat has been prepared includes a chapter 
in order to provide guidance in case of such discoveries.

Indigenous Peoples 
OP/BP 4.10

No There are no indigenous people as defined by the Bank within 
the Benin

Involuntary 
Resettlement OP/BP 
4.12

Yes The project could involve land take. To be in full compliance 
with the policy, the borrower has prepared a Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF) that has  also been reviewed, 
consulted upon, disclosed in-country on February XXX, 2017 
and at the World Bank➢❨ s Website February XXX, 2017.

Safety of Dams OP/
BP 4.37

No The project will not finance any dam construction.

Projects on 
International 
Waterways OP/BP 
7.50

No The project will not finance any activities with impacts on 
international waterways.

Projects in Disputed 
Areas OP/BP 7.60

No The project will not finance any activities in disputed areas.

IV. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify 

and describe any potential large scale,  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
There are no significant or irreversible adverse impacts that are expected from the implementation 
of activities that will be financed under this AF. Most of the adverse environmental and social 
impacts associated with these investments will be small-scale and site-specific.  Hence, they will 
be manageable at an acceptable level. 
 
The project remains EA category B and triggers four safeguards policies namely OP/PB 4.01; 
OP4.09;OP/PB4.11 and OP/PB 4.12.  Safeguard instruments (ESMF, IPMP and RPF) have all 
been updated and will be implemented as guidance/guidelines for the activities during the 
Additional Financing phase.  
 
During the parent project➢❨ s implementation, Overall safeguard compliance (OP/BP 4.01 on 
Environmental Assessment; OP4.09 on Pest Management and OP/BP 4.12 on Involuntary 
Resettlement) is rated Moderately Satisfactory.  All safeguard documents have been prepared and 
disclosed in accordance with national legislation and Bank policies.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities 
in the project area:
The assessment of potential environmental and social adverse impacts does not foresee long-term 
impacts associated to this project.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse 



Page 8 of 11

impacts.
N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an 
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Given that the exact location of future investments are not yet known and activities are diversified, 
the borrower has prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF). That 
safeguard instrument contains standards, methods, and procedures specifying how future activities 
whose location, number, and scale are unknown will systematically address environmental and 
social issues.  It includes procedures for screening and mitigating impacts from construction and 
operation of the irrigation schemes, and includes the following: (a) checklists of potential 
environmental and social impacts and their sources; (b) procedures for participatory screening of 
proposed sites and activities and the environmental and social considerations; (c) procedures for 
assessing potential environmental and social impacts of the planned project activities; (d) 
institutional arrangements for mitigating, preventing, and managing the identified impacts; (e) 
typical environmental management planning process for addressing negative externalities in the 
course of project implementation; (f) a system for monitoring the implementation of mitigation 
measures; and (g) recommended capacity building measures for environmental planning and 
monitoring of project activities. 
 
To manage land acquisition, involuntary resettlement or loss of livelihoods induced by the 
implementation of activities and other sub-projects, the client has developed a Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF).  That safeguard instrument clarifies the principles, organizational 
arrangements, and design criteria to be applied to investments/sub-projects to be prepared during 
project implementation. Investment-specific Resettlement Action Plans (RAP) will be prepared, as 
necessary, in line with the RPF and submitted to the Bank for approval.  
 
The PMP encourages the use of organic fertilizers and biological technics to fight against 
agriculture predators. In addition to that, It sets up guidance and guidelines with the aim to protect 
population health and environment integrity in promoting best practices in the case of use of 
chemical products. 
 
All the above safeguard documents provide detailed mitigation measures to ensure sustainability 
and compliance with Benin➢❨ s regulations and legislations, as well as with the World Bank 
environmental and social safeguard policies. 
 
Activities financed under the project will be screened using a standardized approach based on the 
tools developed under the original project.  ESIA including ESMPs will be prepared as needed for 
the small civil works expected to be undertaken under this AF.  For works with negligible impacts 
environmental measures based on national laws and regulations will apply. 
 
The PIU includes currently an environmental specialist who is responsible for safeguards 
implementation. Moving forward, under this AF, the same staff will continue to oversee the 
implementation of the project safeguards instruments and coordinate efforts at the national level. 
Moreover, the PIU staff will continue to regularly monitor and follow-up with any safeguard 
issues with the assistance of the ABE(Agence Beninoise de l➢❨ Environnement) involved since 
the beginning of the parent project in ESMPs implementation monitoring. Lastly, the Bank➢❨ s 
implementing support missions will also continue to include environmental and social safeguard 
specialists.



Page 9 of 11

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure 
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Stakeholders concerned by the AF are constituted by farmers, breeders, fishermen, NGOs, and 
ministries in charge of Agriculture, Livestock, Water, Forestry, Environment and land 
management. During the safeguard instruments preparation, these various stakeholder groups have 
been consulted. During the updating of the safeguards documentation, new series of consultations 
were held where all of these stakeholders have been consulted and their recommendations, 
comments and suggestions taken into account in the safeguards documents finalization. The latest 
consultation in the process of safeguard instruments preparation was the workshop held in 
Bohicon from December 13 to 16, 2016 at Hotel Fifatin.

B. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank 09-Jan-2017

Date of submission to InfoShop 03-Feb-2017
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors

"In country" Disclosure
Benin 03-Feb-2017
Comments:

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank 23-Dec-2016

Date of submission to InfoShop 03-Feb-2017
"In country" Disclosure

Benin 03-Feb-2017
Comments:

Pest Management Plan
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal? Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank 09-Jan-2017

Date of submission to InfoShop 03-Feb-2017
"In country" Disclosure

Benin 03-Feb-2017
Comments:

If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


























































World Bank Document


PROGRAM INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 

APPRAISAL STAGE  

    November 4, 2016 

Report No.: 110125 

 

Operation Name Second Development Policy Operation 

Region EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA 

Country Moldova 

Sector General public administration sector (30%); Banking (20%); 

Public administration- Industry and trade (20%); General 

finance sector (20%); General agriculture, fishing and forestry 

sector (10%) 

Operation ID P149555 

Lending Instrument Development Policy Financing 

Borrower(s) THE REPUBLIC OF MOLDOVA 

Implementing Agency MINISTRY OF FINANCE 

Date PID Prepared November 4, 2016 

Estimated Date of Appraisal November 4, 2016 

Estimated Date of Board 

Approval 

December 16, 2016 

Corporate Review Decision October 21, 2016 

 

 Country and Sector Background 

Moldova has experienced rapid growth and poverty reduction over the past decade, 

although deterioration in external conditions and increased governance challenges since 

2014 have led to slower growth. Since the early 2000s, the economy has expanded by an 

average of 5 percent a year. Poverty declined substantially to 11 percent in 2014 from 26 

percent in 2007 (using the national poverty line) and from much higher levels earlier in the 

decade. Consumption growth among the bottom 40 percent of the population w as consistently 

higher than average consumption growth. Since 2014, however, external conditions have 

deteriorated significantly with the slowdown in the European Union (EU) and the Russian 

Federation on which Moldova is dependent for trade and remittances. This, together with a 

series of summer droughts and increased governance challenges, particularly in the financial 

sector, have resulted in slower growth in Moldova. The economy contracted by 0.5 percent in 

2015 and public and guaranteed debt increased to 46.6 percent of gross domestic product 

(GDP) from 38.2 percent a year earlier. A rebound in agriculture, in 2016, together with recent 

reforms are helping Moldova respond to adversity. Growth is projected to improve modestly to 

2.2 percent in 2016. 

Progress in poverty reduction has been driven largely by remittances and pensions, with 

the reform program supported by DPO-2 taking initial steps toward addressing the 

medium-term challenge of shifting toward greater sustainability. Remittances have made a 

significant contribution to domestic income, which has fueled private consumption and, 

together with exports, driven economic growth. Remittances, mainly going to rural areas where 

many of the poor are, have also contributed to poverty reduction and the welfa re improvement 

of the bottom 40. Pensions have also played an important role in raising incomes among the 
population, although mainly in urban areas. At the same time, employment has declined, led by 

falling labor force participation rates among both men and women which have reached very 

low levels compared to other countries. This declining labor supply is largely explained by a 

combination of greater emigration flows, the segment of the inactive labor force who have 

future migration plans, and informal workers who drop out of the labor force, all symptoms of 

low labor demand and limited availability of productive jobs. In fact, the lack of jobs and the 

wage differential with richer neighboring countries continue to motivate emigration. Going 

forward, the reforms to improve the business climate, enhance financial sector stability, and 

improve expenditure efficiency should help Moldova move toward a more sustainable model 

of growth and poverty reduction driven by private sector job creation. 

European integration has anchored the government’s policy reform agenda since 2009, 

but political instability and governance challenges have slowed the pace of reform.  
Negotiations between Moldova and the EU on an Association Agreement and a Deep and 

Comprehensive Free Trade Agreement began in 2010 and were concluded on June 27, 2014, 

with the signing of both documents. Visa-free access for Moldovan citizens travelling to the 

Schengen area went into effect in April 2014. However, periodic breakdowns in pro -European 

coalitions made progress uneven. Governance challenges have continued to take the center 

stage, as exemplified by the banking fraud revealed in 2014 that involved the loss of the 

equivalent of over 10 percent of the country’s GDP. After a period of short -lived governments, 

the Government of Mr. Filip was appointed in January 2016, dedicating policy efforts on 

stabilizing the macroeconomic situation, increasing transparency, and addressing identified 

weaknesses in the financial sector. 

The proposed operation supports the efforts of the Moldovan authorities to address key 

constraints to inclusive and sustainable growth by consolidating reform efforts in three 

areas. Accordingly, the proposed operation is built around three pillars, which are also the 

program development objectives. The first pillar of the operation seeks to strengthen the 

regulatory framework to improve predictability of the business environment, fac ilitate 

competition, and reduce regulatory compliance costs. The second pillar aims at strengthening 

financial sector stability, promoting transparency of shareholding, and easing conditions for 

access to finance. The third pillar, focusing on the quality of public spending, seeks to improve 

the public investment management (PIM) framework, make investment subsidies in agriculture 

more efficient and equitable, and improve the coverage of well-targeted social assistance 

programs. The reform program builds on strong complementarity with other World Bank 

Group instruments in Moldova, including investment projects and analytical and advisory 

activities. In addition, although not a formal continuation of the previous program, the first two 

pillars of this series support the implementation of select laws supported by the 

Competitiveness DPO (approved in FY2013). 

 Operation Objectives 

The proposed DPL series supports the Government of Moldova's to improve the business 

climate, promote financial sector stability and development, and improve the equity and 

efficiency of public expenditure. The proposed operation is the second in a planned 

programmatic series of two single-tranche operations supporting key policy and institutional 

reforms with three development objectives: 



 Pillar A: Strengthen the regulatory framework to improve predictability of the business 
environment, facilitate competition and reduce regulatory compliance costs. 

 Pillar B: Strengthen financial sector stability, promote transparency of shareholding and ease 
conditions for access to finance. 

 Pillar C: Improve the public investment management framework, make investment subsidies 
in agriculture more efficient and equitable and improve the coverage of well-targeted social 

assistance programs. 

The Pillar A seeks to improve the business environment facing Moldovan companies and 

farms. Supported measures aim to reduce the burden of regulatory and compliance costs of state 

inspections and to enhance competition and to set up an institutional mechanism for information 

collection on all state aid to increase transparency on how state aid is granted and contribute to a 

more efficient use of state budget resources. 

The objective of the Pillar B is to support the Moldovan authorities to build a more 

sustainable, resilient, and transparent financial sector that can prudently expand access 

to financial services. The policy actions address priority reforms in the areas of the corporate 

shares registry, the integrity of shareholders’ ownership rights, corporate gover nance 

standards, shareholder transparency, and proper supervision by NBM and NCFM. Reforms 

under this pillar are also aimed at enhancing access to finance, which continues to constrain 

private sector development, especially for SMEs and entrepreneurs. 

Pillar C focuses on improving the public investment management framework, making 

investment subsidies in agriculture more efficient and equitable and improving the 

coverage of well-targeted social assistance programs. Existing inefficiencies and inequities 

in the allocation and implementation of public investment resources, including in the 

agriculture sector, and the erosion of coverage in well-targeted social assistance programs 

reduce the effectiveness of public spending for reaching national strategic objec tives, poverty 

reduction and promoting shared prosperity. Transforming the economy will require significant 

upgrades in infrastructure through public investments. Moreover, adequate appraisal of 

investment projects ensures cost effectiveness. Agricultural support to small or individual 

farmers is still modest, and does not reflect their current and potential role in high -value 

agricultural production. 

 Rationale for Bank Involvement 

This operation (second in a programmatic series of two) supports efforts of the 

Government to improve the business climate, promote financial sector stability and 

development, and improve the equity and efficiency of public expenditure, and is aligned 

with the National Development Strategy “Moldova 2020” (NDS). The three pillars of the 

operation directly support three of the eight national priorities in the NDS: “improving the 

business climate” (supported by Pillar A), “reducing financing costs” (supported by Pillar B), 

and “ensuring competitiveness of agro-food products” (supported by Pillar A and C). In 

addition, improving the public investment management framework is expected to contribute to 

efficiency of public spending, and ultimately, to growth. Increasing the coverage of well -

targeted social assistance programs is expected to contribute to poverty reduction and to 

increase shared prosperity, while maintaining fiscal sustainability. The reforms supported in 

this DPL series are informed by substantial technical assistance and analytical work. This 



includes both recently completed and ongoing activities, with strong collaboration with other 

development partners. 

This operation is a key component of the CPS for FY14-17. The CPS discussed by the 

Board in September 2013 includes three pillars: (i) Increasing competitiveness; (ii) En hancing 

human capital and minimizing social risks; (iii) Promoting a green, clean, and resilient 

Moldova. The DPO operation will directly support the first pillar of the CPS, improving 

economic competitiveness. It will also contribute to the second pillar (minimizing social risks) 

by strengthening the efficiency of the social assistance system. In addition, reforms aiming at 

making public expenditure more efficient and equitable support the cross -cutting governance 

theme of the CPS. 

 Tentative financing 

Source: ($m.) 

Borrower/Recipient 0 

International Development Association  17.8 

International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 27.2 

 Total 45 

 Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 

The reform program supported by this operation builds on strong complementarily with 

other World Bank Group instruments in Moldova, including investment projects and 

analytical and advisory activities. The operation is complemented in each area by technical 

assistance and investment lending. TA in investment climate reform and competition policy 

has strongly informed the policy reforms in these areas. On the investment side, the 

Competitiveness Enhancement Project II, complements the DPO series with Regulatory 

Reform, SME Development and Access to Finance components. The World Bank Group’s 

Competition Policy Team provided technical assistance to the Competition Council to help 

implement the state aid registry. Reforms in the financial sector are also supported by the 

programmatic technical assistance. Reforms in public investment management are supported 

by technical assistance under the programmatic Public Expenditure Review and the Trust Fund 

for Strengthening Public Investment Management. In social assistance, the DPO complements 

the on-going Strengthening the Effectiveness of the Social Safety Net results-based SIL.  

 Risks and Risk Mitigation 

The overall risks to this operation are substantial. Key risks are: (i) political and 

governance; (ii) macroeconomic; (iii) sector policies and institutions and (iv) institutional 

capacity for implementation and sustainability. The overall risk rating level of the proposed 

DPO is substantial. To partially mitigate these risks, the Bank team has consulted with 

Parliamentarians as many proposed policy measures require parliamentary passage. In 

addition, the policy actions across all three pillars of this operation help increase transparency 

and promote good governance. Finally, development partners, including the International 

Monetary Fund and the European Commission remain engaged in policy dialogue, technical 

assistance, awareness campaigns and financing (including three-year IMF EEF program  

 Poverty and Social Impacts (PSI) and Environmental Aspects 

The policies and reforms supported by the operation are expected to have positive 

distributional and gender impacts and thus help reduce poverty and promote shared 



prosperity. Pillar C will make fiscal policy more equitable and efficient and therefore have a 

direct effect on poverty reduction and the promotion of shared prosperity. Pillars A and B will 

contribute to the twin goals indirectly by helping provide opportunities for business growth, 

supporting fair and transparent institutions and improving the functioning of financial markets, 

thereby enabling higher growth. No measure is expected to have negative distributional or 

gender impacts. Measures under pillar A are expected to promote employment growth in 

sectors that have a high share of women’s employment such as agriculture (which accounts for 

27.3 percent of women’s employment) and services, where the largest share of employed 

women works. 

Among the measures expected to have a direct positive impact on poverty, the measures 

to increase the inclusion of small farms in the agriculture support program are expected 

to be pro-poor and to contribute to strengthen the livelihoods of the rural poor.  According 

to the 2011 agricultural census overall most corporate subsidy recipients are large farms, with 

30 percent of all corporate farms receiving subsidies against 7 percent of individual farms. For 

both individual and corporate farms, the share of subsidy recipients is slightly lower among 

female-headed than male-headed farms. Redirecting resources to small farmers is the more 

important considering the high incidence of poverty in rural areas vis a vis urban ones (14.5 

percent versus 1 percent in big cities and 5.7 percent in small towns), and the particularly high 

incidence of poverty among farmers and agricultural workers (12.5 and 13.9 percent 

respectively).  

The measures aimed at facilitating the use of movable collateral, based on international 

experience, can be expected to benefit smaller firms in the service sector which have 

limited fixed assets, and therefore have a positive (if small) distributional impact.  The 

cogency of the constraints faced by smaller firms in accessing credit is illustrated by the 20 13 

Enterprise Survey which indicates that over a third of firms with fewer than 20 employees, and 

in particular those managed by women, that applied for a loan were rejected. To the extent that 

these measures extent to agricultural enterprises the poverty reducing impact of these measures 

will be amplified (about 6.5 percent of the poor lives in households engaged in entrepreneurial 

activities outside of agriculture, but the share rises to 23 percent when agriculture is included). 

The parametric changes in the Ajutor Social social assistance program of last resort have 

explicit positive pro-poor and gender impact. Indeed, the rationale for the changes is to stop 

the erosion of the potential beneficiary base of the program. By directly supporting the income 

of a significant proportion of the poorest households in the country, these measures were 

estimated to reduce poverty by as much as 0.5 percentage points, with additional 

improvements in the livelihoods of the poor not captured by a decrease in poverty incidence  

(but in lower depth and severity of poverty). The proposed policy action is not expected to 

substantially modify the gender incidence of these programs, but as 57 percent of adult 

recipients of Ajutor social in 2015 were women, this measure is expected to have a positive 

gender impact.  

The withdrawal of the licenses from BEM, Banca Sociala, and Unibank and their 

liquidation has affected negatively the workers who lost their jobs and were not absorbed 

by other banks. The country’s regime of severance packages (growing with years of tenure in 

the job so that for example it would provide 9.6 weeks of salary for those employed for one 

year, and 18.6 weeks of salary for those with 10 years of tenure) was applied to cushion the 

shock on those who lost their job. Given wage levels in the banking sector (almost twice as 



high as the average for the economy) those severance packages were quite generous (the 

equivalent of 6.3 times the poverty line for those with one year of tenure in the job and of 27 

times the poverty line for those with ten years of tenure). In addition, because of their higher 

than average wages, workers in this group were not among the most poor and vulnerable (in 

2015 only 9 percent of workers in the financial sector were among the bottom 40 percent). 

Finally, there is at least anecdotal evidence that several employees from the banks that were 

liquidated were reabsorbed elsewhere in the sector. Other negative impacts of the bank 

liquidations, such as the losses for the depositors were fully compensated for during the 

liquidation process. 

The DPO environmental assessment (EA) and of the proposed priority actions shows most 

of them are either neutral or beneficial for the environment (see Annex 4). Measures in 

Pillar C to improve the public investment management framework and make investment 

subsidies in agriculture more efficient and equitable would eventually lead to better natural 

resource management, promotion of organic agriculture, energy efficiency and climate change 

adaptation technologies. Existing EA legal and administrative frameworks in the country is 

overall well developed and in compliance with good international practices. The PIM regulation 

requires environmental assessment for projects, and as such would help mitigate the potential 

environmental impacts. 


























































World Bank Document


 

PROGRAM-FOR-RESULTS INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 

APPRAISAL STAGE 

Report No.:PIDA0101994  

 

Program Name Transformation of Agriculture Sector Program Phase 3  
Additional Financing 

Region Africa 

Country Rwanda 

Sector Agriculture 

Lending Instrument Program for Results 

Program ID P161000 

Parent Program ID P148927 

Recipient Republic of Rwanda 

Implementing Agency Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Resources (MINAGRI) 

Date PID Prepared December 6, 2016 

Estimated Date of Appraisal 

Completion 

December 23, 2016 

Estimated Date of Board 

Approval 

February 28, 2017 

 

 

 Country Context 
 

Rwanda is a small (26,000 km2) landlocked country with few natural resources and a population 

of 10.7 million (2012) and projected population of 13 million by 2020.  Its hilly terrain covers 85 

percent of the land mass and the country has the highest population density in Africa with 416 

people per square kilometer, with 53 percent of them female. Rwanda has made a remarkable 

transition from genocide to peace and development. Between 2000 and 2012, GDP growth 

averaged 8.1 percent per year. Development efforts and results have been significant. Rwanda 

experienced 14 percentage points reduction in the poverty headcount, from 59 percent in 2001 to 

45 percent in 2011 and with the remaining poor on average much closer to the poverty line in 

2011 than in 2001. Developments in agriculture were key drivers of this poverty reduction 

accounting for more than 45 percent in total due to increased agriculture production (35 percent) 

and increased agriculture commercialization (10 percent). Self-employment in small off-farm 

non-agriculture business accounted for an additional 13 percent of poverty reduction. Part of this 

self-employment was associated with agriculture value chain employment. 

 

Despite this impressive performance in the last decade and particularly in the last 5 years, 

significant challenges remain. While improving, Rwanda remains a low income country with 

annual per capita income of US$644 in 2012 (with more than 45 percent below the national 

poverty line). About one in four rural households live in extreme poverty. Poverty is still mostly 

a rural phenomenon with 49 percent of the poor in rural areas compared to 22 percent in urban 

areas. Poverty is highest (76.6 percent) among households (often landless) who obtain more than 

half of their income from working on other people’s farms. The land distribution is skewed – 36 

percent of households own 6 percent of farm land, with an average of 0.1 ha per household 

(compared to the national average of .33 ha per household). Women are more likely to fall into 

this category.  In addition, women provide the bulk of labor in the crop sector, but function 

mainly at subsistence level with insufficient skills, access to markets and control over land and 

other agricultural services. If Rwanda is to achieve its targets to reduce the number of people 

living below the national poverty line to less than 20 percent and eliminate extreme poverty by 

the year 2020, continuation of the past strong growth performance will not be sufficient. A 

further acceleration of inclusive growth would be needed, on top of further reductions in 

inequality. 

 

The strategy for stimulating rapid and sustainable economic growth and reducing poverty is 

articulated in Rwanda’s Vision 2020. Vision 2020 is the national vision and policy framework 

which articulates key priorities for the country’s development by the year 2020. This vision is 

further laid out in the Second Economic Development and Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper 

(EDPRS 2) which delineates the agriculture sector as a key sector and a significant engine of 

inclusive growth for the country. Likewise, in the recent report Rwanda Economic Update, 

Maintaining Momentum it states that increasing agriculture productivity is the main driver of 

poverty reduction in Rwanda. Agricultural transformation, especially through competitive value 

chain development, is expected to boost growth in both the formal and informal sectors, with the 

effect of reducing the proportion of the population dependent on agriculture from the present 73 

percent (2009) to less than 50 percent in 2020. In addition, while agricultural productivity is 

increasing, there is considerable potential to accelerate and continue to raise productivity, 

increase commercialization of agriculture production, increase self-employment in small on and 

off-farm business and achieve significant poverty reduction, income gains and increased 

prosperity.  Gender equity and equality has also been highlighted as a foundational and cross-

cutting issue under EDPRS 2 and the Third Phase of the Transformation of Agriculture Sector 

Program (known by its French acronym, PSTA 3) building on a solid foundation with the highest 

percent of women in parliament in the world at 64 percent and 32 percent women's participation 

in all decision-making local government bodies. Accordingly, the Government of Rwanda (GoR) 

has made a strong commitment to continue to increase gender equity and equality particularly at 

the local level, and is determined to see it well integrated in government policies and programs at 

all levels. 
 

 

 Sectoral (or multi-sectoral) and Institutional Context 
 

Accounting for 32.7 percent of the GDP (2015), agriculture is a critical driver of economic 

growth (7.6 percent, 2000-15) and poverty reduction, contributing to 35 percent of the total 

decline in poverty rates over the past decade. A well-established policy framework, facilitating 

enhanced access to better agricultural inputs, has greatly contributed to the positive agriculture 

sector performance.  As a result, the total production of cassava and maize, as well as milk, meat, 

fish and eggs, more than doubled between 2005 and 2015. 

 

Despite these positive developments, Rwanda has yet to meet its production potential. Although 

key agricultural yields have greatly increased since 2000 (e.g. cereal and cassava yields have 

trebled, sweet potato yields have doubled etc.), they reached a plateau in 2011. At their current 

levels, they are estimated to be at 40-50 percent of their productivity potential, resulting from 

suboptimal use of production factors. Similarly, livestock yields have remained consistently low 

over time. 

 

A contributing factor is small farm size – a rural household, on average, cultivates 0.6 ha, and 


has 2-5 animals – and 96 percent of rural households are directly reliant on agriculture as their 

main or only source of income. The projected increase in the rural population, an estimated 

additional 2.5-3.5 million people by 2032, is likely to add more pressure on land resources and 

farm incomes, unless alternative employment opportunities become available. 

 

In addition, Rwanda remains challenged by malnutrition, with a stunting rate of 37.9 percent, 

while its food security index lies below the average of the Sub-Saharan African countries. Some 

20 percent (2015) of Rwandan households remain food insecure, and most of them are located in 

the western and northern parts of the country. 

 

 

 Program Scope 
 

The proposed operation supports the Government of Rwanda’s strategic objectives of the 

Transformation of Agriculture Sector Program Phase 3 with aims to enhance food security and 

nutrition contributing to a reduction in poverty and inclusive economic growth. The operation 

supports four broad program areas: (i) agriculture and animal resource intensification; (ii) 

research, technology transfer and professionalization of farmers; (iii) value chain development 

and private sector investment; and (iv) institutional development and agricultural cross-cutting 

issues. 
 

 

 Program Development Objective(s) 
 

The program development objective (PDO) is to increase and intensify the productivity of the 

Rwandan agricultural and livestock sectors and expand the development of value chains. 
 

 

 Environmental and Social Effects 
 

The Additional Financing (AF) will introduce a new disbursement-linked indicator (DLI) on the 

development of an updated National Agricultural Policy (NAP) and increase several of the 

existing DLI targets. Increasing the DLI targets and incorporating a new DLI will support GoR’s 

on-going efforts to maximize the productivity of the agriculture sector while transforming the 

overarching policy environment. 

 

The updated NAP will provide an overarching vision for the agriculture sector. It will place 

significant emphasis on sustainable production and food security. However, the policy will not 

include specific policy instruments. Individual policy instruments for all sub sectors will be 

reviewed, revised, or developed. All policies will need to be compliant with the principles 

outlined in the NAP (including those of protecting the environment while maintain food 

security). This approach ensures that sustainable practices will be mainstreamed throughout all 

sub sectoral policies. 

 

The assessment of these adjustments to the Program is as follows: 

 

a) DLIs that are focused on improving the productivity of land and increasing the 
productivity of key crops (DLI 1, 2, 3 and 4) will not induce new environmental and 


 

social risks but may request to pay more attention to potential direct, indirect or 

cumulative risk generated from activities such as expansion of irrigation, as some 

irrigation structures will include canals, as well as small dams. As with any irrigation 

structure, these dams may have safety-related risks, which were effectively managed by 

the GoR during RSSP investment projects. Other potential impacts include water quality 

and quantity degradation (both surface and ground water), surface water sedimentation, 

and spread of waterborne diseases. 

b) Inclusion of DLI 8 focusing on the production of an updated NAP which will integrate 
new initiatives, such as the climate smart Agriculture and Information Communication 

Strategy, which could benefit environmental management.  

 

The level of risk remains moderate and can be addressed through: (i) the existing GoR 

Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) including the small dam safety 

guidelines and the Environmental and Social Implementation Manual (ESIM). The process for 

rolling out the ESIM to all Districts is part of the on-going decentralization process. The rollout 

to 30 Districts is expected to be concluded by September 2017; and (ii) exclusion of high-risk 

interventions which include activities that are judged likely to have significant adverse impacts 

on the environment and/or affected people. Among these high-risks interventions are dam 

construction/irrigation or drainage infrastructures on transboundary water resources. 

 

While the existing ESMS is adequate, it will be strengthened to further benefit and improve the 

GoR’s understanding of social issues in the following areas by: 

 

 Strengthening measures to enhance GoR’s capacity to implement the ESMS Program. As 
a result, this new action includes a “capacity building program based on the ESIM, and 

the small dam safety guidelines” to benefit the District officers. This program will ensure 

that: (a) the ESIM has sufficient guidelines on small dams; and (b) all relevant staff are 

trained in the ESIM. The manual and training program will be prepared by involving the 

relevant MINAGRI SPIU teams which are already conversant with the safeguards 

policies; and implemented before the end of the Program. 

 

 The Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) database will be fully functional (including 
relevant staff training) within MINAGRI by July, 2017. This will be supported by the 

development of a communication strategy (included in the updated PAP) to ensure there 

is awareness of the database and that the outcomes of grievances are made public. 

 

 

 Financing 
 

The updated financing table for PSTA3 (see Table below) reflects original commitments from 

2013, as well as actual (to June 30, 2016) and projected contributions (to June 30, 2018).  

Table: Updated PSTA Financing to June 2018
1
 (US$ Millions) 

                                                 
1
 The PAD for the original PforR operation indicated that the PforR represented 12 percent of PSTA financing from the World 
Bank, USAID, and other DPs exploring the viability of providing co-financing as part of ensuring aligned donor support to the 

sector. The PAD clarified that co-financing would not change the overall budget envelope and would not bring additional 



5 

 

Source 

Original 

Commitment 

to PSTA 3  

Actual 

contribution as 

of June 30, 2016  

Projected 

Contribution 

to FY 

2016/17 

Projected 

Contribution 

to FY 

2017/18 

Total 

(Actual + 

Projected) 

Government  300.0 132 60.0 60.0 252.0 

IDA (Agriculture PforR)  100.0 66.3 22.7 0.0 89.0 

EU  160.0 52.0 37.0 37.0 126.0 

IDA (LWH, RSSP, FRDP)  194.0 106.4 31.9 31.9 170.2 

USAID 138.0 121.0 28.5 25.0 174.5 

IFAD 120.0 43.0 21.0 21.0 85.0 

DFID  39.4 20.3 2.8 2.7 25.8 

MDTF (DFID) 50.6 29.1 15.4 6.1 50.6 

Netherlands  10.0 8.6 1.4 0.0 10.0 

Swiss  6.0 6.0 
 

 6.0 

Japan/JICA  32.0 20.7 11.0 8.0 39.7 

AfDB  20.0 56.6 
  

56.6 

FAO  30.0 18.0 8.0 10.0 36.0 

Sub-total 1200.0 680.0 239.7 201.7 1121.4 

Financing Gap     78.6 

(-) IDA (Ag PforR AF)   23.0 23.0 46.0 

(-) MDTF (Ag PforR AF)    5.0 5.0 10.0 

Revised Financing Gap     22.6 

Total 1200.0 680.0 267.7 229.7 1177.4 

 

Foreign exchange rate losses have resulted in a total financing gap of US$78.6 million from both 

GoR and IDA-financed programs. Included in the above projected contribution for 2016/2017 

and 2017/2018 is the proposed AF from the IDA Credit (US $46 million) and the MDTF Grant 

(US$10 million) totaling US$56 million. The combined proposed AF would reduce the financing 

gap to US$22.6 million. 

 

 

 Program Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 
 

The Public Sector 

 

The lead government ministry for the agriculture sector is MINAGRI.  Organizationally, it is 

composed of four main entities as follows: 

 

MINAGRI Central guides policy, strategy and key programs for the Ministry. It comprises the 

Minister and Principal Secretary, and four departments/directorates: Planning, Inspection, Crop 

Production, and Animal Resources. 

 

Rwanda Agricultural Board (RAB) is a semi-autonomous implementation agency of MINAGRI 

that is responsible for promoting food crop production. It has a national network of research 

stations, projects and staff that focus on improved production and yields of food staple crops. It 

has agronomists based in four zones corresponding to the four provinces, and who are 

responsible for expanding farmer access to enhanced extension services. The RAB is also 

responsible for all research and certification of seeds and houses two Task Forces (Irrigation and 

Post-Harvest Infrastructure) which will be assimilated within MINAGRI’s structure as of July 1, 

                                                                                                                                                             
resources, but would mean switching modalities from either sector budget support or project financing to programmatic 

financing (PforR). Apart from DfID, no other donors are providing programmatic support through co-financing of the PforR or 

participation in the MDTF. 



6 

 

2014 as they have completed their mandates; 

 

National Agricultural Export Board (NAEB) is similarly a semi-autonomous implementation 

agency of MINAGRI that is responsible for export crop production. It has concentrated in the 

past on coffee and tea, but is broadening its mandate to cover and expand horticulture and non-

traditional export crops. It also has a national network of projects and staff focusing on improved 

production, yields and competitiveness of export crops. It also has agronomists based in some 

districts and on plantations responsible for expanding farmer access to improved extension 

services in support of increasing export crops. 

 

Single Project Implementation Units (SPIUs) were established to ensure efficient and timely 

implementation of a large portfolio of donor funded projects and are headquartered at MINAGRI 

Central.  Most of the projects being implemented by the SPIUs cover most of the 24 SPs. Three 

SPIUs are responsible for managing projects/operations funded by three key DPs: (i) IFAD 

funded projects: the Kirehe District Water Management Programme; Project for Rural Income 

Through Exports; Climate Resilent Post-harvest and Agribusiness Support Project (PASP); (ii) 

AfDB-funded Projects: Bugesera Natural Rural Region Infrastructure Support Project; Livestock 

Infrastructure Support Project; and (iii) World Bank funded projects: LWH (basket fund), RSSP 

3, and the FRDP. 

 

In addition to MINAGRI, six additional government ministries have significant responsibilities 

in the agriculture sector, as follows: 

 

The Ministry of Local Government (MINALOC) is responsible for 30 Districts, which in turn, 

are responsible for expanding local level service delivery. They promote agriculture development 

as part of their responsibility for local economic development. Funds are earmarked in District 

budgets for implementation of MINAGRI priorities as defined in PSTA 3 (currently 10 percent 

of MINAGRI’s total budget). Although these resources pass directly to the Districts from 

MINECOFIN, they form part of MINAGRI’s overall budget ceiling and programs. Each District 

and sector has an agronomist that is responsible for local level implementation of agriculture 

activities. These agronomists work closely with RAB and NAEB agronomists who work in the 

Districts. The on-going local government restructuring exercise is expected to further expand 

fiscal decentralization, including expanded earmarking of funds from MINAGRI and other 

central ministries, and strengthen local government implementation capacities. The 

implementation of the ASIP, as well as PforR program will involve expanded roles of the local 

government actors, while also restructuring central government organizational and staffing 

structures to be more supportive of these decentralization changes/reforms. MINALOC also 

collaborates on implementation of the National Nutrition policy with MINAGRI, ensuring 

community training and service provisions to improve nutrition outcomes. 

 

The Ministry of Natural Resources (MINIRENA) is responsible for state forests around the 

country, although MINAGRI is responsible for on-farm agroforestry. MINIRENA is also 

responsible for environmental protection and in this capacity has its own programs of hillside 

terrace construction, which reinforce the land conservation terracing that MINAGRI undertakes. 

MINIRENA is also responsible for the RNRA water resources department, and seeks closer 

collaboration with MINAGRI. 

 

The Ministry of Trade and Industry (MINICOM) has the key responsibility of promoting 



7 

 

business and trade growth and development, including expanded agribusiness. It leads the 

development of policy and strategy to accomplish Rwanda’s goal of an expanding, competitive 

and healthy private sector. 

 

The Ministry of Infrastructure’s (MININFRA) Rwanda Transport Development Agency (RTDA) 

has the responsibility of supporting Districts and monitoring implementation of feeder roads 

rehabilitation, upgrading and maintenance. RTDA works closely with the Districts in 

procurement, contract management and management of social and environmental systems.  In 

addition, MININFRA/RTDA provides guidance on technical standards and specifications.   

 

The Rwanda Development Board (RDB) is responsible for investment promotion in Rwanda. 

Although it concentrates on foreign direct investment (FDI), it also promotes local investment. It 

brings together all the government agencies responsible for investment under one roof. This 

includes key agencies responsible for business registration, investment promotion, environmental 

clearances, privatization and specialist agencies which support the priority sectors of 

Information, Communication and Technology (ICT) and tourism as well as Small and Medium 

Enterprises (SMEs) and human capacity development in the private sector. RDB has a 

substantial portfolio of agriculture and agri-business investment projects which it is promoting 

for private sector-driven investment, including expanding the public and private partnerships. 

 

The Rwanda Development Bank (RDB) is the government’s main investment arm and offers 

long and medium-term loans. The GoR is pursuing privatization of the Bank and has signed an 

MOU with a prospective investor. In April 2014 the RDB had an agriculture and agri-business 

loan portfolio of RWF 33.3 billion accounting for a significant proportion of the Bank’s total 

lending. Most agricultural loans were for coffee and tea production and processing and the 

import of fertilizer. On May 16, 2014 the International Finance Corporation (IFC) issued its first 

bond denominated in Rwandan francs, raising RWF 15 billion (about US$22 million) to expand 

the availability of long-term local-currency finance for local businesses through the RDB. 

 

The Private Sector 

 

In addition to the public sector agriculture entities, there are two organizations dedicated to 

supporting private sector actors in agriculture as follows: 

 

The Private Sector Federation (PSF) is the representative umbrella body for the private sector in 

Rwanda and advocates and dialogues with government for policies and programs which will 

promote the growth of the private sector. Amongst its objectives are business promotion and 

development, building private sector capacity and effective private sector advocacy. It is 

composed of nine chambers, including the Chamber of Rwanda Farmers. The Chamber conducts 

a program to train farmers and build entrepreneurship. The member associations of the Chamber 

cover most of the major agricultural commodities produced in Rwanda. 

 

The Rwanda Cooperative Agency (RCA) is the representative body for the cooperative 

movement in Rwanda. There are 1,953 agricultural and 1,307 livestock cooperatives operating as 

farmer associations involved in crop production, agricultural savings and credit, livestock 

development and processing and marketing of outputs. RCA promotes the interests of the 

cooperative movement and runs support and training programs in helping cooperatives function 

and perform as private sector entities 


 


























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Regional and Local Roads Connectivity (P163239) 

 
 

  
Jan 05, 2018 Page 1 of 17  

     

 
 
 
      

 

Combined Project Information Documents /  
Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (PID/ISDS) 

 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 22-Jan-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSA22919 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Albania P163239 Regional and Local Roads 
Connectivity 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA 23-Jan-2018 25-Apr-2018 Transport & Digital 
Development 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Finance and 
Economy 

Albania Development 
Fund 

 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
The Project Development Objective is to improve access to selected agricultural and tourism centers, and to 
strengthen selected project municipalities’ capacity to manage their road assets 

 
Components 

Component 1 - Accessibility Improvement 
Component 2 - Capacity Building for Municipalities 
Component 3 - Implementation Management Support 
front end fee 

 
 

Financing (in USD Million) 

 

Finance OLD 

Financing Source Amount  

International Bank for Reconstruction and Development   50.00  

Total Project Cost   50.00  
    
 

Environmental Assessment Category 

B - Partial Assessment 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the preparation to continue     
 
 
 
 




 
B. Introduction and Context 

 
Country Context 

 
Albania has experienced rapid growth since 1990, rising into the ranks of middle-income countries in 2008. 
It emerged from the collapse of isolationist communism in the early 1990s as one of the poorest countries in 
Europe but since then has experienced a growth of nearly 6 percent per year. The rapid pace of growth helped 
the country narrow the per capita income gap with the rest of Europe from 18 percent of average European 
Union (EU) incomes in 1998 to 30 percent by 2012, and this fueled aspirations to join the EU. Growth 
successfully halved poverty from 25.2 percent in 2002 to 12.5 percent in 2008. However, the global and euro 
area crises in 2008 brought Albania's growth to a near standstill by 2012, and the country is struggling to 
recover, particularly given its historic ties to Europe’s poorer performing economies. The aftermath of the 
crisis presented an increase of the poverty rate, to around 14 percent in 2015, particularly in urban and coastal 
areas, along with rising unemployment affecting mostly youth and women. 

Recently, economic activity has picked up and the near-term economic outlook for Albania is positive. 
Economic growth is expected to accelerate to 3.8 percent in 2017 (from 3.4 percent in 2016 and 2.2 in 2015), 
supported by private investment and consumption. Investment is mostly linked to two large foreign direct 
investment-financed energy projects (the Trans Adriatic Pipeline and the Devoll hydropower plant), and 
consumption is supported by job creation and the easing of credit conditions. Net exports were helped by 
tourism and a recovering commodity market. Growth is projected to moderate to an average of 3.6 percent 
for 2018–2019 with completion of the two large energy projects and no other large projects planned.  

The Government remains committed to making deep structural reforms. Over the past years, the 
Government implemented a range of reforms, including improvements in Public Financial Management (PFM) 
(clearance of arrears, tax reforms), mitigation of fiscal risks from pensions and the energy sector, reduction of 
nonperforming loans, and improvements in doing business. Results were positive: growth picked up, the fiscal 
deficit declined, and the public debt started to fall. This provided a window of opportunity for advancing 
ongoing structural and fiscal reforms, to reduce macroeconomic risks and better support long-term growth. 

Albania applied for EU membership in 2009 and became an official candidate for accession in June 2014. 
This entails strong commitments in the transport sector, which manifest themselves in signing, with the 
European Commission, the Memorandum of Understanding for the Core Network creating the South East 
Europe Transport Observatory (SEETO)1 and in signing the Transport Community Treaty in July of this year. 
The treaty will help the Western Balkan countries align their national transport laws with those of the EU. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 

 
Roads and highways are the predominant mode of land transport in Albania and provide essential 
connectivity for freight and personal mobility. Roads are one of the highest value public assets, estimated at 
about US$6 billion. The overall length of Albania’s road network is about 15,000 km; 4,000 km of national 

                                                           
1 The main aim of SEETO is “to promote cooperation on the development of the main and ancillary infrastructure on the South East 
Europe Core Regional Transport Network and to promote and enhance local capacity.” 


roads; and 11,000 km of regional, local, and urban roads.2 The Ministry of Infrastructure and Energy (MoIE), 
formerly the Ministry of Transport and Infrastructure, is responsible for the policy and regulatory framework 
and technical standards. The Albania Road Authority (ARA) is responsible for managing the national road 
network and the municipalities are responsible for managing the regional and local roads. The Albania 
Development Fund (ADF) was established in 1993 with support from the World Bank, to implement regional 
and local roads projects mainly financed by international development partners.   

In 2015, Albania implemented significant administrative and territorial reforms consolidating 372 
communes and municipalities into 61 municipalities to increase the cost efficiency of local units so that they 
can provide better services. The new municipalities consolidated the responsibilities from the previous levels 
of local government—municipalities, communes, and regional councils—each of which was administering 
road networks within their jurisdiction, respectively, within city/town boundaries, within commune 
boundaries, and regional roads in regional council areas. Within the current regional and local road network, 
the function comprises (a) regional roads that connect groups of villages to the national road network or with 
main administrative centers of a municipality and (b) local roads that provide transport links between villages 
and farms. 

The infrastructure planning and prioritization process still has some way to go to provide transparent and 
economically efficient outcomes. With support from the World Bank, progress has been made by the 
Government in developing Medium-term Budget Plans (MTBPs) 2015–2017 to prioritize higher impact new 
investments. A framework that is more aligned with the budget realities is slowly emerging and more fiscal 
discipline is applied at all levels to avoid accumulation of arrears in the road sector. Under the proposed 
Regional and Local Roads Connectivity Project (RLRCP), a rigorous prioritization approach has been formulated 
for the selection of project roads which target investments that complement productive sectors of the 
economy and particularly in agriculture and tourism. This process provides an example for investment 
prioritization, transparency, and governance at a local level. 

Maintenance of the road network has been systematically underfunded, undermining the sustainability of 
the sector. The ongoing Results-based Road Maintenance and Safety Project (RRMSP) is addressing highest 
priority maintenance needs of 4,000 km of national roads while the proposed RLRCP will support the asset 
management of regional and local roads under the control of municipalities. 

The regional and local network is in bad condition overall, with more than 50 percent of network 
categorized in poor condition, 30 percent in fair condition, and less than 20 percent in good and very good 
condition. Some sections are impassable for parts of the year, thus restricting access to essential public 
services of health and education, as well as to economic centers. As of 2016, the maintenance expenditures 
for regional and local roads was allocated at approximately 300 Euro per km per year,3 which is extremely 
low and can only cover the routine maintenance, with no allowance for periodic maintenance or 
improvements. Investments and maintenance of regional and local roads are financed by local taxes 
combined with unconditional grant transfer from the central government. The poor condition of roads is a 
manifestation of the weaknesses in the municipalities planning, implementation and/or monitoring 
capacities.    

The Government of Albania (GoA) has taken large strides in improving conditions of the regional and local 
         

road network in the past decade but more work is necessary. ADF implemented a Rural Road Program, during 
the period 2008–2016, with World Bank support which crowded in US$386 million in financing from IFIs. The 
program improved1,200 km of rural roads in 12 regions and 61 municipalities which improved the mobility of 
over 2 million people. The World Bank’s engagement through the Secondary and Local Roads Project (SLRP), 
from 2008 to 2013, was evaluated as highly satisfactory which is an important milestone. The program was 
indeed highly successful, exceeding its developmental and implementation outcomes while recognizing there 
is still room to consolidate the e network improvements in a sustainable manner to enable growth in the 
agricultural and tourism sectors. 

The existing condition of regional and local road network is not able to serve the emerging tourism industry4 
and hinders the development of the agricultural sector.5 Over the past few years, the GoA has developed key 
strategic instruments including the National Territorial Development Strategy and the Coastal Management 
Strategy that provide a vision for the development of Albania over the next 15 years (2015–2030). These 
strategies highlighted a number of challenges which include improved road connectivity and the need to 
invest in municipal capacity to improve tourism destination management. The on-going Integrated Urban and 
Tourism Development Project is addressing these issues in the South of Albania while the proposed RLRCP will 
support improved access to tourism development areas in the project road areas of Albania. 

In October 2014, the GoA approved the five-year Strategy for Rural and Agriculture Development, drawing 
upon the strategic planning approach used by the EU under its Common Agriculture Policy 2014–2020. One 
of the obstacles pointed out by the strategy is lack of market access for agricultural products through an 
appropriate network of national, regional, and local roads. Considering that in Albania the agri-food industry 
is responsible (directly and indirectly) for almost half the economy-wide jobs, improving market access 
through better road connectivity is critical for the development of the country. It is also important for 
productive inclusion of women, who represent half of those employed in the sector (the highest share of 
participation of women in agriculture in the Western Balkans) and 80 percent of informal employment in the 
sector.  

Road safety remains a major social and public health issue in Albania. Although the number of accidents has 
dropped in recent years, Albania still compares unfavorably with countries in the region or EU member states, 
with the World Health Organization estimated 15.1 fatalities per 100,000 population—while it is 11.9 in 
Montenegro, 9.1 in Greece, 7.7 in Serbia, 4.3 in Germany, 5.1 in France, and 2.9 in the United Kingdom.6 In 
response, the GoA aims to reduce the number of fatalities by 50 percent in 2020, in comparison to 2009.7 The 
GoA has increased its attention to road safety reforms, including the adoption of the Road Safety Strategy and 
Action Plan in 2011 and adoption of mandatory Road Safety audit8 for all new roads. The RRMSP is 
strengthening the capacity of the Inter-Ministerial Road Safety Council, introducing road safety audit training 

                                                           
4 Tourism is a significant contributor to the Albanian economy, with 8.4 percent of total GDP in 2016, and is forecasted to rise to 10.8 
percent by 2027. Its contribution to employment is also significant, directly supporting 85,500 jobs (7.7 percent of total 
employment) in 2016, and is estimated to grow to 120,000 jobs (10.1 percent of total employment) by 2025.  
5 Agriculture is the single largest contributor to GDP in the country (22 percent in 2015) and the largest employer (41 percent in 
2015). Agricultural productivity and the competitiveness of the sector are adversely affected by the fragmented and subsistence-
oriented supply base, poor enforcement of food safety standards, infrastructure deficiencies, including poor transport networks and 
access to markets and tourism hubs, among others.  

 
6 World Health Organization. 2015 “Global Status Report on Road Safety 2015.” 
7 Government Decision No. 125, February 23,  2011, on “Implementing Objectives for Improving Road Safety.” 
8 By Amendment to Article 71/, introducing “Road Safety Audit” to the Highway Code. Decision 815 in November  2011. 

accreditation courses, supporting media campaigns, and enhancing the Accident Information System. The 
RLRCP will build on these reforms and address road safety through improvements to regional and local road 
infrastructure. 

Better links from the regional and local road network to the national road network will complement 
envisioned improvements in the country’s trade and transport facilitation competitiveness which are being 
supported under the separate proposed Regional Trade and Transport Facilitation Project. Improved feeder 
and distribution links from the regional and local road network to the national network together will reduce 
cost of trade and transport, lower the cost of importing and exporting for goods and services including 
agriculture and tourism.  These two areas will be the focus of the proposed RLRCP. 

A major emergent issue affecting sustainability of the road sector is the road network vulnerability to 
climate changes and natural disasters. Floods in recent years have increasingly affected the infrastructure 
and consequently the access of population and farmers to markets which have been substantially disrupted. 
A World Bank-executed Technical Assistance (TA) funded by the Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and 
Recovery (GFDRR) is starting to address the issue of vulnerability of the road network and how to improve 
road asset management. Implementation of the TA outcome will be implemented as one of the components 
of the proposed RLRCP. 

In recent years, several IFIs have supported road sector investments and reforms in Albania. Several IFIs 
including the World Bank, European Commission, European Bank for Reconstruction and Development 
(EBRD), European Investment Bank (EIB), and Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau (KfW) are the main partners 
supporting the GoA including: (i) improvement of planning and budgeting process, (ii) introducing better 
management practices to avoid future arrears, (iii) deepening ARA reforms , and (iv) providing financing for 
priority projects. Bilateral partners including the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID), Deutsche 
Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ), Agence Francaise de Developpement (AFD) and the 
Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation (SDC) are involved in supporting the new municipalities to 
capacity building, asset and resource management under their administration with a focus on water supply 
and sanitation, solid waste, and municipal financing. The proposed RLRCP presents an opportunity to develop 
an overall investment and policy framework for the regional and local roads sector that can be supported 
through the joint efforts of different development partners. In this context, the EBRD is currently in discussions 
with GoA to match the World Bank financing with a further US$50 million loan for a parallel operation. 

Gender gap. Gender gaps in construction and transport sectors, where less than 5 percent and 17 percent of 
all employed respectively, are women, are very substantial. Therefore, promoting women’s economic 
opportunities as part of the efforts to reverse poverty trends and boost shared prosperity are part of the 
project objectives. A separate TA funded by the State and Peace Building Fund (SPBF) administered by the 
World Bank will be looking into opportunities in this regard. The results from this TA will be implemented 
through the proposed RLRCP. 

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
 
Development Objective(s) (From PAD)  
The Project Development Objective is to improve access to selected agricultural and tourism centers and to strengthen 
selected project municipalities’ capacity to manage their road assets
 

Key Results 
 

• Number of agricultural and tourism centers connected by improved project roads 
 

• Reduced travel time on project roads 
 

• Demonstrated better asset management capacity by selected municipalities through adoption of 
Municipal Transport Investment and Maintenance Plan. 

 
D. Project Description  

 
The Albania RLRCP is expected to be financed by an IBRD loan of US$50 million. The RLRCP will focus on the 
role that improved roads can play in enabling connectivity driven economic gains, particularly in the 
agricultural and tourism sectors, both key drivers of growth and employment in Albania. More specifically, 
the proposed RLRCP will support tourism development through improving road access to existing and 
potential tourism destinations and providing quality tourism-friendly amenities (for example, parking lot for 
tourist bus, viewpoints) and signage along the roads in the project areas. It will also support the integration 
of agricultural producers to agri-food value chains and market participation, particularly for women who make 
up the majority of the workforce in agriculture. 

To achieve these overarching goals and set an example for investment prioritization at the municipal level, 
a rigorous prioritization approach has been formulated in the RLRCP road selection. The selection of project 
roads was done through a two-step prioritization process including the development of a long list of 1,400 km 
candidate roads based on consultations between the ADF and 61 municipalities and a short list of 200 km 
candidate roads using multi-criteria analysis, considering tourism destinations, agriculture potential, 
beneficiary population, and economic efficiency indicators. The selection process reflects the priority from 
the municipalities as well as the GoA’s vision on rural roads investments that support tourism and agriculture. 
This approach also allows for easy scale-up to a program for the GoA, municipalities, and other developmental 
partners to implement. 

The RLRCP will include capacity building TA in support of the municipalities to improve management of road 
assets and strengthen links between roads, improved agricultural market access, and tourism development 
plans where they exist. The RLRCP is designed to address the sustainability of road maintenance at the 
municipal level which is a significant challenge following the transfer of local and regional road assets to the 
municipal level. The RLRCP is also designed to address road safety issues in regional and secondary roads in 
the selected municipalities to provide safer and sustainable infrastructure. 

In addition, the project will implement action plans on ways to promote climate resilience and women’s 
economic opportunities in regional and local roads in Albania as follows:  

• Climate Resilient Road Assets for Albania: Albania’s vulnerability to climate change and natural 
disasters, for example, flooding, landslides, and earthquakes, within the road sector, is being analyzed 
under a separate Technical Assistance and its outcome will inform the prioritization of investment to 



provide more sustainable and resilient road assets. The TA outcomes will be incorporated into the 
RLRCP designs of specific road sections.  Improved regional and local roads at time provide an 
alternative to the national road network critical links during extreme weather events. The TA will also 
include recommendations to adjust the design standards for regional and local roads and apply them 
to the project roads. 

• Promoting Woman’s Employment in Road Sector in Albania: the capacity of local stakeholders to 
reach out and increase women’s inclusion and participation in road maintenance programs is being 
analyzed under a separate TA. The outcome will consider policy options to provide support to 
contractors that explore opportunities to promote women’s employment in high skilled jobs in their 
respective workforce.  The focus will be on more and better jobs.  
 

The project will finance the following components. 

Component 1. Accessibility Improvement (Total cost US$47.03 million; IBRD US$47.03 million) 

This component will finance the rehabilitation of regional and local roads; consultancy service for designs, civil 
works supervision, and technical and road safety audits; and road safety initiatives.  

• Subcomponent 1.1. Climate resilient road rehabilitation works (Total cost US$45.83 million). This 
subcomponent will finance the rehabilitation of about 50 km of regional and local roads within 5 to 6 
municipalities. The roads will be designed according to Albanian standards with particular attention to their 
climate resilience (such as to flooding and landslides) given the vulnerability of the network. As a first-year 
program, three project roads in three municipalities, totaling 40 km, have been selected based on further 
surveys and a rigorous multi-criteria analysis on the short-listed 200 km of roads. The remaining roads will be 
identified and prioritized during implementation. Where roads serve tourism areas or pass through urban 
areas, attention will be given to footpaths, bicycle paths, safety improvements, orientation signage, and 
aesthetic considerations. In addition, new bike lanes and sidewalks will be build, to encourage the shift to 
cleaner modes of transport. This subcomponent will also finance all necessary designs, civil works supervision, 
and technical and road safety audits, although the designs of the first-year program were already financed by 
the GoA.  

• Subcomponent 1.2. Road Safety Initiatives (Total cost US$1.2 million). This subcomponent will 
consist of identification of potential road safety interventions on regional and local roads that are not included 
in Subcomponent 1.1 but within the project municipalities. Identification efforts shall include both road risk 
mapping using available crash data and a road safety inspection of sections linked to Component 1.1 roads. 
These interventions will address accident blackspots and include traffic calming measures, footpaths, crash 
barriers and junction design. 

Component 2. Capacity Building for Municipalities (Total cost US$0.85 million; IBRD: US$0.85 million) 

This component will build capacity in the project municipalities’ to manage their transport system and road 
assets in a sustainable way and to maximize the impacts of improved accessibility on agricultural production 
and tourism potential. It will develop standard approaches that will be implemented in a few municipalities 
in this project but can subsequently be rolled out more widely. The following activities are envisaged: 

• Subcomponent 2.1. Municipal Transport Capacity Development for all Participating Municipalities 
(Total cost US$0.45 million). This subcomponent will focus on developing municipal systems for road 
maintenance and road planning following the recent transfer of road assets to the municipal level. It will: (i) 
assess municipalities capacity, local planning instruments and processes for road planning and maintenance 
and public transport planning, (ii) develop recommendations for addressing weaknesses, and (iii) provide 
training based on the recommendations. The focus will be on road maintenance and will include support on 
programming, budgeting, sustainable financing for road rehabilitation and maintenance priorities, asset 
management and maintenance execution. Public transport planning will extend to public parking and bus 
terminals, and safety measures. The subcomponent will also finance the preparation of a standard service 
level agreement contract for maintenance between the municipalities and the service provider and will 
provide training to the municipalities on its use.  

• Subcomponent 2.2. Linking Farmers to Markets (Total cost US$0.20 million). This subcomponent will 
support implementation of the recently approved 100 villages program. It will provide technical support for 
linking agricultural producers to local demand, including through local markets and tourism centers. The focus 
will be on production areas adjacent to the road infrastructure supported by the project. The subcomponent 
will provide an assessment of potential activities that could be financed through the grants available under 
the 100 villages program or other development partner programs. Potential activities include  supply chain 
activities for key agricultural products; recommendations for alleviating impediments in connecting roads, 
warehouses, harvesting facilities, regulations; developing collection zones; and promoting “Eat Albania” 
restaurants. This subcomponent will also increase the World Bank’s evidence base for supporting women 
smallholder farmers and women-led agriculture small and medium enterprises (SMEs) to start and/or enhance 
their participation in agri-food value chains in Albania; analyze the barriers that women face in accessing 
markets, in general, but particularly in light of the new business opportunities that the project is hoped to 
deliver; and recommend the ways to address them.9 

• Subcomponent 2.3. Managing for Tourism Growth (Total cost US$0.20 million). As above this 
subcomponent will support implementation of the recently approved 100 villages program. It will provide 
technical support to promote agro-tourism in the project municipalities. The subcomponent will provide an 
assessment of potential activities that could be financed through the grants available under the 100 villages 
program or other development partner programs. The subcomponent will also provide technical support to 
concerned municipalities to plan for this growth and mitigate any possible environmental and social impacts. 
Where appropriate support may also be given to steer public and private investments in tourism related 
infrastructure and services.        

Component 3. Implementation Management Support (Total cost US$2.0 million; IBRD: US$2.0 million) 

This component includes incremental operational cost of the ADF, development and maintenance of 
Geographic Information System (GIS) and prioritization database for regional and local roads, midterm 
evaluation, and capacity-building initiatives for the ADF. It will also include the implementation of a Project 
Impact Assessment to assess the project’s impacts on key social, transport, agriculture, and tourism indicators. 
This is similar to the approach used by ADF in the previous Rural Road Program using financing from the 
development partners and outsourced expertise.    

                                                           
9 The project scope and available budget will likely not allow for addressing most of the recommendations resulting from the gender 
analysis of this subcomponent. Still, in light of the large gender gaps in agriculture and the focus that the CPF rightly puts on them, 
the team considered it important to integrate gender analysis as part of the envisaged study. The recommendations will be provided 
to the client and will also be used to inform the World Bank’s future activities.  

E. Implementation 
 

Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 

The project will be implemented over four years and seven months by the ADF, which has strong experience 
and track record as an implementing agency of road projects financed by the World Bank and other 
development partners since its inception in 1993. A Project Management Team (PMT) will be established 
within the ADF, staffed by its own personnel, which will also coordinate with representatives of the respective 
municipalities. The PMT will manage project activities, such as procurement, social impact assessments, 
safeguard functions, monitoring and evaluation, and so on. When necessary, the project management 
function will be supported by consultants. A budget for such operating costs has been allocated in Component 
3. 

It is recognized that the participation of municipalities is critical during both project preparation and 
implementation. During the project preparation, the ADF has worked very closely with municipalities in the 
prioritization exercise, and several consultations with municipalities and local communities have taken place 
during the preliminary designs of the project roads. Before starting the civil works, an Investment Agreement 
and a Function and Maintenance Agreement will be signed by the municipalities, defining duties that 
municipalities must carry, e.g. maintenance requirement, after the project roads are handed over. The ADF 
will monitor the compliance of these agreements. When procuring and implementing capacity building 
activities, municipalities will provide ADF with inputs to TOR and sign off outputs.  

1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project has been classified as Category B.  Under Component 1, the project will finance the rehabilitation and/or 
reconstruction within the right-of-way of regional and local roads in selected municipalities. This Component will also 
finance and implement safety works on improving signage, pedestrian crossings, line-marking, etc. of regional and 
local road network.  
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
Additional impacts might be expected due to increased traffic on rehabilitated roads, however the project will under 
Component 1 finance and implement safety works on improving signage, pedestrian crossings, line-marking, etc. of 
regional and local road network. In addition, the rehabilitation works itself financed under the same component will 
also support improving the road safety aspects in project roads, and as such are expected to have long-term positive 
social impacts. 
 
 
 
 
 .    
F. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 

The project will finance rehabilitation of priority regional roads across the municipalities. Construction will 
mainly occur within the existing right-of-way, and the estimated cumulative length of project road segments 


is 50 km. Three project roads were selected for implementation in the first year, and are located in Shkoder, 
Pogradec and Fier municipalities. There is no geographical focus for the remaining roads to be financed. 

 
 
G. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 
 

Bekim Imeri, Social Safeguards Specialist 
Natasa Vetma, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 

 
 
 

SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The project is categorized as category B and not 
expected to have significant or irreversible 
environmental impacts given the rehabilitative 
nature of works to be financed.  Anticipated civil 
works will primarily entail rehabilitation and 
reconstruction of rural roads.  Potential negative 
environmental impacts may include, but not limited 
to: (i) temporary construction -related effects on 
noise, dust, and air quality; (ii) temporary localized 
water quality impacts resulting from possible 
drainage and sewage pollution; and (iii) temporary 
changes in access to, and the use of, public spaces 
during construction. The exact project locations are 
still not known as the prioritization of rural roads is 
still ongoing. For that reason, preparation of 
Environmental and Social Framework (ESMF) is 
proposed prior to appraisal. ESMF is prepared to 
facilitate screening, assessment, and management of 
environmental and social issues for activities to be 
taken up by the project in subsequent years. The 
ESMF ensures preparation of appropriate and World 
Bank safeguard policy-compliant safeguard 
instruments during project implementation. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

Some of the rehabilitation works are envisaged in 
nature protected areas and natural habitats. For that 
reason, the ESMF defines procedures for identifying 
and managing subprojects affecting natural habitats. 
No new construction will be allowed in nature 


protected sites, or significant natural habitats, but 
only rehabilitation of the existing roads. In addition, 
no activities will be allowed in or in proximity of 
critical habitats. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No The project will not have any impacts on forests 

Pest Management OP 4.09 No 

The project is not expected to trigger pest 
management policy. The investments will not 
promote or increase the use of the pesticide. 
Although the project will finance solely roads 
rehabilitation, the ESMF provides guidance for use of 
herbicides for roads maintenance. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No 

The project is not expected to trigger OP 4.11. The 
investments will be focused on rehabilitation of 
existing roads. Nevertheless, due to the countries 
cultural richness, during the earthworks chance finds 
might be possible. For that reason, ESMF includes 
provisions on chance finds and required 
practices.For each such subproject, the ESIA and 
ESMP will be prepared, prior reviewed by the World 
Bank environmental specialist, and 
cleared/consulted with the Albanian Agency for 
Protected areas (or relevant environmental 
authorities). 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No Not relevant 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

The project will finance rehabilitation and 
reconstruction of rural roads. Roads connecting 
villages with the regional centers, touristic/cultural 
sites and agricultural fields. Given the linear nature 
of the works the land-take impacts will be minor and 
linear, adjacent to the existing road. Thus there will 
be small land taken. Displacement of households or 
businesses is not expected either, nor any impact on 
livelihoods. Given that the project is a rehabilitation 
of existing roads, there will be no need for access 
roads, thus it is not expected to address associated 
land-take cases. To address the social safeguards 
instrument, the borrower will prepare Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF) that will guide the land take 
activities during the whole cycle of the project 
implementation. If for any sub-project it is expected 
that the footprint will be known during the 
preparation phase of the project then the borrower 
will prepare site specific abbreviated or full fledge 
(depending of the impact) Resettlement Action Plan. 

 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No Not relevant 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
The project activities will not have impact on 
international waterways 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No Not relevant 

 
 

KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project has been classified as Category B.  Under Component 1, the project will finance the rehabilitation and/or 
reconstruction within the right-of-way of regional and local roads in selected municipalities and short new segments 
only where they present natural continuation / connection. Under the same component, the project will also finance 
and implement safety works on improving signage, pedestrian crossings, line-marking, etc. of regional and local road 
network. This implies that the project will possibly have some adverse environmental impacts; however, these would 
be site specific and would not be significant nor long-term. For the project to remain category B, ESMF defines 
following environmental criteria for eligible subprojects: a) category A sub projects will not be financed; b) for sub 
projects in nature protected sites, or significant natural habitats, only rehabilitation of the roads would be allowed and 
no new construction. No activities would be allowed in or in proximity of critical habitats; c) New construction should 
be limited and allowed only in some specific cases for example where segments are missing or alignment of a section 
that is currently particularly difficult of dangerous; d) The construction, reconstruction or rehabilitation of roads on 
existing right of way would be allowed only in form of one or two lane roads. 
Some of the rehabilitation works are envisaged in the nature protected areas and natural habitats. For that reason, 
the ESMF defines procedures for identification and managing subprojects affecting natural habitats. No new 
construction would be allowed in nature protected sites, or significant natural habitats, but only rehabilitation of the 
existing roads. In addition, no activities would be allowed in or in proximity of critical habitats. For each of such sub 
projects ESIA and ESMP would be prepared, priory reviewed by WB environmental specialist and cleared / consulted 
with the Albanian Agency for Protected areas (or relevant Environmental Authorities). For all supported TA activities, 
the TORs for these activities should include environmental and social considerations in line with the triggered 
safeguards operational policies. 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
Additional impacts might be expected due to increased traffic on rehabilitated roads, however the project will under 
Component 1 finance and implement safety works on improving signage, pedestrian crossings, line-marking, etc. of 
regional and local road network. In addition, the rehabilitation works itself will also support improving the road safety 
aspects in project roads, and as such are expected to have long-term positive social impacts. 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. 
As the project will finance mainly rehabilitation of existing roads, no major alternatives were, nor will be considered. 
Some alternatives will be taken in consideration during design when considering roads width and possible new 
connections. All those alternatives will be examined in site specific environmental due diligence documents prepared 
during project implementation. The ESMF screening procedure will help guide the Client in ensuring that the site-

specific impacts are mitigated, that no additional safeguards policies are triggered and that no category-A works are 
financed 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower 
capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Albanian Development Fund (ADF) will be implementing the project. ADF has experience in managing 
environmental and social impacts of World Bank-financed infrastructure investments and other infrastructure projects 
financed by international finance institutions. The ADF project team includes experienced environmental and social 
specialists.  
To comply, the ADF prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) as well as Resettlement 
Policy Framework, satisfactory to the Bank, to guide the overall project as the exact subproject locations are still not 
known or are currently being assessed. The purpose of this ESMF is to guide the Environmental and Social Assessment 
process, i.e. to facilitate screening, assessment, and management of environmental and social issues for activities to 
be taken up by the project in subsequent years. Environmental due diligence documents envisaged by ESMF include: 
ESIA, ESMPs and ESMP checklists. In addition to ESMF, the Borrower prepared a sample Environmental and Social 
Impact Assessment (ESIA) for Fier-Seman road rehabilitation. 
The Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was prepared parallel with the Environmental and Social Framework 
(ESMF)/ The documents were disclosed on the December 22th and the consultation held on January 4th . 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, 
with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Major stakeholders are ADF and municipalities in which the projects will be implemented. ESMF documents was 
disclosed and publicly consulted prior to appraisal. ESMF with the call for public consultation was disclosed on the ADF 
website on December 22, 2017 and major municipalities participating in a project (paper or electronic) for two weeks. 
The ESIA for Fier-Seman road was disclosed on ADF website and in Fier municipality on January 5, 2018. In addition to 
the public call, the government and relevant non-governmental organizations were invited through official invitations 
sent out by the ADF. Public consultation meetings were held in Tirana (January 4, 2018r) and Fier (January 15, 2018). 
The Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was disclosed and consulted parallel with the Environmental and Social 
Framework (ESMF) 
The similar procedure will be followed for site specific ESMPs during project implementation as defined by the ESMF. 
All due diligence documents will be disclosed on the ADF websites respectively, and hardcopy will be available at their 
premises as well in participating municipalities for at least two weeks following public consultation as per ESMF. 
 
 

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
CHAD Skills Development for Youth Employment and Competitiveness Project (P164297) 

 
 

  
Apr 12, 2019 Page 1 of 23  

     

 
 
 
      

 

Combined Project Information Documents /  
Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (PID/ISDS) 

 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 21-May-2019 | Report No: PIDISDSA24795 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Chad P164297 CHAD Skills Development 
for Youth Employability 
Project 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA 15-May-2019 20-Jun-2019 Education 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Republic of Chad Ministere de l'Education 
Nationale et de la 
Promotion Civique, 
Ministere de la Formation 
Professionnelle et des 
Petits Metiers, Ministere 
de l'Economie et de la 
Planificatin du 
Developpement 

 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
The project development objective (PDO) is to (i) improve access to skills training and labor market outcomes for 
project beneficiaries; and (ii) strengthen the technical and vocational education and training (TVET) system in Chad 

 
Components 

Expanding Access to Skills through Improved Technical and Vocational Education 
Employment Support for Youth and Improved Entrepreneurship Opportunities 
Improving TVET System Governance and Institutional Capacity Building 
Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation 

 
 

PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
   

SUMMARY-NewFin1  
 

Total Project Cost 50.00 

Total Financing 50.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 50.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 

   
DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 50.00 

          IDA Grant 50.00 

    

Environmental Assessment Category 

B-Partial Assessment 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate     
 
 
B. Introduction and Context 

 
Country Context 

 
1. Chad is sparsely populated, with only 13 million people, and vast in size (being more than 1 million km²). 
It is a low-income country, with a gross domestic product (GDP) per capita of about US$823 in 2018, and, has 
among the lowest human development indicators in the world. The country is divided into 23 regions located in 
three main geographical zones: a desert zone in the north, an arid Sahelian belt in the center, and a more fertile 
Sudanese savanna zone in the south. It faces adverse climate conditions including prolonged droughts in some 
areas and yearly flows in others, as well as wind erosion, and desertification, leading to recurrent food crises, as 
well as population displacement. Combined with security risks due to political instability and transit through Chad 
by terrorist groups such as Boko Haram, and al Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM), as well as an uptick in 
migration, urban populations are projected to reach nearly 6 million by 2030, or 27 percent of the total population. 
Chad is home to an estimated 450,000 displaced people, the large majority of which are refugees1.  
 

2. The economy is largely dominated by agriculture and extractive industries, mainly oil. However, the 
recent fall in oil prices has had a dramatic impact on an economy in which oil accounted for 30 percent of total 
GDP and 70 percent of Government revenues in 2017. Almost half (47 percent) of the population was living under 
the national poverty line in 2011, the most recent year for which poverty numbers are available. The high level of 
poverty is accompanied by low human development, and Chad currently ranks 157 out of 157 in the recent World 
Bank Human Capital Index (HCI) with an index estimated at 0.29 meaning that Chad is losing 71 percent of its 
potential productivity. Life expectancy at birth is 51.9 years, expected years of schooling is 7.3 years, and mean 

                                                           
1 Based on the UNHCR definition refugees are people who are recognized as refugees under the 1951 Convention Relating to the 
Status of Refugees or its 1967 Protocol, the 1969 Organization of African Unity Convention Governing the Specific Aspects of 
Refugee Problems in Africa, people recognized as refugees in accordance with the UNHCR statute, people granted refugee-like 
humanitarian status, and people provided temporary protection. Asylum seekers--people who have applied for asylum or refugee 
status and who have not yet received a decision or who are registered as asylum seekers--are excluded. Country of asylum is the 
country where an asylum claim was filed and granted. 



years of schooling stands at just 2.3 years. Education attainment is highly unequal with people in the wealthiest 
quintile having an average of 6.7 years of schooling, compared with 1.0 for those in the poorest quintile. 

 

3. Two thirds of the population are less than 25 years old and the proportion of young people will continue 
to increase dramatically in the coming years. Those under the age of 24 will continue to grow faster than the rest 
of the population through 2050 creating an even bigger “youth bulge.” The growing population and increasing 
dependency ratios are challenging for increasing employment, improving productivity, and adequately providing 
public services. The high population growth rate alone will result in extreme pressure on the health and education 
sectors, requiring a continuous increase in expenditures just to maintain coverage. The “youth bulge” will lead to 
a sharp rise in the number of young people seeking employment, and urbanization will push and increasing 
proportion of these youth to seek employment outside of the agricultural sector, though this increase is slow, and 
the majority will remain in informal work in agriculture.  

Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 

Sector Context  

4. Low education and literacy levels are severe constraints to a productive labor force. The education 
system in Chad is subdivided into early childhood education (almost inexistent, gross enrolment rate (GER) of 2%), 
six years of primary education, four years of lower secondary education, three years of upper secondary 
education, and higher education. However, according to the DHS 2014-15, almost half (46 percent) of primary-
school-age children in Chad did not attend school. Stark gender and regional inequalities remain, with a gender 
parity rate at 0.75. For those who do attend school, low learning outcomes are a perennial challenge, with only 
15.7 percent of sixth graders equipped with sufficient competency in reading according to the 2014 PASEC results. 
The low supply of science and technology skills is particularly acute, with just 67 girls nationally enrolled in 
mathematics and science tracks in the last year of upper secondary – or 0.1 percent of the total baccalaureate 
candidates.  
 

5. While the unemployment rate for the working age population is low in Chad (as in other parts of SSA), 
the youth unemployment rate is notably higher. It was estimated at around 9 percent for both 2016 and 2017 
with young women more likely to be unemployed (at a rate of 10.6 percent). Comparatively, the working age 
population unemployment rate is estimated at 5.8 percent in 2017 up from 5.7 percent in 20162. Educated youth 
and youth in urban areas appear to be more likely to be unemployed, and if Chadians are working, the quality of 
their jobs tends to be low.  According to ECOSIT 3 data, more than 35 percent of the working age population is 
underemployed, especially in rural areas (36.4 percent, compared to 27.2 percent in urban areas). 

 

6. A high concentration of the labor force in self-employed informal and low-productivity operations. Most 
of the workers are in the informal sector which represents 95 percent of the workforce. Jobs in the informal sector 
are highly vulnerable, with low earnings, and low dependability. Even outside of agriculture, 60 percent of jobs 
are in the informal sector. Of the 400,000 informal establishments outside of agriculture, most are engaged in 
trade and repair of vehicles or equipment, followed by manufacturing of food and beverages.  As above, 
underemployment remains a major challenge. Within the informal sector 39.2 percent of the workers in the non-
agricultural sector are estimated to be underemployed vs. 40.2 percent for agricultural workers.  

 

                                                           
2 See World Development Indicators 2018.  

7. The agriculture sector employs 80 percent of the Chadian workforce and accounts for 52 percent of 
GDP. It is also the second largest source of export income for the country after oil. The Government has, among 
other actions, prioritized the industrialization of agriculture with the aim of boosting exports to diversify the 
economy, but the sector is struggling to modernize and remains largely dependent on weather conditions3. Family 
farming often has low productivity and profitability and lacks resilience to shocks. While lack of equipment and 
technology contribute to low productivity and profitability, low education levels and lack of skills are also key 
determinants. Support for more productive self-employment and diversification of rural livelihoods is critical to 
supporting the high proportion of vulnerable rural Chadians.  

 

8. A multi-tier system of technical and vocational education and training (TVET) exists, with several 
institutions that focus on providing differing levels of skills but is complex and poorly coordinated. Students at 
the lower secondary level can seek a DFFTP (Diplôme de Fin de Formation Technique et Professionnelle) which is 
awarded after two years of vocational study at a technical college. Students who pass the exit examination at the 
end of the lower secondary cycle can also enroll in a three-year program taught in a lycée technique, leading to 
the degree of BT. Students who successfully complete middle school can also seek a BEP degree which can be 
obtained with two years of technical or vocational training in a college technique following successful completion 
of middle school. The technical and vocational education sector includes two industrial technical high schools, 
four industrial technical secondary schools, twenty-one high schools specialized in commerce. In addition to these 
institutions there are eighteen apprenticeship and training centers with varying levels of capacity, which tend to 
focus on shorter term training.  
 

9. Although TVET and skills development efforts are a critical pathway for improving the stock of skilled 
workers for market relevant jobs, the subsector has suffered from numerous challenges which undermine their 
potential. These include the following:    

 

(a) Unsustainable Funding.   Public technical and vocational training institutes receive funding from 
multiple resources, including a payroll tax on private businesses and a tax on foreign workers, but little 
coordination exists among these groups, and allocations do not rely on formal criteria related to needs or 
priorities. In many cases equipment, basic inputs such as electricity, raw materials, and ventilation are 
outdated or non-existent within centers. Further, centers lack autonomy, have no way to generate 
additional revenue, and lack basic governing procedures at the institutional level.  
(b) Low enrollment. TVET centers have extremely low absorptive capacity despite demand and do 
not make use of efficiency measures in scheduling and shifting to maximize space and enrollment. In the 
school year 2014 - 157,042 students were enrolled in technical colleges, and 1,039 in vocational schools. 
The majority of students (5,563 students or 78.3 percent) chose the technical commercial schools while 
the remaining 21.7 percent enrolled in the technical and industrial streams. Private institutions account 
for 27 percent of total enrollment. 
(c) Lack of diversity and access. Access is particularly limited for Chadians living in rural areas, as well 
as women both in rural and urban areas. Furthermore, inclusion measures for participants with 
disabilities, even very basic ones, do not exist within the centers. Just 1.5 percent of enrollment at the 
secondary level is occupied by rural Chadians, given that the centers are concentrated in major cities and 
there are few offerings focused on key sectors such as agriculture,4 and the female imbalance is acute 

                                                           
3 Agriculture Sector Review Report (ASRR) 2017.  
4 N’Djamena is home to 37 percent of the TVET institutions and 48 percent of the sector’s students. In Moundou, the country’s 
second largest city, these numbers stand at 9 percent and 18 percent respectively. 

(except for the commercial streams5. Girls accounted for only 5 percent of the total 2,518 enrollees in the 
industrial streams of the TVET institutions and there are extremely small numbers of female teachers and 
no female directors in any of the TVET institutions.6  
(d) Limited relevance and low quality. The key factors driving low quality are (i) program offerings 
do not appear to be driven by employment offerings and do not result in required skills for employment7; 
(ii) equipment is outdated or nonexistent, and hands-on application is often not possible; and (iii) poorly 
trained trainers and staff as well as outdated heavily theoretical curricula diminish the quality of training 
to students.   
(e) Lack of industry involvement. AFD is supporting development of standards which were previously 
non-existent or defunct, however there remains very little input from industry on training design. Further, 
for entrepreneurship and self-employment, even though these remain the main sources of employment. 

 

Institutional Context and Government Strategy  

 

10. The technical and vocational training sector is highly fragmented in terms of both service delivery and 
financing. At least seven ministries intervene in one way or another in the training sector. The three main 
ministries are (i) the Ministry of Vocational Training and Micro Commerce (Ministère de la Formation 
Professionnelle et des Petits Métiers, MFPPM); (ii) the Ministry of National Education and Civics Promotion 
(Ministère de l’Education Nationale et de la Promotion Civique, MENPC); and (iii) the Ministry of Higher Education, 
Research and Innovation (Ministère de l’Enseignement Supérieur, de la Recherche et de l’Innovation, MESRI). Each 
of these ministries manages training centers or schools which deliver diplomas or certificates to its graduates. 
However, many other ministries also manage training schools and centers in their specific sector without any 
relationship to the three major ministries. The Ministry of Civil Service, Labor, and Social Dialogue manages eight 
training centers and the Ministry of Agriculture has 35 centers. The Ministries of Health, Justice, Livestock, Post 
and Telecommunications, and Youth to name a few all manage technical and vocational centers.   
 

11. The National Development Plan (2017-2021), aims at developing Chad into an emerging regional 
country by 2030. It champions the four strategic objectives of (i) strengthening of national unity; (ii) strengthening 
good governance and the rule of law; (iii) the development of a diversified and competitive economy; and (iv) 
improving the quality of life of the Chadian population. As part of this approach, there is an emphasis on improved 
human capacity development and specifically improvement of technical and vocational education through 
Outcome 4.2.2 which stipulates that the actions planned to improve the sector are: (i) building the human and 
material capacities of institutes of technical education; (ii) improving governance of the sector; (iii) improving 
access to, and the fairness and quality of, technical training centers; and (iv) vocational training centers; and (v) 
building the capacities of human resources.  

 

12. President Idriss Deby, reiterated the importance of education and youth employment, following the 
new constitution, in a speech in May 2018, in which he presented the country’s commitment to human capital 
development. This includes significant education reforms which aim to connect education to the world of work, 

                                                           
5 Technical commercial streams graduate students in fields such as management, commerce, or business. 
6 According to 2017-18 institutional annual reports there was one female out of 26 teachers (or 3.8 percent) and 10 females out 

of 70 teachers (or 14.3 percent) in the TVET school of Moundou (CETIM) and N’Djamena (LETIN) respectively 

7 Opportunities in areas such as agriculture, forestry, and fishing, even though they are the main sub-sectors of employment are 
rarely offered.  

ensure that skills development of young people is responsive to the most pressing needs of the country especially 
in the critical sector of agriculture, and ensuring more and better job opportunities for young women and men.  

 

13. The specific policy objectives for Technical and Vocational training are further outlined in the 2017 
National Employment and Training Policy, and the 2014 Interim Strategy for TVET which is not yet validated. 
These strategic documents main objectives are to equip young and adult Chadians with the necessary skills to find 
decent jobs or create their own jobs in the growth sectors. To that end, the Government is cognizant of the 
necessity to reform the technical and vocational training sectors by improving its quality and creating stronger 
links with the private sector. The system will also need to improve its absorptive capacity to be able to train even 
a small share of the massive number of youths that will enter the labor market during the next decade, estimated 
at 2.5 million. Without comprehensive and profound reforms, the sector is very unlikely to be able to deliver the 
expected results. 

 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
Development Objective(s) (From PAD)  
The project development objective (PDO) is to improve access to quality skills training; and labor market outcomes for 
project beneficiaries and to strengthen the technical and vocational education and training (TVET) system in Chad 
 

Key Results 
 

Type Objective Indicator  

PDO Indicator 1 (core) Improve access to skills training for project 
beneficiaries  

Total beneficiaries of job focused 
intervetions (gender disaggregated)  

PDO Indicator 2  Improve labor market outcomes for project 
beneficiaries 

Share of beneficiaries of skills 
development programs who are 
employed within 6 months of 
completion 

PDO Indicator 3 Strengthen the technical and vocational 
education and training (TVET) system  

Number of CFTPs and TVET centers 
that have a functioning board of 
directors 

 
 
D. Project Description  

 
14. To improve skills, employability, employment prospects, and labor market outcomes for its youth Chad 
will need to adopt a multi-pronged strategy: (i) improve the quality of its general education especially the pre-
primary and primary cycles (PARSET2 is focused on primary education); (ii) improve the quality and relevance of 
its formal technical and professional skills formation system which will lead to higher quantity and better 
employability; and (iii) support the skills acquisition system for those in the informal sector or out-of-school. The 
project is designed to support these through four components. Component 1 will support the expansion of 
quality training opportunities by strengthening the public sector system, while Component 2 aims at improving 
the school to work transition for those in secondary technical or post-secondary education and bringing training 
opportunities to out-of-school youth and those living in rural areas. The main objective of Component 3 is to 


strengthen the governance of the TVET public system which will have medium to long term impacts on the 
system’s ability to deliver quality training and make quality improvements implemented by the project self-
sustaining. Lastly, component 4 will focus on the project management and instilling a culture of monitoring and 
evaluation.  

 

Component 1. Expanding Access to Skills through Improved Technical and Vocational Education 

(US$14.7 million) 

 

15. This component aims to improve access to training and improve the overall quality of vocational 
training to meet the needs of the of the Chadian economy in sectors with high labor potential. This objective 
will be achieved through two sub-components: i) creation of a new model Centre de Formation Technique et 
Professionnelle (Center of Technical and Professional Training -CFTP), including the construction of the CFTP and 
the development of new management and training methods; and (ii) the improvement of the quality and 
upgrading of existing technical and vocational secondary schools in the industrial stream (Collèges and Lycèes 
d’Enseignement Technique et Industriel, CETIN and LETIN). Youth aged 14-29 will be targeted who meet the 
qualifications for entry into the newly created and restructured institutions and will benefit at least 30 percent 
females.  
 

16. Component 1 will roll out a new institutional management and operations model which utilizes industry 
linkages and reorientation of the programs around labor insertion for graduates. This includes adopting sector 
specific curricula currently under development with support from AFD and in-depth training of school managers 
and trainers to upgrade quality of teaching and institutional management. To this end multi-year performance-
based contracts (PBCs) will be signed between the government and targeted institutions which incentivize 
improved relevance, quality, access, and employment outcomes. Greater autonomy of training institutions and 
several sector reforms are required to create an enabling environment for this results-based management and 
operations model, which will be supported under Component 3.  

 

Sub-component 1.1 Improving Access to Quality Skills through the Creation of a new CFTP and 

Expanded Opportunities through preexisting CFTPs (US$5.3 million) 

 

17. The construction of a new CFTP will be funded by the project. The new institution will incorporate the 
new pedagogical and management models including participation from the private sector. The site for the center 
will be X.  
 

18. The project will finance development of the PBC between the CFTP and Ministry which elaborate clear 
targets namely: (i) the establishment of a Board of Directors; (ii) a minimum private sector and civil society 
participation of 40 percent in the Board of Directors; (iii) number young people registered by specialty area; (iv) 
the share of girls enrolled; (v) the share of enrollees participating in dual-training programs; (vi) number of 
graduates certified ; (vii) monitoring of graduates’ insertion in the labor market; (viii) effective in-service training 
of trainers; and (ix) the implementation of a new financing model. The performance contracts will be monitored 
by the MFPPM and each CFTP through their own monitoring and evaluation systems. They will also be supported 
by PARSET2 monitoring and evaluation specialist. 

19. Main activities: this sub-component will finance the construction of a new CFTP and the following 
activities through the PBCs: (i) the development and implementation of new pedagogical models and curricula; 
(ii) new administrative management involving the private sector; (iii) strengthening of the professional and 
teaching competencies of trainers; (iv) the provision of relevant equipment; (v) the purchasing of adapted 
textbooks; (vi) rehabilitation of existing infrastructures and equipment; (vii) information and sensitization 
campaigns to attract more female students; and (viii) governance reform and institutional financing. 

 

Sub-component 1.2 Rehabilitation and upgrading of Lycees Techniques et Industriels (US$9.4 million) 

 

20. The project will support the reform and upgrading (modernization) of two to four collèges and lycées 
techniques et industriels through performance-based contracts to improve the quality of service delivery and 
the efficiency and effectiveness of the LETINs. These institutions currently offer courses in construction, 
electricity, and automotive, among others. The institutions are characterized by outdated equipment, limited 
hands-on and relevant training, heavily theory based teaching, and weak links with the private sector. The aim is 
to focus the course offerings, improve the management of the schools, strengthen practicum-based teaching and 
learning, introduce entrepreneurship and non-cognitive (socio-emotional) skills development8, and improve 
linkages with related industry to better prepare graduates for employability, in addition to upgrading of hardware. 

 

21. The project will provide support for the preparation of operational manuals regarding the management 
of TVET schools, performance monitoring, relationship with the private sector relations and the preparation of 
regulatory texts. Technical assistance will be recruited to support the teams responsible for the management of 
TVET schools and the ministerial directorates in charge of technical education and vocational training.  

 

22. Technical auditors will be recruited to conduct an external evaluation of each performance contract and 
certify the level of achievement of the expected results. The technical audit report will be used to determine the 
amount of funds to be allocated for the following year. 

 

23. Main activities: this sub-component will finance the following activities through the PBCs: (i) the 
development and implementation of new pedagogical models and curricula (in coordination with AFD programs); 
(ii) new administrative management involving the private sector; (iii) strengthening of the professional and 
teaching competencies of trainers; (iv) the provision of relevant equipment including for ICT; (v) the purchasing of 
adapted textbooks; (vi) rehabilitation of existing infrastructures and equipment; (vii) information and sensitization 
campaigns to attract more female students; (viii) governance reform and institutional financing; and (ix) study 
tours for all relevant actors especially at the central level, directors, and a select number of teachers. The sub-
component will also finance technical assistance to the TVET school to help them navigate through the 
institutional changes envisioned in the project and improve their financial management capacity. 

 

Component 2. Employment Support for Youth and Improved Entrepreneurship Opportunities (US$24.4 

million) 

     
24. This component seeks to provide first work experiences, and skills relevant to labor market demands, 
including entrepreneurship training, to youth. Targeted young people may have completed the full education 
cycle or dropped out of the school system prior to completion. The objective is to provide quality hands-on job 
training and entrepreneurship training, to improve employability, employment prospects, and ultimately 
livelihoods. This would include (a) internships for skilled graduates in their prospective professions; (b) 
apprenticeships; and (c) entrepreneurship for agricultural development. Apprenticeships and entrepreneurship 
approaches focus heavily on unskilled workers given that they are the most promising approaches to helping the 
large scale of low-skilled individuals within Chad transition into employment/self-employment.  

 

Table 1: Summary Overview of Sub-components 
Sub-component Beneficiaries Duration of Program Implementing Agency 

2.1 Internships to improve 
school-to-work 
transition 

6,000 youth aged 15 to 29 
registered in CFTPs, LETINs, 
or university 

6 to 12 months ONAPE and CNPT 

2.2 Expanding 
opportunities for 
apprenticeships 

7,500 out-of-school youth 
aged 15 to 39 with limited 
education and who are not 
in a wage job 

6 to 24 months 
depending on the trade 

FONAP, MFPDS 

2.3 Agricultural 
entrepreneurship 

8,000 out-of-school youth 
aged 15 to 39 living in rural 
areas and mostly engaged 
in the agriculture sector 
either wage worker or self-
employed 

Up to 6 months ONAPE and local NGOs 

 

Sub-component 2.1 Internships to Improve School-to-Work Transition (US$6.8 million) 

 

25. The internship program aims to improve the employment outcomes of graduates transitioning from 
secondary or post-secondary general education and TVET institutions into the labor market. Chad’s educational 
system does not have sufficiently strong linkages with the private sector to facilitate the immersion of young 
graduates in enterprises during their time at school or following their graduation. The subcomponent aims to 
address this practical skills gap of current graduates, while simultaneously reorienting the TVET institutional 
approach to focus on employment.  

 

26. Internships will last 6 months during which the internships are funded fully by the project. After the first 
6 months, the contract will be renewable for another 6 months, at which point the intern would be partially funded 
(50 percent) by the enterprise. Internships could for example include placements in hotels, healthcare, other 
service sectors, and construction firms which have been shown through data from ONAPE to recruit the highest 
numbers of workers. After one year, the intern then becomes eligible for recruitment, at which point the company 
would be wholly responsible for funding. The number of interns a company can hire over the course of the project 
and at any point in time will be limited (with optimal limit to be determined) to avoid abuse of the system by 
companies, as well as limits on the number of trainees a company can take without hiring any. The monthly 



 

The World Bank  
CHAD Skills Development for Youth Employment and Competitiveness Project (P164297) 

 

 

  
Apr 12, 2019 Page 11 of 23  

 

internship stipend amount will not exceed 60,000 XOF with girls receiving a higher stipend to cover for potential 
day care cost. 

 

27. Main activities: The sub-component will finance (i) employment and internships recruiting camps in 
technical schools, training centers, and universities jointly hosted by ONAPE and the private sector, (ii) 
communications campaigns and partnership building in private companies; (iii) internship payments that include 
stipends, accident and medical insurance coverage, and (iv) technical assistance to ONAPE to implement the 
program and setup a website and the support to its decentralized branches outside of the capital city. 

 

Sub-component 2.2 Expanding Opportunities for Apprenticeships (US$9.2 million).  

 

28. An apprenticeship scheme will be developed to facilitate improved labor market integration for youth 
through a dual apprenticeship program which combines adapted training programs with on-the job training 
opportunities with craftspeople and professionals. Dual training refers to a combination of practical, on the job 
training, and theoretical education to ensure an optimal blend of theory and practice. Training programs will 
combine practical training and theory with an emphasis on hands-on experiences in various types of workshops. 
Training in training institutions will constitute 25 percent of the program, with 75 percent focused on hands-on 
practical application, and will be targeting to youth with a minimum level of education. Additionally, training in 
functional literacy, numeracy and life skills will be coupled with the job specific training to improve employability. 
 
29. To encourage female participation the project will pay a higher stipend to girls especially those with 
children who need to pay for day care costs. The payment of the stipend will depend on attendance. The project 
will also encourage girls to join male-dominated trades which provide better employment prospects and higher 
earnings in the labor market through a targeted sensitization campaign. 

 

30. Main Activities: the sub-component will finance (i) training fees for the training providers and master 
craftsmen; (ii) stipends for the trainees paid via mobile money; (iii) training in functional literacy and numeracy 
and life skills by qualified training providers; (iv) a defined package of materials and equipment including all 
necessary protections, (v) accident and medical insurance coverage for apprentices; (vi) costs associated with 
training of trainers, upgrading of skills of apprentice instructors, (vii) costs associated with selection and placement 
of apprentices; (viii) development of new training guidelines and the design and implementation of the regulatory 
and operational framework for the apprenticeship program; and (ix) an institutional and organizational audit of 
FONAP as well as monitoring and evaluation. 

 

Sub-component 2.3 Development of Agricultural Entrepreneurship (US$9.0 million) 

 

31. The sub-component will aim to provide entrepreneurship training to youth in rural communities to 
improve livelihoods. The goal is to provide necessary skills for addressing constraints related to (i) lack of 
entrepreneurship know-how (equipping small scale farmers with knowledge to diversify options and ideally 
transition out of subsistence farming); ii) community organizing along agro-value chains (i.e. building the value 
chain so that it is possible to grow, harvest, transform products, and get them to markets) and (iii) limited means 

of food processing (i.e. loss of mangos during mango season due to limited technical skills and small scale 
equipment which result in not being able to transform/conserve them).  The approach is consistent with the large 
numbers of youth who remain in rural communities in Chad, and the majority of workers who are engaged in 
informal employment in the agriculture sector.  

 

32. Linkages between producers and sources of financing will be critically important and will be facilitated 
by connecting promising small-scale agriculture entrepreneurs with micro-loans via ONAPE. ONAPE has prior 
experience providing micro-lending to agriculture entrepreneurs, thus the program will build on the current 
mechanism, improve capacity and scale the approach. 

 

33. Main Activities: The sub-component will finance (i) a campaign to promote training activities and 
agriculture as a viable livelihood; (ii) the development of the training modules; (iii) delivery of training sessions via 
contracted local NGOs; (iv) training of trainers; (v) agriculture micro-loans through the existing ONAPE financing 
mechanism; and (vi) monitoring and evaluation. 

 

Component 3. Improving TVET System Governance and Institutional Capacity Building (US$5.9 million) 

 

34. This component is designed to strengthen the TVET system which suffers from weak governance and 
chronic underfunding.  Given the relative neglect of the sub-sector, the sustainability of the project depends on 
the capacity of the collèges, lycées, and CFPT to self-finance their activities.  It is critical that the status of these 
schools is revised to provide them with more autonomy and allow them to generate revenue, and flexibility to 
spend it.  Thus, a new regulatory framework will be necessary as is improved institutional and management 
capacities of the ministries and institutions involved in project implementation and project execution.  
 

35. This component will also build the leadership and management capacity of CFTP and TVET school 
directors to improve service delivery and implement a new finance model. TVET schools have often very low 
teacher-student ratios and teachers are underutilized - working less than 12 hours per week on average. Re-
organizing school calendars, better planning the use of classrooms and workshops, and organizing dual-training 
could substantially increase the number of students the institutions receive without jeopardizing its quality. To 
provide more training opportunities to the youth restructuring the current  financing model which currently 
operates using several uncoordinated sources of funding is critical. Rethinking the highly fragmented nature the 
training fund and address the financing challenges and the fractured nature of the skills development sector in 
Chad in terms of both service delivery and financing is also necessary.  

 

36. Because the reforms envisioned in this component are necessary for the public sector TVET to perform, 
their effective implementation will condition disbursement for the activities in Component 1. As noted earlier, 
if the CETIN, LETIN, and CFTP continue to operate under the current model i.e. with no public financing, no 
possibility to generate own funds, no cooperation with the private sector, and an outdated governance structure 
with little accountability it is very unlikely that any investment in this system will be sustainable. New equipment 
will become old and rusty because of lack of maintenance funds, teachers will quickly revert to theory-only 
teaching because they would lack the necessary material for labs. 


37. Main Activities: this component will finance (i) TA to revisit the TVET national strategy and the national 
employment policy; (ii) roundtable and national consultations around the revised strategy; (iii) training of CFTP 
and TVET institutions’ staff; (iv) capacity building activities of selected training institutions, government 
departments, private sector associations, and employment agencies; (v) south-south exchanges through study 
tours; (vi) the revision of the national strategy of technical and vocational education and training, (vii) revision of 
the national employment policy; (viii) ONAPE’s capacity building to manage a website and generate databases to 
match supply and demand sides; (ix) national awareness campaigns that promote TVET and especially girls in 
TVET; (x) a study on the supply of training in Chad; and (xi) organizational and institutional audits of ONAPE, 
FONAP, and other important institutions. 

 

Component 4. Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation (US$5.0 million) 

 

38. This component will support the Project Coordination Unit (PCU), M&E activities, and capacity building 
activities associated with the implementation of the project. PARSET2’s PCU which has successfully managed 
several projects is retained to manage the project. The PCU will be responsible for overall coordination and 
implementation of project activities, as well as financial management (FM) and procurement. The project would 
finance the salaries of PCU staff, operational costs and the cost of equipment. Additionally, this component would 
cover specific technical assistance (TA) and capacity building needs for project implementation, and M&E 
(including third party validation, surveys, and impact evaluations). The proposed capacity building activities under 
this component could include: (i) trainings, study tours, and other initiatives to enhance the capacity of relevant 
ministry or agency staff to implement, coordinate, and monitor their programs; and (ii) capacity building of TVET 
institution administrators to increase their capacity to design surveys, conduct tracer studies and utilize the data 
for analysis and action.  

 

39. Assessment activities – including, impact evaluations and beneficiary surveys of interventions under 
component 2, as well as support to the Gender Innovation Lab which will work with local institutions to carry out 
statistical analysis/employment surveys/labor studies/etc. monitoring of youth and follow-up activities during 
internships, survey of youth after the completion of the internships, apprenticeships, and entrepreneurships. 
There will also be at least two impact evaluations embedded in the project. This includes working with the Gender 
Innovation Lab to evaluate the impact of the inclusion of socio-emotional in the skills training program on labor 
market outcomes such as likelihood of wage employment, self-employment, or net income. There will be a special 
focus on rural areas and girls. 

 

 

Project cost and financing  

Table 3: Project cost per component and financing source 

Components/Sub-components Project cost 
US$ million 

Percent IDA 
Financing 

Component 1 Expanding Skills Development through Improved Technical and 
Vocational Education 

14.7 100 

Sub-component 1.1: Creation of new CFTPs and Expanded Opportunities through 
preexisting centers 

5.3 100 

Sub-component 1.2: Rehabilitation and upgrading of Lycées Techniques et Industriels 9.4 100 

Component 2: Employment support for Youth and Improved Entrepreneurship 
Opportunites 

24.4 100 

Sub-component 2.1: Internships for improved school-to-work transition 6.8 100 

Sub-component 2.2: Expanding Opportunities for Apprenticeships 9.2 100 

Sub-component 2.3: Development of Agricultural Entrepreneurship 9.0 100 
 

  

Component 3: Improving TVET System Governance and Institutional Capacity Building 5.9 100 
   

Component 4: Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation 5.0 100 
   

Overall Project 50.0 100 

E. Implementation 
 

Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 
 
40. The project will be implemented over a five-year period. The proposed closing date is October 31, 2024. 
The Ministry of National Education and the Promotion of Civics (Ministère de l’Education Nationale et de la 
Promotion Civique, MENPC) and the Ministry of Vocational Training and Micro Works (Ministère de la Formation 
Professionnelle et des Petits Métiers, MFPPM) will be the main implementing agencies for the project. 
 
41. Steering Committee (SC). A system-wide Steering Committee (SC) will be established to provide 
guidance to the project on an annual basis. The representative of the MFPPM will be the President of the SC and 
the representative of the MENPC will assume the Vice-Presidency. The SC will have representatives of MEPD, the 
Ministry of Higher Education, Research, and Innovation (Ministère de l’Enseignement Supérieur, de la Recherche 
et de l’Innovation, MESRI), the Ministry of Finance and Budget (Ministère des Finances et du Budget, MFB), the 
Ministry of Civil Service, Work, and Social Dialogue (Ministère de la Fonction Publique, du Travail et du Dialogue 
Social, MFPTDS), the Ministry of Youth Promotion, Sports, and Employment (Ministère de la Promotion des 
Jeunes, des Sports, et de l’Emploi, MPJSE), the Ministry of Production, Irrigation, and Agricultural Equipment 
(Ministère de la Production, de l’Irrigation et des Equipements Agricoles, MPIEA). It should also include 
representatives of civil society and private sector. 

 

42. At the annual meeting, the MENPC and MFPPM with support from the PCU will provide results for the 
year and will set out its intended results and necessary resources for the following year. The annual meeting 
will be done before the end of September of each year to ensure that the decisions taken by the Steering 
Committee are reflected in the budget submission for the following year. The first meeting of the Steering 
Committee is expected to take place in November 2019 (the second in September 2020) while the first annual 
work plan will be devised by the preparation team with the support of PARSET2. 

 

43. The PCU will be responsible for daily project coordination, as well as the administration of the financing: 
procurement, financial management, disbursement, monitoring, reporting and evaluation, environmental and 
social safeguards. The PCU is already staffed with a qualified Project Coordinator, Procurement Specialist, 
Financial Management Specialist, Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) Specialist, and Accountant. PARSET will be 
required to hire a team of engineers who will help oversee the CFTP construction and the rehabilitation program 
of the lycées and collèges d’enseignement technique et industriel. In addition, the DPEF will add a full-time 
Safeguards Specialist to ensure that the environmental and social safeguards requirements are met. Technical 
implementation of the Project will be the responsibility of each concerned department within the MENPC, 


MFPPM, MFPTDS, and MEPD. Detailed project implementation mechanisms will be provided in the Project 
Implementation Manual (PIM), which will be completed by effectiveness. 

 

44. The role of the Steering Committee is to provide guidance and advice for strategic direction of the 
project and approve annual budget and action plan. In those cases where specific action is needed to address 
issues that go beyond the scope of any single ministry, the president of the Steering Committee can bring together 
the relevant parties to find solutions to problems that are inter-ministerial in nature, which may be presented to 
the Steering Committee, if necessary. 

 

45. The following implementation arrangements will be established. No more than three months after 
project effectiveness, each relevant MENPC and MFPPM director will nominate focal points who will be heads of 
components and sub-components who will work with the PARSET2 coordinator and the M&E specialist to convene 
the appropriate Government officials to finalize the work plan for each component. These will be key contributions 
to the overall project work plan to be developed by the project coordinator under the guidance of the Steering 
Committee which will be discussed with MENPC and MFPPM and communicated to the Bank. Thereafter, once a 
quarter, the PCU will report on progress to the MENPC and MFPPM as well as key development partners within 
the LEG and will share the work plan for the following three months. 

 

46. Annual reviews will be held in November/December of each year, bringing together all key stakeholders 
in the system. At those reviews, the MENPC and MFPPM officials will provide updates on the status of the technical 
and vocational education and training sector, including information regarding the start of the school year 
(enrollments, recruitments, trainings, and so on). Each functional/central directorate will present its results, and 
each regional directorate will do the same. The arrangements will be formalized in the project implementation 
manual. More details on the project implementation arrangements can be found in Annex 1. 
 
 
 .    
F. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 
 

 
G. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 
 

Kristyna Bishop, Social Specialist 
Bougadare Kone, Environmental Specialist 
Mamadou Diedhiou, Social Specialist 
Aurelie Marie Simone Monique Rossignol, Environmental Specialist 


SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

Due to the civil works inherent to constructions 
and/or rehabilitation civil works activities of 
schools/centers, the potential social and 
environmental risks of the proposed project are 
expected to be moderate and mostly site-specific, 
with no significant or long-term negative risks and 
impacts, which are foreseen to be easily 
manageable; typical of category B projects. 
  
Since project’s physical footprint is presently 
unknown and would so be prior to appraisal, in 
compliance with OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental 
Assessment) core requirements, the Borrower will 
prepare, consult upon and publicly disclose – both 
in-country and on the world Bank’s website, prior to 
appraisal, an environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF) to guide the way that potential 
negative environmental and social risks and impacts 
of future sub-projects will be identified and 
mitigated during project implementation.  If, during 
project preparation/implementation, any project 
specific site is known before appraisal, a site-specific 
an Environmental and Social Impact Assessments 
(ESIA)/Environmental and Social Management Plans 
(ESMP) will also be prepared, amply consulted upon 
and publicly disclosed, both in-country and on the 
World Bank website prior to appraisal the physical 
start of civil works  

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No  

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 No  

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No  

Pest Management OP 4.09 No 

The project comprises no activity which may induce 
the purchase and/or the use of pesticides or related 
chemicals. The project will not finance pesticides 
acquisition or distribution. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 

This policy is triggered because of the nature of 
possible civil works to be financed under component 
1 – more precisely under sub-component 1.2 which 
might lead to the unearthing of such potential 
physical cultural resources (PCR).  Nevertheless, it is 


highly unlikely that any physical cultural resources 
will be impacted; nonetheless, the existing a  
“Chance finds procedures” will be embedded in the 
ESMF to ensure that these aspects will be taken into 
account an adequate management of PSRs during 
project preparation and implementation. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 
The policy is not triggered as there are no 
Indigenous People in project targeted areas. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

The project has triggered OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary 
Resettlement) to enable the project to better tackle 
issues related to land acquisition, including 
economic and physical displacement. Since the 
project footprint is yet to be known, the Borrower 
will prepare project has updated the a Resettlement 
Policy Framework  (RPF) for each participating 
country. The RPF sets out the policies, principles, 
institutional arrangements, likely categories of 
affected people, eligibility criteria and categories, 
compensation rates, methods of valuing affected 
assets, community participation and information 
dissemination, Grievance Redress Mechanism and 
effective monitoring and evaluation. The RPF will be 
amply consulted upon, and once cleared by the Bank 
it will be publicly disclosed both in-country and at 
the WB’s external website prior to appraisal.  
 
 Further, when investment sites lead to land take 
that causes economic and/or physical displacement, 
the borrower will prepare a site-specific 
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP). Since the 
resettlement process is meant to be inclusive to 
encompass vulnerable social groups and guarantee 
that they receive fair and equitable treatment, the 
corresponding site-specific RAPs, wherever deemed 
necessary, will be consulted upon, cleared by the 
World Bank, and publicly disclosed both in-country 
and at the external WB’s website prior to the 
physical start of civil works  

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 
The project will not finance any activities related to 
the construction of dams nor affect operations of 
existing dams or affiliated reservoirs 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No The project will not affect international waterways. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No No activities are planned in any disputed areas. 


KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project is focused on improving skills of the Chadian youth, with an emphasis on improving the public TVET 
system, instituting performance-based contracts, building capacity, improving the governance of TVET institutions, 
creating linkages with the private sector, improving monitoring and evaluation, etc. As such, these activities have little 
to no environmental impact. However, civil works will also be financed, such as the construction of technical and 
vocational training centers, and the extension and rehabilitation of secondary technical schools, within existing 
schools, the provision of fencing, access to clean water, adequate sanitation, and electricity for which the most cost-
effective and environment-friendly options (such as solar panels) will be given preference. Impacts from these 
activities could include work-related health and safety impacts; noise, dust, reduction of air and water quality; loss of 
tree/vegetation cover; etc. The short, medium- and long-term socio-economic impact of the proposed project is 
expected to be largely beneficial. The project has a low probability of inducing physical or economic displacement. Its 
intervention is mainly focused on existing secondary schools and vocational training centers except for the 
construction of one new model center. As there may be some unforeseen resettlement. Therefore, the project will 
prepare a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). The influx of male workers may increase the demand for sex. As a 
result, women in the project community may be subject to higher rates of violence. 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
Not applicable 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. 
Not applicable 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower 
capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
As the impacts from Project activities on the environment are expected to be moderate, the Borrower will prepare an 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF). The ESMF will be used by the implementing agency as a 
defined procedure and guidelines to screen each activity as it is proposed for financing. The ESMF will be used to 
prepare site-specific Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) which will include impacts, mitigation 
measures, a responsible entity and a budget for each mitigation activity. Given the Recipient’s limited but growing 
experience with implementation of environmental and social safeguards instruments, close safeguards supervision 
and implementation support will be carried out during the early stage of project implementation until adequate 
safeguards experience is developed. The PARSET2 engineer, in collaboration with the relevant directorate and regional 
office of the MFPPM, will supervise the implementation of the safeguards instruments discussed above. IDA 
supervision will focus on: (i) providing regular implementation support; (ii) carrying out field reviews of safeguards 
implementation; and (iii) monitoring safeguards implementation based on periodic progress reports.  
 
The short, medium- and long-term socio-economic impact of the proposed project is expected to be largely beneficial. 
The project has a low probability of inducing physical or economic displacement. Its intervention is mainly focused on 
existing technical secondary schools and vocational training centers. However, the construction of a new vocational 
training center is planned in Sahr region. As there may be some unforeseen resettlement. Therefore, the project will 
prepare a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). The construction to be realized in this project are not large and the 
works will be realized by the local companies. Thus, the influx of foreign labor will be very limited, or-existent. 
Nevertheless, the project will also set in place mechanisms to prevent Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and sexual based 
violence. The project will emphasize the importance of having internal prevention and response systems and policies 
(sexual harassment policies, anonymous reporting mechanisms) in place and building staff capacity to recognize and 
address these issues at the project level during implementation. Finally, a The GRM will be prepared, in consultation 
with stakeholders, including communities. A project level GRM is outlined in the RPF and ESMF. It is designed to be a 
mechanism that is trusted by all relevant partners including the project affected persons (PAPs), if it turns out that 
impacts happened in the implementation stage. It will facilitate the redress of any grievance and conflict that may 
arise from the Project. The PIU will be notified of any disputes in the project zone. Project field staff should work 
closely with the communities and the community leaders to clarify and resolve any misunderstanding that could give 
rise to conflicts. The PIU will develop a clear plan and procedures for the GRM, including complaint collection and 
processing procedures, reporting format, database/records specifications, and committee membership using 
guidelines provided in the RPF and ESMF. Public participation and consultation will be a key part of the process at all 
times to promote understanding and prevent unnecessary complaints and disputes.  
 
IDA supervision will be carried out by field-based Bank technical staff, complemented by specialist consultants as 
necessary, during regular biannual supervision missions and during interim technical safeguards missions that will 
respond to emerging issues. Monitoring will be based on ESMF activities. It will also be an occasion to discuss the 
project safeguard requirements with the Recipient, including management plan and reporting requirements. 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, 
with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
During the preparation of the ESMF and RPF, the Borrower held consultation with several public TVET institutions and 
communities located in the regions that will be targeted by the project such as Moyen-Chari, Sahr, and Moundou as 
well as in N'Djamena. The Borrower met with TVET schools directors, teachers, and students. Further consultations 
will be held before appraisal and will specifically ensure that vulnerable groups, like women, refugees, etc. are 
included 
 

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Agricultural Productivity Program for Southern Africa - Angola & Lesotho (P164486) 

 
 

  
Oct 01, 2017 Page 1 of 13  

     

 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 07-Mar-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSC23363 


BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Africa P164486  Agricultural 
Productivity Program 
for Southern Africa - 
Angola & Lesotho 
(P164486) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA Jun 01, 2018 Jul 26, 2018 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Leostho Ministry of 
Finance,Angola Ministry of 
Finance 

Angola Ministry of 
Agriculture, Lesotho Ministry 
of Agriculture and Food 
Security 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
To increase the availability of improved agricultural technologies in participating countries in the Southern Africa 
Development Community (SADC) region. 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 45.00 

Total Financing 45.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 45.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) 25.00 

     International Development Association (IDA) 20.00 

          IDA Credit 20.00 

   


Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B - Partial Assessment  Track I-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

 
Southern Africa’s increasingly integrated regional market presents opportunities for greater economic growth and 
poverty reduction. Southern Africa is a diverse region of both low income and middle-income countries and is home to 
over 330 million people connected through an increasingly dynamic regional market. The region hosts two well-
established pan-African institutions covering agriculture and commerce—the Southern African Development Community 
(SADC) and the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA), which are actively pursuing a regional 
integration agenda. 
 
Agriculture varies in importance from country to country within the region but is the primary source of subsistence, 
employment, and income for most of the population. Particularly in the lower income countries, agriculture is the 
largest contributor to GDP, and the performance of the agricultural sector has a strong influence on growth, 
employment, food security, and poverty. In Angola, while the agriculture sector contributes only on average 5.5 percent 
to GDP, 44 percent of the employed population works in the sector. More than half of Angola’s poor are in rural areas 
and depend almost exclusively on agriculture for their livelihood.  Within Lesotho, agriculture contributes around 6 per 
cent to the GDP, employs almost 60 per cent of the labor force (on subsistence farms) and provides livelihood 
sustenance for 90 per cent of the rural population.  In Lesotho, more than half the population – 57 percent – live below 
the poverty line, many of whom reliant on agricultural activities. 
 
Both Angola and Lesotho have experienced development challenges common to the Southern Africa region: economies 
heavily reliant on natural resource exports with high levels unemployment and food and nutrition insecurity in rural 
areas. For many countries in Southern Africa over-reliance on oil and mineral resource driven growth has led to 
increased focus on economic diversification and more inclusive growth.  
 
Within Angola the 2015/2016 oil price shock highlighted the need to more forcefully address vulnerabilities and 
dependence on oil, and diversify the economy and better manage oil revenue volatility. The shock prompted the 
Government of Angola to accelerate efforts to diversify the economy and reduce dependence on food imports. The 
Government’s strategy in the face of the crisis placed a strong emphasis on agriculture as an immediate way to increase 
domestic production and reduce imports. Increased agricultural production (particularly cereals and vegetables) and 
productivity have the potential to ease the current account pressures and the foreign exchange scarcity. 
 
Lesotho’s economic growth has been driven by natural resource based exports – water and diamonds –  and is strongly 



linked to trade with South Africa, where Lesotho also struggles to compete with South Africa’s more efficient firms or 
farms. Lesotho’s National Strategic Development Plan prioritized development of several sectors – agriculture and rural 
economy, manufacturing, tourism and mining. Measures to develop processing and manufacturing capacity – including 
agro-based – are important to diversification efforts and address rural unemployment.  
 
The region’s rich land and water resources have potential but the agriculture sector has not yet been fully developed to 
contribute to economic transformation. Southern Africa region falls within the so-called Guinea Savannah zone, which 
has significant potential for highly productive commercial agriculture as with similar agro-ecologies in other parts of the 
world such as Brazil and Thailand. Angola is the third largest country in sub–Saharan Africa in terms of geographic size 
and much of its agricultural land is within the underexploited Guinea Savanah zone. A major agricultural producer before 
the civil war, Angola’s agricultural performance remains a fraction of its potential.   
 
In the past 50 years, Lesotho has gone from a position of virtual self-sufficiency in grain production to being highly 
dependent on imports of grain.  A mountainous country with limited amounts of arable land, Lesotho nonetheless has 
areas of high agricultural potential and the possibility to exploit its extensive water resources and unique highland 
growing environment – particularly for higher value crops.  
 
 

Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
Raising agricultural productivity is necessary if agriculture is to contribute to growth and poverty reduction. Agricultural 
productivity has increased in southern Africa, but remains well below potential. This remains the case in Angola and 
Lesotho where even average yields are below southern Africa regional averages. Most of the growth in productivity in 
Africa has come from bringing previously uncultivated land into production, rather than from intensification made 
possible by technical change. Comparisons of total factor productivity growth have shown technical change accounted 
for a large share of agricultural productivity growth in Asia and Latin America, but a very small share of agricultural 
productivity growth in Africa in recent decades. Southern Africa has experienced more technology-driven productivity 
growth than other regions in Africa, but the gains have occurred mainly in middle income countries. Analysis has 
identified several yield gaps (the difference between actual and potential yields) that could be narrowed with additional 
investments in technology adaptation and dissemination. 
 
Regional approaches to technology generation and dissemination are a more effective and strategic than national 
efforts alone. Regional integration has proven to be an effective strategy that can allow groups of countries facing 
common research challenges to increase the efficiency of their investments in agricultural R&D. Adoption of a regional 
approach to research based on the concentration of resources within a reduced number of large, specialized research 
institutes serving an expansive shared technology space can deliver many benefits. First, it can reduce duplication by 
allowing a single regional research institute to undertake work that otherwise would be done in parallel within multiple 
national research institutes. Second, it can help capture economies of scale by concentrating resources within a single 
institute, where they can achieve a critical mass. Third, it can increase the payoffs to research by facilitating 
dissemination of improved technologies across national borders, thereby vastly increasing the number of beneficiaries. 
Fourth, it can mitigate the isolation that frequently occurs in small, fragmented research institutes by creating effective 
mechanisms for facilitating knowledge exchange and technology transfer. 
 
Southern Africa continues to offer attractive opportunities for regional research. Groups of countries within southern 
Africa share similar agro-ecological zones and farming systems, suggesting that there is potential for finding shared 
solutions to common problems. Technology spillover is already occurring within the sub-region, and several high-


yielding crop varieties and improved crop and livestock management practices have been successfully disseminated 
across borders. Significant unrealized potential remains, however, for expanding spillovers.  Southern Africa is aso 
vulnerable to climate shocks and many countries are likely to face greater variability and more pronounced extremes of 
temperature and rainfall. Adaptation measures—particularly the adoption of climate-smart agricultural practices—will 
be needed to maintain productivity and ensure resilience in the face of more frequent and more severe shocks. 
 
National systems for generating and disseminating agricultural technology are operating well below their potential, 
constrained by inadequate facilities, shortages of qualified staff, and low levels of overall investment and budget 
support. These factors, in turn, are linked to the high degree of fragmentation in the deployment of resources within the 
sector, as limited financing is spread over a range of priorities. Given the small size of many countries and economies in 
the sub-region, few can afford fully elaborated technology development systems capable of addressing all of the crops 
and livestock breeds in their highly diversified production systems. This particularly true in the case of Angola and 
Lesotho, which have small number of PhD scientists (particularly for Lesotho) and infrastructure that has largely been 
devastated by the civil war.   
 
The regional productivity program model has demonstrated satisfactory outcomes.  The Agricultural Productivity 
Program for Southern Africa (APPSA) was approved in March 2013 with IDA financing to Malawi, Mozambique and 
Zambia. APPSA is part of the Bank’s larger portfolio of regional agricultural productivity programs and was third regional 
operation in a series that followed the successful implementation of the West Africa Agricultural Productivity Program 
(WAAPP) and the East Africa Agricultural Productivity Program (EAAPP).  Like the first two programs, it was expected 
that APPSA would expand to include additional countries as they expressed interest and if financing was available.  
 
In terms of results, to date APPSA has launched 74 R&D sub-projects which are currently making 156 technologies 
available to farmers (new and “on the shelf” technologies). This includes 47 technologies in Malawi (37 seed varieties; 10 
agronomic practices); 63 technologies in Mozambique (11 seed varieties; 28 agronomic practices, 16 pest and diseases 
management practices, 3 water management practices, and 5 post-harvest technologies); and 46 technologies in Zambia 
(31 seed varieties; 15 agronomic practices). Additional results include improving cross border movement of technology 
through the introduction of new plant material and varieties; scaling up extension and dissemination of improved 
technologies to reach more farmers; improved seed production; building a larger pipeline of qualified agricultural 
scientists – particularly women scientists; and upgrading of laboratory and fields to modern standards. 
 

Relationship to CPF 
 
APPSA is consistent with the emerging priorities of the new Regional Integration Strategy and the Africa Region 
priorities. Africa Region has prioritized IBRD and IDA funding around macroeconomic stability, improving 
competitiveness and economic diversification, improving human capital and access to basic services; and resilience to 
shocks. APPSA touches closely on the latter three areas with a focus on increasing.   
 
The Angola CPF is currently under review, but agriculture remains a high priority and APPSA aligns to Pillar I of the 
outgoing CPF, which is focused on supporting integrated national economic diversification and regionally balanced 
development. Productivity is central with a focus on increasing yields and developing post-harvest processing 
technologies.  APPSA is also consistent with Lesotho’s FY16 – 20 CPF Focus Area II: Promoting Private Sector Jobs 
Creation, which will direct support towards improving smallholder and MSME agriculture productivity. The CPF 
specifically prioritizes raising productivity, strengthening farmers’ capacity, fostering stronger marketing linkage, 
substituting imports from South Africa, create job opportunities, and promote women’s status in rural communities. 
 
     

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 

 
To increase the availability of improved agricultural technologies in participating countries in the Southern Africa 
Development Community (SADC) region. 

 
Key Results (From PCN) 

 
Results would be measured using the APPSA results – which include the following PDO indicators: 
 

• Number of technologies that are being made available to farmers and other end users   
• Percentage of Lead Farmers in targeted areas who are aware of an improved technology promoted by the 

Project  
• Number of technologies generated or promoted by the Project in one participating country that are released 

in another participating country 
• Direct Project beneficiaries (number) 
• of which female (percentage) 

 
D. Concept Description 

 
APPSA’s regional design. APPSA is currently supporting agricultural research, technology dissemination, and capacity 
building activities associated within a regional collaborative framework around priority farming systems/commodities 
value chains.  These have been identified on the basis of a regional priority-setting study that identified leading R&D 
priorities for the SADC region, as well as the priorities indicated by each country. To date APPSA is actively supporting 
research and dissemination activities around maize, sorghum, legumes (beans, soybean, cowpea, pigeon pea), rice, 
cassava, and cross cutting climate smart agriculture practices. Regional Centers of Leadership have been established in 
in legumes (Zambia), maize based farming systems (Malawi) and rice based farming systems (Mozambique).  
 
The proposed expansion would allow the addition of horticulture and roots and tubers (cassava and potato) to APPSA 
activities with Angola taking a lead on cassava and Lesotho taking a lead on horticulture. This adds a valuable dimension 
to APPSA with a stronger focus on higher value production (fruits, vegetables, potatoes) and processing.     
 
Component 1: Technology Generation and Dissemination. The first component will finance technology generation and 
dissemination activities associated with the commodity or commodity groups being targeted by APPSA. Regional R&D 
activities for the initial targeted commodities have been developed in the initial set of APPSA participating countries and 
additional activities proposed by Angola and Lesotho as part of as part of the preparation of each country’s RCoL 
proposal. R&D activities include technology generation (research), but also technology dissemination activities 
(extension, strengthening of innovation systems).  
 
All activities financed under Component 1 are undertaken through collaborative R&D projects involving the participation 
of at least two countries. To date 74 R&D projects have been developed  through the following process: (i) for each 
commodity being targeted by APPSA, priorities are identified and endorsed at national level; (ii) draft concept notes are 
developed through communication with other regional partners; (iii) for each commodity being targeted by APPSA, 
regional planning meetings will be convened by CCARDESA to facilitate the finalization of regional research and 
dissemination priorities and associated R&D project proposals; (iv) a peer review process facilitated by CCARDESA 
provides feedback on the relevance and quality of R&D project proposals; and (v) R&D project proposals will be 

confirmed and agreed at national level.  
 
Participating countries will participate in R&D projects relating to the commodity farming system being targeted by the 
RCoL that they are hosting, as well as in R&D projects relating to the commodity farming systems being targeted by 
RCoLs in other countries; or additional R&D priorities that are agreed collectively by all participating countries. 
Therefore, each country is expected to devote a share of its Component 1 funding to R&D projects related to the 
commodity farming system being targeted by the RCoL that it is hosting, but a portion of its Component 1 funds will also 
go to support R&D projects related to the commodity farming systems being targeted by RCoLs hosted by other 
countries or any other regional priorities.  
 
Technology dissemination priorities: APPSA will support the dissemination of improved technologies by providing 
resources for RCoLs to engage with a range of partners in scaling up the use of promising innovations of relevance to the 
targeted commodities. APPSA will help to strengthen the links between researchers, extension agents, input 
distributors, and farmers and other end users, but lead responsibility for technology dissemination will remain with the 
national extension system.  
 
Component 2: Strengthening the Institutional and Enabling Environment for Technology Adoption. Component 2 will 
support activities to strengthen institutional capacity of RCoLs and to facilitate the movement of improved technology. 
The choice of activities to be financed will be driven primarily by the specific needs of each country, as identified at 
national level. In general APPSA will support: (i) upgrading of research infrastructure including rehabilitation and 
construction of physical infrastructure; farm, laboratory, and office equipment; and information technology and 
knowledge management systems; (ii) upgrading of infrastructure for sanitary and phytoanitary (SPS) management; (iii) 
improving institutional administration and performance management systems within RCoLs or SPS systems; (iv) 
developing human capital including by providing scientific or technical training at the post graduate level; by upgrading 
skills through short courses or targeted training, and scientific exchanges; and (iv) strengthening seed production 
capacity, seed regulatory functions, and related services.   
 
Component 3: Coordination and Facilitation. Component 3 will finance three main categories of activities:  
 
National level research coordination and management: At national level, APPSA will finance project coordination 
activities, including planning and budgeting, management and administration, monitoring and evaluation, safeguards 
compliance, and regional engagement. If necessary, APPSA could finance consultants to ensure that all essential project 
coordination activities are carried out effectively. Government counterpart resources will be used to pay staff-related 
costs not eligible for IDA or IBRD funding.  
 
Regional facilitation by CCARDESA: At the regional level, APPSA will finance regional facilitation activities including: (i) 
planning, monitoring and evaluation activities related to regional collaboration; (ii) regional exchange of information, 
knowledge and technologies; and (iii) technical assistance and capacity building. Many of these activities will be carried 
out by CCARDESA, which will play an important role in facilitating the development of R&D projects, including organizing 
the peer review process and providing quality control. The regional facilitation activities to be performed by CCARDESA 
will be supported using funds from a subsidiary agreement between the APPSA participating countries.  
 
R&D policy analysis and dialogue: APPSA financing will support analytical work, needs assessments, and policy dialogue 
or policy harmonization activities in key areas that affect R&D at national and regional level. Work will focus on analysis 
of relevant policies and legislation for intellectual property rights, operationalization of the SADC harmonized seed 
regulatory system, implementation of biosafety regulations, and similar topics. Discussions will take place during 



implementation to determine whether Project resources could be used productively to advance the regional seed 
agenda. If the participating countries agree that APPSA could play a useful role by supporting key players other than the 
RCoLs, support for these key players could be channeled through CCARDESA. 
 
 
    

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
Project activities will take place on research stations and farmer fields (on farm trials and demonstrations). The activities 

will all take place on land that is already part of existing agricultural research stations in the respective countries. 
However, as not all land is currently in active use by the client and the exact location of all project activities are not 
known, OP4.12 has been triggered as a precautionary measure.  
 
Indigenous Peoples (IPs) in Angola are dispersed through small communities in southern Angola border regions and their 

exact location is difficult to identify. Therefore, once potential project locations are confirmed, OP4.10 may be triggered 
to provide clear guidance if IP groups are encountered during the course of implementation. 
 

 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
Both Angola and Lesotho have some experience in implementing Bank safeguards requirements through other projects 

but capacities remain limited in the specific implementing agencies. In Angola the implementing agency is the Ministry of 
Agriculture through its Institute of Agriculture (Institute de Investigacão Agricola (IIA)). In Lesotho the implementing 
agency is the Ministry of Agriculture through its Department for Agricultural Research (DAR). In each agency, incremental 
staff and consultants will be recruited to ensure implementation of safeguards instruments and monitoring compliance of 
all components. In addition, the World Bank will provide guidance and training to ensure that the client will have the 
adequate capacity to implement, monitor and report on environmental and social issues. Both Angola and Lesotho, have 
established project implementation units for other World Bank agriculture projects that will be utilized for shared 
services, and fiduciary and safeguards issues. 
 
 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 



Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The policy is triggered as a result of: (i) proposed 
research activities under component 1 which could 
include breeding, germplasm, and on farm technology 
testing that can involve the application of agro-
chemicals including chemical pesticides; and (ii) 
capacity building for Regional Centers of Leadership 
under component 2, which would include financing for 
civil works investment in field rehabilitation, office and 
lab infrastructure and irrigation related upgrading or 
construction. Angola and Lesotho will prepare an 
Environment and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) as the safeguard instruments which will 
provide mitigation measures and a uniform approach 
for addressing identified potential negative 
environmental impacts as well as screening 
procedures and monitoring plans for compliance 
management.  
 
The project is proposed to be classified as an EA 
category B. 

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No  

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 No 

The policy is not triggered as the program would not 
involve significant conversion of natural habitats 
through its direct or indirect activities. APPSA support 
under component 1 activities are intended to improve 
the productivity of agriculture through the adoption of 
improved technologies (intensification) rather than 
expansion of agricultural production (extensification). 
Technologies developed, tested and released under 
the project would not specifically target natural 
habitats but would aim to improve the productivity of 
existing agricultural practices. Under Component 2 the 
project is expected to finance infrastructure upgrading 
on already existing agricultural research stations and 
fields. No new land would be acquired and natural 
habitats are not known to be inside or adjacent to 
research stations. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No 

The policy is not triggered as program activities do not 
have any direct impacts on the health and quality of 
forests, people who depend on forests, nor is there an 
aim to change the management, protection, or 
utilization of forests.  

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 
The program may purchase pesticides or 
agrochemicals at very low volumes as part of project 
supported research activities. No pesticides or 

     

agrochemicals will be purchased and supplied to 
farmers outside of their participation in research trials 
or demonstrations activities.  Adoption of improved 
agricultural technology generated by APPSA could 
indirectly result in increased use of pesticides and 
agrochemicals by farmers, but the scale of this indirect 
impact is not known. For this reason, each 
participating country will prepare a Pest Management 
Plan (PMP) which incorporates Integrated Pest 
Management (IPM) procedures. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 

The policy is not triggered as implementation is not 
expected to involve any known physical cultural 
resources and will take place on land already actively 
in use for agricultural purposes either within 
agricultural research stations or farmer fields. 
Nonetheless, lessons learned from other projects in 
Lesotho have shown that in some of the districts 
where the project will be implemented, such as Leribe 
and Butha Buthe, artefacts from historical cultural 
resources have been found at some places. Therefore, 
the Chance Find Procedures will be included in the 
ESMF in case of chance finds during implementation 
project. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 TBD 

This Policy may be triggered for Angola, given the 
possibility of IP communities being present in the 
project areas. Based on the review of potential project 
locations, an IPPF will be prepared in order determine 
and provide measures to avoid and mitigate potential 
negative impacts. The framework will be specific for 
each group identified and will as well be focused on 
providing positive benefit for this vulnerable 
population. 
OP4.10 is not triggered in Lesotho as there are no 
indigenous people within the project area of influence. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

The policy is triggered in Angola and to be determined 
in Lesotho. Although no land acquisition is expected 
under the project and activities will take place on land 
already under the management of agricultural 
research stations or farmers, in some cases land is 
currently fallow or not actively used and local 
communities may have encroached into fields for their 
own farming. While all land which is required for 
project activities belongs to the respective clients, 
there is a risk that informal occupation or use may 
occur during project implementation. OP4.12 is 
therefore triggered as a precautionary measure to 



guide implementation and mitigation measures to 
avoid resettlement impact. An RPF will be prepared in 
Angola and a determination made whether it is 
required for Lesotho during the course of preparation. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 Yes 

The policy is triggered. Although the project would not 
invest in large scale dam construction the project 
would invest in small productive rural infrastructure, 
such as the establishment or rehabilitation and 
improvement of small-scale irrigation and drainage 
works for research stations under the RCoLs, and 
possibly include small-scale earth dams to harvest and 
store water. These structures, however these would 
generally be far less than 10 m in height. The FAO 
manual on small dams will guide implementation and 
be incorporated into the relevant safeguards 
instruments. The small dams would be designed and 
the construction supervised by a qualified engineer. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 

The policy is not triggered as the project would not 
invest in any large scale irrigation works that would 
adversely affect the quality or quantity of water flow 
within shared waterways. Small scale irrigation within 
the context of technology demonstration or research 
could be financed by the program but would be within 
the context of research facilities and would not exceed 
more than 50  hectares per station/center.  

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
The policy is not triggered as the area where the 
program will be implemented is not known to include 
any disputed areas  

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Feb 28, 2018 
 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
An ESMF with PMP will be prepared for each country. An additional RPF will be prepared in Angola and if required in 

Lesotho. If OP 4.10 is triggered an IPPF will be prepared for Angola. Both Angola and Lesotho ESMFs will also have a 
screening process for sub-projects under component 1. 
 
 



























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Lesotho Second Smallholder Agriculture Development Project (SADP) (P165228) 

 
 

  
Mar 13, 2019 Page 1 of 20  

     

 
 
      

 

Combined Project Information Documents /  
Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (PID/ISDS) 

 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 10-Apr-2019 | Report No: PIDISDSA26662 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Lesotho P165228 Second Phase Smallholder 
Agriculture Development 
Project 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA 10-Apr-2019 30-May-2019 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Finance Ministry of Agriculture 
and Food Security (MAFS) 

 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
The development objective of the project is to support increased adoption of climate smart agricultural technologies 
in Lesotho's agriculture, enhanced commercialization and improved dietary diversity among targeted beneficiaries. 

 
Components 

Scaling Up Climate Smart-Agricultural Practices and Advisory Services 
Improving Commercialization and Nutrition 
Project Management, Coordination and Monitoring and Evaluation 
Contingency Emergency Response Component 

 
 

PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
   

SUMMARY-NewFin1  
 

Total Project Cost 57.00 

Total Financing 57.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 50.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 

 
   
DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 50.00 



 

          IDA Credit 50.00 

Non-World Bank Group Financing 

     Counterpart Funding 5.00 

          Local Beneficiaries 5.00 

     Trust Funds 2.00 

          Japan Policy and Human Resources Development Fund 2.00 

    

Environmental Assessment Category 

B-Partial Assessment 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate     
 
 
 
 
B. Introduction and Context 

 
Country Context 

1. The Kingdom of Lesotho is a small, mountainous, landlocked country in Southern Africa with a population of 
2.2 million. It is an open economy, traditionally centered on trade, with textiles, water, and diamonds as its 
main exports. Lesotho is a member of the Southern African Customs Union (SACU), the Southern African 
Development Community, and the Common Monetary Area all of which create strong opportunities for regional 
trade. As a member of the Common Monetary Area, its currency is pegged to the South African Rand.   
 

2. Lesotho is one of the poorest countries in the region, with high levels of poverty and inequality.  An estimated 
57 percent of the population lives below the national poverty line and 34 percent fall below the extreme poverty 
line. Income inequality is among the highest in the world. Rural areas, heavily dependent on subsistence and 
semi-subsistence agriculture, account for 70 percent of the population and 87 percent of all people living below 
the poverty line (SCD, 2015). A wide (30 percent) poverty gap, high rates of unemployment, wide prevalence of 
HIV/AIDS, and climate vulnerability further constrain the scope for inclusive growth and improvements in living 
standards. GDP per capita is estimated at US$1,181 (2017) and when adjusted by Purchasing Power Parity is 
equivalent to 16 percent of the world's average.    
  

3. Economic performance declined after 2012 as Lesotho’s growth drivers shifted from exports to high public 
expenditure and consumption. Real annual GDP growth was at a low 2.5 percent in 2016-2017 down from a 4.5 
percent average over the previous five years.  The sharp decline in SACU-related revenues over 2016-2017 and 
increase in public expenditures to 60 percent of GDP, fueled by wage and employment growth in the public 
sector, have resulted in a widening of the fiscal deficit and a difficult economic outlook for the country.  Output 
is estimated to have contracted by 1.6 percent in 2017 and is projected to remain subdued in the near term.       
 


4. Recognizing the inherent unsustainability of this economic model, Lesotho has endorsed a new template for 
development. The recently completed National Strategic Development Plan (NSDP)-II 2018/19 – 2022/23 seeks 
to pursue inclusive, sustainable growth and private sector-led employment creation.  The Government of 
Lesotho (GoL) has identified four productive sectors, viz. agriculture, manufacturing, tourism and creative 
industries and technology and innovation as potential sectors for job creation and inclusive economic growth 
under a new growth path led by the private sector.   

 
 

Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 

5. Agriculture plays a significant role in Lesotho’s economy.  Over 70 percent of the country’s population lives in 
rural areas and depends, directly or indirectly, on agriculture for employment and livelihood.  The sector has 
the highest potential to increase food security, reduce rural poverty, and generate both on- and off-farm 
employment opportunities.  Main crops include maize, sorghum and wheat which are planted as monocrops on 
85 percent of the country’s arable land which comprises 10 percent of Lesotho’s total land area.  Livestock 
contributes 75 percent of total agricultural output, including semi-intensive and intensive production of pigs 
and poultry, as well as extensive (free range) production of goats and sheep on rangelands in the foothills and 
highland areas (Johane, 2011). Sheep and goats, which dominate the livestock sector, are reared mainly for wool 
and mohair.  
 

6. Lesotho’s agricultural sector suffers from low levels of productivity and commercialization which has made 
the country heavily dependent on food imports to meet domestic consumption needs.  Despite 70 percent of 
the rural population engaged in some form of agricultural activity, the sector contributes less than 10 percent 
to the national gross domestic product (GDP). Most of the rural population is engaged in subsistence farming: 
rain-fed, undiversified farming (primarily cereal production) and extensive livestock grazing characterize the 
sector. Productivity challenges in the sector, include, inter alia, limited size of arable land1, unfavorable farm 
structures (average land holding of about 1.0 ha per family), outdated farm technologies and farm management 
practices, limited technical expertise, sub-optimal use of inputs, lack of an adequate irrigation and drainage 
system, weak rural infrastructure, a rudimentary rural advisory system, and limited access to credit and 
investment capital. In addition, the country has experienced severe land degradation.  Massive soil erosion and 
loss of scarce agricultural land have resulted in extremely low agricultural productivity levels: land productivity 
averaged about USD 70 per hectare per year compared to the regional average of about USD 120 per hectare 
per year for the period 2008-2013; cereal yields average less than 1,000 kg per hectare, failing to meet the SADC 
RISDP target of achieving at least 2,000 kg per hectare2. Consequently, marketable surplus remains low.  A 
nascent private sector further constrains commercialization. Private sector activity in Lesotho is dominated by 
micro-enterprises, with a marked absence of the small and medium-sized enterprises that drive economic 
growth and job creation in most countries.3  

                                                           
1 While the agricultural land area of 2.36 million ha accounts for 78 percent of total land area, only 357,000 ha (12 percent) 
is suitable for crop production. Most agricultural land is mountain pasture, suited to extensive livestock production – which 
accounts for 75 percent of the total value of agricultural output. FAOSTAT 
2 Charles Nhemachena, Greenwell Matchaya and Sibusiso Nhlengethwa.  Agricultural Growth Trends and Outlook in Lesotho. 2016 
3 A survey of registered business enterprises in 2015 shows that of 9,625 registered business enterprises, 75.6 percent were 
micro-enterprises (1-4 employees) and 37.5 percent had a turnover of less than one million maloti (approximately 
$US70,000). Only 15 percent of the enterprises surveyed were small to medium (5-50 employees), and only 4.3 percent had 
a gross revenue of 1-5 million maloti ($US 70,000-$350,000). This pattern is even more evident in agro-processing and agri-
business. Five large enterprises dominate the food and beverage sector3, with few medium- or micro-enterprises. 




 
7. Climate change poses major challenges to the development of Lesotho’s agricultural sector.  The Inter-

Governmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) categorizes Lesotho as one of the countries highly vulnerable to 
the impacts of climate change.  The country has a temperate climate with subalpine characteristics and 
experiences regular droughts, floods, frosts, snow, hailstorms, and strong winds. The El Niño-Southern 
Oscillation (ENSO) phenomenon particularly affects climate variation in Lesotho (MEMWA, 2013)4. High intra-
seasonal and inter-annual rainfall variability, with frequent droughts, has often resulted in delayed planting or 
farmers not planting at all, reduced seed germination due to hardened soil and lack of water, crops failures, 
deterioration of rangelands and pasture, water scarcity for livestock, and increased food prices of staple grains 
such as maize.5  Chronic droughts have also negatively impacted the livestock sector, resulting in rangeland 
degradation and limiting the carrying capacity of pastoral land. The drought of 2015-16 growing season was the 
most severe on record putting over 534,000 people at risk of food insecurity. The current rain-fed crop 
production system with its focus on maize at the expense of diversification to more drought-tolerant crops 
(sorghum, millet, cowpeas) increases vulnerability to climatic shocks. The crop production system also makes 
limited use of climate smart agricultural technologies such as new varieties, conservation agriculture, 
intercropping, integrated pest management and simple water harvesting technologies, all of which compromise 
productivity. The erratic and severe weather patterns and land degradation reinforce the need to mainstream 
climate resilience in Lesotho’s agricultural sector.  
 

8. Provision of irrigation is critical for addressing climatic risks in Lesotho’s agriculture; however, the subsector 
is beset with challenges. Despite the ready availability of water from the mountains, only 2,600 ha of arable 
land has been developed for irrigation.  Poor management and inadequate maintenance have reduced the area 
under irrigation, with only an estimated 1,200 ha under irrigation in 2014.  The modernization of national water 
resource management policies and institutions has been slow and physical infrastructure has deteriorated due 
to lack of public funds for maintenance. Many pump stations are no longer operational and existing headworks 
and reservoirs have silted up. On-farm irrigation systems have also deteriorated due to ill-defined property 
rights over infrastructure and weak local capacity for management. There are few effective community-based 
irrigation management systems and poor links between the existing institutions and the local public institutions 
responsible for water management. Combating the effects of climate change and increasing productivity 
towards food security and commercialization will require sustained efforts to provide adequate, reliable and 
timely delivery of irrigation to Lesotho’s crop and livestock farmers.    
 

9. Development of high value cash crops, such as fruits and vegetables and potatoes as well as dairy and small-
scale pig and poultry production offer opportunities for moving from uncompetitive maize monocropping 
production to a more diversified production base responsive to climatic risks.  Lesotho’s higher altitude, 
potential for early season production and access to cheap water and labor combine to create favorable 
conditions for the production and export of vegetables, fruit and seed potatoes. Regional demand for fruit and 
vegetables is increasing as urban populations grow, incomes rise, and the popularity of healthy diets increases. 
Higher production and sales of these high value crops would also deepen domestic agricultural markets, 
generate rural employment and improve nutrition. Diversification and commercialization need a much broader 
base than this however, as current commercial vegetable production currently ranges from 100-600 ha and 
commercial potatoes are less than 500 ha. Government and donor support for increased production and 

                                                           
4 World Bank, 2016. “Lesotho Water Security and Climate Change Assessment.” World Bank, Washington, DC. 

5 CIAT; World Bank; 2018, 201Climate-Smart Agriculture in Lesotho. CSA Country Profiles for Africa Series.  



 
commercialization of small-scale dairy, pig and poultry enterprises will also be necessary, in addition to 
continued support for mohair and fine wool.   
 

10. A more diversified production base, with greater emphasis on horticulture and livestock production also 
offers a means to increase dietary diversity and reduce child malnutrition. Lesotho’s high rates of child 
malnutrition are attributed to poverty, low dietary diversity and inadequate consumption of fruits and 
vegetables. Limited dietary diversity affects all children - only 23 percent of children have minimum dietary 
diversity and 11 percent have a minimum acceptable diet. Fruit and vegetable availability was estimated at 128 
grams in 2013, compared with the WHO recommended daily intake of 400 grams. Increased horticulture and 
livestock production would contribute to improved nutrition by (a) increasing the availability of fruits and 
vegetables as well as protein-rich foods; and (b) improving incomes and so access to a more diverse diet.   

 
11. Recognizing the significant role of agriculture in Lesotho’s overall economic growth agenda, the Government 

of Lesotho (GoL) is undertaking critical measures to build a commercial and climate resilient agricultural sector.  
The National Strategic Development Plan (NSDP) II (2018/19-2022/23), which prioritizes the development of the 
agricultural sector, identifies three broad areas of strategic action: (i) sustainable commercialization and 
diversification of agriculture, (ii) a well-functioning agri-food system, and (iii) rehabilitation of range lands and 
wet lands. Priorities for action within these areas include: (i) improved technology and infrastructure (including 
irrigation and climate smart agriculture); (ii) increased production of high value crop and livestock products; (iii) 
the development of institutional frameworks for producer and industry organizations; (iv) building the capacity 
of farmers to benefit from these institutions; and (v) the development of value chains and agricultural markets. 
The NSDP II also calls for the need to scale up current nutrition systems towards strengthening human capital 
and expanding the use of water harvesting for irrigation. Gender and climate change are indicated as critical 
cross-cutting issues. Several policies and strategies, including Vision 2020, National Climate Change Policy (2017), 
Lesotho Food and Nutrition Policy (2016) and Lesotho Zero Hunger Strategic Review (LZHSR) accord high priority 
to scaling up climate-smart practices and actions to promote agricultural adaptation and increased food security, 
achieving zero hunger by 2030, access to adequate food and healthy diets all year round, ending malnutrition, 
doubling of smallholder productivity and incomes, and eliminating food loss and waste. The GoL has also initiated 
reform of the water sector to promote sustainable and productive use of Lesotho’s water resources.  
 

12. The Bank has provided substantial support to the development of Lesotho’s agriculture sector over the past 
decade. Through the ongoing Smallholder Agricultural Development Project (SADP) as well as Private Sector 
Competitiveness and Economic Diversification Project (PSCED) the Bank has provided financial and technical 
assistance  to improve commercialization and competitiveness in Lesotho’s agricultural sector. SADP is providing 
training and competitive grants to smallholder farmers for improving marketable surplus in several value chains, 
including horticulture (fruit and vegetable production), poultry, piggery and dairy.  The project is also supporting 
the development of an irrigation master plan to assist the government in its efforts of defining strategic priorities 
for improving the irrigation subsector in terms of alignment with agriculture growth potential, improving 
resource utilization, water delivery service, and institutional and financial sustainability and identify a pipeline of 
high priority irrigation investments for support from donors, government, private sector and other non-state 
actors. The PSCED is assisting in building an  enabling business environment, leveraging private investment 
support, providing access to finance to increase productivity and increasing market opportunities in Lesotho’s 
horticulture subsector.  The Bank has also supported the preparation of the Lesotho Climate Smart Agricultural 
Profile which provides an overview of the agricultural challenges in Lesotho and recommends country-specific 
climate smart agricultural practices that can help the country adapt to and mitigate climate change.  
 


13. The proposed Lesotho Climate Smart Agriculture Project (LCSAP) is being prepared at the request of the 
Government of Lesotho to contribute to its efforts in developing a climate smart agricultural sector.  The 
proposed project, an IDA credit in the amount of US$50 million and a Japanese Policy and Human Resources 
Development (PHRD) grant of US$2.0 million aims to harness the triple wins of CSA in Lesotho’s agri-food sector, 
i.e., improved productivity, increased adaptive capacity to climate risks and reduced greenhouse gas emissions.  
Through the provision of technical assistance and investment support, the proposed project would introduce and 
scale up best practices in CSA and sustainable land management thereby mainstreaming climate and 
environmental considerations into agriculture as well incentivize a shift from uncompetitive maize monocropping 
to high potential value chains, all of which are expected to result in positive outcomes of enhanced climate 
resilience, increased commercialization, food security, job creation, improved rural livelihoods and improved 
nutritional outcomes.  

 
 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
Development Objective(s) (From PAD)  
The development objective of the project is to support increased adoption of climate smart agricultural technologies in 
Lesotho's agriculture, enhanced commercialization and improved dietary diversity among targeted beneficiaries. 
 
 

Key Results 

• Land area brought under climate-smart agriculture and sustainable landscape management  

• Household Commercialization levels (value of produce sold as a % of value of produce 

• Farmers adopting improved agricultural practices 

• Households with increased dietary diversity (disaggregated by women and children) 
 
 
D. Project Description  

 
 

25. The project will build on the achievements and lessons learned under SADP as well as the Lesotho Climate 
Smart Investment Plan (CSIP).  Through a robust, multi-stakeholder process, the CSIP has developed a normative 
vision and CSA goals for Lesotho’s agriculture sector and pathways for achieving the vision and goals. It has 
prioritized key policy actions and investments towards building a productive, climate-resilient and low-
emissions agriculture sector in Lesotho.  The CSA goals, developed under the three pillars of CSA, call for, inter 
alia, increasing yields of major crops, reducing losses across agricultural value chains, including post-harvest 
losses, increasing arable land under stress-tolerant crops, conservation agriculture, and agroforestry as well as 
reduced livestock emissions.  Strategies for achieving these goals include measures reflected in project design, 
i.e. climate resilience and nutrition security (such as agricultural diversification, CSA practices at the farm level, 
stress tolerant crops); commercialization (agricultural value chain, market infrastructure development) and 
capacity development (knowledge development, integrate weather and market advisories using ICT).     
 
26. The following four components are envisaged under the project: (i) Promoting Climate-Resilient 
Agriculture; (ii) Improving Agricultural Commercialization and Nutrition; (iii) Project Management, Coordination 
and Monitroing and Evaluation; and (iv) Contingency Emergency Response.  


Component 1: Scaling Up Climate-Smart Agricultural Practices and Advisory Services (Total Cost: US$20.0 
million) 

27. This component aims at strengthening the adaptive capacity of smallholder farmers to adjust and modify 
their production systems to minimize the potential future impacts from climate variability. The overall goal is to 
enhance climate resilience through solutions that improve soil health, increase water use efficiency, and 
increase farm productivity and crop diversification. The component focuses on: (i) capacity building for scaling‐
up the adoption of climate‐smart agriculture technologies by farmers and enhancing farm management 
practices aimed at improving soil health, water‐use efficiency, crop diversification, and farm productivity; (ii) 
promoting a more efficient use of surface water accompanied with a more sustainable use of groundwater, 
leading to improved availability and quality of water at the farm level; and (iii) improving access to climate and 
market advisory services through ICT, thereby strengthening farmers’ adaptation and resilience.   
 
Component 2: Improving Agricultural Commecialization and Nutrition (US$30.0 million of which IDA 

US$23.0 million; PHRD Grant US$2.0 million; Beneficiary Contribution US$5.0 million) 

 
28. The objective of this component is to support the development of high potential value chains (VCs) in 
Lesotho’s agricultural sector by strengthening backward and forward linkages within selected VCs with overall 
aim of promoting diversification from uncompetitive maize monocropping to high value cash crops and 
sustainable livestock production animal husbandry, improving productivity, quality, value addition and market 
linkages towards increased agricultural commercialization and improved nutrition.   
 
29. Component interventions will foster the integration of a greater number of smallholder producers that 
dominate Lesotho’s rural landscape in potentially remunerative VCs, promote sustainable intensification of 
production through adoption of  CSA and environmentally friendly agricultural technologies supported under 
Component 1, incentivize contract farming, strengthen horizontal alliances and encourage farmers to establish 
producer groups, strengthen vertical alliances by building trusted commercial partnerships between farmers 
and private agri-businesses and drive enterprise operations towards more lucrative domestic and export 
markets.  Activities under the component are expected to result in the positive outcomes of job creation, 
improved beneficiary incomes, better nutritional outcomes and increased economic opportunities for women 
and youth in the rural sector.   
 
30. The component will finance services to support the formation of new as well as strengthen the existing 
(e.g., those established under SADP-1) farmer groups in Lesotho’s agriculture sector.  Special attention will be 
accorded to the need and interests of women and youth6.  Where feasible, the formation and strengthening of 
horizontal alliances will draw on the Smallholder Horticulture Empowerment Project (SHEP7) approach 
developed by the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA).  This approach shifts smallholder thinking from 
subsistence farming to farming as a business by training farmers to conduct their own market surveys to identify 
local crops with potential for commercialization; training them to grow these crops profitably; organizing 
stakeholder forums to exchange information with other like-minded farmers, input suppliers and potential 
buyers; and by helping them to build good relations with these market agents.  


31. Two matching grant programs are envisaged under the component: grants up to US$30,000 for 
smallholder farmers for increased productivity and grants ranging from US$30,000 to US$100,000 to agri-
enterprises for post-harvest infrastructure and management.  All grants will require an equity contribution: 25 
percent for the smaller grants and 40 percent for the larger grants.  The procedures and selection criteria used 
for both matching grant programs will be detailed in a Grant Manual which will be prepared in a manner 
satisfactory to the Bank. The Grant Manual will specify implementation arrangements of the Matching Grant 
Programs and include appropriate technical, fiduciary, environmental and social safeguards provisions to ensure 
that the grant funds will be used for intended purposes only. It will also include the Bank’s Anti-Corruption 
Guidelines and consequences should the agreed commitments not be met. Any changes to the Grant Manual 
during project implementation will require prior Bank approval. The PMU will be responsible for administering 
the Grant Scheme. 
 
32. Towards improved nutrition, the project will support a broad advocacy campaign to increase the 
knowledge among the people of Lesotho of the benefits of dietary diversity. In addition to media campaigns, 
the project will finance the development of industry guidelines for sugar, salt, and fat content, nutrition 
fortification in food products, and labelling through stakeholder consultations. This work will be coordinated by 
the Food and Nutrition Coordination Office (FNCO) in collaboration with CGIAR and other partners. Activities to 
enhance knowledge on diets and nutrition will include nutrition education and demonstrations on production, 
processing, cooking demonstrations, food safety and storage.  The project will also provide grants to individuals 
for increasing household-level production and consumption of safe and nutritious foods. This activity will target 
women to increase their capacity to feed their families a diversified diet through the consumption of inter alia, 
a variety of fruits and vegetables as well as protein-rich food such as eggs and meat. Grants will be provided for 
cultivation of horticulture products as well as purchase and rearing of small livestock and ruminants.  Grants will 
also be provided for small-scale processing which will generate income opportunities for grant recipients.  Under 
this window, small grants in the size of USD 2,000-20,000 (up to 80 percent of total investment cost) will be 
available for production of nutritious foods and small-scale, nutrition-sensitive processing (e.g. purchase of 
small equipment such as dryers, canning). Women and youth will be given priority under this program.  
 
COMPONENT 3: Project Management, Coordination, Monitoring and Evaluation (US$7.0 million) 
 
33. This component will support project management, coordination, monitoring and evaluation (M&E) of 
project activities.  The existing Project Management Unit (PMU) within the Ministry of Agriculture and Food 
Security will be responsible for project implementation including fiduciary aspects (including audits); knowledge 
management/communication (including public awareness campaigns); grievance redress mechanism; citizen 
engagement; and monitoring the implementation of safeguard related measures. It will finance PMU staff 
related costs (training etc.), goods, equipment and vehicles, incremental operating costs, 
assessments/analyses/studies for preparation of future projects/operations, and other eligible expenses 
associated with overall project implementation. Support will also be provided for social/results/impact surveys 
at project mid-term as well as project completion. Additional periodic surveys will be supported to improve 
project implementation, for example to assess and improve women and youth participation. The monitoring 
and evaluation (M&E) system will be strengthened to improve the efficiency of data collection, analysis, 
evaluation and reporting.  The capacity of the PMU will be enhanced by hiring additional technical and 
administrative staff as needed,  

 
COMPONENT 4: Contingency Emergency Response Component (US$0.0 MILLION) 


 
34. A Contingency Emergency Response Component (CERC) with zero allocation to partially cover emergency 
response via implementation of key activities by the appropriate agencies to respond to the emergency. The 
CERC could also be used to channel additional funds should they become available as a result of an eligible 
emergency. 
 

 
E. Implementation 

 
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 

 
35. Project oversight. The project will be implemented under the direct oversight of Principal Secretary 
MAFS. A Project Management Committee (PMC) that was established under SADP will be maintained given the 
multi-sectoral nature of project interventions. The PMC will include representatives from several ministries 
such as Ministry of Finance (MoF), Ministry of Development Planning (MoDP), Ministry of Agriculture and Food 
Security (MAFS), Ministry of Forestry and Land Reclamation (MFLR), Ministry of Trade & Industry, Cooperatives 
and Marketing (MTICM), Ministry of Environment and Tourism (MoET), Ministry of Local Government and 
Chieftainship (MLGC). The PMC, which is an extension of the Technical Working Group formed during project 
preparation of the ongoing SADP will review all project reports and Annual Work Plans and Budgets (AWPB). 
The PMC will meet quarterly with the Project Manager acting as the Secretary to the PMC. 

 
36. Project Implementation. The existing Project Management Unit (PMU) within the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Food Security (MAFS)will be responsible for project implementation including fiduciary aspects 
(including audits); knowledge management/communication (including public awareness campaigns); 
grievance redress mechanism; citizen engagement; and monitoring the implementation of safeguard related 
measures. It will finance PMU staff related costs (training etc.), goods, equipment and vehicles, incremental 
operating costs, assessments / analyses / studies for preparation of future projects/operations, and other 
eligible expenses associated with overall project implementation. Support will also be provided for 
social/results/impact surveys at project mid-term as well as project completion. Additional periodic surveys 
will be supported to improve project implementation, for example to assess and improve women and youth 
participation. The monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system will be strengthened to improve the efficiency of 
data collection, analysis, evaluation and reporting. 

 
 
 
 .    
F. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 

The Project will be undertaken in all the ten districts of Lesotho–Teyateyaneg, Butha-Buthe, Leribe, 
Mafeteng, Maseru, Mohale’s Hoek, Mokhotlong, Qacha’s Nek, Quthing and Thaba-Tseka. Lesotho is 
predominantly mountainous, with the highlands and mountain zones covering approximately 59 percent of 
the total land area. This land is mostly characterized by steep slopes with fragile soil formations which are 
extensively degraded. The highlands cover approximately 15 percent of the country, while the lowlands and 
Senqu (Orange) River Valley make up approximately 17 percent and 9 percent of the country, respectively. 
The cultivable land is largely confined to the lowlands and highlands along the Western border and the 


Senqu River valley in the south, the latter being densely populated and resulting in much pressure on 
natural resources. Land degradation in various forms is a dominant landscape feature in the country, and 
inherent infertile soils affect the productivity of both arable and rangelands. Lesotho is highly susceptible to 
climate-related events such as frost, drought, strong winds, snow, hailstorms and floods, all of which have a 
devastating effect on agricultural productivity, including crop failure and increased incidences of invasive 
plants and infestation by pests. Specific geographical locations for the proposed sub-projects have not been 
identified yet but will be selected on a demand-driven basis during the implementation of the Project. Site-
specific environmental and social assessments will be carried out during implementation and biophysical 
characteristics comprehensively described. The designs of the sub-projects will also incorporate climate 
resilience engineering measures and take into consideration the various environmental conditions which 
could exacerbate impacts on the natural resource base. 

 
 

SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The environmental risks of the Project are moderate 
given the potential adverse but manageable impacts 
likely to be generated from the construction and 
operation of small-scale irrigation and drainage 
schemes. The project will finance minor 
rehabilitation works, the purchase and installation of 
on-farm pipeline systems and irrigation auxiliaries, 
irrigation canal and head work repair, provision of 
pressure pipes and network repairs. The project will 
also finance the rehabilitation of existing pump 
stations and construction of water harvesting and 
distribution reservoirs and where feasible also 
establishment and repair of existing vertical wells 
(boreholes). The total command area (hectares) for 
rehabilitation of the on-farm irrigation infrastructure 
is not known, but will be determined from the 
recommendations of the Irrigation Master Plan 



 

currently being developed with full participation of 
key stakeholders, including smallholder farmers who 
will directly benefit from the Project. Key 
environmental impacts associated with the 
construction and operation of irrigation schemes 
include (a) changes to the low flow regime of rivers 
which may have significant negative impacts on 
downstream users, (b) changing hydrological regime 
associated with irrigation schemes may alter the 
capacity of the environment to assimilate water 
soluble pollutants, (c) excessive use of both natural 
and chemical fertilizers may result in excess of 
nutrients which might have impacts on water bodies 
and human health, (d) areas with water tables that 
have a low hydraulic gradient are at risk from 
salinization, (e) reduction in low flows and flood 
flows may alter the river morphology, reducing the 
capacity to transport sediment and thereby causing 
a buildup of sediments in slower moving river 
reaches, (f) irrigation schemes may fail if the 
sediment load of water supply is higher than the 
capacity of the irrigation canals to transport 
sediment loads, (g) irrigation schemes may have 
ecological impacts, particularly in wetland areas 
affecting natural habitats. 
 
The Resettlement Policy Framework has been 
prepared to  guide the PMU in avoidance, 
minimization and mitigation of any potential 
resettlement impacts associated to rehabilitation of 
irrigation infrastructure and activities related to 
commercialization of agricultural that will require 
land acquisition or restricted access to land and land 
use.The Resettlement Policy Framework has been 
prepared to guide the preparation of Resettlement 
Action Plans 

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No  

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

The policy is triggered. Reduction in natural river 
flow and discharge of polluted return flows from 
irrigation schemes, have potential impacts to 
habitats both within and alongside rivers. Significant 
changes to low flows (+/-20%) will alter micro-
habitats particularly wetlands. 


Forests OP/BP 4.36 No 
The Project will not support sub-projects located 
within forested areas or plantations as defined 
under OP 4.36. Therefore, the policy is not triggered. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The Pest Management Policy is triggered as agro-
chemicals will be used for irrigation subprojects. 
Based on observations from the ongoing Smallholder 
Agriculture Development Project, the risk of 
pesticide use is considered low to moderate due to 
the small quantities of pesticides currently being 
used in the sub-projects. An Integrated Pest 
Management Plan (IPMP) will be prepared to 
provide guidance on the sustainable application of 
fertilizers and pesticides taking into consideration 
the soil type and slope to ensure protection of both 
surface and ground water. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 

The policy is triggered given the likelihood of chance 
finds in conjunction with earth works and/or an 
encounter of graveyard sites from the experience 
implementing infrastructure projects in Lesotho.The 
ESMF will include Physical Cultural Resources 
Management Plan (PCRMP) that includes measures 
for avoiding and mitigating any adverse impacts on 
physical cultural resources as well as providing 
Chance Find Procedures (CFP).  The CFP will entail 
measures to screen for and manage potential 
impacts on cultural heritage or property that could 
be affected by project activities. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 
The policy will not be triggered as there are no 
indigenous peoples in Lesotho. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

OP 4.12 will be triggered. The project will likely 
expand the irrigation service area; however, this will 
only be confirmed once the Irrigation Master Plan 
has been prepared and investments to be supported 
under SADP-2 are identified for support during 
project implementation. At this stage while it is 
unknown whether there will be any land acquisitions 
as a direct result of the project, there might be 
restricted access to resources (whether related to 
private or communal resources) related to 
rehabilitation of irrigation infrastructure and 
therefore Involuntary Resettlement OP 4.12 is 
triggered to address any adverse impacts.  Since the 
exact location of these structures is not known, a 
Resettlement Policy Framework will be prepared, 
consulted and disclosed prior to appraisal. The 



 

Resettlement Policy Framework will guide the 
preparation of Resettlement Action Plans. The 
Resettlement Policy Framework will guide the PMU 
in avoidance, minimization and mitigation of any 
potential resettlement impact. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 Yes 

This policy has been triggered as a precautionary 
measure. At this stage, Tthere is insufficient 
information to determine whether irrigation 
schemes and drainage canals would rely on water 
from existing dams or new small dams would need 
to be supported under the project. An exclusion 
clause will be included in the ESMF indicating that 
the project would not support activities that are high 
risk and trigger a full environmental assessment. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

Yes 

Exception notification to be sent to riparian states 
will be requested since the proposed small-scale 
irrigation schemes will not adversely change the 
quantity and quality of water flows to other riparian 
states.  In addition, the proposed schemes will not 
be adversely affected by the use of water 
downstream by the other riparian states. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 

The project will not finance activities located in any 
known areas under territorial dispute as defined in 
OP 7.60. Therefore, the 
policy is not triggered. 

 
 

KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Potential environmental impacts are anticipated under Component 1: Support for Irrigation and Component 2: 
Agricultural Commercialization. The provision of grants may result in agricultural intensification and increased 
application of fertilizers and pesticides by grant recipients.  The grants will be awarded based on screening criteria set 
forth in the ESMF/ IPMP currently under preparation. The screening criteria as set forth in the ESMF will help to  
screen out project activities corresponding to a category A, and to provide adequate due diligence on a case-by-case 
basis for the grants. The approach outlined in the ESMF/IPMP will apply to the matching grants, irrigation 
rehabilitation and any activity that would be proposed to be financed within the project or the subsequent AFs.  
The environmental impacts associated with the grants program and irrigation rehab should be readily mitigated 
through sound construction practices (dust and noise, waste management, material sourcing) while the operational 
impacts can be mitigated through environmentally friendly farming approaches (manure management, waste 
disposal, emissions from food processing facilities, improved water resource use). 
Under Component 1rehabilitation of the irrigation schemes is foreseen to lead to better management of water 



resources. This activity will potentially entail minor construction related impacts that can be mitigated through a site-
specific ESMP.  The overall project would lead to an increase in agricultural practices therefore having implications on 
pest management, which should apply and follow the Integrated Pest Management Plan as prepared under the ESMF.   
 
The potential social issues are likely to be on restriction to land use and access and possible land acquisition for the 
rehabilitation of irrigation infrastructure and agricultural commercialization activities. The project will likely expand 
the irrigation service area; however, this will only be confirmed once the Irrigation Master Plan has been prepared and 
investments to be supported under SADP-2 are identified for support during project implementation. At this stage 
while it is unknown whether there will be any land acquisitions as a direct result of the project, there might be 
restricted access to resources (whether related to private or communal resources) related to rehabilitation of 
irrigation infrastructure and activities under commercialization of agriculture, as a result Involuntary Resettlement OP 
4.12 is triggered to address any adverse impacts.  Since the exact scope of works for rehabilitation of irrigation 
infrastructure and commercialization of agriculture activities is not known, a Resettlement Policy Framework has been 
prepared for the project. The Resettlement Policy Framework will guide the preparation of place specific Resettlement 
Action Plans. The Resettlement Policy Framework will guide the PMU in avoidance, minimization and mitigation of any 
potential resettlement impact. 
 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
There are no long term or indirect impacts associated with the project, beyond the potential increase in agricultural 
production and therefore implications on pest management, where the  Integrated Pest Management Plan as 
prepared under the ESMF should apply. 
 
There are no long term adverse social impacts anticipated for the project, however, the project is expected to have 
significant positive effects on households, by improving dietary diversity in households, increasing climate resilience of 
farmers and promote adoption of climate smart agricultural technologies for enhanced agricultural commercialization. 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. 
NA 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower 
capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Government of Lesotho has prepared an ESMF/IPMP and RFP.    
The project will be implemented by the Project Management Unit (PMU) under the MAFS that is currently 
implementing SADP.   The PMU has demonstrated limited capacity in assessing environmental and social (E&S) risks 
and impacts, developing appropriate mitigation measures and implementing and monitoring E&S aspects of the 
project. Currently, it does not have full-time and qualified E&S safeguards specialists to oversee the monitoring and 
implementation of safeguards. Before LCSAP appraisal, the PMU has prepared a comprehensive Environmental and 
Social Management Framework (ESMF) and Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and carried out stakeholder 
consultations in line with both the Lesotho Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) law and regulations and the World 
Bank Safeguard Policies. The ESMF and RPF will provide clear procedures and methodologies for carrying out site-
specific E&S assessments, review, approval and implementations of physical investments (sub-projects) to be financed 
by LCSAP.  During implementation, the PMU will be responsible for carrying out site-specific E&S impacts assessment 
for each sub-project including the associated Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) and Resettlement 
Action Plans (RAPs) according to procedures outlined in the ESMF and RPF. The site-specific ESMPs and RAPs will be 
included in the bidding documents for any civil works to be implemented. The PMU will ensure that all the mitigation 

 

measures recommended in the site-specific ESIAs and RAPs are implemented, monitored and reported in progress 
reports submitted to the Bank.  The Bank will also work with the PMU in recruiting full-time dedicated and qualified 
E&S specialists whose responsibilities will be to screen sub-projects, determine the level and degree of E&S risks and 
impacts, prepare site-specific ESMPs and RAPs, and ensure that mitigation and management measures are 
implemented, monitored and reported in progress reports. The E&S specialists would also train/re-train PMU staff and 
district agriculture officers in the implementation of appropriate mitigation measures for types of impacts expected. 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, 
with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders include representatives of the Project Management Unit and the Ministry of Agriculture and 
Food Security (MAFS), farmers associations, entrepreneurs, local authorities, irrigation schemes, as well as the 
members of the local communities where the project will be implemented. The ESMF/IPMP, RPF have been subjected 
to public consultations and disclosure before appraisal while each of the subsequent ESMPs and RAPs prepared for 
each specific subproject will also be subjected to disclosure and public consultations. The ESMF/IPMP and RFP will be 
disclosed through the MAFS website and Bank's external website. 
 
 
























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Serbia: Competitive Agriculture Project (CAP) (P167634) 

 
 

  
Jan 08, 2019 Page 1 of 13  

     

 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document (PID) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 06-Jun-2019 | Report No: PIDISDSC25635 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Serbia P167634  Serbia: Competitive 
Agriculture Project 
(SCAP) (P167634) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA Sep 02, 2019 Nov 21, 2019 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Finance Ministry of Agriculture, 
Forestry and Water 
Management 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
Improve market access for small and medium agricultural producers in Serbia 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 50.00 

Total Financing 50.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 50.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) 50.00 

   
 

Environmental and Social Risk Classification Concept Review Decision 

Moderate  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
Other Decision (as needed) 

 
 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

 
1. Following years of recession and slow growth, the Serbian economy expanded by 1.8 percent, on average, over 
the previous three years (2015–2017), while a stronger growth of 3.5 percent was estimated for 2018. Over the previous 
three years, growth started to recover on the back of higher investment (average annual growth of 8.3 percent) and strong 
growth of exports (up 10.7 percent annually in real terms). Consumption recovered as well, but at a slower pace (at 1 
percent annually in real terms). Growth of the industry and services sectors contributed most to the overall growth of the 
economy over the previous three years, while agriculture had a negative contribution to growth in 2015 and 2017. For 
2018, growth was broad-based with all three major sectors growing faster than last year. As a result, the growth in 2018 
reached 4.2 percent. The medium-term growth projections depend crucially on deeper and timelier structural reforms 
and progress with European Union (EU) accession. 
 
2. The Government of Serbia (GOS) has implemented a successful fiscal adjustment but economic vulnerabilities 
remain. In 2014, the GOS adopted an ambitious fiscal consolidation and structural reform program supported by the 
International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank. In the short term, the program focused on the control of 
aggregate wage and pension expenditures, improvements in tax administration, and reductions in subsidies to state 
owned enterprises. The implementation of these measures led to the reduction of budget deficits in 2015–2016 and 
budget surplus of 1.2 percent of gross domestic product (GDP) in 2017 and 0.5 percent of GDP in 2018, underpinned by 
strong revenue collection and lower than planned public spending ensuing, among others, from the interest payment 
savings and under-execution of public investment. As a result of prudent fiscal policies, public debt continues to decline 
and stood at 54.3 percent of GDP (at the end of December 2018), and is expected to continue declining during 2019, albeit 
at a slower pace. However, the country remains vulnerable to spillovers from regional developments and market volatility, 
thus ensuring fiscal sustainability and supporting private sector development, growth, and formal employment are 
important for Serbia’s economic performance in the long term. 
 
3. Over this same period, the prospects for accession to the EU provided an impetus for a broad spectrum of 
reforms. In November 2007, Serbia initiated a Stabilization and Association Agreement with the EU. In 2012, it was granted 
an EU candidate status. Since the formal start of the accession negotiations in 2014, progress has evolved largely following 
its predicted trajectory. As of December 2018, Serbia opened 16 out of 35 chapters of the EU’s Acquis Communautaire, of 
which two are provisionally closed. 
 
4. Regional disparities of living standards are evident. There is a high degree of variability of living standards within 
the country, with 25 percent of the population of Serbia (close to 1.8 million people) being at risk of poverty. Municipalities 
in the Southern and Eastern part of Serbia have high poverty incidence as compared to the rest of the country, with risk 
of poverty rates ranging between 13 and 63 percent within these regions. Better understanding of these geographic 
disparities can help the Government of Serbia design and target policies and programs to support growth, jobs, poverty 
reduction and social inclusion.   
 

Sectoral and Institutional Context1 
 
5. Agriculture plays an important role in the economy of Serbia. Agriculture is the third largest sector, accounting 
for around 6 percent of GDP and 19 percent of formal employment, and the most important export sector, representing 
23 percent of total exports. The impressive growth of exports of both primary and processed food products provides 
evidence of the competitiveness of Serbian production in international markets and of significant potential to further 
leverage the sector’s growth to create jobs and income. From 2005 to 2016, the country’s exports of primary food and 
beverage products increased 148 percent and of processed food products increased 83 percent. In 2016, Serbia 
accumulated an agricultural trade surplus of US$650 million in primary products and of US$525 million in processed food 
and beverage products. 
 
6. Agriculture is undergoing a process of structural transformation towards a modern agri-food system. Primary 
agriculture, an important source of income and employment in the past, has diminished its contribution to the rapidly 
diversifying economy of Serbia. The declining share of primary agriculture in GDP and employment signals a process of 
transformation that provides ample opportunities for developing a modern, dynamic and more competitive agri-food 
system, able to generate better jobs up and downstream and improve income and livelihoods in the rural space. 
Improvements in labor and land productivity have contributed towards the expansion of agricultural output in Serbia. This 
is important as it leads to an increase in the supply of raw materials at lower costs to agri-processors, which in turn 
supports a much larger scale of operation, promotes horizontal integration, and reduces overall costs, all factors that 
increase the competitiveness of the whole agri-food system, as the country prepares for EU accession. Improving 
productivity is more than just raising yields and decreasing costs; it is also about raising food quality, moving into higher 
value products by using improved technology and practices2. 
 
7. Sector growth is geographically differentiated and narrow based in terms of composition of production. Growth 
patterns in agriculture are influenced by regional disparities in sector performance and composition, with a positive sector 
growth in the Northwestern parts of the country and contraction of production in Southeastern Serbia. The autonomous 
province of Vojvodina, in the North, is the key driver of agricultural output in Serbia, with 43 percent contribution to 
national agricultural GDP (in 2014) with large scale production of commodities. Between 2003 and 2013, crop output in 
Serbia expanded, mainly due to increased production in Vojvodina, as the other three regions recorded only a marginal 
expansion or even a decline (South and East Serbia). Livestock output declined over the same period, with all regions, 
except Vojvodina, recording contraction rates between 24 percent (Sumadija and West Serbia) and 33 percent (South and 
East Serbia). In the same period, livestock output in Vojvodina increased by around 13 percent.  
 
8. Despite regional comparative advantages, structural factors underpin the regional disparities. There are 
important structural limitations to agriculture in Serbia - very small and fragmented land holdings, ageing and declining 
farm labor force, low efficiency and productivity, low use of technology, high labor intensity, low financial liquidity and 
capital availability for investment (especially for smallholders) and outdated production management practices. Despite 
all of these, economic opportunities exist in rural areas. Cereals, vegetable oils and edible fruit have historically driven 
growth of agricultural production and exports, with Vojvodina’s larger producers benefiting the most. Only one percent 
of the farms in Serbia have 50 hectares or more of land and most of them are in Vojvodina3, while farmers who own less 

                                            
1 This section borrows from the World Bank Group Sector Study “New Opportunities and Old Constraints: The Context for Agriculture Sector 
Development in Serbia” by Garry Christensen (2016) as well as from a recently completed Agriculture Public Expenditure Review by Demetris 
Psaltopoulos and Svetlana Edmeades. 
2 World Bank. 2019. Harvesting Prosperity: Technology and productivity Growth in Agriculture”.  
3 Only one percent of farms in South Serbia cultivate more than 50ha of land, while in Vojvodina, 10 percent of farms cultivate more than 50ha of 
land.  



than 5 hectares of land account for 78 percent of all holdings and 25 percent of the total cultivated area in Serbia and are 
concentrated in the South and East Serbia.  
 
9. Broadening the scope for sector growth to include small and medium scale producers may be key to sector 
transformation. Although fragmented farm structures are often perceived as a challenge to scale economies and 
competitiveness, with high transaction costs preventing the many small producers from engaging in markets, in the case 
of Serbia, recent public expenditure analysis shows that smallholders4 are the most technically efficient producers in the 
country and hence, supporting their development can improve sector growth. Hence, consolidation at the product level, 
through aggregation and economic clusters, may hold the key to development, enabling the specialization of small 
efficient units and their integration into broader value chains. Middle size farms, which are often seen as the drivers of 
growth in the sector, are found to be the worst performers in terms of technical efficiency in Serbia, posing a question on 
the adequacy of the enabling environment for their agricultural development. These producer segments also specialize in 
agricultural products that are not scale intensive yet can hold important value proposition and drive the generation of 
jobs and growth in rural areas. Improving the enabling environment to support the productive inclusion of small and 
medium scale producers can drive the process of structural transformation of agri-food systems in Serbia.  
 
10. Rethinking and redirecting policy instruments and incentives can increase the speed of sector transformation. 
Agricultural budget support has been aligned with the EU budget support framework, and a Directorate for Agrarian 
Payments has been established to administer national direct payments (subsidies) and rural development investments 
(both national and EU Instrument for Pre-Accession and Assistance for Rural Development (IPARD) grants). Subsidies and 
transfers dominate agricultural spending (2011-2017) and, on average, account for 82 percent of sector expenditure. They 
are found to negatively affect sector productivity and efficiency and are thought to contribute towards freezing the current 
dual farm structure. Emphasis on area and headage payments5 reduce the incentives to increase productivity, preserve 
farm structures dominated by smaller farms and do not contribute to the acceleration of the structural transformation 
process6. Further, coupled output subsidies distort the allocation of productive resources. When the above are combined 
with the low (at least until 2017) level of funds dedicated to rural development, including the provision of public goods 
(agricultural infrastructure, R&D, advisory services, etc.), it creates a policy framework which constrains farm restructuring 
and the potential of smaller and medium-sized farms, that currently dominate Serbian agriculture, to increase their size, 
modernize production systems, benefit from expanding markets and contribute to a competitive agri-food sector and to 
a vibrant rural economy. 
 
11. Despite ample EU resources, productive investments, through rural development grants, are underutilized. 
IPARD funds in the amount of EUR230 million (including national co-financing) have been allocated to Serbia for the 
programming period of 2014-2020 in annual instalments. Serbia has received accreditation for 2 of the 11 IPARD 
measures7. Although the scope of these measures is broad, actual number of beneficiaries is limited, with most small and 
medium scale producers not being able to take advantage of this productive support due to the complex application 
process and the requirement for upfront financing. A key constraint in the uptake of IPARD grant support is the complexity 
of the application process, due to the numerous requirements which applicants often can’t fulfill, added to limited capacity 
in the Directorate for Agrarian Payments for review and approval. In addition, a limiting factor is the requirement of an 
upfront payment of the full grant amount by the applicant, which assumes availability of financial resources, with 

                                            
4 In the context of Serbia, small producers are those with an economic size of up to 8,000 euros; medium producers are those with an economic size 
between 8,000 and 25,000 euros. 
5 Criticized for not relying on objective and valid baseline indicators, as well as the poor definition of eligibility criteria (Bogdanov et al., 2017) 
6 It is noted that leased agricultural land is excluded from farm support (Bogdanov, 2016). 
7 Accredited measures in 2018 are Investments in Physical Assets of Agricultural Holdings and Investments in Physical Assets for Processing and 
Marketing of Agriculture and Fisheries Products; 2 more are planned for accreditation in 2019 - Farm diversification and business development and 
Technical assistance; and 2 additional ones for 2020 – LIDER program for local development and organic production.  



reimbursement of 50 percent after all investment criteria have been fulfilled, ex post. This requirement alone makes IPARD 
grants difficult to access for the majority of small and medium scale producers in Serbia. 
 
12. National program resources can shift the sector equilibrium from low productivity to high value for small and 
medium scale producers in Serbia and encourage convergence of the National and EU programs over time. For rural 
development grants, boundaries are established between eligible beneficiaries of the national rural development program 
and those eligible to apply for IPARD support, based on either size or production potential. All producers not eligible for 
IPARD support, are eligible for national program support. Reaching out with national investment funds to the small and 
medium producers of Serbia, especially in the South and Southeast of Serbia, can improve these producers’ productive 
inclusion and competitiveness, and enable them to actively participate in the process of structural transformation of 
agriculture in Serbia and preparing them for EU accession.  
 
13. Improving financial inclusion for productive investments can stimulate broader private sector participation. 
While around two thirds of adults in rural areas in Serbia have accounts with financial institutions, only 14% of them have 
loans to operate, start or expand farm and small business activities. Most medium and larger farmers and medium/larger 
SMEs have access to finance as banks have the right expertise, systems and products to serve these agricultural segments 
profitably. However, smaller farmers have very limited access to bank financing and mostly rely on off takers and input 
suppliers to finance their inputs. This type of value chain financing does not cover longer term funding for equipment, 
machinery and is currently decreasing as these players try to re-focus on their core business. The long-term goal is the 
development of efficient, competitive markets, producing to EU standards which requires better inclusion of small-scale 
producers (among them women and youth) in modern supply chains, an increase in investments in machinery, equipment 
and knowledge as well as the modernization of processing and marketing. For this to be achieved, however, public funds 
are not sufficient resources and bank financing can play a catalyst role in the further development and competitiveness 
of the sector. 
 
14. A combination of targeted public incentives and private financing can improve sector productivity and 
competitiveness. A policy mix that focuses on the improvement of competitiveness and value addition capacity of the 
agri-food system in Serbia can have important sectoral and economy-wide growth effects by inducing positive spillovers 
to other economic sectors and contributing to employment, poverty reduction and economic prosperity of rural areas. 
The public expenditure analysis has shown that direct payments do not promote technical efficiency and productivity 
growth and slow down the structural transformation in Serbian agriculture. Reducing the direct payments envelope and 
significantly increasing the rural development one (including advisory and farm extension services and R&D) is therefore 
paramount for improving the performance of the sector. To enable that, a different set of financial mechanisms may be 
required, to enable small and medium scale producers to access finance and participate in productive decisions, such as 
matching grants8 and public guarantee funds that reduce the risk to producers and other financial institutions, hence 
stimulating financial and productive inclusion. At present, small farmers do not have financial records, do not have 
business plans, they find bank requirements challenging and, most importantly, they lack collateral. Matching grants and 
technical assistance (TA) can create the conditions for banks to finance investments of farmers that are not their typical 
clients. Matching grants can create the required equity for the banks and TA can ensure bankability of the business plan 

                                            
8 Matching grants are an instrument aimed at promoting private sector development which has been used extensively over the past years, in 
particular for agriculture development. A matching grant is defined as a one-off, non-reimbursable transfer to project beneficiaries, for a specific 
purpose, based on the condition that the recipient makes a contribution for the same purpose. These grants can be used for a variety of activities 
including technical assistance, investment in assets or financing of working capital. Total grant financing dedicated to agriculture reaches 650 million 
USD or almost twice the volume of those outside of agriculture. In addition, the proportion of matching grants projects supporting agriculture has 
significantly increased in the 2000s. Recent interest for this instrument to support agriculture might be due to growing concerns about other forms 
of support which distort financial markets such as interest rate subsidies, as well to the compatibility of such agricultural subsidies with World Trade 
Organization requirements.  




and prepare the client to approach the bank. Finally, if commercial banks require additional safeguards for their 
investments, they will be able to access credit guarantees to be soon provided by the Development Credit Authority 
(USAID Guarantee Program) and European Investment Fund (EIF) including risk sharing through a new IFC project. 
 
15. Greater resilience to climate and market risks can further boost the overall sector performance. The reliance on 
agricultural commodities increases Serbia’s exposure to price volatility, which added to the increasing number of extreme 
climatic events in Serbia (droughts and floods) further exacerbates agricultural growth volatility. Projected increases in 
temperatures and declines in precipitation will affect rainfed crops, which dominate Serbian agriculture. Production is 
concentrated in the north (Vojvodina), where crops are vulnerable to decreasing precipitation and increasing 
temperatures, primarily during the summer growing season. Rainfed maize may decline by as much as 58 percent due to 
reduced rainfall and higher temperatures in summer. Increases in temperature have already brought about increases in 
fungal diseases and pests that reduce crop production. Cereals and fruits are the most important agricultural products in 
terms of production area and economic output; fruit production is particularly vulnerable to spring frost, hail, extremely 
low winter temperatures, low precipitation and/or heavy rainfall events9. Hence, diversifying the sector base has 
important climate mitigation (reducing risks) and climate adaption (improving resilience) implications for the country.  
 
16. As Serbia advances in the process of sector transformation and alignment to EU acquis, the effectiveness of 
public service delivery becomes critical to improving sector performance. Serbia has committed to align its national 
agricultural policy to the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) of the EU by the date of accession. To this end, the country is 
required to have all the necessary systems in place to manage and receive funds from the EU and to make payments to 
beneficiaries in Serbia in accordance with EU rules and procedures. An Integrated Administration and Control System 
(IACS), along with other tools, are necessary for the efficient utilization and monitoring of support funds. Systems for 
monitoring results (and not only expenditures) will also be required by the reformed CAP, starting in 2020. EU membership 
unlocks significant financial assistance to farmers under the EU’s CAP, yet it also imposes stricter food safety and other 
trade-related requirements to agricultural production. Enhancements in digital approaches can improve targeting, 
efficiency of spending, food safety monitoring, as well as support the governance structure of the sector.  The innovation 
environment in Serbia would need to be strengthened and uptake of emerging digital technologies by farmers improved 
to help lower transaction costs and facilitate information access about best farming practices, inputs, prices, access to 
credit and markets. This will improve transparency, reduce innovation hurdles and support an enabling environment for 
productive and financial inclusion of agricultural producers in Serbia. 
 

Relationship to CPF 
 
17. The proposed project is consistent with the Serbia Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for the period of FY16-
20. While the SCD identified agriculture as a priority sector for the twin goals, the CPF did not originally envisage an 
operation because of counterpart readiness. However, engagement with a new team at the MAFWM demonstrates a new 
strategic drive and opportunity to make an impact. Therefore, as part of the program update permitted under the PLR, 
the Bank decided to re-engage in this sector. Through productive investments targeting small and medium scale producers 
and strengthening the information systems of the agricultural sector, the project aims at increasing sector 
competitiveness, while providing economic opportunities in rural areas, as the country moves closer to EU membership. 
The Performance and Learning Review (PLR) of the CPF identifies agriculture as one of the high priorities for the 
Government with an important dimension of shared prosperity. The project is also aligned with the strategic goals of the 
National Agricultural and Rural Development (NARD) strategy for 2014-2024: i) growth of production and income stability; 
ii) growth of competitiveness with adjustments to domestic and foreign markets requirements and technical-technological 


promotion of the sector; iii) sustainable management of resources and environment protection; iv) promotion of quality 
of life in rural areas and poverty reduction; v) efficient management of public policies and promotion of institutional 
framework for development of agriculture and rural development. 
 
 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
18. To improve access to markets and information systems for agricultural producers in Serbia.  
 
This will be achieved through a) improving productivity of small and medium scale farmers by strengthening advisory 
and technical support; b) supporting market access of small and medium scale farmers (including finance and business 
planning capacity); c) improving government systems to strengthen the enabling environment for all agricultural 
producers (including capacity building for the Ministry, information systems, data platform). 
 
Key Results (From PCN) 
 

19. The project will achieve the following results: 
 

(i) Productivity10: Increase in gross value added per utilized agricultural area 
 

(ii) Competitiveness11: Increase in the share of production sold by project beneficiaries 
 

(iii) Financial inclusion12: Number of beneficiaries accessing commercial bank loans for their productive 
investments (disaggregated by gender)  
 

(iv) Use of information systems13: Number of unique users of the integrated information platform (disaggregated 
by gender) 

 
D. Concept Description 

 
A. Concept 
 
20. Scope: The project will support the Government of Serbia with the implementation of the National Agriculture 
and Rural Development Program. This will complement Serbia’s on-going efforts to align its national programs to the EU 
CAP programs. In particular, the project will provide financial and technical support to all productive investments in 
agriculture in Serbia through the national rural development program14 and will not participate in the financing of direct 
payments (subsidies). This delimits the scope of project interventions outside of all IPARD measures that the country has 
been accredited for or plans to be accredited for and puts it in the center of national rural development program.  
 

                                            
10 Improved on-farm productivity (use of better management practices, climate smart agriculture, etc.) 
11 Improved linkages between producers and buyers/markets (volume, quality and uniformity of production, value and volume of sales, market 
segmentation strategies, etc.; building entrepreneurial capacity of the production units) 
12 Improved access to finance to drive the process of value-addition on and off-farm (enable investments in equipment, small infrastructure, technical 
assistance, and other services that improve the competitiveness of the production units) 
13 Improved information systems for decision making at the level of the Ministry of Agriculture Forestry and Water Management (MAFWM) and 
information flow with agricultural producers 
14 In 2018, the program received 8,000 applications from small and medium scale producers.  

21. Beneficiaries: Small and medium scale agricultural production units (including producers, producer groups, 
agribusinesses/agro-processors that can provide direct link to smallholder farmers) that have or can have commercial 
focus and are not covered by accredited IPARD measures. Although large producers will not be directly targeted, the 
project will also benefit them with the enabling environment it will create through the improvements in information 
systems and the financial services provided. Small and medium size producers are defined by the economic size of holding 
expressed in euros of standard output. For the purposes of this project and the context of Serbia, small producers are 
those with an economic size of up to 8,000 euros; medium producers are those with an economic size between 8,000 and 
25,000 euros. 
 

 
Description 
 
22. The project activities are structured into three Components. Component 1 will focus on improving the productive 
and entrepreneurial capacity of small and medium farmers by supporting business and financial planning for productive 
investments, as well as supporting market access and strengthening sector competitiveness. Component 2 will focus on 
improving the capacity of the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Management (MAFWM) to provide core public 
goods for improving sector performance. This includes establishing and information system aligned with EU CAP 
requirements to enable evidence-based policy making and monitoring of results, enhance market information for 
stakeholders and build capacity for regulatory roles aligned with EU CAP. Component 3 will focus on project management. 
 
23. By addressing sector needs at the level of producers (Component 1) and the MAFWM (Component 2), the project 
will support a broader policy reform process in the agriculture sector through: i) improved targeting of policy instruments 
to different typologies of producers, ii) strengthened enabling environment for investment for small and medium 
agricultural producers, by improving the delivery of services to these productive segments (advisory, financial, 
information, etc.), iii) improving the monitoring of public resources and their utilization, as well as sector performance. It 
is expected that this will bring about a significant shift in the utilization of public resources in agriculture from subsidies 
(direct payments) to rural development investments.  
 
 
Component 1: Improving the value-added of agriculture (US$35 million) 
 
24. The objective of this component is to improve the economic performance of small and medium agricultural 
producers in Serbia on- and off-farm. The component will support the building of entrepreneurial capacity of agricultural 
producers through the integration of production decisions with market requirements and technical and financial services. 
Activities will focus on improving land and labor productivity, broaden access to productive assets, technology, 
information, and credit, diversification of agricultural products, and access to markets, including traceability and 
differentiation strategies. Unlocking agricultural finance for productive investments, strengthening productive and 
entrepreneurial capacity of producers, developing short value chains and market linkages will stimulate economic 
activities in rural areas and can lead to the creation of jobs. It will also create capacity for better absorption of IPARD funds 
for improving the rural development of Serbia, while also strengthening alignment to EU CAP. 
 
25. The component is structured into two sub-components: (i) Improving entrepreneurial capacity – focusing on 
capacity building activities required to formulate business plans, investment decisions and financial support, from public 
and private sources; (ii) Improving productivity and competitiveness – comprising investments in equipment and technical 
assistance to support their implementation. The detailed description of the sub-components is provided below.  
 



Sub-component 1.1: Improving productive and entrepreneurial capacity (US$5 million) 
 
26. This sub-component will focus on technical assistance to producers, producer groups and agri-businesses for the 
formulation of business plans that normally bundle three key elements: i) investment in equipment, ii) working capital, 
and iii) technical assitance for productivity improvement and entrepreneurial capacity. The sub-component will finance 
the preparation and implementation of business plans for proposed investments, including: (i) business skills and 
organizational training for small-scale producers; (ii) preparation of subprojects, including information on financial cash 
flow as per bank requirements, including the formulation of matching grants15 for capital investments in equipment, 
machinery, processing units16, packaging, storage, etc., (iii) specific technical studies and consultancies that would 
contribute to the implementation and the execution of approved business plans; (iv) a communication strategy designed 
to raise awareness of and stimulate participation of the SME agribusinesses in the project; (v) support banks with 
developing methodologies suitable for assessing credit for the types of investments and beneficiaries of the project.  
 
27. The scope of the business plan will depend on the capacity of producers and the complexity of the sought 
investment. Activities will take place on- and off-farm. To enable greater participation of potential beneficiaries, emphasis 
will be placed on improving the entrepreneurial capacity of producers by providing technical assistance and seed capital 
for analysis of investment options. The business plans will also include public good/ compliance elemtns (environemntal 
and social aspects, food dafety compliance, etc.). Strict eligibility criteria will be set forth to enable the participation of 
small and medium producers. The selection and eligibility criteria and the governance and management aspects of the 
matching grants will be detailed in a Grant Operational Manual to be formulated during project prepration.  
 
Sub-component 1.2: Improving productivity and competitiveness (US$30 million) 
 
28. This sub-component will focus on improving the productivity and competitiveness of project beneficiaries through 
specific investments, as defined in the business plans and implemented through matching grants (defined in Component 
1). The total cost of the business plan depends on the type of investment, the amount of working capital and the scope of 
the technical assistance. This cost also varies by the productive activity and the typology of the producers. For example, 
in Montenegro (under the MIDAS project), the total cost for agricultural producers ranges between 10,000 and 70,000 
euros, while for agricultural processors it ranges between 50,000 and 250,000 euros. In Kosovo, the range for producers 
ranges between 10,000 and 100,000 euros, while for processors it is between 30,000 and 400,000 euros. The project will 
finance only a share of this cost (through a marching grant of typically 50%), as a one time incentive to leverage private 
investment, including own resources and/or credit. 
 
29. The sub-component will finance i) the use of good environmental and agricultural practices to improve on-farm 
productivity, ii) in on-farm inputs and equipment required for the optimizatoin of production and/or diversification, as 
well as technical advice for the use inputs, technologies, alternatives, etc., iii) support digital agriculture approaches to 
improve productivity on-farm and enhance linkages between producers and markets, iv) support compliance with food 
safety standards, traceability, geographic denomination of origin and other market-related activities as part of the 
improvement of the competitive position of beneficiaries; v) carry out market demand assessments to identify differential 
market potential for products; vi) support beneficiary participation in trade fairs and other events; vii) support the 
commercialization of agricultural products by improving access to medium-term finance, providing start-up capital for 

                                            
15 There is a strong public good argument for using matching grants – stimulate cross compliance (improving enviornmental outcomes), stimulate 
use of innovations, new technologies, development of skills, modernization, horizontal integration, financial inclusion. Through the project, capacity 
for the use of matching grants will be improved in the sector, which can lead to a consecutive better absorption of IPARD grants. 
16 Under IPARD grants, investment grants for processing facilities is only provided for new structures; national rural development program can provide 
investments for rehabilitation and upgrade of existent facilities.  



     

small- and medium-sized farms involved in productive partnerships, and by ensuring the availability of financing for value 
chain support. Considering the high risk of lending to small producers, the project will support the enabling environment 
for de-risking by working with existent public credit guarantee funds. There are various guarantee schemes applicable to 
Serbian agriculture and, in particular, the EIF and DCA17, which the project seeks to leverage as a risk mitigating mechanism 
for crowing-in private investment through lending by commercial banks.  
 
 
Component 2: Improving the capacity of MAFWM to support modern agriculture (US$10 million) 
 
30. The objective of this component is to improve capacity of MAFWM and related agencies to facilitate the enabling 
environment for improved sector performance through evidence-based policy making and provision of public goods, such 
as information systems and open data platforms. A digital platform for decision making18 will benefit all agricultural 
producers of Serbia, whether they apply for support through IPARD or national program or don’t. A unique registry 
system19 would be required to support decision making and to also support pension reform efforts in the country.   
 
Sub-component 2.1: Improving information systems 
 
31. This sub-component will support the Ministry of Agriculture Forestry and Water Management (MAFWM) to 
modernize its information systems and strengthen its decision-making capacity, through the improvement of hardware, 
software and human capacity for information support to the sector. Modernizing the information systems is critical in the 
process of alignment to EU CAP, including sanitary and phytosanitary (SPS) delivery and monitoring, advisory information, 
land parceling (LPIS), paying agency data management, etc. In addition, the project will support a digital producer 
identification card (“one card”) to enable the better monitoring of the access to resources, support services and 
information by all farmers in the country. The project will finance the following: i) technical assistance to improve the 
coordination within and across existing information systems across Directorates and enhance delivery of information for 
decision making at different levels; ii) acquisition of hardware and software to improve the scope, functionality and 
compatibility of information systems and establish digital data collection and processing of current paper-based processes. 
 
32. The project will also assist the Ministry of Agriculture Forestry and Water Management (MAFWM) with technical 
assistance to develop capacity to assess the demand, structure, and modalities for agricultural Guarantee agency in Serbia, 
similar to these in other neighboring and EU countries, with the potential of establishing in the medium term such a 
guarantee agency (state-owned or PPP). Options to capitalize the guarantees would also be part of the assessment. 
 
 
Sub-component 2.2: Open data platform 
 
33. This sub-component will establish an open, public information platform where key information is accessible to all 
agriculture stakeholders. The project will finance the software, hardware and technical assistance required for the set-up 

                                            
17 Two public donor guarantee schemes with agricultural windows are expected to be available in early 2020 – European Investment Fund (EIF) 
(backed by EU funding) and the DCA (guarantee facility of USAID), still under negotiations with MAFWM – and can be tapped on by commercial banks 
in the first couple of years of project implementation. IFC is already engaged with the EIF. Although a public guarantee fund exists in Serbia (the 
Serbian Development Fund, SDF), it is weak and does not cater to agriculture. Hence, a capacity building (through a TA) activity may be warranted 
under the project to provide guidance on future needs by the public sector for unlocking private investment in agriculture. 
18 A PHRD grant on strengthening M&E capacity of MAFWM, implemented in parallel to this project, will support this platform thro ugh capacity 
building within the Ministry and technical assistance, as needed. 
19 For example, only farm household applying for IPARD grants are registered in the national farm registry (around 335,000), excluding a large number 
of agricultural producers. 


and functionality of the platform. Access to important production and market information, including weather variables, 
prices of key products, etc. is critical for on and off-farm decisions. This platform can also be a support system for advisory 
services in Serbia and can link to digital approaches on farm, ensuring a two-way communication on plan and animal 
health, and other risks that can constrain agricultural competitiveness. Maintaining the content and enabling public access 
to this platform is a key role that the Ministry can play in the enabling environment for agricultural sector transformation.  
 
34. A digital information platform can play an important role for the spatial tracking and connectivity of production 
and market demand, thus contributing to improved positioning of products, sales and overall competitiveness. In addition, 
by including weather and climate information modeling, the project could contribute to early warning systems, helping 
producers to better prepare and adapt to changing climatic conditions. The project will use existing digital agriculture tools 
and will collaborate with private sector IT companies for finetuning electronic delivery mechanisms for monitoring 
production, access to technical information, traceability of goods and identification of market opportunities.  
 
Component 3: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (US$5 million) 
 
35. This component will support the establishment of a project management team (PMT) in the Directorate of 
Agrarian Payments (DAP) and capacity needs related to project implementation, as well as project monitoring, including 
a comprehensive baseline, mid-term review and a final impact assessment of project investments.  
 
    
 
Legal Operational Policies                                  Triggered? 

Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50 No 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60 No 

 
Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts 

 
The project is classified as Moderate Risk taking in account the low risk nature of the interventions, the limitations on 
implementation capacity, the application of environmentally friendly practices and new technologies, and the difficulty 
of enforcing workers’ rights in multiple SME agribusinesses. No adverse impacts such as involuntary land acquisition, 
impacts on community health and safety, on cultural heritage, are expected. Some of the project funded activities may 
include support to small scale community agriculture that is undertaken within areas under some level of environmental 
protection. The project will introduce new technologies and support improvement of technical knowledge and skills of 
beneficiaries on, amongst other, water and energy efficiency, pollution prevention and best practice use of herbicides 
and pesticides. The project’s anticipated social impacts are predominantly positive, such as increased income and 
employment in the agricultural sector as well as protection from climate related economic losses for farmers through the 
introduction of an early warning system. As labor informality is prevalent in the agricultural sector, the Borrower will 
prepare Labor Management Procedures to manage risks related to workers’ rights in project supported agribusinesses. 
The environmental and social screening criteria developed for the agricultural grant schemes and the credit guarantee 
fund will screen for relevant risks and apply mitigation hierarchy. 

 

 
 


























































World Bank Document

PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
CONCEPT STAGE

Report No.: PIDC12805

Project Name Burundi Coffee Sector Competitiveness Support Project (P151869)
Region AFRICA
Country Burundi
Sector(s) Crops (35%), Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (30%), Agricultural 

extension and research (20%), Public administration- Agricultur e, fishing 
and forestry (10%), General finance sector (5%)

Theme(s) Rural services and infrastructure (30%), Export development and 
competitiveness (30%), Rural policies and institutions (25%), Other 
environment and natural resources management (15%)

Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P151869
Borrower(s) Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock
Implementing Agency INTERCAFE
Environmental 
Category

B-Partial Assessment

Date PID Prepared/
Updated

28-Aug-2014

Date PID Approved/
Disclosed

13-Mar-2015

Estimated Date of 
Appraisal Completion

31-Mar-2015

Estimated Date of 
Board Approval

29-May-2015

Concept Review 
Decision

Track II - The review did authorize the preparation to continue

I. Introduction and Context
Country Context
1. Burundi is a post-conflict, landlocked, small country with an estimated population in 2013 
of nearly 10.20 million increasing at a rate of 3 percent annually. After more than 13 years of 
conflict, Burundi is now showing positive signs of economic recovery. Over the last 5 years, the 
annual GDP growth in Burundi has consistently remained around 4%. Despite these positive signs, 
the country is unlikely to meet the Millennium Development Goals 2015: (a) the human capital base 
is weak due to limited access to social services; (b) a large majority of youths are under-employed 
because of lack of opportunities; (c) less than 3 percent of the population has access to electricity; 
(d) 52 per cent of children under five are chronically malnourished; and (e) 67 percent of 
Burundians are living below the poverty line. Poverty is overwhelmingly rural and most of the 

country’s poor are small-scale farmers. These data explain why Burundi finds itself at the bottom of 
the list of countries for most development indicators. According to the Human Development Index, 
Burundi is ranked 178 out of 186 countries . 
 
2. Following substantial improvement in security and peace consolidation, the Government 
focused its resources to expand basic social services in the country and initiated the modernization 
of existing economic infrastructure and institutions. The Government launched also key reforms 
addressing improved governance, public finance management system, business environment and 
investment climate, etc., which led to the country achieving considerable progress towards macro-
economic stabilization. These efforts have been recognized by the World Bank which in its reports 
“Ease of Doing Business”, ranked Burundi as one of the world’s top economic reformers for 
streamlining business and attracting foreign investment. Nonetheless, Burundi has still to address 
major challenges in terms of good governance, vulnerability to external shocks, diversifying the 
economy, and generating productive employment for its largely young population. 
 
3. The Government of Burundi’s second Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP II, 
2012-2015) and the joint International Finance Corporation (IFC)-World Bank Business Plan have 
identified potential growth sectors. The focus is rightly put on modernizing the agricultural sector 
since it accounts for nearly 41 percent of the GDP and about 90 percent of current labor force. 
Burundi’s main traditional export crop - coffee has been identified as a key sub-sector with high 
growth potential which can contribute to achieving the results of the PRSP - Pillar II “Transforming 
Burundi’s economy to generate sustainable, job-creating growth”. Other sub-sectors with potential 
growth identified are tea, cotton and cinchona. Furthermore, as part of it PRSP, the Government 
plans to support corps diversification by promoting nontraditional agricultural exports, including 
horticultural products, essential oils, medicinal plants, avocados, and macadamia nuts.

Sectoral and Institutional Context
4. Burundi has all of the factors which make agricultural investment essential. The sector 
plays a key role in economic growth, poverty reduction, food security and employment. It 
contributes most to gross domestic product, using 90 per cent of Burundi’s labor force and earning 
90 percent of export revenues - primarily from coffee production, which constitutes the key source 
of income for more than 600,000 rural households (about 30 percent of the population).  Despite the 
country's dependence on the primary sector, agriculture has not been modernized and continues to 
depend essentially on subsistence agriculture (1.2 million rural households) using unreliable and 
inefficient technology. Over the past decade the growth rate of agricultural production (2 percent) 
has been less than the growth rate of the population (3.0 percent); which aggravates the country’s 
food security situation. 
 
5. The farms in Burundi are highly fragmented with an average size of less than 0.5 hectare 
and the pressure on the land is increasing due to demographic pressure . The farming systems are 
determined by weather cycles and organized around multiple crops to reduce risk. A comparison of 
crop yields in the country with those in neighboring regions shows that Burundi’s agriculture faces 
major productivity challenges. For example, over the period last years the growth rate in cereal 
productivity in the East African Community (EAC region) increased by 3.13 percent while it 
declined by 0.08 in Burundi. Various interlinked factors contribute to the low agriculture 
productivity in Burundi, for instance: degradation of natural ecosystems and declining soil fertility, 
low use of improved inputs (quality seeds, fertilizers, pesticides, etc.), low use of modern 
technologies, inadequate access to agriculture extension services, poor physical infrastructure 

affecting market access and access to improved inputs, limited access to credit, marketing 
constraints and post-harvest losses among others. With the continued fragmentation and scarcity of 
agricultural land, future growth in agricultural production can only be generated from intensification 
and productivity gains. In addition, only market-oriented agriculture will allow rural households an 
adequate livelihood from their small plots, abundant labor, and relatively ample water resources. 
 
6. Burundi’s agricultural sector policy is articulated in its national agricultural strategy 
document adopted in 2008. The latter is based on the priorities identified in the country’s basic 
strategic documents, primarily Outlook 2025 and the Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers (PRSPs). 
Furthermore, with the support of the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Program 
(CAADP), the Government of Burundi put forward a National Agricultural Investment Plan 
(NAIP), covering the period 2012-2017, which was fully integrated with the PRSP II. A top priority 
sub-sector identified within the NAIP for investment is coffee which plays a strategic role in the 
national economy as a source of foreign exchange earnings and incomes for a large number of rural 
households. The Burundi coffee value chain presents considerable potential for growth. Its impact 
extends to several other sectors through backward and forward linkages (inputs, processing, 
transport, financial services, and taxes) and therefore plays a key role in the country for jobs 
creation, food security and poverty reduction. 
 
7. The NAIP main focus are on: (a) the increase in crop and livestock production by raising 
productivity and ensuring optimal management of soil and water resources; and (b) the 
strengthening of human resources capacities of national institutions and farmers organizations. 
Other important elements of the NAIP address common issues such as land tenure and natural 
resources preservation, the development of infrastructure and measures related to agribusiness 
promotion and market access, including an improved investment climate and access to rural finance. 
For the coffee sub-sector, the focus is on increasing productivity associated with actions to promote 
quality, such as rejuvenating orchards, periodic field maintenance, farmers’ organization and 
restructuring and/or modernizing washing facilities through privatization and a niche marketing 
strategy. 
 
8. The NAIP is structured around four major programs as follows: (a) Sustainable growth in 
production and food security; (b) Professional training of farmers and promotion of innovation; (c) 
Development of value chains and agribusiness; and (d) Institution-building for public bodies. The 
NAIP is also promoting partnership between the public and private sectors in implementing its 
programs and achieving its objectives. This proposed project is particularly the type of financing 
which would be shared between the state and private operators, producers and investors. While the 
private sector is encouraged to increase investment in productive, industrial and marketing 
activities, the state needs to establish an environment favorable to the development of the sector. 
Efforts are being undertaken in this direction, for the coffee value chain – private operators are 
encouraged to be involved at several levels, notably at those of export, curing and de-pulping 
stations and roasting. Such initiative should be further promoted and expanded to establish 
sustainable public-private partnerships.  
 
9. The coffee sector: Coffee production is mostly a smallholder based activity with around 122 
million coffee trees and a production area of 70,000 hectares . The species grown is mainly the 
Arabica, though some Robusta is also planted. The average production of coffee cherries is 
estimated at about 164,800 tons and around 20,000 tons of green coffee  - of which about 70-80 
percent are fully washed. Average coffee cherries production per tree is about 1kg which is far 


below the yields of 2.5 to 3.0kg observed in other coffee growing areas; for instance in Asia and 
Latin America. Registered production of green coffee  in Burundi in 1990/91 was 33,912 tons while 
observed figure in 2011/12 was about 15,000 tons. The highest pick was registered in 1994/95 with 
40,985 tons. The cyclical swing of seasons sometimes leaves the country with very limited 
quantities to export (5,673 tons in 2003/4).  
 
10. Despite the current low and declining productivity level of the coffee sector in Burundi, it 
continues to play a vital role in the country’s economy and represents the main industry and export 
product – accounting for up to 80 percent of the foreign currency earnings. During the harvest of 
raw and green coffee, the sector plays also a key role in stimulating the rural economy. The 
associated industry (de-pulping and washing stations) and traders inject an important sum of cash 
into rural areas which increases spending in purchase of goods for rural households, manufactured 
products, payment of social expenses, and reimbursement of credit. Furthermore, the construction of 
washing stations in rural areas led to a modest first stage of industrialization, off-farm jobs for local 
labor during the coffee campaign and, most importantly, the development of rural access roads to 
the washing stations which are also used for other purposes.  
 
11. The coffee industry was one of the priority sectors targeted for deregulation reforms and 
privatization in the structural adjustment program (initiated in 1986) that aimed to limit the state’s 
involvement in the productive sector. Due to the civil war and subsequent recovery challenges, this 
process (sector reform and privatization of state entities: OCIBU, SODECO and washing stations) 
experienced some delays. But it subsequently led to positive developments, among others: (a) the 
establishment of a new regulatory body (ARFIC) and an inter-professional association 
(INTERCAFE); and (b) an effective deregulation of de-pulping and export through the construction 
of new washing stations by private investors and SOGESTALs . 
 
12. Today, the government is eager to complete the process of privatization which consists of a 
3rd phase (some 77 washing stations and a mill firm) – although different actors of the value chain 
have different ideas about how this should be carried out. For instance, coffee farmer associations 
are determined to take part in the privatization and the emergence of these associations adds a 
politico-socio-economic dimension to the on-going reform process. Even if some of the competing 
interest groups are small, their diverse political, regional and even ethnic backgrounds prompt the 
coffee reform to be a central peace-building focus for Burundi. Important to note that a recent 
Poverty and Social Impact Assessment (PSIA) concluded that the earlier privatization (Phases I and 
II) had mostly a positive impact on the incomes and welfare of affected coffee producers. 
 
13. While several steps have been taken toward improving the performance of the Burundi 
coffee sector, it is currently experiencing serious instability and decline which cannot be explained 
by chance or climatic conditions alone. Some of the causes behind this situation: (a) Persistence of 
structural deficiencies, such as inefficiencies in the governance of the value chain. The institutions 
and the actors involved in the value chain are facing several constraints (incomplete reform and 
privatization process, lack of technical and managerial capacity for emerging farmers’ association, 
non-transparent pricing mechanisms, etc.) that hamper their operations and, consequently, limit the 
development of the coffee sector in Burundi; (b) Low productivity due to insufficient technical and 
financial support to farmers. Lack of investments in productivity enhancing technologies following 
the liberalization of the market resulted in low and highly fluctuating productions, poor maintenance 
and degradation of the orchards, low input application as well as pest and disease problems, etc.; (c) 
Limited competitiveness with a decrease in quantity and quality caused by the aging of orchards at 



the farm level (28 percent are more than 30 years old and 62 percent are between 9 and 30 years), 
limited technical know-how moving downstream the chain to support quality improvements 
(milling, tasting, etc.); and inefficient marketing structures for promoting the Burundi brand; and (d) 
Primary production has also not kept pace with the expansion of processing capacity, leading to a 
situation in which all raw materials are competitively sought with little price differentiation. Many 
washing stations have experienced low profitability due to high operational costs (partly related to 
capacity underutilization) and management limitations.  
 
14. Under such circumstances it will be extremely difficult for Burundian coffee producers to 
be able to compete with the world coffee industry (or even maintain their competitiveness at the 
regional level). The resulting economic and social consequences are severe for Burundi. Despite 
these weaknesses, the coffee value chain in Burundi is not entirely without its strengths and 
therefore presents  some advantages which justify transformative investments in reversing current 
trends: (a) climate and altitude to produce specialty Arabica coffee that attracts premium world 
market prices; (b) opening of the sector to private investors; (c) local producers interested and 
experienced in growing coffee; (d) emerging farmer associations and private-led governance 
structures; (e) well-established processing infrastructure - washing stations and dry milling capacity 
to support increased production of high quality coffee; (f) increasing worldwide consumption with 
an average annual growth rate of 1.9 percent during the last 50 years and a high demand for 
specialty coffee in developed markets ; and (g) in term of the macro-economic situation of the 
country, Burundi is heavily depending on  coffee export proceeds that failure is not an option. Also, 
since coffee is a perennial and the land is already tied to it for the lifecycle of the tree, it is not 
readily easy to convert and diversify the production base. 
 
15. Against this background, the proposed World Bank project is supporting the Burundi 
Government in implementing its PRSP II and NAIP’s programs - enhancing the productivity and 
competitiveness of the coffee value chain. The proposed project is aligned with the ECCAC 
regional strategy for the development of the coffee sector.  It builds on ongoing operations by the 
World Bank in the country such as PRODEMA (Agriculture and Livestock Modernization Project) 
and PAZDOC (Sustainable Landscape Coffee Project) . It benefits from the coffee sector reforms 
and privatization supported by the World Bank and other development partners (AfD, EU, USAID, 
etc.). It is also complementing on-going operations by IFAD focusing on food security, namely the 
Agricultural Intensification and Value Enhancing Support Project (development of marshlands, 
increase the productivity and yields of rice and other food crops, access to quality inputs and seed, 
etc.), and the Value Chain Development Program (promotion of rice and milk and six other 
secondary value chains).

Relationship to CAS
16. The proposed support project is aligned with the Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for 
Burundi for FY13-16 that aims to support Burundi’s development as an “increasingly stable, 
competitive and diversified economy with enhanced opportunities for productive employment and 
improved standards of living”. Within the CAS framework, the proposed project supports the first 
strategic objective of increasing competitiveness to achieve inclusive growth and reduce poverty.

II. Proposed Development Objective(s)
Proposed Development Objective(s) (From PCN)
17. The project development objective (PDO) is to increase sustainable coffee production and 


enhance coffee quality, for the benefit of smallholders. This will contribute to: (a) improving the 
sector productivity and competitiveness; and (b) the country’s strategic goals of poverty reduction 
and enhanced exports revenues.

Key Results (From PCN)
18. At PDO level, the key results expected from this project are as follow: (a) Increased coffee 
production at the country level at project-end through the combined effect of application of good 
agricultural practices and rejuvenated/renewed plantations; (b) Higher coffee quality demonstrated 
by an increase in the share of coffee sold with price premiums on export; and (c) Enhanced farmers’ 
share of the net FOB price on coffee exports. 
 
19. It is estimated that approximately 200,000 small-scale farmers (from a total of roughly 
600,000 coffee growers at the national level) will directly benefit from the project planned 
activities. These are mostly composed of hillside farmers with less than 1 hectare of land, who 
cultivate an average of 150-250 coffee trees as an integral part of their livelihoods.

III. Preliminary Description
Concept Description
20. Burundi is a small player in international coffee markets and is operating in an environment 
of aggressive competitors. The area where the best results may be realized in terms of the sector 
productivity and competitiveness is not only limited to production increase, but most importantly, 
quality improvement along the value chain and a focus on the lucrative specialty coffee markets. 
Such efforts would certainly allow differentiating the country’s products and also provide a better 
buffer for the inevitable periods of low prices. However, the business principle driving 
improvements needs to be that quality starts at the farm level and can be maintained only through 
proper processing and storage. 
 
21. In this respect, the proposed project will operate through multiple interventions, along 
different segments of the coffee value chain, to address productivity and quality bottlenecks and to 
open new market opportunities to Burundi– the specialty coffee markets.  The proposed project 
would reinforce the private sector role in leading and structuring the sector, namely the coffee 
producers and the industry. More specifically, the following key areas of the value chain will be 
addressed: (a) Governing structure of the value chain and institutional strengthening; (b) increasing 
production and productivity; (c) improving quality and market access. A particular focus would be 
put on greater organization and integration of smallholders into the chain and on more equitable 
sharing of the benefits from improved quality and market access.   
 
22. Component 1 – Institutional strengthening and value chain governance: An essential 
property of the chain is its governance structure, which determines to a considerable extent how 
resources and gains are allocated and flow within the chain. In the case of Burundi, this structure is 
developing but constrained by lack of capacity to implement concerted specific sector policies; 
weak coordination; limited information exchange and non-transparent price mechanisms. The 
project will support streamlining the governance structure of the sector by: (a) reviewing and 
adapting the current intuitional framework to improve its level of effectiveness and efficiency with a 
particular focus on transparency in the decision-making process and on quality and pricing 
mechanism; (b) upgrading the capacities of existing institutions/organizations overseeing the sector; 
and (c) improving the dialogue among the key public and private actors of the chain to arrive at a 


consensus on solving value chain bottlenecks. 
 
23. More specifically, the institutional architecture for coffee sector management that the 
project would support strengthening comprises: (a) INTERCAFE -- a stakeholder-driven 
coordinating body that has the mandate for most sector management decisions; (b) ARFIC-- a 
public regulatory authority that ensures that the basic “rules of the game” for managing the sector 
are adequately defined, transparently implemented, and where necessary, enforced by Government 
authority. This intervention will aim also at upgrading the capacities of ARFIC to provide quality, 
inspection and certification services to the coffee industry. The project will support both the 
modernization of existing labs in line with international standards (and possibly their expansion 
within the producing regions) and developing ARFIC human resources capacities for managing 
regulatory areas and for coffee testing; (c) CNAC-- a coffee grower organization largely represented 
in all coffee growing region; and (d) other stakeholder organizations for each of the main sector 
constituencies, to provide representation into the INTERCAFE’s collective decision making on 
sector management. This architecture is broadly similar to successful agriculture value chain 
management elsewhere in Sub-Saharan Africa and many other producing countries as well, with 
strong public-private sector participation. 
 
24. The project will also support increased consultations among the chain stakeholders; for 
instance, through regular forums to: (a) discuss the various problems and constraints of the sector 
within a “value chain approach”; (b) elaborate (or update) a comprehensive strategy for the coffee 
sector aiming at the general interest of the sector; (c) find harmonized and shared solutions to the 
various challenges facing the sector; (d) eliminate or minimize potential conflicts among the various 
actors in view of the general and common interest; and eventually (e) coordinating donors, 
government and private sector investments to avoid overlap, scale-up impacts, etc. 
 
25. Furthermore, under this component the project will support the development of a Data Base 
on the sector which would provide reliable data on the number of producers, number of trees, 
production, quality, washing stations performance and other ecological and socio-economic factors. 
This Data Base to be initially placed within ARFIC and linked to INTERCAFE, can be further 
expanded to include a formal GI S module that can capture more of the agro-ecological variables 
such as soil types, water sources and other variables that affect coffee quality. This investment will 
constitute an important tool for the value chain actors in terms of planning, monitoring and 
evaluation of their activities and return on investments. It can also be used as an export promotion 
tool (see component 3 below).  
 
26. Component 2 – Support to increased production and productivity: Under this component the 
project will support investments aimed at increasing production and productivity with a focus on: 
(a) the adoption of good agricultural practices - sustainable land management, planting trees, 
nutrition and fertilizer management, pests and diseases control, pruning, rejuvenation (25 percent of 
existing trees), harvesting, quality assessment and improvement, etc.; (b) improving production 
technology and soil fertility; (c) the dissemination of improved varieties to renew old plantations 
(20 percent of existing trees); (d) supporting specific research topics (coffee under shade, variety 
improvement and germplasm enhancement, etc.); and (e) a support fund to facilitate access to 
inputs. 
 
27. In addition special emphasis will be on: (a) linking coffee growers to national agricultural 
research bodies and extension services (public and private) and promoting a two-way flow of 

information between these entities; (b) expanding the tested models for productivity enhancement 
implemented as part of the PRODEMA project (community based mechanisms); (c) disseminating 
sustainable water and land management (SWLM) best practices and more diversified plantations, 
with fruit trees, inter-cropping with food crops, etc.; and (d) encouraging south-south exchange for 
coffee production, for instance, with coffee growing countries including Rwanda, Ethiopia and 
Colombia. This exchange will aim at various learning programs: production techniques, extension 
methodologies, coffee under shade, etc., and will build on cooperation already established between 
the PAZDOC project (Sustainable Landscape Coffee Project – GEF) and Columbia coffee growers. 
 
28. For the implementation of the productivity investments, the proposed project will make use 
of INTERCAFE’s current contractual system provision for extension services and supply of inputs, 
and extend these to a larger share of coffee farmers as well as to coffee-specific agronomic and 
processing research. INTERCAFE has a cess revenue mechanism  already in place to finance such 
activities but, at current levels of national coffee production, the cess revenues only permit activities 
at a modest scale. 
 
29. Component 3 – Support to improved quality and market access: The management of quality 
in the coffee value chain is the most immediate instrument growers can use to improve their 
upgrading opportunities and it is a critical element of the current trend toward coffee differentiation. 
Furthermore, it is specifically vital in Burundi where the existence of “potato taste”, a strong off-
flavor resulting from the interaction between agro-climatic conditions and antestia bug infiltration, 
is endemic . Currently, cherries washing stations have only limited capacity to evaluate their coffee 
and do not have the experience or the cupping infrastructure to evaluate their production. In this 
respect, the project will promote quality enhancement activities along the value chain which would 
require changes in the field, at the washing station and at the dry mill. Applying good agricultural 
practices, flotation of cherries at the washing stations reception, meticulous hand sorting during pre-
drying and several other technical improvements are needed before Burundi can be recognized as a 
reliable supplier of coffee specialty markets. Under this component, the project will build on 
successes of recently closed USAID project in the country  and will in particular support the 
following investments: 
 
Sub-component 3.1- Improving quality: 
 
30. Developing cupping capacity: A main focus of this activity will be on educating all value 
chains actors on quality and cupping and establishing cupping labs in main producing areas.  This 
will be achieved by: (a) selecting a number of “leader” coffee washing stations to serve as an initial 
focus for specialty coffee value chain development and as models for other stations to learn from; 
and (b) the selection of a set of second tier washing stations to serve as “training hubs” aimed at 
maximizing the dissemination of production, processing and marketing best practices that will help 
in improving the quality and market access throughout all coffee producing regions in Burundi. 
 
31. Improving washing stations technical, operational and managerial capacities: Under this 
sub-component, assistance will be provided to the managerial staff of the washing stations to 
develop and implement customized Quality Improvement Plans (QIPs), including infrastructure 
improvement, best practices and Quality Control (QC) systems. The production and processing of 
high quality coffees requires sound technical and business management skills and systems. 
Currently the management (and governance) capacity of most private and cooperatively owned 
washing stations needs improvement. This element is critical to obtaining the highest returns, 

continued access to financing and sustainability. Furthermore, selected strategic supplier 
certification programs offer substantial price premiums to growers but require the implementation 
of detailed and transparent financial reporting systems. In the particular cases of cooperatives where 
the governance can be problematic, it is also important to maintain a fully transparent financial 
management system to ensure cooperative cohesion. 
 
32. For highly performing washing stations, traceability systems from the plantations to the 
destination market may be introduced. Such systems will enable buyers and sellers to track each lot 
from the time it enters the washing station (or even the field) until it is delivered to its final 
destination. This feature is also an essential element that distinguishes specialty coffee production 
from the production of standard grade coffee. The ITC component described below (parag. 34) will 
be integral to the development of the coffee traceability system and to using this system to its full 
potential. 
 
33. Improving existing processing infrastructure to meet environmental concerns: As pulping 
coffee can be the source of significant environmental problems (pollution of water table and the soil 
surrounding the washing stations, etc.), the project proposes integrating environmental mitigation 
measures in existing (and new) washing stations. These investments (water treatment and recycling) 
can lead to substantial cost reduction of production (reduction of water quantities used for de-
pulping) and, most importantly, responsible environmental stewardship is not only a best practice, 
but is an obligation for certification to several preferred supplier programs such as the Neumann 
Kaffee Gruppe (NKG) and the Starbucks’ C.A.F.E. Practices Program. 
 
34. Developing an information technology and communication system specific to the sector: 
Wireless internet access is now available in much of Burundi, presenting an exciting opportunity for 
washing stations to broaden their horizon in terms of technology access, learning opportunities and 
direct communications with buyers. The Data Base described in parag. 25 above can also be 
expanded to track and report on key performance characteristics of all washing stations for purposes 
of monitoring and planning and assessing the impacts of investments in quality improvement. 
Similarly, the Data Base can serve as an important tool for export promotion, accessible to buyers 
interested in visiting and buying Burundi’s coffee. Hot-links to individual washing stations sites will 
allow buyers to download fact sheets, learn about the coffee characteristics, and communicate 
directly with the stations that interest them most. From a basic training point of view, access to the 
internet by washing stations staff will be a powerful tool for the dissemination of training materials 
across the country. Other countries, particularly in Latin America and more recently in Rwanda 
have benefited greatly from the development of information and communications technologies. 
Burundi will be no different in this regard.  
 
Sub-component 3.2- Marketing and promoting the Burundi Coffee brand:  
 
35. Burundi must learn to market its coffee to the new consumers and also minimize the risk 
and uncertainties associated with coffee production, processing and marketing. In addition to the 
investments made on increasing production and productivity, profiling of coffee quality for more 
focused marketing, upgrading t he processing infrastructure, etc., this component of the project will 
support investments in: (a) building a recognizable image for Burundi’s coffee, including, a country 
logo, brochures, standardized washing station fact sheets, coffee maps and other information that 
may be useful to coffee markets; (b) developing a reliable coffee industry intelligence and 
forecasting system; (c) establishing direct sales relationships with roasters and buyers; and (d) 


introducing other innovative promotional activities such as buyer tours, certifications strategies, 
competitions such as the “cup of excellence”, and many other features that will place Burundi’s 
coffees in some of the very best markets in the world. These activities will focus on cultivating 
appropriate contacts and potential coffee relationships in North America, Europe, Japan and other 
emerging markets such as China and Russia. 
 
36. This component of the program will require the full coordination of investments and 
activities at multiple levels, including growers, washing stations, mills and other supporting 
institutions. A key player in this process will be INTERCAFE which would be reinforced to take a 
lead role in coordinating these activities and promoting the Burundi coffee brand. 
 
37. International Finance Corporation (IFC): The IFC Advisory Services Department has been 
supporting the 3rd phase of the coffee sector privatization. A main focus of IFC assistance was to 
advice on financing options for the coffee growers to buy shares of washing stations and to develop 
a target list of experienced international investors in the coffee sector who may be interested in the 
opportunity offered by the privatization. Further support will be sought from IFC, in particular for 
developing industry partnership and linkages with potential international specialty coffee buyers. 
 
38. Component 4 – Program coordination, monitoring and knowledge management: This 
component will facilitate: (a) administrative, technical, and financial management of the program; 
(b) coordination among all institutional partners to ensure efficient flow of information and support 
to all value chain actors, in particular the small coffee growers; (c) effective contractual 
arrangements with key implementing partners (INTERCAFE, CNAC, ARFIC, etc.) and other 
private sector operators; (d) monitoring and evaluation of the performance and the financial, 
environmental, and social impact of the program; and (e) development of communication activities 
to publicize and disseminate the project results, best practices and success stories.  
 
39. Inclusion of youth and women: This population already active in the coffee value chain 
(trees maintenance, harvesting, grading, etc.) will be systematically considered in all project’s 
interventions. In line with the PRSP-2 and the National Gender Policy, a special focus will be given 
to promoting increased youth employment (both women and men) in all segments of the value chain 
by involving them in technical and entrepreneurial training programs and other planned 
developments actions. The project will aim at a target of 50 percent of youth and women directly 
benefiting from the project supported activities. 
 
40. Project costs: The indicative cost for the Coffee Competitiveness Support Project is US
$50.00 million. The proposed Bank-financed support would cost about US$45.00 million. It is 
expected that the beneficiaries (INTERCAFE, ARFIC and CNAC) will contribute up to US$5.00 
million. Furthermore, a GEF project is being considered for potential co-financing of selected 
productivity enhancement activities (PAZDOC: Sustainable Landscape Coffee Project - US$ 4.2 
million). Finally, USAID and the French Development Agency (AfD) are preparing parallel 
financing for the sector with a focus on productivity and trade issues. The exact amount for this 
financing is not yet defined, but is expected to be made available in the 2015 fiscal year. 
Coordination with these projects is foreseen to ensure complementarities and cost effectiveness. 
 
41. Categories of expenditures: For all project’s components, there will be various categories of 
expenditures including: (a) civil and rural works – case of upgrading the processing infrastructure 




(CWSs); (b) materials and equipment; (c) technical assistance and studies; (d) training and 
information; (e) support fund; (f) provision of services; and (i) operation and maintenance.

IV. Safeguard Policies that might apply
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No TBD
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖

V. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 72.25 Total Bank Financing: 55.00
Financing Gap: 0.00
Financing Source Amount
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 0.00
 IDA Grant 55.00
 LOCAL  BENEFICIARIES 17.25
 Total 72.25


























































World Bank Document

PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
APPRAISAL STAGE

Report No.:  PIDA21451

Project Name Lake Qaraoun Pollution Prevention Project (P147854)
Region MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
Country Lebanon
Sector(s) Agricultural extension and research (10%), General water, 

sanitation and flood protection sector (90%)
Theme(s) Water resource management (100%)
Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P147854
Borrower(s) Ministry of Finance
Implementing Agency Council for Development and Reconstruction
Environmental Category B-Partial Assessment
Date PID Prepared/Updated 23-Feb-2015
Date PID Approved/Disclosed 23-Feb-2015
Estimated Date of Appraisal 
Completion

03-Apr-2015

Estimated Date of Board 
Approval

22-Jul-2015

Decision

I. Project Context
Country Context
Lebanon is an upper-middle-income country, with a population of 4.5 million people and a gross 
domestic product (GDP) of US$9,930 per capita in 2013.  The country is highly urbanized, with 
more than 85 percent of its population living in cities.  It has an open economy in which services 
and trade account for 60 percent of GDP and 73 percent of jobs.  The economy is driven by a 
dynamic private sector and is dependent on financial flows from Arab Gulf countries. The country 
is well-known for the high quality of its education system, ranking 13th out of 122 countries.   
 
The Lebanese economy expanded at a moderate pace (3.6 percent annually) during the past five 
decades. However, political instability, terrorism activities and the spillovers from regional conflicts 
made this growth erratic and unstable. Moreover, the ongoing conflict in Syria has resulted in a 
large inflow of refugees (estimated at 1.4 million  in January 2015), accounting for 30 percent of 
the country’s population. This complex political, social, and security environment put additional 
strain on the economy and public services. In fact, the GDP growth decreased from 8 percent in 
2010 to just 0.9 percent in 2013.   
 
Poverty affects nearly 28 percent of the Lebanese population (living on US$4 per day) and extreme 
poverty touches 8 percent (living on US$2.4 per day).  The highest concentration of poor is found 
in the North, followed by the South and the Beqaa. In addition, most refugees are concentrated in 
the already impoverished area of the Beqaa (35 percent) and North Lebanon (35 percent). The 
Syrian crisis is expected to have increased poverty among 170,000 Lebanese by 2014, with the 
existing poor becoming even poorer.  In light of these challenges, job creation and social protection 
are among the main development priorities in the country.  
 
Lebanon made considerable progress in shaping the legal and institutional framework and restoring 
infrastructure after the civil war (1975-89) and the more recent war with Israel (2006). However, 
the country is still at an early stage of transition to environmental sustainability. The cost of 
environmental degradation in Lebanon has been estimated at 3.2 percent of the country’s GDP in 
2005.  Water pollution stands out as the country’s major environmental problem, costing more than 
1 percent of the GDP per year. This accounts for the damages caused by the discharge of untreated 
sewage, industrial effluent, and agricultural runoff into valleys, rivers, and the Mediterranean Sea.

  

Sectoral and institutional Context
THE LITANI RIVER AND LAKE QARAOUN 
 
The Litani River is the principal artery of Lebanon. Rising from the Olleiq springs close to the city 
of Baalbeck, it flows 170 km through the Beqaa valley and the Qaraoun Lake, before it reaches the 
Mediterranean Sea. The upper Litani River catchment extends over an area of 1,500 km2 (10 
percent of the Lebanese territory) and comprises 99 towns distributed into 4 administrative districts: 
Baalbeck, Zahlé, West Beqaa, and Rachayya. The major water structure along the Litani River is 
the Qaraoun Dam, which forms the Qaraoun Lake (or resevoir).  
 
POLLUTION OF WATER RESOURCES  
 
Large stretches of the Litani River and of the Qaraoun Lake are polluted due to four sources of 
pollution.   
• Municipal wastewater. In 2013, the volume of wastewater generated in the Beqaa was 
estimated at 63 million m3 with an annual load of 21,300 tons of Biochemical Oxygen Demand 
(BOD). Most wastewater is currently discharged untreated into the Litani River.  
• Industrial wastewater. This is estimated at about 4 million m3 in the Beqaa. There are 
factories producing effluents that are conveyed to surface water through nearby tributaries. Out of 
294 industrial establishments in the region, 120 are large-scale industries located within 400 m of 
the Litani River, its tributaries, or the Qaraoun Lake. 
• Municipal solid waste. Waste generated in the upper catchment of the Qaraoun Lake is 
estimated at 650 tons per day. Because of the lack of sanitary landfills, most garbage is dumped in 
open dumps and in the Litani River along the Qaraoun catchment. Water pollution comes from 
littering and surface water runoff of solid waste. This is acute when the waste site is close to surface 
water streams. The main dump sites exerting pressure on the Litani River are Temnin El Tahta, 
Saadnayel old dump, Qabb Elias, Barr Elias, Hawch El Harimi, El Khiyara, Ghazzé, and Jeb 
Jennine.  
• Agriculture. The largest use of land in the Litani River basin is for agriculture. In 2010, 
irrigated agriculture in the Beqaa covered about 54,000 ha, primarily concentrated in three districts: 
Baalbeck (24,000 ha); Zahlé (16,000 ha); and West Beqaa (10,000 ha). Vegetables, fruit trees, and 
industrial crops are the main irrigated crops in these areas.  Agricultural water pollution originates 



mainly from irrigation overflows and seepage. A field survey conducted in 2010  concluded that 
farmers in Beqaa are over-fertilizing their crops and many pesticides are being applied at almost 
twice the recommended rates. As a result, agricultural chemicals and non-degradable pesticides end 
up in waterways with irrigation overflows.  
 
BUSINESS PLAN TO COMBAT POLLUTION IN LAKE QARAOUN   
 
The Ministry of Environment (MoE) commissioned in 2010 a Business Plan to help the government 
of Lebanon (GoL) identify the major sources of pollution in the Qaraoun Lake and to recommend 
appropriate solutions to mitigate them (detailed information is provided in annex 2). The Business 
Plan was completed in 2011 and endorsed by the Presidency of the Council of Ministers in 2012. 
The plan includes detailed prioritized investments for each polluting sector, with a financing 
requirement estimated at about US$255 million. In February 2013, the GoL requested World Bank 
assistance to fund priority activities of the Business Plan. 
 
The Business Plan identifies the largest two pressures as agriculture and municipal wastewater. 
Action on agriculture sources of pollution is needed to improve the overall surface water while 
continuing to contribute to the agriculture sector, a key sector, in the Bekaa. On municipal 
wastewater priority actions identified relate to continue to increase the volume of wastewater 
treated in Zahle, Iaat, Temninm El Tahta, Anjar, Jeb Jannine where the population and economic 
activity are most dense. 
 
INSITUTIONAL CONTEXT  
 
The Ministry of Environment. The MoE is empowered to study, propose, and implement national 
environmental policies. It is considered the only regulatory environmental agency in the country. 
The MoE is primarily responsible for environmental policy planning; setting laws, regulations, and 
environmental standards; imposing the application of the Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) 
on development projects; monitoring environmental quality; and identifying permitting conditions 
for new industry, agriculture, quarrying, and mining. In relation to the proposed project, the MoE is 
responsible for regulating the collection and disposal of solid waste. 
 
The Ministry of Energy and Water (MoEW) is responsible for the strategic planning and 
management of water resources. Prior to 2000, there were 21 regional water utilities. Water Law 
221 of year 2000 and its amendments merged them into four Water and Wastewater Establishments 
and one pre-existing river authority: North Lebanon, Beirut/Mount Lebanon, Beqaa, South 
Lebanon, and the Litani River Authority (LRA). This was a major step towards consolidating the 
responsibility of these establishmen ts and clarifying their mandate as public agencies empowering 
them to better manage water and wastewater services. The ultimate role of the water establishment 
is to have full administrative and financial autonomy over the service provision of water and 
wastewater services and irrigation. The Beqaa Water and Wastewater Establishment (BWE) is the 
one responsible for the project area. The BWE inherited distribution networks in poor conditions, 
with very high levels of illegal connections and very low collection rates from those legally 
connected. LRA is a public establishment under the MoEW is primarily responsible to (a) exploit 
hydro electrical power plants; (b) construct irrigation scheme, (c) conduct preliminary studies and 
construct dams, and (d) monitor the quality of the Litani River. 
 
The Ministry of Agriculture (MoA). The MoA has overall responsibility for the development of the 



agriculture sector. While the MoEW has the overall mandate for water resources, including 
irrigation, the MoA has the prime responsibility for irrigation at the farm level. Sustainable 
management and conservation of natural resources is considered an important pillar of the MoA’s 
strategy for 2010�2014. The strategy gives high priority to enhancing the efficient use of irrigation, 
expanding the use of treated wastewater for irrigation, and reducing water pollution from 
agricultural chemicals. The MoA is also responsible for the regulation of pesticide and fertilizer 
imports, marketing, and use, and it has launched a series of measures to enhance enforcement of 
these regulations and promote awareness about the proper use, handling, and disposal of pesticides. 
 
The Council for Development and Reconstruction (CDR). The CDR, established through Decree 
no.5 of 1977 is responsible for preparing national development plans, implementing infrastructure 
project, and mobilizing external financing to lead the reconstruction and development of the 
country. The CDR is accountable to the Council of Ministers.  
 
The Qaraoun Committee. In June 2012, a committee was established  to study the pollution 
problems of the Litani River and Qaraoun Lake and to propose remedial measures. The committee 
included representation of all key stakeholders and was active in the preparation and review of the 
Business Plan for Combating Pollution of the Qaraoun Lake. Once the Business Plan and 
subsequent roadmap were agreed upon, the study committee was dissolved. In May 2014, the 
Qaraoun Committee was established  to follow up on the implementation of the roadmap to combat 
pollution in Lake Qaraoun. The committee includes 16 members representing key stakeholders and 
has assigned the secretariat responsibility to the Litani River Authority.

II. Proposed Development Objectives
The development objectives of the project are to reduce the quantity of untreated municipal sewage 
discharged into the Litani river and to improve pollution management around Qaraoun Lake.

III. Project Description
Component Name
Component 1: Improve the collection of municipal sewage
Comments (optional)
This component will finance activities that increase sewerage collection in areas where wastewater 
treatment plants have been constructed (or planned to be constructed), to maximize the use of these 
investments. The criteria used for the selection of the investments on the expansion of the network 
are the following: (i) network for a currently underserved WWTP; and (ii) network for WWTP 
completed or expected to be completed within the project implementation period.

Component Name
Component 2. Promotion of good agricultural practices including integrated pest management to 
reduce agrochemical pollution in upper Litani basin
Comments (optional)
This component will promote adoption of sustainable production systems among farmers in the 
upper Litani basin, by introducing selected IPM (for example, reduced pesticides application) and 
GAP (for example, reduced fertilizer application and other conservation practices). These practices 
are expected to provide increased quality of agricultural products (without reducing yields); farmers’ 
savings (through decreased cost of production); and reduced pollution of the Litani River.

Component Name



Component 3. Technical Studies in Solid Waste, Water Quality Monitoring, Capacity Building and 
Project ManagementComments (optional)
This component will fund technical, environmental and social studies in solid waste. It will 
strengthen LRA capacity in water quality and water resources modeling and fund awareness /clean 
up campaign around the Litan river. It will improve BWE capacity in the supervision of wastewater 
infrastructure, the improvement in water fee collection and financial administration.

IV. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 50.00 Total Bank Financing: 50.00
Financing Gap: 0.00
For Loans/Credits/Others Amount
Borrower 0.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 50.00
Total 50.00

V. Implementation
The Qaraoun Committee -formally established by COM decision 32 of May 2014—already includes 
a representative from each institution involved in pollution management along the Qaraoun.  The 
committee will have an oversight role in the implementation of the proposedproject. Its main role is 
to ensure coherence and consistency between the proposed project and all other ongoing and 
planned investment in the upper Litani watershed area.  
 
Given the multisectoral aspects of the project, the CDR will be the implementing agency. CDR has 
wide experience with Bank operations, and is familiar with fiduciary and safeguards aspects. A 
Project Management Unit (PMU) will be headed by a project coordinator under the CDR’s 
responsibility. The PMU will be responsible for contract management, fiduciary and safeguards 
oversight, auditing, monitoring and reporting, coordination, and so on. Line ministries will be 
associated in the preparation and implementation of the project from the onset. As such, technical 
experts will be recruited by the CDR as part of the PMU but will be assigned to the line ministries/
agencies and will report to the PMU project coordinator at the CDR and their respective sectors. 
This arrangement will facilitate and bridge the gap between the CDR and the line ministries. It will 
also contribute to raising capacity in the different sectors involved.

VI. Safeguard Policies (including public consultation)
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖


Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖



























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Smallholder Irrigated Agriculture and Market Access Project (P164431) 

 
 

  
Apr 25, 2018 Page 1 of 24  

     

 
 
 
      

 

Combined Project Information Documents /  
Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (PID/ISDS) 

 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 24-May-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSA24220 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Mozambique P164431 Smallholder Irrigated 
Agriculture and Market 
Access Project- IRRIGA  1 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA 11-May-2018 19-Jun-2018 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Finance and 
Economy 

Ministry Of Agriculture 
and Food Security 

 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve smallholder agriculture productivity and market 
access in the project areas developed with irrigation and provide immediate and effective response to an eligible crisis 
or emergency. The Program objective of the Series of Projects (SOP) is to increase farmers' productivity and improve 
rural livelihoods through increased access to irrigation and to markets. 

 
Components 

Component 1-Institutional Capacity Building 
Component 2-Smallholder Irrigation Development and Management 
Component 3-Agriculture Intensification and Market Linkages 
Component 4- Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation 
Component 5-Contingency and Emergency Response 

 
 

PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
   

SUMMARY-NewFin1  
 

Total Project Cost 57.00 

Total Financing 57.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 55.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 

 
   
DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 



 

The World Bank  
Smallholder Irrigated Agriculture and Market Access Project (P164431) 

 

 

  
Apr 25, 2018 Page 3 of 24  

 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 55.00 

          IDA Grant 55.00 

Non-World Bank Group Financing 

     Counterpart Funding 2.00 

          LOCAL: BENEFICIARIES 2.00 

    

Environmental Assessment Category 

B-Partial Assessment 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate     
 
 
 
 
B. Introduction and Context 

 
Country Context  
1. Mozambique is a southeast African country, with a population of about 29 million people1, of which about 70 
percent reside in the rural areas.  It is estimated that about 90 percent of the rural population depend on agriculture 
as the main source of their livelihood.  With the current population growth rate of 2.7%, Mozambique’s population is 
expected to reach 46 million by 2040. The country is endowed with potentially large arable land, water, energy, gas 
and mineral resources; and is also strategically located to support economic development in the region.  

2. Poverty levels remain high and economic growth has been highly inequitable. Despite significant economic 
growth and macroeconomic stability over the last two decades between 1995 and 2015, rapid economic growth rates 
have not translated into poverty reduction. The country ranks 180 out of a total of 187 countries in the 2015 Human 
Development Index as reported by the United Nations Development Program (UNDP) and more than half of its 
population live in poverty2. Approximately, half (43 percent)2 of the children under age of five in Mozambique are 
stunted due to long-term effects of malnutrition and micronutrient deficiencies. Economic growth has been driven 
primarily by few large-scale capital investment projects, with very limited benefits to the poor living in the rural areas. 
Poverty is particularly persistent in the country’s two most populous provinces, Nampula and Zambezia, where poverty 
rates have increased, while the rest of the country has experienced reduction in the poverty rates by over 10% between 
2003 and 2015.  

3. The country’s near-term economic prospects have been recently worsened by political and economic 
instability. Against the backdrop of the longer-term challenge of stimulating more inclusive growth, political and 

 
1 National Statistics Institute-INE (2018), Maputo, Mozambique. 
2 Disease data from the Ministry of Health and mortality data from the National Statistics Institute (MICS, 2008). 
 



economic developments in 2016 led to a rapid and dramatic deterioration in Mozambique’s macroeconomic 
framework. With large unreported debts and increased violence, the fast growth economy pre- 2016 slowed down 
significantly marked by high inflation and depreciation of local currency, coupled with falling commodity prices and 
exports. The country also suffered from the El Ninõ effects that led to extremely low rainfalls and a prolonged drought 
(2014 to 2018) which resulted in limited water supply and low agricultural productivity. This led to a humanitarian crisis 
in some of the most critical regions of the country. 

4. However, medium-term economic prospects appear positive as the country recovers from the recent 
economic crisis. Real GDP growth fell below four percent in 2016, but is expected to pick up in the range of five to six 
percent in 2018. Inflation has stabilized at around 18%, following some tight monetary policy reforms to curb currency 
depreciation and fiscal deterioration. Amidst a medium growth rate forecast, the country still faces a number of 
development constraints, including high-dependence on rain-fed agriculture; limited access to basic services such as 
water supply and electricity; and lack of resilience to climatic events due to limited infrastructure and institutional 
capacity, among others.  

5. Mozambique is among the most affected countries by climate change in Sub-Saharan Africa. Globally, 
Mozambique ranks 36th in terms of vulnerability and 144th in terms of readiness3, indicating significant risk to national 
social and economic development. The country has also been experiencing high rainfall variability, with more frequent 
droughts and floods. Highly variable rainfall, combined with limited water storage and flood control infrastructure, are 
among the main factors contributing to crop losses.  The pattern, frequency and severity of floods and droughts are 
also changing over time with significant adverse implications for agriculture productivity and production. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 

 

6. Agriculture is the largest economic sector in Mozambique. The agriculture sector accounts for 26 percent of 
GDP and employs 78 percent of the labor force. However, most of the population is engaged in smallholder, rain-fed 
subsistence agriculture which frequently suffers from climate-induced shocks with significant negative impacts for 
overall economic growth and poverty reduction. Only about 10 percent of its 36 million ha of arable land is currently 
under cultivation. In 2012, there were about 3.9 million farms in Mozambique, of which 99 percent were smallholders, 
and only about 1 percent were medium and large scale commercially-oriented farms involved in competitive value 
chains, primarily for cash crops. More recently, however, there is an emerging trend and potential for the involvement 
of commercially-oriented smallholders in the value chains of horticulture and other crops as the case the out-growers’ 
systems develop under the implementation of the Sustainable Irrigation Development Project (PROIRRI). 

7. Low agricultural productivity is a binding constraint to Mozambique’s economic growth and poverty 
reduction. The country’s agriculture productivity levels are lower than the average of the low-income countries in 
southern Africa, particularly for maize and rice, two important crops for food security and trade in the region. According 
to FAO statistics 2016, the average yield of maize in Mozambique is 35 percent lower compared to Malawi and 76 
percent lower compared to Zambia. Average rice yields are similarly lower in Mozambique and are estimated at 60 
percent lower compared to Malawi and 50 percent lower compared to Zambia.  Key constraints include limited use of 
improved crop varieties (less than 3 percent of farmers); limited use of fertilizers (less than 5 percent of the farmers); 
inadequate agricultural support services, including extension (there are only 1,200 agricultural extension officers 
employed by the public sector in the country); very small area under irrigation (2.5 percent of the cultivated area); 
limited access to agricultural credit; limited access to mechanization and animal traction services (less than 9.5 percent 

 
3 ND-GAIN (University of Notre Dame Global Adaptation Index) is global index that summarizes a country's 
vulnerability to climate change and other global challenges in combination with its readiness to improve resilience. 


of farmers used animal traction in 2014); and low connectivity and limited access to markets for inputs and outputs 
(road networks provide access to only about 33 percent of the rural population). Moreover, climate-related events and 
an inadequate land rights system present a substantial risk to agriculture productivity and sustainability and reduce 
the efficiency of land use. 

8. A gender gap persists in agricultural productivity in Mozambique. Female headed households tend to be 
poorer, and lack access to productive assets and labor. In addition, they are less likely to adopt improved technologies. 
As a result, they tend to be less productive than male headed households. In 2014, the average maize yield among 
female headed households was 50 kg less than average among male headed households, which represents an 8 percent 
yield gap. This result is consistent with the findings of the literature on agricultural productivity in sub-Saharan Africa.  

9. The provinces of Manica, Nampula, Sofala and Zambézia have the highest agriculture potential, covering some 
of the most fertile soils in the country, along the Zambezi river basin, which accounts for about 17% of the irrigable 
land and 47% of the country’s water resources.4 Also, these four provinces are home to about 1.85 million smallholder 
farmers or 47% of all the country’s smallholder farmers. Nampula and Zambézia provinces face specific challenges: it 
is estimated that 11.21 million people or about 40 percent of the population in Mozambique live in these two provinces, 
but due to limited accessibility, rural households are more isolated and income from farm activities is three times lower 
as compared with the rest of country. In addition, there are generally low levels of irrigation coverage, and current 
investment patterns are not consistent with the highest-potential agriculture areas. 

10. Irrigation has the potential to significantly enhance smallholder agriculture productivity. Mozambique has a 
potential to irrigate 3 million ha. However, only about 180,000 ha are equipped with irrigation infrastructure, and only 
about half of this is currently fully operational. Thus, only about 3 percent of the country’s irrigation potential is 
currently being exploited. Under the World Bank financed PROIRRI – Sustainable Irrigation Development Project 
(P107598, closing in December 2018), smallholder farmers have doubled their productivity in vegetable crops and 
increased cropping intensity to three harvests per year from investments in improved irrigation infrastructure and 
services. PROIRRI developed a total of 3,000 ha under irrigation; out of which 1,700 ha for rice, 800 ha for horticulture 
and 500 ha for out-grower crops.  

11. The Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security (MASA) is the lead institution for agriculture development. 
MASA is responsible for formulating and implementing agricultural policies at the national level, including agrarian 
services, crop development, livestock, irrigation, forestry and food security. Irrigation development is the responsibility 
of the National Irrigation Institute (INIR) under MASA. INIR works in close collaboration with the other MASA 
departments responsible for agriculture and extension services, such as the National Directorate of Agriculture and 
Silviculture, the National Directorate of Agriculture Extension; and the Agriculture Development Fund which finances 
agriculture projects. Other relevant institutions for irrigation development include the National Directorate of Water 
Resources Management from the Ministry of Public Works, Housing and Water Resources (MOPHRH), which is 
responsible for water resources planning and allocation, as well as the development and operation of major hydraulic 
works through the Regional Water Administrations; and the National Directorate of Land and Forestry in the Ministry 
of Land, Environment and Rural Development (MITADER), which is responsible for land allocation and titling. 

12. INIR was created by the Council of Ministers Decree 9/2012 of May 11th, with legal, technical and 
administrative autonomy to promote the development of an efficient and sustainable irrigation sector in the 
country. Currently INIR focuses on technical assistance to small irrigation schemes, including the oversight of design 
and construction supervision of irrigation rehabilitation, as it lacks the technical capacity to do the design and 
construction supervision of these rehabilitation investments in new irrigated areas. INIR is also responsible for 


oversight of two large state-owned irrigation enterprises operating a total of 41,000 ha of irrigated land along the 
Limpopo river basin (23,000 ha in Chokwe and 18,000ha in Xai-Xai). Other large irrigation schemes are owned and fully 
managed by private agribusiness enterprises engaged in sugar cane production along the major river basins. 

13. In 2016, the National Irrigation Program (PNI) which was approved by the Government. The National Irrigation 
Program consists of a series of reforms and investments to address critical irrigation development needs and medium-
term food security targets for the country. MASA developed three scenarios to implement the PNI, moderate, medium 
and high. In the moderate scenario, about U$ 1 billion is needed to develop a minimum of 122,500 ha (32,000 ha public 
and 90,500 ha private) of irrigated land by 2042. The initial phase of the program is focused on strengthening MASA’s 
institutional capacity to plan irrigation infrastructure and related services and to establish and provide training to Water 
User Groups and Water Users Associations (WUGs and WUAs) to improve on-farm water management, and operations 
and maintenance (O&M) of the irrigation schemes. Moreover, MASA intends to coordinate with relevant sector 
institutions to promote agriculture intensification and market linkages for smallholder farmers.  

14. To support the PNI, the Government of Mozambique has requested the World Bank to support INIR’s capacity 
building program and finance priority irrigation infrastructure investments along the Central-Northern region. Under 
the PROIRRI, the World Bank supported key sector reforms, including the development of the PNI, the Water User 
Associations Decree Law5, and the draft regulations for private sector engagement on irrigation development. PROIRRI 
also financed the construction of 3,000 ha priority smallholder irrigation schemes in Manica, Sofala and Zambézia 
provinces, including the establishment and training of Water User Associations (WUAs) and Water User Groups 
(WUGs), and facilitated market linkages through existing agribusinesses. Through the Agriculture and Natural 
Resources Landscape Management (SUSTENTA) Project (P149620, approved by the Board on June 30, 2016) the Bank 
is supporting small emerging commercial farmers (SECF) and strengthening market linkages in a landscape approach 
in ten districts of Nampula and Zambézia. IRRIGA will build capacity for planning, design, construction and operation 
of irrigation infrastructure as proposed under the PNI, and further develop services required to enhance agriculture 
productivity in the northern-central region of the country. The IRRIGA project therefore builds on PROIRRI 
achievements and partners with SUSTENTA to maximize value chain development.  

15. The Government has also requested project support for the establishment at the central level agriculture 
investment management unit (AIMU) that will be responsible to coordinate all donor support to the sector. 
Participation of the World Bank is therefore key to contribute to the implementation of the PNI, and is expected to 
help catalyze additional financial contributions from the other development partners and the private sector. The World 
Bank has been a long-standing and valued partner in the agriculture sector in Mozambique, supporting the 
development of institutional reforms, as well as infrastructure investments. The proposed investment operation will 
build upon and leverage the World Bank’s deep involvement in the agriculture sector over time. 

16. The Bank support will be through a Series of Projects (SOP) to support MASA in the implementation of the 
National Agriculture Sector Investment Plan (PNISA).  The SOP will support a Program aimed to increase farmers’ 
productivity and improve rural livelihoods through increased access to irrigation and markets. The program will also 
fund the rehabilitation of a combined amount of 8,000 hectares of irrigated land, benefiting 12,000 smallholder 
farmers. The project description below and appraisal details refer to the first Project (SOP1).
 

C. Higher Level Objectives to which the Project Contributes 

17. The project is aligned with the Country Partnership Framework (CPF, FY17-21)6 which acknowledges low 
agriculture productivity as a major constraint to economic growth and poverty reduction. Specifically, the project 
contributes to the Focus Area 1 of the CPF on Promoting Diversified Growth and Enhanced Productivity and the Focus 
Area 2 of the CPF on Investing in Human Capital.  

18. The project addresses the Government of Mozambique’s priorities. Irrigation development is a strategic 
objective under Priority III (promote jobs, productivity and competitiveness) and priority IV (develop social and 
economic infrastructure) of the Government’s 5-year Plan 2015-2019. The project also supports the Strategic Plan for 
the Development of Agriculture Sector, 2010-2019 (PEDSA) and the National Agriculture Sector Investment Plan 
(PNISA), 2014-2019, which aim at increasing food security and income of agricultural producers in a competitive and 
sustainable manner, while guaranteeing social and gender equity.  

19. The project also contributes to the World Bank Group’s (WBG’s) twin goals of ending extreme poverty and 
promoting shared prosperity. Improved agriculture and irrigation practices will contribute to increase agriculture 
productivity and income generation for the rural communities in Mozambique. It will also contribute to improvements 
in human nutrition by improving the quality and quantity of food and reducing food insecurity. Moreover, the project 
will contribute to women empowerment by improving access to water and enable multi-seasonal production, as well 
as establishing participatory governing bodies for water management. In addition, the project will promote private 
sector participation mainly through the market linkages and where possible, through public-private partnerships to 
invest and operate small irrigation schemes. 

 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve smallholder agriculture productivity and market 
access in the project areas developed with irrigation and provide immediate and effective response to an eligible crisis 
or emergency. The Program objective of the Series of Projects is the same as the PDO of this Project. 
 
20. The key PDO-level results indicators for the proposed project are: 

• Average crop yield of selected commodities in irrigated production systems; 

• Proportion of the production marketed for selected commodities;  

• Farmers reached with agricultural assets or services (desegregated by gender); and 

• Number of beneficiaries (desegregated by gender) 

 
D. Project Description  
21. The first phase of the project (SOP1) is expected to improve agriculture productivity and market access to 
smallholder on 3,000 hectares of irrigated land rehabilitated under PROIRRI and on additional 3,000 hectares of 
irrigated land to be rehabilitated under the project for a total of 6,000 hectares. While investments in agricultural 
intensification and market access will be primarily in these 6,000 hectares, they will be also extended to areas beyond 
those rehabilitated irrigation areas (in coordination with and involvement of the private agribusiness sector) as the 


opportunity arise. The IRRIGA project will establish and strengthen WUGs and WUAs, improve water service delivery 
and on-farm water management, expedite the introduction and transfer of improved agriculture technology, and 
improve the input and output market linkages to irrigated and non-irrigated areas.  

22. The project will be implemented in four selected provinces - Manica, Nampula, Sofala and Zambezia. The main 
criteria for the selection of these four provinces were: (a) significant agricultural potential; (b) availability of water for 
irrigation in areas currently or formerly irrigated; (c) potential for complementarity with other Bank- funded agriculture 
operations and other partners; (d) large share of population being rural and involved in agriculture for their livelihood; 
(e) high level of poverty; (f) potential for linkages with the private agribusiness sector and other development projects; 
and (f) availability of recently rehabilitated irrigation schemes under PROIRRI. 

23. The project will finance the following five components: (i) institutional capacity building; (ii) smallholder 
irrigation development and management; (iii) agriculture intensification and market linkages; (iv) project management, 
monitoring and evaluation; and (v) contingency and emergency response. Below is the summary description for each 
component. Detailed project description is presented in Annex 1. 

24. Component 1 - Institutional Capacity Building (US$8 million of IDA Grant). The objectives of this component 
are to strengthen the institutional capacity and to improve the enabling policy environment, and support the regulatory 
framework of the institutions involved in the development of irrigated agriculture, and to enhance beneficiaries’ 
capacity for sustainable development and management of irrigated agriculture. In response to a request from the 
Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security, the project will strengthen MASA’s capacity for investment planning, 
implementation, coordination and management of all donor funding for the agriculture sector development in the 
country. This component will finance three main activities: (i)strengthening irrigation institutional capacity; (ii) 
strengthening agriculture institutional capacity and market linkages; and (iii) the establishment the Agriculture 
Investment Management Unit (AIMU). 

25. Sub-component 1.1. Strengthening Irrigation Institutional Capacity. This sub-component will finance technical 
assistance to support INIR to improve the enabling environment in the irrigation sub-sector and develop regulatory 
tools and a professional code of conduct to improve irrigation services delivery. Specifically, this sub-component will 
finance studies, training and equipment to: (i) improve the institutional and regulatory framework for the irrigation 
sector to improve irrigation service delivery; and (ii) establish a national irrigation water monitoring system that will 
collect data at watershed and irrigation perimeter level. These regulatory tools and processes are broadly identified in 
the PNI and include: preparation of the public private partnership (PPP) regulations; develop regulations and contract 
models for partnerships in irrigation, and guidelines for licensing irrigation development in the country; and 
partnerships with formal education systems in the country (e.g. University Eduardo Mondlane, Instituto Superior 
Politecnico de Manica, among others), including provision of internships for irrigation engineering and irrigation 
economics graduates for practical field work up to 12 months of field work.  

26. Sub-component 1.2. Strengthening Agriculture Institutional Capacity and Market Linkages. This sub-
component will finance capacity building of institutions involved in the development of irrigated agriculture, 
specifically: (i) The National Directorate of Planning and International Cooperation (DPCI) at MASA to strength the 
statistic services, agriculture market information systems to collect, process and disseminate market and price 
information (through digital mobile devices) in the country, and provision of training to staff; (ii) the National 
Directorate of Agricultural Extension Services (DNEA) and the Agricultural Research Institute (IIAM) to increase their 
capacity for the dissemination of improved agriculture technologies and practices in the project areas developed with 
irrigation; (iii) the National Directorate of Agriculture and Silviculture (DINAS) to establish a satellite monitoring system 
to monitor the use of all areas developed with irrigation in the country. This subcomponent will also establish an 
“agricultural observatory” to generate reports for decision making for relevant institutions involved in the agriculture 


development. These reports will support relevant departments at MASA, including IIAM, DNEA, DNAS, MITADER, 
Ministry of Public Works, Housing and Water resources (MOPHRH), and the Ministry of Trade and Industry (MIC), 
including input suppliers, traders and private agribusiness operators to improve their planning to support the 
development of the agriculture sector. 

27. Sub-component 1.3 Agriculture Investment Management Unit. This sub-component will finance technical 
assistance and incremental operating costs for the establishment of AIMU to lead agriculture sector investment 
planning and implementation at MASA. AIMU will report to the Technical Committee, composed by the National and 
General Directors of MASA, and headed by the Permanent Secretary. AIMU will initially manage and implement IRRIGA 
under the strategic guidance and supervision of INIR and then gradually evolve into the MASA operational unit for 
agriculture programs implementation, thus hosting all the MASA’s investment operations with donor funding in close 
coordination with the Policy Unit of MASA, in charge of the PEDSA and PNISA. The goal is to create a strong, long-term 
operational capacity within MASA and achieve economies of scale while reducing the burden on other functional areas 
tasked with regulatory and policy functions. 

28. The AIMU will consist of five teams, including financial management, procurement, safeguards management, 
monitoring and evaluation and technical design and supervision team (TDST). Under the IRRIGA Project, the unit will 
be responsible for the design of irrigation schemes and assurance of technical quality in all phases of the development 
of the irrigation schemes.  

29. Component 2: Smallholder Irrigation Development and Management (US$28 million of IDA Grant). This 
component will finance engineering design of 5,000 ha for irrigation development; and construction supervision, 
equipment and civil and hydraulic works for 3,000 ha of irrigated land in the project areas to improve water availability 
and resilience of irrigation services.  Forty potential districts have been identified in the four beneficiary provinces 
based on Government strategies for agriculture development, market needs and existing agro-climatic conditions, land 
and water availability, and existing markets. The location of the potential districts is presented in MAP 1. Out of the 
3000 ha, 500 ha have already been assessed (feasibility) under PROIRRI and 2,500 ha additional schemes which will be 
further assessed in the first eight months of project implementation to determine the exact scope of irrigation works 
to be financed by the project. The timeline for project implementation is presented in Annex 1. 

30. Sub-component 2.1: Irrigation Infrastructure Investment: This sub-component will finance technical assistance 
for detailed engineering design for 5,000 ha irrigated land, of which 3,000 ha will be rehabilitated and modernized 
under SOP1 and 2,000 in SOP2. The rehabilitation and modernization will consist of: (i) upgrading the water intake and 
transmission main; (ii) rehabilitation and expansion of water collection and storage structures; (iii) upgrading the 
distribution system; (iv)installation of water distribution and control structures; and (v) rehabilitation and protection 
of the catchment area and embankments for conservation and erosion control. The AIMU will be responsible for the 
technical oversight and quality control of the irrigation infrastructures to be constructed under this component. Priority 
will be given to gravity-fed open canal irrigation systems, as they are relatively simple to operate and maintain, and 
are less costly compared to pumped systems. Pumping will be considered, if at all, only for high value crops and under 
exceptional cases. The construction of the irrigation infrastructure will take into consideration environmental and 
social risks and will utilize the relevant safeguards instruments to implement appropriate mitigation measures. 

31. Sub-component 2.2: Irrigation Infrastructure Management: This subcomponent is designed to support the 
establishment and capacity strengthening for the Water User Groups (WUGs) and Associations (WUAs) in all irrigation 
schemes in the project areas to manage, operate, and maintain the irrigation and drainage systems operational. 
Specifically, the project will finance technical and logistical support to establish WUGs and WUAs; develop manuals 
and associated learning materials and media products, and deliver trainings on operation and maintenance of the 
schemes. The project will also finance incremental operating costs for transitional O&M and investment costs for WUAs 




operational offices and equipment. 

32. The expected outputs from this subcomponent would be: (i) the establishment of WUGs and WUAs in all areas 
developed with irrigation infrastructure to manage, operate, and maintain the irrigation and drainage systems at 
turnout and tertiary levels, and (ii) improvement of the level of bulk water service delivered to the WUAs. Expected 
benefits include: (a) improved maintenance of irrigation systems; (b) improved water distribution; (c) increased level 
of water fee collection; and (d) enhanced transparency and accountability. 

33. Component 3: Agriculture Intensification and Market Linkages (US$13 million of IDA grant). This component 
will improve productivity, production, cropping intensity, competitiveness and market access for 9,000 smallholder 
farmers cultivating roughly 6,000 ha of land in the project area. This component builds on successful interventions 
models in the country and the region. It will finance training, technical assistance, equipment and matching grants. 
This component will finance three main activities and specific eligibility criteria will be further developed in the PIM to 
ensure equity and avoid double dipping with beneficiaries already receiving assistance under PROIRRI. 

34. Sub-component 3.1. Capacity Building for Smallholder Farmers – Under this sub-component, the project will 
support organization of farmers into producer groups and provide training through Farmers’ Field Schools (FFSs), and 
through the Integrated Program for the Transfer of Agricultural Technologies (PITTA-Programa Integrado de 
Transferência de Tecnologias Agrárias), using methodologies currently under use by MASA.  Training to farmers will 
include: (a) supporting the establishment of smallholder farmers’ organizations and producers’ groups; (b) 
strengthening the knowledge of farmers on improved agricultural practices, technology, inputs and marketing; (c) 
strengthening the functional literacy and numeracy of farmers; (d) improving household nutrition; (e) improving soil 
fertility and integrated nutrient management; (f) promoting climate smart and conservation agriculture and other 
climate smart agriculture technologies and practices; and (g) conducting demonstration trials at the farm level (FFS). 
The project will also support training to staff from the local government institutions and service providers, including 
local NGOs, to provide technical assistance to the project’s smallholder farmer beneficiaries to prepare business plans. 
It is expected that up to a total of 9,000 farmers and 200 Government staff and more than 100 local service providers 
will benefit from the project support. 

35. Sub-component 3.2 Investment Support to Enhance Smallholder Agricultural Production. This subcomponent 
will finance vouchers for eligible farmers to allow access to improved farm technologies.  These would include but not 
be limited to: seeds, inputs, mechanization services such as those using draft animals, power tillers, tractors, etc. for 
individual farmers. The mechanism will enable market access to agricultural inputs and services and improve the 
capacity of suppliers to plan and delivery quality inputs and services based on voucher system. The voucher serve as a 
financial credit for the purchase of inputs and services and will be co-financed by the beneficiary. This approach will 
build on and expands a model promoted in country and in other neighboring countries such as Zambia with FAO 
support, which proved successful in equipping farmers and promoting local input providers.  It is expected that this 
sub-component will assist up to 9,000 farmers, of which half are expected to be women. The Project Implementation 
Manual will specify a sliding scale for financial support, with an increasing co-financing percentage paid by the 
beneficiary as the value of support provided by the project to the farmer increases.  

36. Sub-component 3.3 Matching Grants for Market-led Production and Value Chain Development – This 
subcomponent will finance matching grants to support business proposals to improve production, post-harvest, value 
addition, equipment, storages and marketing facilities. Matching grants will either finance business plans for groups of 
producers (window 1, including equipment, storage facilities, and technical assistance), or for Small and Medium 
Enterprises (window 2, for processing and value addition to improve existing businesses that benefit producers in the 
project area by purchasing production, grading, packaging etc.). Typical investments would include technical assistance 
and equipment to clean, sort, grade, wash, weigh, package, store or any other activity that add value.  


37. The matching grant structure will be similar to that implemented under the World Bank financed SUSTENTA 
Project. Window 1 will typically be up to US$100,000 of which 50 percent will be grant, 40 percent credit from a 
commercial bank to be repaid by the beneficiaries and 10 percent beneficiaries own contribution. Window 2 projects 
would be above US$100,000 and up to US$1 million. Specific details of the matching grants schemes will be further 
detailed in the PIM and matching grants manual (MGM).  

38. The eligibility criteria for the grants (see Annex Table A1.3) will take into consideration the capacity level of 
the farmer’s organization, including the availability of a business/investment plan, agronomic skills and experience, 
and alignment with project supported value-chains. The implementation arrangements and grant delivery structure 
will be reflected in the PIM and harmonized with similar programs under implementation by the Government of 
Mozambique.  

39. Component 4: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (US$6 million of IDA grant). The objective of 
this component is to ensure project management efficiency and efficacy, by ensuring the use of resources in 
accordance with the project’s objectives, procedures, and fiduciary guidelines; and finance monitoring and evaluation 
(M&E) activities during the project implementation and report regularly on implementation status and performance, 
and the achievement of project indicators and development objective. Specifically, the project will finance (i) 
incremental operating costs for project implementation at the national level led by AIMU and at the provincial level 
led by Provincial Implementation Units (PPIUs); and (ii) the establishment of a Management Information System (MIS) 
for irrigated agriculture, and the project monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system. 

40. Component 5: Contingency and Emergency Response (US$0). This component will provide immediate response 
in the event of an eligible crisis or emergency. This is a “zero-dollar” Contingency and Emergency Response Component. 
In the case of an adverse event that causes a major disaster, the Government of Mozambique may request the World 
Bank to channel some financial resources from this component to address the emergency. If agreed by the World Bank, 
part of the project resources will be re-allocated to this component to finance any critical emergency activities under 
this component. This component will facilitate access to rapid financing by allowing reallocation of uncommitted 
project funds in the event of a natural disaster, either by a formal declaration of a national or regional state of 
emergency or upon a formal request from the Government of Mozambique. Component 5 will use IDA Immediate 

Response Mechanism. 

 
E. Implementation 

 
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 

 

41. The project will be implemented by MASA at three levels of implementation: the national, provincial and district 
levels (Figure 1). Detailed implementation arrangements are provided in Annex 2 and will be further detailed in the 
PIM.  

42. At the National Level. MASA will be responsible for the overall implementation of the project, in consultation 
with the other relevant Ministries to ensure that the project activities are consistent with the national policies and 
programs. A Project Coordination Committee (PCC), chaired by the Minister (or - by delegation – by the Vice Minister), 
with participation of MOPH, MITADER, and Ministry of Industry and Trade (MIC), will have the overall decision-making 
responsibility regarding the management of the project, review decisions made by AIMU, issue directives to guide 
project interventions, methods and criteria. The PCC will be responsible for the approval of work plans and budgets, 
and oversight on compliance with World Bank fiduciary requirements. The Permanent Secretary of MASA will be the 
executive level head responsible for strategic direction of the project with support from the Technical Committee of 
 

the National Directors. AIMU will be responsible for day-to-day management of the project and will be composed by a 
Program Coordinator (PC), a communication specialist, an environmental safeguards specialist, a social safeguards 
specialist, an M&E specialist, a procurement specialist, a financial management specialist and the lead specialists for 
TDST. The detailed composition of the TDST is presented in Annex 2.  

43. AIMU. MASA will establish AIMU at the national level that will be (i) responsible for the project coordination and 
management of fiduciary issues in conformity with the standards and requirements agreed with the World Bank; and 
(ii) manage the project in accordance with the Financing Agreement and other project documents such as Project 
Appraisal document and the PIM.  

 

Figure 1. IRRIGA implementation Arrangements 

 



44. At the provincial level.  Each beneficiary province will have a Provincial Project Implementation Unit (PPIU) with 
a minimum of five staff including provincial coordinator, irrigation engineers, safeguard team and will collaborate with 
beneficiary districts to facilitate the project implementation.   

45. The Provincial Directorate of Agriculture will be responsible for implementation of the project in coordination 
with the provincial government directorates and district governments. A Provincial Project Coordination Committee 
(PPCC), chaired by the Provincial Governor, will oversee project implementation, including monitoring project progress 
at the provincial level and making decisions in line with the objectives and institutional arrangements that are 
consistent with the project document and legal agreements. The PPCC will approve and monitor the implementation 
of activities at provincial level. The Provincial Director of Agriculture (within the provincial government) will be 
responsible for strategic direction of the project at the Provincial level with support from the Provincial Project 
Implementation Unit, (PPIU) headed by a Provincial Project Coordinator (PPC) that will be responsible for day-to-day 
management of the project at the provincial level.  

46. Activity implementation on the ground will primarily be handled by service providers with involvement of local 
technical staff at Provincial Directorate of Agriculture. Component 2 will hire qualified engineering firms to undertake 
the design of the schemes and supervise the construction based on TORs agreed with the World Bank; Component 3 
will be implemented by services providers hired on competitive basis, based on TORs also agreed with the World Bank. 
Component 3 will provide training and demand based support in the e-vouchers for eligible farmers, and farmer groups 
for production, processing and marketing sub-projects. A specific Cost sharing grant will be prepared by the Project to 
guide the implementation of the grants in accordance with World Bank and Government of Mozambique Policies. The 
AIMU, PPIU will be responsible for overall coordination of implementation of the approved projects.   

47. At the District Level. Agricultural activities and marketing take place at district level. Given that the capacity is 
in most cases weak, the project will provide capacity building and targeted technical assistance. The District Office of 
Economic Activities (SDAE) will be responsible for project implementation at the district level, in coordination with 
District Services for Planning and Infrastructures and consultation with the District Administration. The SDAE will be 
actively involved in site identification and general oversight of the irrigation infrastructure development at the district 
level, identification and selection of sub-project proposals for matching grants with the Administrator’s guidance. The 
preparation and implementation of sub-projects for matching grants is at the level of irrigation scheme and smallholder 
farmer groups and associations.  To effectively participate in the implementation of the project, local SDAEs will have 
to carry out their work in accordance with their usual functions (training, extension, technical advice, among others), 
but they will require capacity building. To facilitate this process, the project will assist in: (I) capacity building; (ii) 
provide technical assistance; and (iii)engage service providers to assist local SDAEs. The farmers will also be involved 
in the design and construction works for the irrigation schemes and will be fully responsible for O&M of the schemes. 

 

B. Results Framework and Monitoring and Evaluation 

48. The Project will establish a Progress and Results Information Monitoring System (PRIMS) at MASA to monitor 
the implementation progress and the project outcomes. The system will be programmed as a web-based data 
reporting and management tool that will help: (i) to collect, document, analyze and generate reports on project 
progress and results indicators; (ii) to cross reference annual work plan and budget (AWP&B) tables with progress and 
results information; (iii) to integrate progress and results data of all sub-projects (i.e., monitoring of business plan 
implementation); (iv) to store and document geo-referenced data on seasonal water flow and use, agricultural 
production at plot level, and input/output markets; and (vi) to serve as a project related grievances monitoring 
database. The PRIMS will be procured in the first year of implementation.  


49. The Results Framework (RF) and the arrangements for monitoring results are reported in Section VII. The RF 
will be used to periodically track progress in achieving the project’s objectives. Also, the critical processes to achieve 
the project’s objectives, such as procurement, safeguards, technical assistance and institutional development 
activities, will be closely monitored. The project will rely on existing data sources at MASA and other Government 
agencies including the National Institute of Statistics, supplemented by regular data collection, and special surveys and 
assessment updates will be carried out by contracted specialists. Both quantitative and participatory M&E methods 
will be used to assess the social and gender inclusion of project participants. All teams involved in the implementation 
of the project will participate in the process of data collection, compilation, analysis, and use. The project will finance 
MIS costs under component 4. 

50. MASA will recruit an M&E specialist using project funds to be responsible for tracking progress on project 
results indicators. The M&E specialist, reporting to the AIMU, will be responsible for managing the PRIMS. The PRIMS 
will include an activity-specific database aligned with the annual activity plans and the M&E Plan for all outcome and 
intermediate performance indicators. The M&E specialist will be responsible for regular updating the PRIMS and 
producing quarterly progress reports. Two evaluations of project outputs and outcome will be commissioned, first at 
midterm and the second at completion. An M&E unit will be established within AIMU and the MIS and procedures for 
data collection and reporting will be prepared to the World Bank’s satisfaction. The project will finance M&E costs, 
including the impact evaluations (midterm and completion) as well as the implementation completion report, ICR.  

 
 .    
F. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 

The project will support the rehabilitation of irrigation schemes in 3,000 hectares in four provinces of 
central and northern Mozambique: Manica, Sofala, Nampula and Zambézia. The exact locations for the 
interventions have not yet been selected, though they are expected to fall within the above-listed provinces. 
The irrigation schemes will be assessed before investment is considered to ensure, economic, financial, 
social and environmental feasibility. In addition, no infrastructure investment will be made before critical 
issues such as land and water user rights have been fully secured. The project will not support construction 
of large scale irrigation structures to minimize the extent of environmental and social impacts. Priority will 
be given to gravity-fed open irrigation systems, as they are relatively simple to operate and maintain, and 
are less costly compared to the piped systems, and will consist of: diversion weir from the river, main canal 
from the weir to the irrigated area, distribution network canals, drainage network, internal road, protection 
dykes (for flooding risk), and land levelling. Dams are not required because the irrigation schemes will target 
permanent streams/rivers with enough water for irrigation and downstream use. The design and 
construction of the infrastructures will take into consideration the need to avoid and minimize 
environmental and social risks. Under the ongoing PROIRRI project it can be concluded that associated 
negative environmental and social impacts include water abstraction on downstream users, loss of wetland 
habitat because of the irrigation infrastructure needed, point and non-point pollution of water sources, soil 
erosion and siltation, acquisition of land for development of irrigation infrastructure, water and land-use 
related conflicts. However, some other potential impacts may have moderate intensity and significance, as 
well as being non site-specific, such as reduction of downstream water flow and eventual social conflicts 
among downstream water users. IRRIGA is rated as a Category B project, since most of these impacts are 



 

The World Bank  
Smallholder Irrigated Agriculture and Market Access Project (P164431) 

 

 

  
Apr 25, 2018 Page 15 of 24  

 

minor or of low-intensity, site-specific, thus relatively straight forward to manage with adequate 
participation of the Local Government entities. 

 
 
G. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 
 

Nuno Maria Brilha Vilela, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 
Mario Rizzolio, Social Safeguards Specialist 

 
 
 

SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

Proposed project investments under Components 2 
and Component 3 involve irrigation and 
infrastructure activities (irrigation related 
infrastructure, grain storage and processing 
facilities). Such investments have a potential of 
causing environmental impacts that require due 
safeguards consideration. Some of the associated 
negative environmental and social impacts include 
water abstraction on downstream users, loss of 
wetland habitat as a result of the irrigation 
infrastructure needed, point and non-point pollution 
of water sources from use of pesticides, fertilizers 
and other agrochemicals, soil erosion and siltation, 
water and land-use related conflicts. The specific 
location/site and scope of all project components 
are not yet known. Therefore, an Environmental and 
Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been 
prepared, consulted upon, and publicly disclosed 
prior to appraisal. Once there is information specific 
to individual sub-projects, site/project specific 
Environmental and Social Management Plans 
(ESMPs) will be prepared during implementation. 
The ESMF includes a set of Environmental and Social 
Clauses (ESC) for project implementers, provisions 
for stakeholder engagement as well as a grievance 
redress mechanisms. 

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No 
The project does not expect to involve or invest in 
Private Sector activities as defined under this policy 



 

The World Bank  
Smallholder Irrigated Agriculture and Market Access Project (P164431) 

 

 

  
Apr 25, 2018 Page 16 of 24  

 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

Overall, promotion of irrigation and agriculture 
intensification could lead to some negative impacts 
on natural habitats. Such impacts may include 
natural habitats degradation due to an increased 
land use pressure, water bodies and soil 
contamination from use of pesticides, fertilizers and 
other agrochemicals including reduced quantity and 
quality of water upon which natural habitats 
depend. Hence, OP 4.04 was triggered and the 
borrower prepared an ESMF which includes 
appropriate measures to address any potential 
impacts on natural habitats. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No 

The OP/BP4.36 is not triggered. IRRIGA will not have 
any direct or indirect impacts on health and quality 
of forests per this policy definition, or on people 
who depend on forests, as activities will mainly 
involve rehabilitation of existing irrigation schemes. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

Promoting intensification through improved inputs 
under Component 3 may lead to an increased use of 
pesticides (though at a low scale to boost agriculture 
productivity) which  could affect the quality and 
quantity of water or lead to soil contamination and 
degradation including risks to the health and safety 
of the farmers from the use pesticides or 
agrochemicals. To address such impacts the 
borrower has prepared and implemented under 
PROIRRI a Pest Management Plan (PMP) which 
includes guidelines and procedures that are essential 
in disseminating sustainable agricultural practices by 
promoting ecological and biological control of pest 
management. The PMP also contains specific 
measures to address health and safety risks to 
community and farmers due to mishandling of 
pesticides or disposal and storage of empty 
containers. The PMP was duly updated, under 
IRRIGA, tconsulted upon and publicly disclosed prior 
to appraisal. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 

The proposed project will involve civil works and 
could potentially involve chance finds of PCR during 
construction. The ESMF include Chance Find 
Procedures. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 

The policy does not apply to Mozambique, as there 
are no populations/communities that meet the 
definition of Indigenous Peoples as described in the 
policy. 



 

The World Bank  
Smallholder Irrigated Agriculture and Market Access Project (P164431) 

 

 

  
Apr 25, 2018 Page 17 of 24  

 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

The exact nature and specific location of the project 
interventions (in Manica, Nampula, Sofala and 
Zambezia provinces) will be determined during 
implementation, and because the project will 
finance activities such as civil works for irrigation 
schemes that may disrupt farmers activities  
restricting their access to water and potentially 
resulting in the loss of crops, OP 4.12 has been 
triggered. Land acquisition is expected to be low in 
magnitude and it is unlikely that the rehabilitation 
and expansion of agricultural areas would potentially 
result in physical displacement. Consequently, MASA 
has updated the Resettlement Policy Framework 
(RPF) of the PROIRRI to adequately address issues of 
land acquisition resulting in physical impacts on 
people and/or loss of assets, means of livelihoods or 
resources. 
The RPF sets forth the principles and procedures for 
managing issues of land acquisition requiring 
compensation and/or the physical displacement of 
persons/households. The RPF has been consulted 
and was sill be disclosed both in-country on 15 May 
2018 and by the World Bank on 17 May 2018 prior 
to Appraisal. The RFP includes specific guidance for 
screening subprojects for resettlement and 
livelihood impacts, and for the preparation (prior to 
subproject approval) and subsequent 
implementation of site-specific Resettlement Action 
Plans (RAPs) and/or Abbreviated Resettlement Plans 
(ARAPs). 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 Yes 

This policy is triggered since IRRIGA will support 
activities that will involve rehabilitation of water 
storage or water control structures, canals and 
rehabilitation of small dams/water diversion weirs. 
The project will not finance any large dams as 
defined under this policy. Nonetheless, the borrower 
prepared an ESMF that includes basic guidelines and 
measures to address potential environmental 
impacts from rehabilitation of small dams. Such 
measures will be included in the project design and 
will be reviewed by qualified engineers prior to 
commencement of the works. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

Yes 
IRRIGA will support construction and rehabilitation 
of irrigation schemes along Buzi and Zambezi River 
basins. However, the activities supported by the 



 

The World Bank  
Smallholder Irrigated Agriculture and Market Access Project (P164431) 

 

 

  
Apr 25, 2018 Page 18 of 24  

 

project will have a low likelihood of interference in 
intentional watershed, given the downstream 
location of the areas of the project intervention 
relative to riparian countries (Mozambique is the 
lowest riparian country of these rivers).  LEGEN has 
determined that the project qualifies for an 
exception to the notification requirement in OP 7.50.  
A memo for exception to notification prepared 
which was duly cleared by the AFRVP. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
This policy is not triggered. The area in which the 
project will be implemented is not known to include 
any disputed areas. 

 
 

KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project may have some unintended negative environmental and social impacts such as soil erosion, siltation, 
salinization, water pollution with fertilizers and pesticides, health risks for farmers due to agrochemicals usage, limited 
water availability for downstream users and biodiversity loss in mountain water springs, and loss of wetland habitat as 
a result of the irrigation infrastructures needed. Additionally, expansion of irrigation areas may also result in land 
acquisition and limited water availability for downstream which could then lead to loss of crops and livelihoods with 
potential to generate water and land-use related conflicts. Most of these impacts are minor or of low-intensity, site-
specific and thus relatively straight forward to manage, with involvement of the Local Governments entities and 
WUAs. Nonetheless, some other potential impacts may have moderate intensity and significance, as well as being non 
site-specific, such as reduction of downstream water flow, eventual social conflicts among downstream water users, 
drawing from PROIRRI's identified environmental and social impacts, or maybe labor influx issues with local 
communities. Overall, no potential large scale, significant or irreversible impacts are expected under IRRIGA. 
 
Other impacts associated with the civil works include health and safety of the workers and communities, dust 
pollution, and construction waste/debris. Some of the schemes rehabilitation/expansion works and equipment 
installation will be along the cultivated fields. Although the works will primarily occur along the edges of the fields, 
some works may disrupt farmers activities restricting their access to water and potentially resulting in the loss of 
crops. It is not anticipated that the project will lead to significant land acquisition or significant restrictions on access 
to sources of livelihood. Moreover, some of the construction works may require the hiring of external work force, thus 
leading to the risks of labor influx in rural areas. Such risks should be manageable and will be adequately addressed 
through application of standard Bank safeguard instruments (ESMF, RPF, ESIA/ESMP and RAP).  
 
The predecessor project, PROIRRI continues to face compliance issues. The ESMPs for the subprojects (32 irrigation 
schemes) were recently approved. The PIU has submitted a remediation plan which needs to be consolidated and 
implemented, to which end time and resources will have to be allocated. 
 



 

The World Bank  
Smallholder Irrigated Agriculture and Market Access Project (P164431) 

 

 

  
Apr 25, 2018 Page 19 of 24  

 

Borrower capacity to implement sound safeguard management procedures is low, but improving, therefore although 
global environmental and social impacts from IRRIGA are considered to be moderate, the environmental and social 
risk assessment of the overall project, including the PIU  (AIMU - Agriculture Investment Management Unit) capacity 
to perform adequate project safeguard management and procedures, is considered to be substantial. 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
As examples of potential indirect and/or long term impacts of IRRIGA, downstream water contamination from on-farm 
agro-chemicals application, reduction of downstream water flow and eventual social conflicts among downstream 
water users can be put forward. However, water availability studies were undertaken through other WB financed 
projects in the same target area, such as SUSTENTA and involving National and Regional Water authorities. These 
studies demonstrate that river flows are high and current uses are very low, hence easily accommodate the extra 
water need for IRRIGA and for other future water uses. Recent figures related to water availability, made at river basin 
level (for Lúrio, Meluli, Licungo, Zambezi, Pungoe and Buzi) clearly show that future cumulative water demand with 
IRRIGA ranges from 0.16% to 4.6% of these river's mean annual runoff. The ESMF includes an examination of potential 
cumulative and induced impacts to followed upon during implementation. 
 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. 
The project will not support construction of large scale irrigation structures in order to minimize likely environmental 
and social impacts. Priority will be given to gravity-fed canal irrigation systems. The feasibility studies, the design, the 
safeguards instruments and construction of the irrigation infrastructures will take into consideration the need to avoid 
and minimize to the extent possible, environmental and social risks. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower 
capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The project implementation arrangements related to the environmental and social safeguard requirements, national 
legislation and Bank policies, will be under responsibility of the Agriculture Investment Management Unit (AIMU) at 
MASA. 
 
The capacity of MASA to implement safeguard policies is still inadequate, but improving. MASA through AIMU 
(Agriculture Investment Management Unit) is currently implementing other WB funded projects and its overall 
capacity has been gradually strengthened at central ad local levels to address the increasing safeguards risks in this 
sector. AIMU comprises among others, a Project Coordinator and two dedicated safeguards specialists (environmental 
& social) who will ensure management of project’s safeguards requirements. IRRIGA safeguards capacity will build on 
experiences learnt from PROIRRI implementation while also establishing strategic synergies with other WB projects 
coordinated by FNDS (MOZBIO, SUSTENTA) with overlapping geographical area to ensure harmonization of procedures 
and protocols among projects and institutions. In addition, measures are being taken to ensure that the remedial 
measures still pending implementation under the ongoing PROIRRI project are satisfactorily addressed so to serve as 
he basis for IRRIGA safeguards management.  
 
The existing safeguards specialists at central level, will be further assisted at the provincial level by a team of social 
and environmental technicians who will closely oversee implementation and ensure compliance with safeguards 
policies in each of the targeted provinces. In addition, detailed team roles, responsibilities, as well as capacity building 
(training) requirements and procedures for sound management of environmental and social impacts were adequately 
included and budgeted for in the ESMF. A series of regional training seminars/workshops will be organized for all 
actors involved in the implementation of social and environmental safeguards policies, upon project effectiveness. 



 

The World Bank  
Smallholder Irrigated Agriculture and Market Access Project (P164431) 

 

 

  
Apr 25, 2018 Page 20 of 24  

 

 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, 
with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
During preparation of the ESMF, RPF and PMP a Public Consultation Process was undertaken in all provinces targeted 
by the IRRIGA, plus Maputo province, aiming to inform, hear and gather recommendations from different potentially 
affected and interested groups on project design, environmental and social impacts and risks related with the project 
activities. 
After project approval a Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) will be prepared to identify key stakeholders that are 
affected, and/or able to influence project design and its activities while also identifying effective methods and 
structures through which to disseminate project information and to ensure regular, accessible and transparent 
consultation; guide AIMU to build mutually respectful, beneficial and lasting relationships with stakeholders; Establish 
a Grievance Redress Mechanisms; and define roles and responsibilities for the implementation of the SEP. 
The main stakeholders to engage in this project are Farmers, Associations of Farmer, women associations, vulnerable 
groups (youth, elderly, disabled), Ministry of Land, Environment and Rural Development  (MITADER), DPTADER,  
Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security, Provincial Directorate of Agriculture and Food Security, District Services of 
Economical Activities (SDAE), District Services of Planning and Infrastructure (SDPI), National Directorate of Water 
Resource Management (DNGRH), Regional Administrations of Water (ARAs), Ministry of Industry and Commerce, 
NGOs, Academia and other ongoing projects such as SUSTENTA, MozFIP, MOZBIO, among others. 
At IRRIGA subproject level, during the prefeasibility phase and through the implementation of the E&S Screening Form 
(ESSF), stakeholders will be consulted in the identification and assessment of the social and environmental risks of a 
proposed project so that project design alternatives can be identified prior to proceeding to project feasibility. 
 

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Liberia: Rural Economic Transformation Project (P175263) 

 
 

  
Nov 25, 2020 Page 1 of 18  

     

 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document (PID) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 26-Nov-2020 | Report No: PIDC30434 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Liberia P175263  Liberia: Rural Economic 
Transformation Project 
(P175263) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA WEST Mar 16, 2021 May 25, 2021 Agriculture and Food 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Republic of Liberia Jeanine Milly Cooper  

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The project development objective (PDO) is to improve agriculture productivity and access to markets for selected  
value chains in the Project targeted areas. 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-NewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 55.00 

Total Financing 55.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 55.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 55.00 

          IDA Credit 55.00 

   
 

Environmental and Social Risk Classification Concept Review Decision 

Substantial  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

1. Liberia is a fragile and conflict-affected country with a high vulnerability to external shocks. Two civil wars 
between 1989 and 2003 destroyed the country’s economy, basic infrastructure, and institutional framework 
resulting in poor living conditions for most of the population. Following over twenty-five years of economic 
contraction, Liberia’s economy began to recover in 2004 with the 
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growing rate at an average annual 
rate of 7.4 percent from 2004-2013. However, the outbreak of the 
Ebola Virus Disease (EVD) in 2014 and a sharp decline in global prices 
for two of the country’s main export commodities (iron ore and 
rubber) disrupted Liberia’s economic recovery, resulting in a 
stagnant real GDP growth in 2015. An incipient recovery began 
around 2017/18 but was short-lived and the GDP contracted again 
by 2.3 percent in 2019.  

2. The COVID-19 pandemic has further exerted increased pressure on 
the economy. Real GDP is expected to contract again by 2.9 percent 
in 2020. During the first half of 2020, output declined in multiple sectors of the economy, including cement 
(45 percent), gold (33 percent), rubber (19 percent), and services (12 percent), reflecting the restriction 
measures implemented to slow the progression of COVID-19 and the weak global environment. A general 
lockdown aimed at containing the spread of the virus was imposed on April 10, 2020 and lifted on July 22, 
2020. Inflationary pressures moderated to 13 percent in June 2020, compared to 29.9 percent in June 2019, 
due to lower fuel prices and tight macroeconomic policy. The depreciation of the Liberian dollar slowed to 
1.5 percent in June 2020 compared to 30.2 percent in June 2019, reflecting an improvement by US$21.1 
million in the trade deficit in Jan-June 2020 period. According to the Central Bank of Liberia (CBL), export 
receipts declined by 4.8 percent in January-June 2020 while the value of imports decreased by 7.4 percent. 
Fiscal policy was also tightened despite the COVID-19 pandemic with the fiscal deficit expected to be 
reduced to 3.7 percent in 2020, down from 6.1 percent in 2019. Nevertheless, the level of the public debt is 
expected to increase in 2020, reflecting mainly the economic contraction and the continued negative trade 
balance. 

3. Poverty remains widespread in Liberia. With a Gross National Income (GNI) per capita of just US$600 in 
2018, Liberia is among the ten poorest countries in the world. It also has high income inequality levels with 
an estimated Gini coefficient of 35.5 in 2016. From 2007 to 2014, Liberia’s per capita GDP growth rate 

Box 1. Liberia key socio-economic data 

(2019) 

Population, total (millions) 

GDP (current US$, billions) 

GNI per capita US$ 

GDP growth (annual %) 

Inequality - Gini Coefficient 

Merchandise imports (% of 

GDP)a 

External debt, total (% of GDP)b 

5.0 

3.07 

580 

-2.3 

35.3 

33.9 

38.5 

Source: WDI, Macro Poverty Outlook & 
Official Data 
Notes 
a Most Recent WDI Value (2016) 
bMost Recent WDI Value (2018) 

 

averaged 3.3 percent per year, which helped reduce the poverty rate1 from 68.6 percent in 2007 to 38.6 
percent in 2014. However, from 2014 through 2019 per capita GDP contracted causing the poverty rate to 
rise again to 43.4 percent by 2019. In addition, there are acute rural-urban and gender disparities (urban 
population constitutes around 54 percent), driven by unequal access to land and productive assets, 
infrastructure and public services, and markets for both goods and labor. Liberia ranks 176th out of 189 
countries in the 2019 United Nations Development Program (UNDP) Human Development Index. In the 2020 
Doing Business report, Liberia ranked 175th out of 190 economies on the overall ease of doing business2. In 
terms of gender equality, Liberia ranks 97th out 153 countries in the World Economic Forum’s gender 
equality index and 17th out of 34 countries in Sub-Saharan Africa. 

4. Liberia’s development and poverty reduction programs are severely constrained by lack of road access. 
With only 750 km of paved roads, Liberia is below SSA average road density. The 2018 World Bank Logistics 
Performance Index ranked the country 143rd out of 160 countries.  Nearly 60 percent of rural Liberians lack 
access to an all-weather road, limiting their ability to participate in economic activities and access vital 
services such as health and education.  Regional trade accounts for only one percent of the total 
merchandise trade, in part because of the poor condition of the key regional corridor in Liberia’s, Trans-
African Highway Seven (TAH7).  Therefore, improving road access is imperative to promote national 
integration and economic growth.  Despite abundant arable land and a hospitable climate for agriculture, 
Liberia faces chronic food insecurity in part because lack of road access and underdeveloped agro-logistic 
services hinder agricultural productivity and depress farm incomes. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 

 

5. Agriculture is the foundation of Liberia’s economy and the key to food security and poverty reduction. 
Agricultural production constitutes the most important livelihood for the average Liberian, involving more 
than 70 percent of the population. The sector accounted for 27.3 percent of real GDP in 2019 (a decline from 
38.8 percent in 2010) and 43.3 percent of total employment (down from 57.4 percent in 1995). Majority of 
farmers grow cereals/staples, including rice (64 percent) and cassava (60 percent), followed by a variety of 
vegetables, such as a peppers (50 percent), bitter balls (44 percent), okra and green leaves (30 percent). 
Most of these famers cultivate an average of 0.7 hectares under rain-fed conditions generating small 
marketable surpluses. Tree crops, especially rubber, oil palm, cocoa and coffee, make an important cash 
crops to smallholder farmers and contribute significantly to the economy. Rubber is the most important cash 
crop in Liberia and accounts for almost 65 percent of total export earnings3. But Liberia imports 50-60 
percent of its staple food requirements, making it vulnerable to global food price volatility.  
 

6. The Government of Liberia (GoL) considers agricultural growth to be critical for reducing poverty. The GoL 
has developed a five-year National Development Plan referred to as the Pro-Poor Agenda for Prosperity and 
Development (PAPD). As stated in the PAPD, the government recognizes the need for inclusive and 
sustainable economic diversification to achieve structural transformation and growth, the urgency of 

 
1 Liberia’s poverty rate is measured as percentage of population below the international poverty line of US$1.9/ day in 2011 purchasing-power-parity 
(PPP) terms. 
2 World Bank report on Doing Business: Measuring Business Regulations: 2020. www.doingbusiness.org 
3 Rubber production increased from 46,819 mt in 2018 to 65,743 mt in 2019 (40.4 percent. Annual Report, CBL, 2019. 


facilitating private sector participation in the economy, and the importance of the agri-food sector as an 
important engine of growth. It has also prioritized the agriculture sector in their commitment to diversify 
the economy and has identified eight priority value chains requiring support under the PAPD 2018–23. These 
include rice, oil palm, horticulture, cocoa, rubber, cassava, poultry, and pig husbandry. 
 

7. Liberia’s agriculture is characterized by a diversified structure of agriculture production. Forest-based and 
tree crop farming systems cover the largest proportion of the land area in Liberia. They include tree crop-
based systems in which vegetables and other food crops are produced on a minor scale, mostly in the central 
belt of the country; root crop-based systems (with cereals) concentrated in the northern region; and fishing 
and land-based mixed cropping enterprises along the coastal belt. The three main structures of production 
are: (i) large plantations that produce major export crops such as rubber, oil palm, and to a lesser, degree 
coffee and cocoa; (ii) domestically owned, medium-sized commercial farms that cultivate industrial crops 
for export and livestock for the local market; and (iii) small household farms that use traditional production 
techniques and limited improved inputs with relatively low levels of productivity and limited access to 
markets. 
 

8. Liberia’s agriculture is characterized by low productivity. The long-lasting conflicts in Liberia have destroyed 
agricultural capital and disrupted food production, further compounding structural impediments and past 
policy failures. Since the end of hostilities, food production has increased, but smallholder yields remain low; 
e.g., in lowland rice production systems, estimated average farm paddy yield is 1.7 tons per hectare, while 
on-farm research produces up to 5 tons per hectare using improved variety and good production practices4. 
Globally, average rice yields in recent years have been at 4.2 kg/ha for paddy rice. Food value chains are also 
undeveloped, and institutions that provide advisory and support services are weak. Despite Liberia’s large 
arable land, it has been estimated that at least 15 percent of the population was severely food insecure. 

 
9. Significant challenges are limiting increased agriculture productivity and value chains development in 

Liberia. These include: (i) limited access to improved inputs and modern practices;  (ii) limited extension 
services; apart from agricultural extension provided by non-governmental organization, government 
agricultural extension services are practically non-existent5; (iii) impaired market access due to limited 
network of roads and lack of compliance with evolving market demands; (iv) weak integration of value chains 
due to insufficient aggregation of agriculture production, and lack of storage, processing, and marketing 
channels; (v) non-existent sanitary and quality controls for agricultural products; and (vi) high levels of post-
harvest losses. In addition, extremely high cost of electricity impedes the development of functioning and 
cost-efficient cold chains, which constraints competitiveness of Liberian fresh exports. Liberia will require 
critical facilities for managing sanitary and phytosanitary (SPS) requirements and support to private sector 
players to improve quality management through the adoption of (and certification in) good agricultural and 
agro-industrial practices Data collected for the Enabling Business in Agriculture 2019 Report (EBA) has 
identified significant weaknesses in all areas covered by the report, and Liberia’s performance is found to be 
below the regional average in most areas, most notably in use of quality seeds, application of fertilizers, 
secure use of water, using adequate machinery, application of plant protection measures, sustainable 


livestock management, and access to finance.  
 

10. Liberia’s Agricultural Sector Investment Plan (LASIP II).  According to LASIP II, covering the period 2018-
2022, the current strategic long-term vision for the agricultural sector is generally to promote an inclusive 
and sustainable agricultural transformation through catalytic investment in agricultural value chains and 
industrialization and resilience to ensure food and nutrition security, environmental health, job and wealth 
creation and inclusive growth. The challenges to this agricultural transformation are:  (i) weak private sector 
and entrepreneurial skill;  (ii) inefficient production systems;  (iii) weak policy and business environment;  
(iv)  significant human resource challenges;  (v) inadequate infrastructure; (vi) insufficient agricultural 
funding;  (vii) low productivity subsistence farming;  (viii) inadequate natural resource management; and 
(ix) very limited agricultural research and development programs constraining adoption of modern practices 
and resulting in stagnant productivity. 
 

11. Poor road infrastructure has significantly hindered the growth of the agricultural sector. Farmers’ ability 
to access valuable markets and improved inputs to increase production is limited by the poor quality of the 
country’s network of roads. During the May–September rainy season, movement from rural areas is 
significantly restrained due to heavy rainfall, especially in lowland swamp areas. As a result, smallholders 
tend to sell produce in local markets where prices are relatively lower. Despite the government’s current 
initiative to rehabilitate main roadways and some key feeder roads in productive areas, more work is needed 
to improve road and bridge infrastructure in remote rural areas. In recent years the GoL promoted a 
comprehensive road network to increase country’s competitiveness including road in southeastern Liberia 
and the development of a coastal road link joining the capital, Monrovia, with Harper, capital city of 
Maryland County.  
 

12. Small and medium-size farmers trying to establish linkages with buyers have limited ability to deliver the 
required quantity and quality of produce in a timely and consistent schedule. International experience 
shows that, even in the segment of emerging commercially-oriented farmers, it has been challenging for 
them to meet the demands and requirements of buyers, including supplying consistent quantities and 
quality of goods complying with sanitary and phytosanitary standards and delivered them on time. These 
small and medium-sized farmers are less capitalized than the larger individual commercial farmers or 
producing firms/corporations, have low technology adoption and limited access to information. They are 
also lacking the equipment, infrastructure, and farm management skills to diversify into new products and 
to become reliable suppliers to buyers and industry, in a modern market with increasing demands.  Also, the 
limited size and weaknesses of their organizations creates uncertainties for the prospective buyers and 
constraints the flow of information, thus reducing possibilities for gaining access to remunerative markets.  
 

13. Access to adequate financial services, necessary for supporting investments and increasing farm 
productivity and agribusiness competitiveness, are quite limited. The small number of financial institutions 
provide a limited array of products and services to the agri-food sector (credit extended to agricultural sector 
is estimated at 5.4 percent of total lending in the economy).  Financing for agriculture is mainly limited to 
export crops such as rubber and cocoa, for which foreign investors provide finance for plantation 
development and donor-supported projects channel small amounts of financing through financial 


institutions.  The main obstacles for small and medium size farmers, are:  (i) unsecure land tenure and limited 
availability of collateral due to absence of other forms of capital accepted as collateral (ii) low levels of 
financial literacy and credit background; (iii) common perception in the financial sector that agricultural is 
too risky and returns are uncertain; (iv) small farm size and low level of organization do not ensure adequate 
volume of supply with consistent quality; (v) limited experience by financial agencies in lending to the sector; 
(vi) financial intermediaries normally lend at short-term and are reluctant to lend for medium- and long-
term investments. 
 

14. Women are major players in the agriculture sector, although facing substantial gender inequalities. They 
comprise approximately 60 percent of the rural agricultural labor force and carry out 80 percent of 
agricultural activities throughout the planting season, including land clearing, planting, harvesting, and 
marketing. Although they play a dominant role in agricultural production, few women are able to own land, 
access loans, or control the income they earn from their labor. Moreover, women have less access to 
productive inputs than men, including skills training, basic tools, and technology. Women’s workloads are 
also increased during less productive periods, when many men migrate to seek work in mines, plantations, 
and urban areas, leaving women to care for their families and farms.  
 

15. Climate change and shifting cultivation are the most significant environmental threats in Liberia. Liberia’s 
susceptibility to negative climate impacts has significantly increased due to a combination of low agriculture 
productivity, climate vulnerability risks, population pressure and unsustainable natural resource 
management. According to data of the climate change vulnerability index, Liberia is among the top 20 most 
vulnerable countries in Africa. Major climate related changes including an average temperature rise (1-2 
degrees Celsius), modified rainfall patterns, and more frequent extreme weather events (such as flooding 
and drought) are predicted to occur over the next decades. These changes may result in heat stress, 
reduction of food crops and fodder crop production both in quality and quantity, and higher susceptibility 
to pests and diseases. Given the climate sensitivities of multiple engines of growth, agriculture, natural 
capital, and infrastructure, the urgency for Liberia to ramp up climate-smart development at scale and across 
the growth spectrum is an imperative. Moreover, due to the availability of land and forests, farmers tend to 
shift cultivation to new plots annually to increase production rather than implementing improved 
agricultural management techniques, which contributes to deforestation.  Low income populations struggle 
more than others to cope with and adapt to climate change and natural hazards, increasing their risk to fall 
deeper into poverty. 
 

16. GoL recognizes that transformation is required in the food and agriculture sector to maximize its 
contribution to economic growth and poverty reduction. Within the framework of its Pro-Poor Agenda for 
Prosperity and Development, the GoL is focusing on three fundamental issues: (i) improved national food 
and nutrition security with the objective to increase food availability and production in order to spur local 
economic development and food security; (ii) enhanced agricultural productivity, competitiveness, and 
linkages to markets; focusing on strengthening efficiency, promoting innovation, fostering sustainability, 
and leveraging opportunities in national and external markets; broadening and strengthen private sector 
participation; increasing public investments (mainly in rural infrastructure); and creating an enabling 
macroeconomic environment; and (iii) strengthened human and institutional capacities with the thrust to 


establish effective and efficient public sector frameworks in agricultural planning and coordination; reduce 
risks and improve coping mechanisms; mainstream gender and youth in agriculture and rural development 
and ensure sustainable use of natural resources. 
 

17. The proposed Rural Economic Transformation Project (RETRAP) supports the GoL Pro-Poor Agenda for 
Prosperity and Development and the MoA three-year strategy plan for the Agriculture sector with a focus 
on: (i) institutional development and the promotion of inclusive and competitive value chains (cassava, 
rubber, poultry, and piggery). It also supports the GoL achieve its commitments under the Comprehensive 
African Agricultural Development Program (CAADP), which commits the country’s government to investing 
more in the agriculture sector. 

 
Relationship to CPF 

 

18. Country Partnership Framework (CPF) Pillars.  The proposed Project is in consonant with the three pillars 
of the CPF (FY19-FY24) for Liberia, including (i) strengthening institutions and creating an enabling 
environment for inclusive and sustainable growth; (ii) building human capital to seize new economic 
opportunities; and (iii) narrowing the infrastructure gap to foster more equitable nationwide development. 
It is also contributing to achieving the country’s UN Sustainable Development Goals, in particular Goal 1 (End 
poverty in all its forms everywhere), Goal 2 (End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition, and 
promote sustainable agriculture); Goal 9 (Develop quality, reliable, sustainable and resilient infrastructure, 
including regional and trans-border infrastructure, to support economic development and human well-
being, with a focus on affordable and equitable access for all); and Goal 13 (Take urgent action to combat 
climate change and its impact: by enhancing productivity that implies the efficient use of inputs, including 
water and land; enhancing awareness and promoting climate smart agriculture measures).  
 

19. The proposed project supports IDA19 policy priorities (Gender, Climate, Governance, Jobs, FCV). The 
project will support the following key agendas: (i) Economic transformation and job creation: by supporting 
sustained increases in agricultural productivity and a shift to commercial enterprises, the strengthening of 
efficient value chains and the development of a thriving rural economy which will in turn create quality 
employment in upstream and downstream activities servicing agriculture; (ii) resilience building and food 
security: by enhancing resilience of domestic agricultural production systems through the promotion of 
climate smart technologies6; and (iv) Gender inclusion: by helping removing the constraints in access and 
ownership of productive resources faced by women as well as support their access to information, financial 
services and technologies (for production, processing and marketing).  

 
 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
The project development objective (PDO) is to improve agriculture productivity and access to markets for selected  
value chains in the Project targeted areas. 

 
6 The project will also contribute to the WBG’s Africa Climate Change Business Plan and to reaching CIV’s climate change mitigation and adaptation targets articulated 
in the Intended National Determined Contribution (INDC). 

 
Key Results (From PCN) 

 

20. The following key performance indicators are proposed to measure the project outcomes: 
a) Farmers reached with agricultural assets or services, disaggregated by gender (Number) - Core 

Results Indicator (CRI); 
b) Farmers adopting improved agricultural technology; disaggregated by gender (Number). 
c) Increase in yield among project beneficiaries, disaggregated by key targeted commodity (Metric 

tons per hectare).  
d) Increase in volume of annual sales (Metric tons) for the target commodities produced by the 

beneficiary farmers’ groups;   
e) Number of direct project beneficiaries (Number); disaggregated by type and gender 

(Percentage). 
 
 
D. Concept Description 

 

21. The project addresses important challenges to developing agri-food value chains in Liberia. 
These include:  (i) weak capacity of support institutions for delivery of agribusiness services; (ii) poor 
organization of smallholder farmers; (ii) low agriculture productivity due to limited access to 
improved technologies, modern inputs, and advisory services; (iii) weak access to markets due to 
inadequate post-harvest, transport, and marketing infrastructure; and (iv) limited private sector 
investment in production, processing capacity and value-added activities.  To address these 
challenges, the project will contribute to creating long-term economic opportunities for value chain 
actors by applying a three-fold approach: (i) strengthen critical institutions overseeing the 
development of the sector; (ii) intervene at various level of the supply chain via capacity building 
and investment subprojects focused on improving agriculture productivity and resilience of the food 
system to climate change, thus enhancing market access; and (iii) improvement of rural access and 
agricultural marketing through the upgrading of roads, construction of short-span critical cross-
drainage structures, and improvement of agro-logistics centers.  
 

22. Targeted priority value chains. Cassava, rubber, poultry, piggery and vegetable value chains where 
selected for Project support.  These value chains will complement the value chains which are already 
supported under the World Bank-funded Smallholder Agriculture Transformation and Agribusiness 
Revitalization Project (STAR-P – P160945): rice, oil palm, and horticulture. The selection was based on two 
sector scans7, 8  which assessed a range of development impact criteria; including: (i) evidence-based 
market demand for selected commodities; (ii) high growth potential, demonstrated by positive 
growth trends of the value chains, scope for expanding production and increasing sales, and scope 
for value addition through processing; (iii) potential for poverty reduction9; and (iv) project-related 
aspects, including existing infrastructure and complementarities with other projects in the country. 

 
7 Netherlands Enterprise Agency, 2017. Sector Scan-Liberia Agriculture Sector. 
8 World Bank, International Finance Corporation, and GoL. 2017. Agricultural Commercialization and Agribusiness Development Project: Sector Scan 

Report. 
9 Potential for poverty reduction is based on locally available raw materials and skills, new job opportunities created, low entry barriers for small-scale 

entrepreneurs, and prospects for women and youth. 



Vegetables production (home gardens) will also be supported because of its importance in 
generating incomes for women and for nutrition diversification at the household level (See Annex 1 for 
further details). 
 

23. Geographical focus and phased approach. The Project is expected to operate in 10 out of the 15 Counties 
of Liberia (see Annex 2): (i) Group 1: covering the Bong, Lofa, Nimba, Grand Bassa, Bomi, Grand Cape Mount, 
Grand Gedeh and Maryland counties, which offer comparative advantage for the production of cassava; (ii) 
Group 2: covering the Counties of Montserrado, Nimba, Bong, Margibi, Bomi, Sinoe and Maryland counties, 
with advantages for rubber production;  (iii) Group 3:  covering the Regions of Grand Cape Mount, Bomi, 
Montserrado, Bong and Margibi for poultry/piggery production.  The Project would give priority to counties 
where farmers organizations already exist, and where there are market opportunities (processing factories, 
close to urban areas, border-outlets, etc.), before moving to counties without any existing farmers 
organizations. The final selection of the project’s intervention location for the selected value chains will be 
determined during project preparation in consultation with key value chain stakeholders.  
 

24. The project builds on the design features of the Smallholder Agriculture Transformation and Agribusiness 
Revitalization Project (STAR-P, P160945). The proposed project builds on the experience gained under the 
STAR-P Project, expanding the “Productive Alliance” approach to promote new selected value chains. This 
approach support producer organizations by bringing together: (i) a group of  farmers producing a particular 
product; (ii) one or more (potential) buyers for that product; and (iii) other partners involved along the value 
chain providing services or undertaking some processing required by the final buyer/s (e.g., aggregation, 
handling, storage, processing). These entities, or participating members of the “alliance” are connected 
through a business proposition, or “business plan”, which assesses the capital and service needs of the 
producer association, and proposes improvements that would allow them to upgrade their production 
capacities and skills to strengthen their linkage with the markets.  The public sector is normally engaged in 
providing an enabling environment and, in many occasions, supporting the participating member preparing 
investment proposals, as well as providing adequate financing for implementing the proposal. Global 
experience has shown that the approach help solving multiple constraints by providing integrated solutions 
adapted to local conditions and explores the existence of significant motivations perceived by partners in 
the alliance and significantly contributes to increasing stability in prices, assured sales, as well as 
improvements in product quality and, hence, have resulted in increased revenues.   
 

25. In addressing identified value chain constraints and in partnership with IFC, the Project will include a 
spectrum of actions for Maximizing Finance for Development (MFD). These actions, to be further 
developed during preparation, may include: (i) increasing the space for private sector activity; (ii) improving 
the policy and regulatory environment; for instance through establishing partnerships between operators 
within the value chains, and improving farmers – buyers contractual arrangements; (ii) facilitating access to 
finance for agribusiness development (provision of matching grants) and supporting agri-entrepreneurs to 
develop “bankable” and viable business plans;  (iii) supporting essential public goods and services such as 
strengthening human capital, agricultural research/extension services, and public infrastructure (roads and 
market information) contributing to enhance market access; and (iv) technical assistance to financial 
institutions to strengthen their capacity for diversifying their financial products and expanding their 
outreach, as well as to address the lack of financial literacy in the group of potential beneficiaries.  

 
26. Scaling-up and disseminate innovative agricultural technologies:  Farmers’ access to localized, relevant and 

timely information on crop management and market intelligence is critical to achieve project objective. In 
this context, mobile-based rural advisory services (RAS), has potential to drive greater productivity gains 
than traditional methods of extension and reduce information asymmetry on market prices etc. The project 
will identify and assess existing examples10 of relevant modern and innovative solutions implemented in the 
country and provide financial support to customize such products for the project-supported producer 
organizations.  

 
27. The Project will also focus on other cross-cutting priorities.  These are; especially: (i) taking gender issues 

and empowerment of vulnerable groups (women and youth) into account in the context of broad  social 
safeguards measures (ii) promoting mitigation and adaptation to climate change and adherence to 
environmental sound actions as well as giving priority to climate smart technologies enhancing resilience; 
and (iii) promoting inclusion of products for improving nutrition at household level; and (iv) giving priority 
to adoption of technologies reducing GHG emissions. The project will set targets for participation by women 
and youth and will prioritize subprojects that have the potential to generate full-time rural employment 
opportunities. When selecting subprojects for investment, the project will mainstream resilient and low 
carbon activities to help address agricultural vulnerability and reduce agricultural emissions of greenhouse 
gases (GHGs). The project will also promote climate-smart agriculture (CSA) approaches as well as best 
practices and technologies for water resource management to improve climate resilience. With regards to 
nutrition, the project will promote home gardening and simultaneously support the dissemination of 
information on sound nutritional practices among beneficiaries, particularly for women and children.  

 
 

1. Description 
 
Project Components 

 

28. Component 1: Improving the enabling environment, enhancing support services for agribusiness 
development and strengthening producer organizations (IDA US$3.5 million). The objective of Component 
1 is to improve the enabling policy and regulatory environment necessary for private businesses to increase 
investment and commercial activities and enhancing delivery of quality support services that can foster an 
inclusive and competitive development of this sector. The project will invest in development and 
maintenance of an Integrated Agriculture Business Information and Intelligence Information System (IABIIS) 
to improve service delivery capabilities of MoA.  At the same time, the project will be supporting farmers in 
the formation of producer organizations (in areas where they are not present and assessed as feasible), as 
well as in developing their skills in technical, administrative/managerial and marketing activities. The 

 
10 Examples such as a) partnership between The Cookshop (a Liberian online food delivery startup) and GROW Liberia Program (agri-business and 
investment advisory program) to operate a Market Information System for agricultural commodity prices for farmers to post and review products and prices. 
The partnership leverages GROWs existing partnerships with the Monrovia Vegetable Sellers Association and the Farmers Union Network (FUN), and 
Cookshop’s existing relationships with over 40 food retailers including restaurants, hotels and supermarkets; b) Power Gari, a nutritionally fortified cassava-
based porridge, produced with R&D support of a Silicon-Valley based food-tech company, developing plant-based food products; https://nextbillion.net/low-
tech-high-impact-food-production-africa/  
 

component will finance combinations of specialized technical assistance, training, works, goods, consulting 
and non-consulting services, and operational expenses, as detailed below.  
 

30. Subcomponent 1.1: Improving public agribusiness services. This intervention aims at enhancing the 
capacity of selected public services that are critical for enabling agribusiness; principally, Ministry of 
Agriculture (MoA), Cooperative Development Agency (CDA), Central Agricultural Research Institute (CARI), 
Soil and Crop laboratory, and the National Standard Laboratory (NSL, with national responsibility for testing 
food quality). The project will undertake a functional review of these entities and recommend solutions for 
improving the quality of their services. The focus will be on strategies and solutions for enhanced growth 
and entrepreneurship in the agribusiness sector; formulating interactive and demand driven knowledge, 
innovation and extension system with a focus on climate-smart technologies; promotion of investments in 
the sector (encouraging women and youth entrepreneurship); enhanced governance and partnerships 
across the value chains, and management of agribusiness development programs/projects. In principle, it 
will also support MoA to operationalize the sector’s approved acts on seeds, food safety, pesticide, fertilizer 
and the national rice development strategy, updating and enforcement of standards in the agriculture 
sector; this will include the provision of technical assistance, training, and equipment; and (ii) establishing 
an agriculture database to support monitoring, research, policy-making and allocation of resources by 
counties. The system shall ensure that farmers, allied institutions of MoA (such as CARI, NSL) and private 
sector partners have a shared platform for data access, knowledge sharing and to avail advisory/financial 
benefits. The component will finance system design and maintenance, purchase of IT infrastructure, on-
boarding of competent human resources and requisite IT service providers.  
 

31. Subcomponent 1.2: Enhancing value chain coordination and public-private dialogue-(PPD). The Project 
will: (i) conduct a stakeholder mapping exercise as the basis to put in place a representative and inclusive 
Private Public Dialogue (PPD) mechanism; (ii) support the establishment and operation of this mechanism, 
including training of main stakeholders on its effective use to improve the performance of targeted value 
chains; and (iii) support increased consultations among the value chain stakeholders (especially women), 
through  regular forums to discuss the various constraints of the sector, review and update the government 
sector strategy, develop a shared vision and harmonized approach to minimize potential conflict, 
mainstream climate change in the programs, devise mechanisms for coordinating donor assistance and 
creating an enabling environment for private and public investments. It will also support establishing an 
Agribusiness Growth Delivery Unit (AGDU) as an agribusiness strategy incubator and strategic advisory arm 
of MoA.  
 

32. Subcomponent 1.3:  Strengthening Producer Organizations.  This subcomponent will address the need to 
enhance capacities of targeted Farmers-Based Organizations (FBOs) to be able to address critical limiting 
factors to facilitate effective access to markets and sustainable integration with formal and lucrative value 
chains and providing support for taking advantage of investment opportunities. It will comprise financing of 
technical assistance, training and capacity building of beneficiaries and their organizations, as well as 
services for facilitating complementary services (financial, specialized technical assistance, inputs, 
certification services, etc.).  Assistance will cover assistance to establish new organizations in areas where 
they are absent (but it is feasible and there are clear competitive advantages) and legal assistance to their 
formal registration. 
 

33. Component 2: Enhancing Competitiveness and Market Access through Productive Alliances (IDA US$15 
million). The objective of this component is to promote the development of organizations of small and 
medium-sized agricultural producers participating in “productive alliances” with selected partners with the 
aim to be able to operate competitively in selected value chains, with strengthened and more reliable 
linkages with buyers and markets and increased capacity to manage climate risks. The basic approach is to 
promote investments and collective actions, with the aim of gaining economies of scale, enhancing 
bargaining power, facilitating knowledge sharing, and reducing costs of production and service delivery.  The 
activities included in these subprojects could comprise eligible works, goods, and services required by 
different partners participating in the subproject to achieve measurable targets in terms of product/service 
specifications (such as quality, quantity, and delivery conditions) agreed with their respective prospective 
buyer or customers, within the framework of a joint business plan. 
 

34. Subcomponent 2.1:  Pre-Investment Activities.  This subcomponent will support pre-investment activities 
to: (i) promote the project concept and increase outreach to potential FBO beneficiaries, commercial 
partners, and private financing entities, as well as identify productive alliances among FBOs and commercial 
partners; (ii) identify potential business opportunities on the part of the productive alliance; (iii) prepare 
business plans and proposals for Investment Subprojects reflecting the identified opportunity; (iv) build 
capacity among technical service providers to enhance the quality of the services provided to the productive 
alliances;  (v) support project-related studies to promote specific, prioritized value chains and evaluate the 
potential for business plan investments to contribute to climate change mitigation and resilience and to the 
economic inclusion of otherwise marginalized groups.  These investment initiatives (Subproject proposals) 
will be demand-driven and with clearly demonstrated benefits.  Facilitators and Community Development 
Officers (CDOs) will be engaged for a maximum of 2 years of the project period to facilitate the preparation 
of Subproject proposals for farmers’ groups and their participating partners. Capacity building will be 
provided for Facilitators, Services Providers, Farmers Groups and other Producer Associations. 
 

35. Subcomponent 2.2:  Investment Subprojects Supporting Productive Alliances.  This subcomponent will 
provide technical and financial support (matching grants) for the implementation of technically feasible, 
financially viable, economically profitable, socially responsible, climate resilient and environmentally 
sustainable investment Subprojects, which will help producing a consistent and timely supply of quality 
produce to buyers, while helping to provide a reliable income to allied producers organizations and their 
partners participating in the “alliance”. The implementation of these investment subprojects will make 
possible sustainable increases in productivity and improvements in quality of the products offered in 
accordance to market demands.  The Subprojects will be prepared in a participatory fashion with support 
by the Project together with the potential beneficiaries (farmer organizations and their allied partners, such 
as aggregators, processors, technical service providers, lenders, etc.).  Sub-projects with a clear impact on 
agricultural production resilience, using climate-smart technologies e.g. zero tillage, the use of soil and water 
conservation techniques such as tied-ridging, and of integrated soil fertility management options such as 
composting, and efficient use of mineral fertilizers would be particularly targeted and prioritized. 


 
36. Eligible expenditure under these Subprojects include: (i) civil works (for example, lowland rehabilitation; 

clearing of bushland; construction of post-harvest, storage, and processing facilities; and small-scale, 
efficient irrigation systems); (ii) goods, such as productive equipment (for example, farm machinery, 
processing equipment, storage units, and transport vehicles); (iii) incremental working capital (for example, 
for improved inputs); (iv) technical assistance and business advisory services supporting the implementation 
of the subprojects and enhancing organizations’ administrative and managerial capacities.  Investment 
proposals by farmers’ organizations and agribusinesses that integrate climate-smart approaches throughout 
the value chain, such as intercropping and conservation agriculture (which will increase crop diversification); 
use of climate-resilient seeds and varieties; methods to retain soil nutrients and prevent soil erosion; 
improved water management for extreme warm weather; flood-resilient design of production; and efficient 
pest and disease management; alternative sources of energy;  water and wastage re-use systems, saving 
energy of implementing mitigating approaches reduce GHG emissions, will receive priority and may qualify 
for additional bonus financing. 

 
37. These Investment Subprojects will qualify for receiving matching grant through three dedicated windows to 

support the development of value chains in selected commodities and supporting different types of 
beneficiaries, but all integrated into a single Subproject.  The matching grant from the Project will cover a 
part of the overall cost of implementing the Subproject, making necessary for the beneficiaries to come up 
with their counterpart contribution (in cash).  The level of required counterpart financing will depend on the 
type of beneficiary and the amount of the investment to be undertaken (ranges will be fully determined 
during preparation and included in detail in the Project Operational Manual).  These windows are: 

 
(a)  Window A, which will support to smallholder farmers organizations, targeting organized smallholder 

farmers organizations that are eligible to receive matching grant funds as co-financing.  In areas where 
the targeted beneficiaries are not organized, jointly with the Ministry of Agriculture, other government 
agencies and NGOs active in project areas, the project will support the formation of producer and agro-
based organizations.  The main beneficiaries of this window are small producers and other organized 
vulnerable groups, such as women entrepreneurs and women-led producer organizations and youth, 
who will be encouraged to participate through a targeted information campaign. 

(b) Window B, supporting commercially oriented farmers that are also service providers.  This window will 
contribute directly to boost agricultural production that will ensure there is a reliable supply of produce 
along the supply chain.  Priority will be given to those commercially oriented farmers that (a) work with 
smallholder farmers by transferring new technologies and provision of technical assistance; (b) adapt 
technologies that address binding constraints and risks in agriculture, such as climate change; (c) create 
formal partnership with value chains to ensure access to markets and research organizations to ensure 
the transfer of new technologies; (d) create jobs; and (e) contribute to food security.   In cases where it 
is not possible to work with organized farmers, these larger commercially-oriented farmer or service 
providers may be the vehicle to channel funding for investments to be made at the producing level, as 
well as to channel the technical assistance and the improved inputs. 

(c) Window C, supporting all other partners or participating members of an alliance (integrated in a single 
Subproject), such as private business and enterprises providing any aggregation, processing or service 
that is essential to the success of the Subproject according to the demands of the buyer/s and, at the 
same time, requiring a new investment to adapt its operations in order to comply with the buyer/s 
demands. 
 

38. Component 3: Agro-logistics and Infrastructure Investments (IDA US$31.5 million). The objective of this 
component is to improve access to markets through the rehabilitation of existing roads, construction of 
short-span critical cross-drainage structures, and improvement of agro-logistics centers. Expected outcomes 
from such investments are improved quality of products and reduced post-harvest losses, reduced 
marketing costs and better connection between producers and buyers, and improved competitiveness of 
the domestic production in supplying of food products to major consumption centers and export points. 

 
39. Subcomponent 3.1: Roads.  Complementing the planned road works works financed as part of  the South 

Eastern Corridor Road Asset Management Project (SECRAMP; P149279) under which a total of 100km length 
of road between Ganta and Tappita is to be rehabilitated, the Project will support the rehabilitation of 40 
km section of the 112 km long Tappita - Zwedru road11. The project will use Output- and Performance-Based 
Road Contracts (OPRC) under Design, Build and Transfer (DBT) methodology and will also finance the 
associated consultant services.  According to a conceptual design carried out, the proposed design includes 
a full construction of the road to a two-lane carriageway with bituminous surfacing along the existing right-
of-way, with a 20-year design life.  The conceptual design study anticipates reduced vehicle operating costs 
and reliable year-round access resulting in significant increases in additional traffic generated. As part of the 
road design, the project will also incentivize contractors to choose materials and implement processes that 
generate less emissions, adopt engineering and structural measures and bioengineering involving the use of 
vegetation either alone or in conjunction with other civil engineering structures. Once rehabilitated, it is 
expected that the road will play a key role in improving market access for farmers, businesses, traders and 
agro-processors and transport service companies and unlocking the agricultural potential of the entire 
south-eastern region. 
 

40. Subcomponent 3.2: Agro-logistics.  With regards agro-logistics interventions, the project will facilitate the 
preparation of a national agro-logistics program to outline the policy framework and identify the main 
infrastructure networks required to enable proper transport and distribution of agricultural/agro-industrial 
products. It will also finance investments including: (i) construction of a number of open market sheds and 
small storage facilities; (ii) construction of selected infrastructure that require specialized handling agri-
produce; and (iii) construction of market internal path-ways, drainage infrastructure, toilets and clean water 
facilities. The infrastructure to be rehabilitated or established under the Project would incorporate design 
standards ensuring their resilience to the main local risk factors (geophysical conditions and climate change) 
and their potential for climate co-benefits (e.g. improved energy efficiency, use of renewable energy, etc.). 
Detailed locations of these infrastructures and their operation and management would be identified and 
discussed during project preparation. 

 

 
11 Currently, the Ganta -Tappita stretch, almost halfway to Zwedru, is under financing from from GoL, World Bank and Liberia Reconstruction Trust 
Fund (LRTF) sources (Ganta-Saglepie, 39km financed by GOL, and Saglepie-Tappita, 61km financed by WB/LRTF) under the South Eastern Corridor 
Road Asset Management Project (SECRAMP).  The AfDB is also financing the paving of the stretch from Zwedru to the Ivorian Border in the South. A 
gap of about 85km is still under discussion for financing by donors in the next round of allocations. 

41. Component 4: Project coordination and Management (IDA US$5 million). The aim of this component is 
twofold: (i) ensuring that GoL is better equipped to respond to crises and emergencies; and (ii) establishing 
appropriate coordination, Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E), and communication regarding Project 
implementation. The Project will finance the creation and operation of a National Coordination Office (NCO) 
within MoA, through provision of appropriate staffing and operating resources. The NCO will be responsible 
for: (i) ensuring effective planning, implementation and monitoring of the Project activities; (ii) fiduciary 
management and environmental and social safeguard compliance; (iii) effective coordination with 
participating stakeholders and partners; (iii) evaluating the Project’s final results, outcomes, and impacts on 
value chain actors; and (iv) ensuring efficient knowledge management and effective communication on 
project activities. 
 

42. Component 5: Contingency Emergency Response Component – CERC (IDA: US$0.0 million). The objective 
of this component is to provide immediate response to an Eligible Crisis or Emergency, as may be presented 
in the future. The CERC is one of the Bank’s contingent financing mechanisms available to Borrowers to gain 
rapid access to Bank financing to respond to a crisis or emergency. It is included as a Project component that 
is designed to provide swift response in the event of an eligible crisis or emergency, defined as “an event 
that has caused, or is likely to imminently cause, a major adverse economic and/or social impact associated 
with natural or man-made crises or disasters.” The mechanism for the triggering of the CERC will be included 
in the Credit Agreement, which will require (inter-alia), the preparation of a CERC Manual detailing the 
applicable fiduciary, environmental and social, monitoring, reporting, and any other implementation 
arrangements necessary.  Provided the World Bank Group agrees with the emergency assessment, this 
component would allow the government to request the World Bank to reallocate uncommitted resources 
from other project components to this component in order to cover emergency response and recovery costs 
or, eventually, to channel additional financing that may become available because of the emergency. 

 
    
 
Legal Operational Policies                                  Triggered? 

Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50 No 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60 No 

 
Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts 
.  
 
 
 

Environmental Risk Rating 
 
The environmental risk rating for the proposed project is substantial. The classification is based on the potential 
environmental risks and impacts, the sensitivity of the recipient environment and the capacity of the implementing 
agencies to manage the risks. The project’s adverse environmental risks and impacts will mainly emanate from 
interventions under Components 2 and 3. The Matching Grant (MG) scheme under Component 2 might trigger 
agricultural commercialization, expansion of farmlands, expansion and/or renovation of agricultural infrastructure such 


as warehouses, processing facilities, electricity connectivity etc. Land clearing associated with farming and provision of 
infrastructure could contribute to deforestation, forest degradation, destruction of natural habitats, soil erosion and 
depletion of biodiversity. Agricultural intensification could trigger extensive use of pesticides with adverse repercussions 
on human health and biodiversity. The proposed support to poultry and piggery industry will produce animal waste 
(manure) which could contaminate ground and surface water as well as contribute to green-house gas emissions if 
poorly managed. Similarly, effluents from processing facilities e.g. cassava processing under the MG scheme could 
contribute to water contamination, eutrophication and unsightly scenes in communities. The risks associated with 
surface water contamination from pesticides and effluents from processing facilities could transcend communities and 
may have far reaching consequences, if not properly managed. These potential risks will be further assessed along with 
appropriate mitigation measures in the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) to be prepared for 
the project prior to appraisal. The proposed road improvement of 40 km under Component 3 might result in 
environmental, occupational, and community health and safety risks. The risks and impacts will generally range from 
minor to substantial but mainly localized. The Ministry of Agriculture will implement the project in collaboration with 
other ministries. Environmental safeguard capacity varies among ministries with no experience in the implementation of 
the ESS.  
 
Social Risk Rating 
 
The social risk rating for the proposed project is substantial. The classification is based on the potential project social risks 
and impacts, the country context social sensitivity issues and the capacity of the implementing agencies to manage the 
risks. The project social risks include risk of conflicts within communities, agribusiness service providers and project if 
selection of beneficiaries is not transparent. Risk of exclusion of poor households and vulnerable groups and elite capture 
of project benefits (e.g. the Matching Grants, provision of farm inputs, access to information on crop management and 
market intelligence), poses substantial risk. Similarly, risks and impacts associated with temporary and permanent land 
acquisition for rural agribusiness infrastructure (e.g. warehousing, processing facilities etc.) and road rehabilitation are 
anticipated. In particular, economic or physical displacement is anticipated under the proposed rehabilitation of a 40km 
section of the 112km long Tappita - Zwedru Road. Other social risks include potential legacy issues related to impacts of 
previous road construction activities on Project Affected People (PAP) and communities along the proposed road corridor 
to be rehabilitated. While use of local labor is anticipated, use of migrant workers and risk of use of child labor and/ or 
forced labor cannot be ignored. The risk of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and Sexual Harassments (SEA/SH) is possible 
given the country context and social sensitivity issues and focus of project interventions in rural areas with possibility of 
men and women working in unsupervised conditions. Risks of spread of communicable diseases including spread of 
COVID-19 are anticipated given the project interventions will be implemented in counties where potential for spread of 
infectious diseases cannot be ignored. 
 
  

























































World Bank Document

PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
APPRAISAL STAGE

Report No.:  PIDA20918

Project Name Forests and Communities (P132846)
Region LATIN AMERICA AND CARIBBEAN
Country Argentina
Sector(s) Forestry (80%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector 

(20%)
Theme(s) Gender (20%), Indigenous peoples (20%), Rural non-farm income 

generation (20%), Rural services and infrastructure (20%), Other 
envir onment and natural resources management (20%)

Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P132846
Borrower(s) Argentine Government
Implementing Agency SAyDS
Environmental Category B-Partial Assessment
Date PID Prepared/Updated 03-Feb-2015
Date PID Approved/Disclosed 10-Feb-2015
Estimated Date of Appraisal 
Completion

20-Feb-2015

Estimated Date of Board 
Approval

07-Apr-2015

Decision

I. Project Context
Country Context
After rebounding from the economic crisis of 2002, Argentina has been one of the top two 
performers in the Latin America and Caribbean region in reducing poverty and sharing the gains of 
rising prosperity by expanding the middle class.  Total poverty (measured at US$4 per day) 
declined from 31.0 percent in 2004 to 10.8 percent in 2013, while extreme poverty (measured at US
$2.50 per day) fell from 17.0 percent to 4.7 percent.  Income inequality, measured by the Gini 
coefficient, fell from 50.2 in 2004 to 42.5 in 2012. Argentina’s poverty rate and Gini coefficient are 
among the lowest in the region. At the same time, the middle class in Argentina grew by 68 percent 
between 2004 and 2012, reaching 53.7 percent of the population.  
 
However, significant regional disparities persist with respect to poverty and access to basic 
services. The gap between regions has grown since the 2002 crisis, with Patagonia far outpacing 
Northeast and Northwest regions. The Northern provinces have poverty rates two to three times 
higher than the national average and lag behind the rest of the country in social services and basic 
infrastructure. In addition, disparities exist among and within provinces in terms of levels of 


economic and social development and access to high-quality basic services (see figure 1), such as 
education, health, roads, and water, which in turns limit the ability of the poor to participate in 
economic activities, particularly in rural areas. Improving basic services in impoverished rural 
communities is critical for human capital formation and building pathways out of poverty. 
 
Indigenous people are one of the largest and most vulnerable groups of rural poor in Argentina. 
Indigenous people (2.5 percent of the population) are present in all provinces of Argentina but more 
so in the northern provinces of Salta, Jujuy, Chaco, Formosa, Santa Fe, and Tucuman. In access to 
services, 23.5 percent of indigenous households have unsatisfied basic needs, compared to 13.8 for 
the rest of the population. 
 
Today, more than 40 percent of the Argentine population remains at risk of falling into poverty.  
Three challenges stand out for the poor and vulnerable population. First, the greatest vulnerability 
to poverty arises in periods of economic crises or prolonged sluggish growth, which reduce 
employment and earnings and limit the ability of the Government to finance social programs that 
directly support the poor. Second, although Argentina is a broadly inclusive society, endowments 
and opportunities continue to vary for different groups in society and across regions. Poverty risks 
are highest among those with limited access to, and command of, human and basic infrastructure 
assets. Third, Argentina’s economy depends on natural capital, and environmental degradation 
represents a significant cost to the economy, threatening livelihoods, especially for the poorest rural 
households that are the most dependent on these resources. 
 
Strong economic growth over the last decade was accompanied by rising macro-imbalances. Key 
macroeconomic challenges include the existence of inflationary pressures, deficits in fiscal and 
current accounts and falling international reserves. Argentina has relatively modest fiscal and 
current account deficits as well as low public sector debt to GDP. Nonetheless, given the limited 
access to international capital markets, they create pressures on the economy. These imbalances 
need to be resolved in order to avoid unwanted effects on the medium-term sustainability of the 
gains in equity and development achieved during the last decade. In this regard, the Government of 
Argentina (GoA) has recently implemented various public policy interventions aimed at resolving 
key macroeconomic imbalances. It must be noted, however, that continued and consolidated efforts 
are required for achieving the desired results.

  

Sectoral and institutional Context
A third of Argentina’s continental territory is covered with natural grasslands, and another third 
with crops and forest plantations. Only around 11% of its territory is covered with natural forest 
totaling approximately 31.4 million hectares. Two thirds of this area is situated in the Chaco Eco-
Region (21.7 million ha), which also has around 13.4 million ha of forest and shrub land in various 
stages of degradation due to overgrazing and unregulated timber and fuel-wood extraction.  The 
Chaco Forest Biome occurs in  12 Argentinean provinces, four of which, Chaco, Salta, Santiago del 
Estero and Formosa account for 87 % of the total area (19.1 million ha) and produce 98 % of 
registered round wood, firewood and poles of the whole Chaco Eco-Region. 
  
The Chaco Eco-Region produces around 90% of all natural forest products in Argentina (mainly 
poles, tannin, firewood and charcoal), or around 6.3 million tons per year. Although the population 
of the 12 Provinces that make up the Chaco Eco-Region amounts to only 18% of the national total, 
they consume more than 50% of the total fuel wood in the country. Eight out of ten rural 


households in the most critical areas  of the Chaco Eco-Region use wood or charcoal to cook their 
food. The illiteracy rate there is three times higher than the national average and more than a third 
of its population lives with unsatisfied basic needs. 
  
Most deforestation in Argentina takes place in the fragile Chaco Eco-Region where a combination 
of limited development options, poverty and weak institutions combine to make the area extremely 
vulnerable both economically and environmentally. Between 2006 and 2011 more than 1.5 million 
ha of natural forest were destroyed, with conversion to agriculture and uncontrolled (often illegal) 
forest exploitation causing deforestation at a rate of 1.2% per year biodiversity has been lost, soil 
and water resources have been degraded, and carbon emissions have increased.  
 
Rationale for the World Bank’s Involvement. The Bank has maintained a partnership with the GoA 
by supporting work on sustainable natural resources management since at least 1995. Previous 
Bank supported forestry operations, have demonstrated that SAyDS and the provinces are 
committed to sustainable forest management. However institutional capacity and collaboration 
among the national, provincial and local levels are still modest compared to the magnitude and 
complexity of the task. Developing an effective working relationship with local communities and 
indigenous peoples in the area is still a work in progress. The Bank and the FAO, through its 
Cooperative Program (FAO/WB-CP), are uniquely placed to assist the GoA in this effort because of 
their twenty-year working relationship in forestry conservation, agriculture and demand-driven 
sustainable development in the country.

II. Proposed Development Objectives
The PDO is to improve forest management and increased access to markets and basic services by 
forest dependent communities and small producers – indigenous and criollos – in Northern 
Argentina.

III. Project Description
Component Name
Sustainable Livelihoods
Comments (optional)
Financing for preparation and implementation of management plans for land and forests in 
approximately 250 Communities. Integrated Community Plans (Planes Integrales Comunitarios) 
will be designed to raise incomes and increase resilience to drought through demand-driven 
investments including both service delivery (among other, improving forest management planning, 
increasing dry season water availability, strengthening tenure, improving efficiency of wood energy 
systems) and locally-managed subprojects (among other, increasing production, processing and 
marketing of timber and non-timber products and installation/monitoring of improved cook stoves 
and charcoal kilns). Forest management plans prepared under this component will be considered for 
certification and for financing.

Component Name
Natural Forest Management and Civil Society
Comments (optional)
Financing for (a) a national forest and climate awareness campaign to expand and maintain support 
for implementation of the Forest Law and (b) the establishment or expansion of existing community 
radio stations in a total of 25 locations to distribute informationlocally and in native languages. The 
campaign would highlight, among other things, the importance of the conservation of natural forest 

for agriculture (and agro-exports) due to their ecological functions (regulating hydrologic cycles, 
contributing to soil fertility and biodiversity conservation), and emphasize the important role that 
forests play in supporting rural livelihoods and maintaining the cultural values of the indigenous and 
criollo populations.

Component Name
Skills and Technology Transfer
Comments (optional)
Financing strengthening the technical and managerial skills of (a) indigenous and criollo community 
members, (b) small private forest owners, and (c) technical service providers and extension agents 
working in the project area. The training delivered under this component will cover project related 
topics; such as, sustainable forest management, improved production, climate resilient agricultural 
and livestock production, value addition and tenure security. Short training courses will be delivered 
through both classroom and community level instruction. Classroom instruction will be delivered to 
both community members and Rural Development Agencies (RDA) staff and others involved in 
project related service delivery.

Component Name
Forest Information and Monitoring Systems
Comments (optional)
Financing the expansion of SAyDS technical and institutional capacity to manage forest information 
and monitor changes in forest cover. The component would finance (a) expanding coverage of the 
Forest Administration, Control and Verification System (SACVEFOR) to 10 Provinces in Northern 
Argentina, (b) establishment of a national Deforestation and Forest Degradation Early Warning 
System, and (c) the planning and establishment of a National Grid of Permanent Sample Plots. The 
component would finance consultant and non-consultant services, training, and equipment.

Component Name
Project Management and Impact Monitoring
Comments (optional)
Financing (a) the technical and administrative coordination of the project, (b) hiring consultants to 
staff the National Project Executing Unit (NEU) and (c) operational costs, training and equipment. 
This component also would support the development of an impact evaluation to identify changes in 
outcomes directly attributable to project activities. The impact evaluation is expected to help 
identify strengths and weaknesses in the design and implementation of existing policies and 
regulations related to forest management and forest tenure in Argentina and inform future decisions 
and regulatory revisions including during project implementation.

IV. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 62.80 Total Bank Financing: 58.90
Financing Gap: 0.00
For Loans/Credits/Others Amount
Borrower 3.90
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 58.90
Local Communities 0.00
Total 62.80




V. Implementation
A.  Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 
 
Implementing Agency. The project will be implemented under the Ministry of Environment by the 
Secretariat of Environment and Sustainable Development (SAyDS). During implementation of the 
preparatory activity (BIRF-7520-AR) SAyDS established a National Executing Unit (NEU) in 
Buenos Aires integrated into its line functions.  
 
Project Management. The existing NEU includes an Executive Coordinator responsible for 
oversight of the Project and its operations, and the NEU will recruit individual thematic specialists 
acting as managers for each of the four technical components. By utilizing the NEU’s established 
administration and management capacity, systems and procedures initial costs and time frame for 
launching the project should be greatly reduced. The NEU led the development of the technical and 
institutional design of the proposed Project. The team of the NEU will be completed by M&E, 
safeguards, accounting, and procurement specialists and administrative assistants. Consultants will 
be recruited to fill knowledge gaps as they arise. 
 
Technical Implementation. Local Executing Units (LEU) located in the eight selected departments 
will include one specialist in charge of each of the following technical areas; (a) Community Forest 
Management, (b) Participatory Land Use Planning (PICs), (c) Land Tenure and Rights 
Strengthening, and (d) Marketing of Forest and NTFP. One of the specialists will act as coordinator 
in each LEU. LEU’s will also include administrative and M&E support officers (see Organogram 
Annex 3, Figures 2 and 3). Component 1 will be implemented in close collaboration with national, 
provincial and local Rural Development Agencies (RDA) that already work with targeted 
indigenous and criollo communities in the Project area. Selected RDAs will include public agencies, 
non-governmental organizations, and academic institutions. 
  
Consultation Committees. Each LEU will work closely with provincial institutions responsible for 
forest, tenure, social development, and indigenous peoples’ issues. To facilitate information 
exchange and coordination a Local Project Consultation Committee (LPCC) will be set up in each 
Department with representatives from local agencies, NGOs, and communities Project Consultation 
Committee should include IP and Criollos organization representatives.  
 
B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation 
 
The results framework (Annex 1) details performance indicators by component and sub-component. 
Monitoring and evaluation efforts will include (a) biannual progress reports with performance 
indicator updates and (b) a project-specific impact evaluation designed in consultation with the 
Development Impact Evaluation Initiative (DIME) . SAyDS has gained experience reporting on 
progress during the ongoing operation (LN 7520) however with a greater number of field activities 
and a larger number of implementation partners, SAyDS will need to rely more on Local Executing 
Units (LEU) and ensure that they follow established methodologies for reporting progress. An M&E 
strategy will be included in the operational manual and a M&E specialist will be providing support 
and capacity development at all levels (See Organogram Annex 3, Figure 3) The implementing 
agency was involved in the development of the results framework and plans to collect disaggregated 
data on gender and ethnicity. 
 
M&E reports, including environmental and social monitoring results, will be produced quarterly at 



the LEU level, and every six months at the NEU level. The data collected at the field level would be 
consolidated and analyzed at the LEU level and consolidated by the NEU for reporting and 
feedback. Annual evaluation and impact monitoring reports will facilitate adaptive management, 
allowing for the identification of issues and lessons that could help adjusting the operational 
strategy. The format and content of the annual monitoring report will be defined in the Project 
Operational Manual. The mid-term review of the Project would occur no later than 30 months after 
effectiveness. 
 
C. Sustainability 
 
The proposed project design will increase the availability of key technical and managerial skills at 
both departmental and community levels and address shared prosperity by improving small-
producers’ access to financial resources for sustainable forest management (through links to the 
Forest Fund under the Forest Law). Adoption of a community driven approach ensures that 
beneficiary communities will acquire skills needed to advocate for improved natural resources 
management and access forest management funding through provincial authorities on an ongoing 
basis, after project completion, though the Forest Fund. Engaging a number of RDAs will contribute 
to inter-agency coordination and cooperation and spread the implementation burden across 
participating institutions allowing selected provinces and departments to meet a wide range of 
beneficiary needs (land tenure, water, and resilient agriculture). Investments in forest monitoring, 
early warning systems, publicity campaigns and community radio are expected to increase public 
awareness and cooperation with indigenous people and criollo communities’ efforts to manage 
natural resources sustainably.

VI. Safeguard Policies (including public consultation)
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Accelerating Impacts of CGIAR Climate Research for Africa (AICCRA) (P173398) 

 
 

  
Jun 09, 2020 Page 1 of 11  

     

 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document (PID) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 09-Jun-2020 | Report No: PIDC29338 

 
The World Bank  
Accelerating Impacts of CGIAR Climate Research for Africa (AICCRA) (P173398) 

 
 

  
Jun 09, 2020 Page 2 of 11  

     

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Africa P173398  Accelerating Impacts of 
CGIAR Climate 
Research for Africa 
(AICCRA) (P173398) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA Jun 16, 2020 Sep 30, 2020 Agriculture and Food 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing International Center for 
Tropical Agriculture (CIAT) 

International Crops Research 
Institute for the Semi-Arid 
Tropics (ICRISAT), 
International Livestock 
Research Institute (ILRI) 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The Development Objective is to increase access for agriculture research and extension service providers in Africa to 
knowledge, technologies, and decision making tools relevant to enhancing the resilience of agriculture and food 
systems in the face of climate change. 
 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 60.00 

Total Financing 60.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 60.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 60.00 

          IDA Grant 60.00 

 

Environmental and Social Risk Classification Concept Review Decision 

Moderate  Track I-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
A policy waiver will be sought from IDA to allow the International Center for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT), an international 
organization, to serve as recipient of a regional IDA grant. 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

 
Agriculture remains central to the livelihoods of millions of Africans, yet far too many agriculture-dependent Africans 
remain food insecure and malnourished. After a period of moderate improvement, food security throughout the region 
has recently deteriorated. Slowdowns in productivity growth, combined with increasingly frequent food production 
failures, point to the need to significantly raise the bar when it comes to increasing the productive capacity and 
strengthening the resilience of rural households. The economic hardship resulting from the COVID-19 crisis are expected 
to further worsen food insecurity in the region, making resilience-building an even more urgent task. 

The livelihoods of African farmers and livestock keepers, long known to be vulnerable to the vicissitudes of weather, are 
being severely impacted by climate change. Climate-related shocks to food production have increased in frequency from 
occurring once every 12.5 years to occurring once every 2.5 years. The increased frequency of climate-induced production 
shocks have made it increasingly difficult to maintain positive growth in per capita food production over the longer term.   

Climate change is projected to further increase the number of drought days in Africa and shorten growing seasons. 
Droughts, floods, and tropical storms are the climatic events that affect food production the most. Substantial increases 
in these major drivers of crop and livestock production shortfalls are projected for large parts of Africa. This at a time when 
the number of people to feed will almost double by 2050 to over 2 billion―a population that will be increasingly urbanized. 

Climate change poses a serious threat to crop productivity in sub-regions within Africa that are already food insecure. The 
impact is projected to be highest in maize, millet, sorghum, and wheat. Climate change will also affect productivity in 
Africa’s livestock sector. Depending on the location and prevailing production systems, water scarcity will lower the 
productivity of pastures, reduce yields of milk and meat, and increase the incidence of diseases. All this will translate into 
a significant deterioration in food security, if no action is taken. 

Agriculture is an important livelihood source for women throughout sub-Saharan Africa and an important source of 
employment. Studies consistently show that in most parts of sub-Saharan Africa, productivity of women farmers 
consistently lags behind that of men farmers. The sources of the productivity gap have been amply documented including 
land, improved technologies, lesser access to inputs, credit, insurance, and advisory services. They are thus generally less 
well-resourced, and hence more vulnerable to shocks that negatively impact farming and livestock keeping activities.  

Women farmers are especially vulnerable to climate change impacts, due to household responsibilities as well as increased 
agricultural work from male out-migration. Climate-smart agriculture (CSA) options have the potential to provide benefits 
for women; when they have access to information on CSA, they are just as likely as men to adopt the practices. Women 
can be important agents of innovation, including in response to climate change, and ensuring that women beneficiaries 


of the project are able to avail of CSA technologies and climate information will be a focus of the project’s gender strategy.  

The ambition of many African governments to improve food security, nationally and at household level, is in danger of not 
being met. The 2014 Malabo Declaration set ambitious 2025 targets to end hunger, double agricultural productivity, halve 
post-harvest losses, and sustain agricultural GDP growth of at least 6 percent per year. The region is not on track to meet 
these targets, and it will be difficult to make sustained progress in the face of large climate-induced production shocks.  

Strengthening the productivity and resilience of African agriculture will depend critically on the ability of governments and 
their partners to bring science and innovation to the forefront of the development agenda. Urgent action is needed to 
improve climate adaptation of Africa’s food systems. Incentives, knowledge, science, and finance will all need to play a 
role, together with increased co-ordination among development partners to improve the climate resilience of production 
systems, build efficient value chains, facilitate internal and external trade, and boost the purchasing power of the most 
vulnerable households. As countries contemplate a shift towards climate-smart investments, investing in agricultural 
research is more critical than ever. The high returns to investment in agricultural research and innovation are well 
documented, and a large body of evidence shows that such investment is very effective at reducing poverty and hunger. 

In recognition of the critical role played by science and innovation in enabling the adaptation of African agriculture to 
climate change, the World Bank recently announced an increase in support to CGIAR. At the Climate Action Summit that 
took place during the UN General Assembly held in September 2019, President Malpass announced an increase in support 
to CGIAR. While the CGIAR system has in the past received direct grants from the World Bank, the unprecedented decision 
to use IDA financing to support CGIAR reflects the World Bank’s strong commitment to step up support to CGIAR despite 
a constrained budget environment. The incremental financing presents a unique opportunity to support critical CGIAR 
work being done for the benefit of millions of poor households in IDA countries whose livelihoods depend on agriculture.   

The World Bank’s increased support for CGIAR comes at a critical time, when the COVID-19 pandemic is further 
threatening food security throughout the region and undermining the livelihoods of millions of agriculture-dependent 
households. Going forward, efforts will be needed to increase domestic food production throughout the region and make 
food supply chains more resilient to the threat of pandemics, by promoting innovation and building additional capacity to 
manage pests and diseases while monitoring the health and safety of food. CGIAR will be at the forefront of these efforts. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 

 
CGIAR is the world leader in international agriculture research on climate change adaptation. With a budget of around 
US$1 billion, CGIAR operates at a scale that when combined with the investments made by its many partners is having a 
measurable impact on climate adaptation efforts worldwide. CGIAR specializes in “translational research,” adapting 
knowledge produced through basic research so it can be applied in specific contexts. CGIAR does this by partnering with 
regional organizations, national research institutions, civil society organizations, and private firms and individuals.  

CGIAR can play a vital catalytic role in strengthening the agriculture research architecture in Africa, if the “missing middle” 
can be filled. At present, regional and national programs in Africa have difficulty engaging with CGIAR in a systematic way, 
and what is happening now is often done in an ad hoc manner. A major obstacle is the absence of resources to support 
interactions between CGIAR Centers on the one hand (funded mainly by international donors) and regional and national 
programs on the other hand (funded mainly by African governments). New sources of flexible funding are needed to 
facilitate the engagement between CGIAR and regional and national programs in Africa.  

The CGIAR Research Program (CRP) on Climate Change, Agriculture, and Food Security (CCAFS) is at the forefront of 
fostering climate adaptation in agriculture and food systems. The over-arching objectives of CCAFS are: (i) to identify and 
test pro-poor climate change adaptation and mitigation practices, technologies and policies for food systems, adaptive 
capacity and rural livelihoods; and (ii) to provide diagnosis and analysis that will ensure cost effective investments, the 


inclusion of agriculture in climate change policies, and the inclusion of climate issues in agricultural policies, from the sub-
national to the global level in a way that brings benefits to the rural poor.  

CCAFS is being implemented by a consortium of CGIAR and non-CGIAR partners, under the leadership of the International 
Center for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT), an international agricultural research center within the CGIAR system with the 
mandate to carry out research on problems of tropical agriculture for the benefit of developing countries. CCAFS work is 
led by staff at CGIAR Centers and at six partner universities, including: (1) Leeds University, (2) Columbia University, (3) 
University of Vermont, (4) University of Oxford, (5) Utrecht University, and (6) Wageningen University.  

CCAFS activities are focused on enhancing climate resilience in Sub-Saharan Africa, but the level of funding is inadequate. 
During 2017-2019, nearly one-half (48 percent) of the total CCAFS budget of $160 million went to support work in Africa, 
including 26 percent allocated to CCAFS programs in West Africa and 22 percent allocated to CCAFS programs in East 
Africa. CCAFS has an approved expenditure framework, but shortfalls in expected donor financing have resulted in 
significant funding gaps that threaten the achievement of some critical results. Moreover, since CCAFS was approved in 
2018, new evidence has emerged (for example, IPCC’s 2019 1.5 degree assessment report) that makes clear that the level 
of ambition to promote climate adaptation must increase dramatically. 

AICCRA will support CCAFS programs and activities that are targeted specifically to Africa and will help take to scale the 
most strategic and impactful CCAFS-Africa programs, promoting resilience to climate change and improved food security 
in the region. AICCRA will fill a critical gap by making cutting-edge CGIAR research and innovation available to NARS and 
other key stakeholders in Africa. It will support knowledge creation and capacity building activities to enable regional and 
national-level stakeholders to take CSA innovations to scale. It will achieve that by fostering partnerships between CGIAR 
and local research institutes, universities, civil society organizations, farmer organizations, and private sector. AICCRA will 
facilitate the development of Climate Information Services (CIS) and promote the adoption of CSA solutions across sub-
regions within Africa that are extremely vulnerable to climate change. The project will also support on-the-ground 
activities in selected countries in Western, Eastern and Southern Africa where CGIAR science has the greatest chance of 
success in delivering catalytic results, which can be adopted by other countries in the region. 

 
Relationship to CPF 

 
AICCRA is well aligned with World Bank regional strategies. AICCRA will support the World Bank Africa Regional Integration 
and Cooperation Assistance Strategy (2018). It will contribute to the World Bank Group Strategy for Fragility, Conflict and 
Violence 2020–2025, as well as to the World Bank Group Adaptation and Resilience Action Plan (2018) and the World Bank 
Africa Climate Business Plan (2018) and New Generation Climate Business Plan (under preparation). In addition, it will 
contribute to the activities proposed under World Bank Country Partnership Frameworks for many countries being served 
in Africa by CCAFS.  

AICCRA will build upon the achievements of past and current engagements by the World Bank in Africa. The design of 
AICCRA incorporates lessons learned from other World Bank initiatives in the region, including the West Africa Agricultural 
Productivity Programs (WAAPP), the Great Green Wall initiative (GGW), the Sahel Irrigation Initiative Support Project 
(SIIP), and the Regional Sahel Pastoralism Support Project (PRAPS), among others.  

AICCRA will complement and add value to future World Bank lending operations in Africa. The World Bank is preparing a 
series of new lending operations to mobilize cutting-edge science in addressing food security needs in the face of the 
global climate crisis by promoting the successful adoption of proven technologies on a massive scale. Noteworthy among 
these is the West Africa Food System Resilience Program (FSRP) The success of FSRP, which forms part of the Africa 
Regional Integration and Cooperation Assistance Strategy, will depend critically on the ability of the participating entities 
to access the newest and most effective technologies available, especially those generated by CGIAR. AICCRA will 
complement FSRP by serving as a conduit for the international science generated by CGIAR Centers to reach the regional 


and national actors who will be supported by FSRP (e.g. ECOWAS, CORAF).  

As a regional project, AICCRA will fill an important niche in the Word Bank’s’ Africa portfolio and help to advance the 
regional integration agenda. By supporting activities that will be implemented at sub-regional level through multi-actor 
networks, AICCRA will be able to achieve outcomes that cannot be achieved easily, if at all, by engaging with individual 
partners at country level. On the research supply side, working at regional level justifies investment in infrastructure and 
personnel at scales that surpass minimum critical mass and allow economies of scale to be captured. On the research 
demand side, working at regional level facilitates the flow of innovations across national borders and enhances learning 
effects, increasing the number of adopters and amplifying the benefits. 

 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
The Development Objective is to increase access for agriculture research and extension service providers in Africa to 
knowledge, technologies, and decision making tools relevant to enhancing the resilience of agriculture and food systems 
in the face of climate change. 
 
Key Results (From PCN) 

 
Achievements of the Project will be measured using the following PDO level indicators: 
 
Results Area 1: Knowledge and tools needed to project likely impacts of climate change on agricultural systems available 
for use by beneficiaries in project area.  

Results Area 2: Climate-smart agriculture technologies available for upscaling in project area. 
 
D. Concept Description 
 

AICCRA will focus on bridging the gap between the research institutes that produce improved technologies and the 
development organizations that promote the adoption of improved technologies, for the purpose of enhancing the 
resilience of Africa’s agriculture and food systems in the face of climate change. Through support to CCAFS, AICCRA will 
strengthen the technical, institutional, and human capacity needed to move CGIAR innovations off the shelf and achieve 
impacts at scale in IDA-eligible countries in Africa. 

AICCRA will strengthen systemic capacity to monitor climate change in Africa, project the likely impacts of climate 
change on local agri-food systems, identify improved technologies that can strengthen the resilience of those systems in 
the face of climate change, and transfer knowledge about the improved technologies to agri-food system actors. The 
knowledge, technologies, and decision making tools promoted under AICCRA will be of value not only to productive agents 
(e.g., farmers, livestock keepers, assemblers, processors, and distributors), but also to the public, private, and civil society 
organizations that play critical roles in delivering improved technologies to productive agents.  

Climate advisories generated through monitoring networks and early warning systems work much better when they 
flow rapidly and easily into decision support systems and are integrated with input provision. For that reason, there is 
a need not only to strengthen monitoring and analytical capacity to make sure systems are in place that can generate 
timely and relevant climate advisories and early warnings, but also a need to implement policies and reinforce institutions 
to ensure that those climate advisories and early warnings can be translated into effective preventive actions, for example 
through changes in the types and amounts of inputs being used, or adjustments in management practices. In addition, 
decision support systems must be capable of channelling information from service users back to service providers, to 
inform research so that it becomes more demand-driven and responsive to local needs.  



AICCRA will consist of four components. Box 1 provides illustrative examples of the results which are anticipated from the 
three large areas of support under AICCRA. The results will be further elaborated during project preparation and 
development of the results framework. All activities will be undertaken for the benefit of IDA-eligible SSA countries.   

Component 1. Knowledge and Services 

Component 1 will support the generation and sharing of knowledge products and tools that will address critical gaps in 
the design and provision of climate services, enable climate-informed investment planning, and support the design of 
policies to promote uptake of CSA practices. Activities to be supported under Component 1 will include one set of 
transversal activities to be pursued Africa-wide, as well as two subsets of geographically tailored activities to be pursued 
in Western and Eastern/Southern Africa, respectively. 

Subcomponent 1.1. Africa-wide. Sub-component 1.1 will support the generation of new knowledge and associated 
delivery platforms that are expected to be relevant throughout the region to improve targeting in the provision of agro-
climatic services as well as planning of CSA investments. The following activities will be financed, inter alia: (i) Identification 
of adaptation interventions targeted to agricultural land-use categories, small-scale farmer groups and associated climate 
hazards; (ii) Development of climate information service packages to accompany climate-smart interventions based on 
needs assessments and qualitative-quantitative cost-benefit analyses; (iii) Development or refinement of indicators and 
other adaptation tracking systems that can feed into planning processes and assist with national reporting related to NDCs 
and NAPs; (iv) Identification of big-ticket CSA investment opportunities, detailing the potential social, economic, and 
environmental benefits at national, regional, and continental scale (an example might be assessing the potential to launch 
large-scale initiatives to produce and distribute seed of drought-resilient varieties); (v) Development of business models 
and identification of innovative finance options for scaling-up CSA and climate-resilient value chains, with special 
consideration of gender and social inclusion; and (vi) Undertaking climate, agricultural and environmental policy 
coherence analyses to identify regional policy overlaps, gaps and alignment. 

Sub-component 1.2. Western Africa. Sub-component 1.2 will support the development of new or improved climate 
service tools that can help bridge the gap between meteorological services and agricultural extension systems. Activities 
to be financed include the development of ag-data hubs, design of climate service and visualization tools and 
dissemination systems and strengthening of partnerships for the delivery of early warnings, climate services, and climate-
informed digital agro-advisories to support agricultural decision-making. The sub-component will also seek to identify 
tailored climate information services and digital agro-advisory packages for use in building new extension systems or 
strengthening existing extension systems. Activities will take place in selected countries in Western Africa (Mali, Ghana 
and Senegal).  

Sub-component 1.3. Eastern and Southern Africa. Sub-component 1.3 will support the development of new or improved 
climate service tools that can help bridge the gap between meteorological services and agricultural extension systems. 
Activities to be financed include the development of ag-data hubs, design of climate service and visualization tools and 
dissemination systems, and strengthening of partnerships for the delivery of early warnings, climate services, and climate-
informed digital agro-advisories to support agricultural decision-making. The sub-component will also seek to identify 
tailored climate information services and digital agro-advisory packages for use in building new extension systems or 
strengthening existing extension systems. Activities will take place in selected countries in Eastern and Southern Africa 
(Ethiopia, Kenya and Zambia). 

Component 2. Partnerships for Delivery 

Component 2 will support building of partnerships and networks to strengthen the ability of actors all along the research-
to-development continuum to anticipate climate effects and project their likely impacts on agriculture, food security, and 
rural livelihoods, with the goal of accelerating the identification, prioritization, and uptake of best-bet adaptive measures 


within defined application domains. Activities to be supported under Component 2 include training and building of 
partnerships and networks, at regional and national levels. A particular focus will be on planning and implementing 
appropriate delivery channels to promote the flow of innovative knowledge generated under Component 1, via regional 
and national partners.  

Subcomponent 2.1. Africa-wide. Sub-component 2.1 will support capacity development activities designed to strengthen 
the ability of regional multi-stakeholder platforms to conduct participatory visioning and priority setting, supported by 
quantitative and qualitative analytical methods at different scales. It will encourage engagement with regional institutions 
(AGRHYMET, ICPAC, and others) to collaborate in sharing knowledge and scaling up national climate services within and 
across regions. Where needed, it will backstop national, regional and continental groups involved in climate negotiations. 
Activities to be financed include, inter alia: (i) formal and informal training, (ii) workshops, (iii) study tours, (iv) knowledge 
exchanges, and (v) technical assistance. 

Sub-component 2.2. Western Africa. Sub-component 2.2 will support training and provide institutional support to 
enhance the capacity of diverse groups of beneficiaries to form innovative partnerships that can ensure sustained delivery 
and use of climate services. Activities to be financed include: (i) Strengthening of national meteorological services (NMS) 
real-time monitoring, weather forecasting, data archiving and generation systems; (ii) Capacity building of public and 
private sectors (e.g., NMSs, NARES, MoA, ICT companies and media) for effectiveness of context-specific climate services 
delivery models; (iii) Strengthening National Frameworks for Climate Services (NFCS) and supporting national stakeholders 
to implement effective governance for sustained national early warning, climate services and agro-advisory delivery; (iv) 
Training farmer organizations and other value chain actors in the use of climate services, co-production and feedback 
processes; and (v) Training extension officers, input providers, development agents, private sector and media for effective 
implementation and use of prioritized CSA options in crop and livestock value chains. Activities will take place in selected 
countries in Western Africa (Mali, Ghana and Senegal) 

Sub-component 2.3. Eastern and Southern Africa. Sub-component 2.3 will support training and provide institutional 
support to enhance the capacity of diverse groups of beneficiaries to form innovative partnerships that can ensure 
sustained delivery and use of climate services, Activities to be financed include: (i) Strengthening of national 
meteorological services (NMS) real-time monitoring, weather forecasting, data archiving and generation systems; (ii) 
Capacity building of public and private sectors (e.g., NMSs, NARES, MoA, ICT companies and media) for effectiveness of 
context-specific climate services delivery models; (iii) Strengthening National Frameworks for Climate Services (NFCS) and 
support national stakeholders to implement effective governance for sustained national early warning, climate services 
and agro-advisory delivery; (iv) Training farmer organizations and other value chain actors in the use of climate services, 
co-production and feedback processes; and (v) Training extension officers, input providers, development agents, private 
sector and media for effective implementation and use of prioritized CSA options in crop and livestock value chains. 
Activities will take place in Eastern and Southern Africa (Ethiopia, Kenya and Zambia). 

Component 3. Supporting the Uptake of Climate-Smart Agriculture  

Component 3 will support the uptake of CSA among small-scale farmers and intermediaries in selected value chains by 
supporting the validation of CSA technologies in the field, linking validated CSA technologies to technology transfer 
systems, and improving assess to climate-informed agricultural advisory services that will help farmers and other value 
chain actors make better decisions about CSA technologies and practices. It will also support the development of climate-
smart agriculture investment plans (CSAIPs) at national level as a sustainable scaling mechanism for CSA, coupled by CSA 
and CIS bundling collaborations through regional bodies.  

Subcomponent 3.1. Africa-wide. Sub-component 3.1 will support regional and continental efforts to promote the use of 
CIS in support of CSA at scale by influencing the planning and implementation mechanisms of regional bodies (i.e. African 
Risk Capacity) and large implementation agencies (i.e. WFP). Activities to be financed include: (i) Identification of initiatives 


that are seeking to promote regional and continental collaboration around climate modeling, introduction or 
strengthening of early warning systems, and/or promotion of CSA technologies; (ii) Promoting dialogue among 
participants in these initiatives, with the goal of securing agreement on common standards and protocols for delivery of 
climate advisory services; (iii) Identification of opportunities to use regional and continental networks to promote 
dissemination of the results of CGIAR climate research; and (iv) Development of approaches and mechanisms to ensure 
sustainability of regional and continental initiatives.  

Sub-component 3.2. Western Africa. Sub-component 3.2 will support the uptake of CSA at national level in selected 
countries in Western Africa. Activities to be financed include: (i) Assessment of the climate-smartness of candidate 
technologies; (ii) Participatory selection and prioritization of best-bet and promising CSA options in key value chains, 
through stakeholder engagement; (iii) Identification of scaling mechanisms, especially for women and youth; (iv) 
Formulation of recommendations to be integrated into tailored climate-informed agro-advisory systems for distinct 
smallholder profiles; and (v) Refining of investment opportunities from existing climate-smart agriculture investment plans 
(CSAIPs), developing investment prospectus, and identifying specific investors and funding instruments, including new 
CSAIPs for countries without CSAIPs, as needed. Activities will take place in selected countries in Western Africa (Mali, 
Ghana and Senegal) 

Sub-component 3.3. Eastern and Southern Africa. Sub-component 3.2 will support the uptake of CSA at national level in 
selected countries in Eastern and Southern Africa. Activities to be financed include: (i) Assessment of the climate-
smartness of candidate technologies; (ii) Participatory selection and prioritization of best-bet and promising CSA options 
in key value chains, through stakeholder engagement; (iii) Identification of scaling mechanisms, especially for women and 
youth; (iv) Formulation of recommendations to be integrated into tailored climate-informed agro-advisory systems for 
distinct smallholder profiles; and (v) Refining of investment opportunities from existing climate-smart agriculture 
investment plans (CSAIPs), developing investment prospectus, and identifying specific investors and funding instruments, 
including new CSAIPs for countries without CSAIPs, as needed. Activities will take place in Eastern and Southern Africa 
(Ethiopia, Kenya and Zambia). 

Component 4. Project Management 

Component 4 will support project management functions. Consistent with the objective of strengthening systemic 
capacity in CGIAR, project management activities will be distributed among all of the CCAFS partners. CIAT as the Lead 
Center for CCAFS and recipient of the IDA grant will hold ultimate responsibility for technical, administrative, fiduciary, 
legal, and safeguards compliance functions. The CCAFS management team will provide oversight of the technical work 
program, ensure coordination among and between the implementation entities, supervise monitoring and evaluation 
activities and compile consolidated M&E reports documenting progress achieved. Under the shared accountability 
approach, the CCAFS implementation entities will be expected to comply with all applicable administrative, fiduciary 
(procurement and financial management), monitoring and evaluation, and safeguards requirements, and they will be 
responsible for providing information needed by the CCAFS management team and by CIAT to fulfill compliance with the 
terms of the IDA grant.   


Legal Operational Policies                                  Triggered? 

Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50 No 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60 No 

 
Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts 
.  
 

The relevant Environmental and Social Standards (ESSs) are: ESS 1 (Assessment and Management of Environmental and 
Social Risks and Impacts; ESS 2 (Labor and Working Conditions); ESS 3 (Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention 
Management); ESS 4 (Community Health and Safety); and ESS 10 (Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure). 
Key risks are related to: waste management, pest management, resource use (including water, soil, energy), Occupational 
Health and Safety (OHS) and labor issues. The Project will not finance activities that involve land acquisition, restrictions 
on land use and involuntary resettlement, or adversely affect biodiversity conservation, sustainable management of living 
resources and cultural heritage. The Project will be implemented mainly in established agricultural research stations and 
will not be implemented in areas in which Indigenous Peoples / Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional 
Local Communities are present, or have collective attachment to a proposed project area. 

 

 
 
  

























































World Bank Document


PROGRAM INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
APPRAISAL STAGE 

April 17, 2018 
Report No.: 126014 

  

Operation Name First Programmatic Economic Recovery and Resilience Grant  

Region AFRICA 

Country Chad 

Sector Agriculture (15); Governance (35); Social Protection & Labor (25); 
Transport & ICT (25) 

Operation ID P163424 

Lending Instrument Development Policy Lending 

Borrower(s) Republic of Chad 

Implementing Agency Ministry of Finance and Budget 

Date PID Prepared April 17, 2018 

Estimated Date of Appraisal April 20, 2018 

Estimated Date of Board Approval June 19, 2018 

Corporate Review Decision  

 

I. Country and Sector Background  
 
1. The collapse of global oil prices, a persistently unstable regional security situation, and the high 
fiscal cost of ongoing humanitarian efforts, have strained Chad’s public finances. The Government has 
responded with a proactive but severe fiscal adjustment and the economy has experienced a deep and 
extended recession with high social costs. The crisis has also weighed heavily on the country’s ability to 
implement much needed structural reforms for non-oil sector recovery and social inclusion.  

2. Following a global oil price drop, Chad’s economy contracted 6.3 percent in 2016 and 3 percent 
in 2017. Chad’s oil sector has not only driven growth during boom years, but also translated falling oil 
prices into a sharp recession since 2016. The export price for Chadian crude oil fell from an average of 
US$100 per barrel in 2013-14 to US$34 in 2016, putting an abrupt end to growth rates around 6.3 percent 
per year in 2013-14. Oil-related fiscal revenues dropped from 11.7 percent of non-oil GDP in 2014 to just 
3.5 percent in 2016. Chad’s crisis has been aggravated by limited economic diversification and widespread 
poverty. In 2017, the economy struggled to recover and remained in recession, to a large extent due to 
an unexpected oil production shortfall.  

3. The new context of lower oil revenue, together with the challenging security and humanitarian 
situation, has greatly intensified economic, fiscal and social pressures. In the absence of adequate macro 
policy buffers and in the presence of immediate financing needs, the government had no room to 
undertake counter-cyclical fiscal policy to support economic recovery and protect social spending 
effectively. Monetary policy options have also been limited as the regional central bank is trying to 
manage the fallout from the oil price shock across Central African Economic and Monetary Union (CEMAC) 
members (including Chad). Regional security threats have negatively impacted growth by reducing cross-
border trade and kept foreign direct investment away. Significant security expenditures are linked to 
Chad’s continued efforts combating transnational terrorist groups (such as Boko Haram), supporting 
regional stabilization (peace-building) initiatives (2.8 percent of GDP in 2016), as well as providing for a 

vast number of refugees and displaced persons (around 2.8 percent of 2016 GDP per year).1 Domestically, 
the government keeps diffusing tensions between agricultural communities and pastoralists. 

4. The government has demonstrated its determination to responsibly manage what has turned 
out to be a much deeper and longer fiscal crisis than expected. Continued efforts to restructure external 
commercial debt came to fruition in February 2018, when an agreement in principle was reached. This 
agreement will allow Chad’s public debt to return to sustainability and moderate risk of debt distress (as 
per the March 2018 Bank-Fund Debt Sustainability Analysis). The substantial oil-collateralized loan with 
an international commodity firm – Glencore – had heavily reduced fiscal revenues and rendered debt 
unsustainable (see Box 1 for details). As a result, between 2014 and 2016, public spending was cut by 10.8 
percent of non-oil GDP, and since 2016 an emergency fiscal consolidation action plan has been adopted 
and extended in the 2017 Finance Law. Despite such sharp adjustment, Chad’s fiscal situation remained 
challenging during 2017, with a financing gap that required domestic arrears accumulation.  

5. Poverty reduction gains achieved over the past decade have been threatened by the current 
economic crisis.2  In the absence of a well-targeted and effective social safety net, the poor and vulnerable 
have likely been deeply affected by the crisis. During the oil boom, poverty rates declined (from 55 percent 
in 2003 to 47 percent in 2011), however, the absolute number of poor increased from 4.9 million to 5.6 
million due to population growth. Progress on non-monetary poverty also presents a mixed picture. Since 
the beginning of the crisis, dwindling fiscal resources have disrupted vital public services despite the 
government’s efforts to protect priority social spending. Payments to community-based teachers and 
health workers, funding for student scholarships, social-program benefits, and the provision of 
agricultural inputs have either been delayed or halted altogether at various occasions, and all public 
investment projects have been suspended.  

II. Proposed Objective(s) 
 
6. The primary objectives of the series are to enhance fiscal and oil sector risk management and 
transparency, promote economic diversification, and improve social protection for the poor and 
vulnerable. To achieve these objectives, the programmatic series is organized around four intertwined 
pillars: First, it aims at enhancing fiscal risk management through (a) improved debt management, (b) 
rationalization of tax expenditures, (c) streamlining the payroll for enhanced fiscal space, and (d) improved 
oversight and transparency in the management of SOEs. Second, to improve the contribution of the oil 
sector to fiscal sustainability and economic resilience it promotes (i) a functional oil revenue management 
mechanism; (ii) transparency in the sector; and (iii) improved control over oil production costs. Third, to 
increase diversification and resilience of Chad’s population in face of economic and climatic shocks, the 
operation (a) contributes to greater agricultural productivity for more sustainable and inclusive growth; 
and (b) strengthens the contribution of the ICT sector to inclusive growth through enhanced affordability 
and coverage of services, as well as improved transparency for public and private service delivery. Fourth, 
it increases social protection for the poor and most vulnerable groups including refugees, by developing 
an effective and well-targeted social safety net system, and implementing cash transfers.  

 

                                                 
1 Of the more than 750,000 displaced people currently living in Chad, 403,780 are refugees. The number of refugees is equivalent 
to over 3 percent of the population, the fifth-highest level in the world. See: UNHCR and World Bank IDA18 refugee Sub-Window 
Board Consultation Paper (September 19, 2017). 
2 The latest poverty data are available as of 2011 only. 



III. Rationale for Bank Involvement 
 

7. Building on the 2017 Emergency Fiscal Stabilization Operation (EFSO), this series shifts Bank 
support towards a structural resilience and growth agenda. The authorities aim at sustaining growth 
recovery, fostering economic diversification in the medium term, and developing coping mechanisms for 
the poor and vulnerable. Four intertwined pillars combine structural measures to enhance fiscal risk 
management with boosting economic diversification and social resilience. Improved debt management, 
SOE oversight and oil revenue management are complemented by increased productivity in agriculture 
and competitive, open access information and communication technologies (ICT). Finally, putting in place 
a well-targeted and fully operational social protection system for the poor and vulnerable adds an explicit 
micro layer of resilience.  

8. The program supported by the proposed series is closely aligned with the three pillars of the 
Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY16-20. The CPF was discussed at the Board on December 10, 
2015. The CPF, which succeeded the interim strategy note for FY10-12, is based on three engagement 
themes: (i) strengthening fiscal management; (ii) improving the returns to agriculture and developing 
agricultural value chains; and (iii) building the stock of human capital and reducing socioeconomic 
vulnerability.  

9. The proposed series follows a sequence of efforts by the World Bank to help the Chadian 
government cope with the impact of multiple exogenous shocks and lay the groundwork for sustained 
growth recovery and social inclusion. In December 2015, the Board approved the Fiscal Consolidation 
Program Support Grant (FCPSG), Chad’s first development policy operation in a decade. The FCPSG aimed 
to reinforce macroeconomic stability, protect critical expenditures, and initiate a medium-term structural 
reform agenda. It supported measures to broaden the tax base, rationalize public spending, enhance PFM 
transparency, and streamline business-registration procedures. In December 2016, as a protracted slump 
in global oil prices coupled with persistently high security and humanitarian costs further strained Chad’s 
fiscal resources, the Board approved US$80 million in additional financing for the FCPSG through Crisis 
Response Window allocation. The FCPSG’s implementation has been broadly on track, with a substantial 
in of the number of taxpaying firms and newly registered businesses observed despite the difficult 
economic climate. While less progress has been achieved in enhancing public procurement and limiting 
recourse to extraordinary spending procedures, the government is now preparing to implement a new 
procurement code, while the fiscal consolidation and the recent shift to cash-based budgeting are 
expected to curb the use of extraordinary spending procedures. Considering the country’s dire macro-
fiscal situation, the World Bank also approved a US$65 million emergency development policy financing 
operation - the EFSO – in June 2017, which builds on the FCPSG and has helped the government meet 
urgent financing needs while laying the groundwork for more substantive reforms. 

IV. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 
 

10. The government’s Negotiation Committee will oversee the implementation of the reform 
program supported by the proposed operation. The Negotiation Committee, which is chaired by the 
Ministry of Economy and Development Planning, is an inter-ministerial committee charged with 
coordinating the preparation of the proposed operation and monitoring the reform program. The 
participating ministries, departments, and agencies will provide information on the status of their 
respective programs, and the committee will monitor their progress against program objectives. The 
committee previously collaborated with both the IMF and the World Bank during the successful HIPC 
completion process and the implementation of the FCPSG. A results framework will define concrete 



indicators and empirical benchmarks to monitor progress and facilitate ex post evaluation following the 
end of the program. 

V. Risk and Risk Mitigation 
 

11. The overall risk rating for the proposed operation is high. Political and governance risks, 
macroeconomic risks, and risks related to institutional capacity for implementation and sustainability are 
especially serious.   

12. Following the agreement in principle to restructure the debt to Glencore, debt vulnerabilities 
declined significantly. Public debt remains in distress for the time being. Once the final agreement is 
reached and progress is made on clearing the outstanding external arrears, other things equal, the risk 
rating would be expected to be upgraded to moderate under the current LIC DSF methodology. 

13. Risks of delayed structural reforms in sensitive areas because of political resistance cannot be fully 
mitigated and remain high.  Against the backdrop of continued exposure to oil price and production 
shocks, the government has demonstrated a strong commitment to fiscal discipline and an ability to 
maintain a sound fiscal stance in a challenging economic context. While CEMAC membership has 
bolstered macroeconomic stability in recent years, CEMAC’s low foreign-exchange reserves and the 
constrained fiscal space of its members pose additional downside risks.  Risks related to institutional 
capacity for implementation and sustainability will be mitigated by leveraging ongoing and planned World 
Bank projects in the policy areas supported by the proposed series, as well as technical assistance from 
Chad’s development partners, including France, the AfDB, EU, IMF and CEMAC. 

 

VI. Poverty and Social Impacts and Environment Aspects 
 
Poverty and Social Impacts 
 
14. The proposed series is expected to have a significant positive impact on poverty reduction in 
the medium and longer term. The proposed operation is expected to help decrease poverty in the 
medium and long term through the promotion of inclusive growth in agriculture, and the development of 
more affordable ICT services and broader coverage in underserved areas. In addition, a properly targeted 
expansion of the social safety net system has the potential to have a significant impact on allowing 
households to move out of poverty and strengthen household resilience to shocks. The overall impact on 
poverty therefore is expected to be positive in the medium and longer term.  

15. Medium term efficiency gains in fiscal and debt management and better overall risk 
management are expected to improve fiscal space for social protection and other public services as well 
as pro-growth investment. While fiscal rationing and stabilization policies of the Government may have 
a negative short-term impact on poverty through public sector job losses or decreases in public services, 
however, medium term efficiency gains in fiscal and debt management and better overall risk 
management should clearly improve fiscal space for social protection and other public services as well as 
pro-growth investment. Improved control of fiscal risks should also contribute to macroeconomic stability, 
which is beneficial to growth and poverty reduction. The social costs associated to the elimination of 
irregularities in the payroll is likely to have only negligible social costs. However, the payroll audit may set 
the stage for deeper reforms of the civil service (beyond the scope of this operation), which would likely 
involve significant social costs and would require careful evaluation and adequate mitigation.  



 
16.   The proposed reforms in agriculture and ICT may lead to a more diversified economy and 
improved public services. As around 80 percent of Chad’s labor force is active in agriculture, productivity 
gains stemming from enhanced dissemination and adoption of agricultural technology and more effective 
input supply chains is bound to result in broad positive effects for vulnerable and poor households. The 
development of more affordable ICT technologies is also expected to contribute directly, over the medium 
term, to the provision of better public services. This would benefit the poor who tend to rely 
disproportionately on public services. Cheaper, more effective ICT services in Chad, may also contribute 
directly to inclusive growth in agriculture by facilitating extension services, but also have cross cutting 
positive spillover effects for most sectors using ICT as an input. Ultimately, effective ICT is also expected 
to support faster and more efficient implementation of social safety nets and related transfer and social 

protection systems nationwide. 

 
17. The expected medium-term impact of the reforms included in this operation on gender equity 
is positive.  In the medium to longer term, increased fiscal space for health, education, and social safety 
nets would have positive impacts on services benefitting women. Increased spending for health may 
contribute to decrease very high maternal mortality rates. At 856 deaths per 100,000 women, Chad ranks 
only above CAR and Sierra Leone in international comparisons.3  In addition, increased funding for 
education and social safety nets may support improved school attendance for girls. Families with limited 
resources often prioritize the education of sons, and, despite recent improvements, the 2014/15 
Demographic and Health Survey shows that 44 percent of girls aged 15 to 19 have never attended school, 
compared to 30 percent of boys in the same age group.  To help address this, the implementation of the 
NSPS clearly identifies women as the most vulnerable population, and targets them specifically as the 
primary recipients of cash transfers and cash for works programs. 
 
Environment Aspects  
 
18. The reforms and policy actions supported by the proposed operation are not likely to have 
significant negative effects on the country’s environment, forests and other natural resources. 
Environmental Assessment (EA) is a legal requirement in Chad and is widely applied to all developmental 
projects. The EA process is based on Presidential Decree No. 630/PR/PM/MEERH/2010 on EA regulations 
and the ministerial decision No. 039/PR/PM/MERH/SG/DGE/DEELCPN/2012 with respect to the general 
guidelines and procedures for environmental assessment. The department of environmental assessment 
and pollution control in the Ministry of Environment and Fisheries is institutionally saddled with reviewing 
and clearing environmental impact assessment (EIA) documents. 
 
19. As per the Policy on Development Policy Financing, the World Bank assessed whether specific 
country policies supported by the DPF series are likely to cause significant effects on the country’s 
environment, forests, and other natural resources. The assessment concluded that the policies 
supported by the proposed DPF are not likely to have negative impacts on the country ‘s natural assets. 
All the actions supported throughout the operation are policy-oriented; they do not support direct 
investment in environmentally impactful investments or involve policy actions with significant 
environmental consequences. The assessment of potential impacts related to actions supported by the 
DPF will rely on the existing national legal and regulatory framework, and will be monitored and addressed 
through the national procedures in place in Chad. 
 

                                                 
3 World Health Statistics 2016, World Health Organization. 



20. Prior actions and triggers designed for increasing social protection for the poor, vulnerable and 
refugees are also largely environmental neutral. Although some cash for work under the social 
protection programs could be expected to have some small physical footprint, the Government will 
finance significant capacity-building activities including environmental and social safeguards through the 
Cellule Filet Social (CFS) established on March 10, 2016. In conjunction with department of environmental 
assessment and pollution control, the CFS will play a key role in minimizing any environmental and social 
adverse impacts and enhancing the positive ones derived from social protection programs. Further, the 
operation’s focus on ensuring adequate fiscal space to preserve pro-poor spending and maintain the 
government’s capacity for effective social protection policy could indirectly support environmental 
objectives by mitigating the need for rural households to resort to environmentally unsustainable 
practices in the event of a natural disaster or a shock to agricultural production. 
 
21. Prior actions with respect to reforms in the agriculture and ICT sectors may have positive or 
little impact on the environment. Improved seeds will increase productivity at the intensive margin, 
thereby reducing the need to increase cultivated land size and grow at the external margin. Although this 
operation focuses uniquely on open access to Chad’s fiber backbone, potential extension of geographic 
coverage of mobile networks at a later stage could involve the destruction of some flora and fauna. 
However, any potential environmental impact could be minimized by avoiding areas were the impact will 
be substantial. Also, the licensed operators would be encouraged to begin revegetation of excavated sites 
immediately the sites have been backfilled. 
 
22. The Government’s reform agenda encompasses a robust institutional framework for 
environmental protection. The NDP includes a pillar dedicated to environmental protection and 
adaptation to climate change built on four key elements: (i) the protection of Lake Chad and other critical 
ecosystems; (ii) improved land management in rural and urban areas; (iii) the mitigation of risks related 
to natural disasters; and (iv) the fight against desertification and the conservation of biodiversity. The 
1998 Environmental Code was augmented in 2009 by a decree on pollution and environmental damage. 
The use of charcoal is officially forbidden in Ndjamena to minimize indoor air pollution, and the country 
is promoting the use of improved cooking stoves. Nevertheless, indoor air pollution remains a major 
health risk, and access to clean fuels is limited. The Environmental Code also defines principles for solid 
and hazardous waste management, though these are poorly enforced. The GoC promulgated a Forestry 
Law in 2008 that clearly distinguishes between conservation and production activities.   
 

VII. Tentative financing 
 

Source: ($m.) 

BORROWER/RECIPIENT 0.00 

International Development Association (IDA) 65.00 

Borrower/Recipient  

IBRD 
Others (specify) 

 

 Total 65.00 

 
























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Scheme - Phase 2 (P158364) 

 
 
Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 07-Mar-2017 | Report No: PIDISDSC19562 

 
The World Bank PROJECT CONCEPT NOTE 
NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Scheme - Phase 2 (P158364) 

 
 

Jan 05, 2017 

    

F
o
r 

O
ff
ic

ia
l 
U

s
e
 

O
n
ly

 

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their official duties. I ts contents 
may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization. 



 
The World Bank PROJECT CONCEPT NOTE 
NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Scheme - Phase 2 (P158364) 
BASIC INFORMATION 

 

Project ID Lending Instrument Environmental Assessment 

Category 

Team Leaders 

P158364 Investment Project 

Financing 

B - Partial Assessment Ahmed Shawky M. Abdel 

Ghany 

Approval Date Bank / IFC Collaboration   

14-Nov-2017 No   

Practice 

Manager/Manager 

Senior Global Practice 

Director 

Country Director Regional Vice President 

Meike van Ginneken Guang Zhe Chen Qimiao Fan Annette Dixon 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 

 
The project development objectives are to improve the irrigation service and to strengthen farmer organizations in the 

irrigated areas of the Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Scheme. 

 

PROJECT FINANCING DATA 

 

[ ✔ ] 

Counterpart 

Funding 

[    ] IBRD [ ✔ ] IDA Credit 

 

[    ] Crisis Response 

Window 

 

[    ] Regional Projects 

Window 

[    ] IDA Grant 

 

[    ] Crisis Response 

Window 

 

[    ] Regional Projects 

Window 

[    ] Trust 

Funds 

[    ] Parallel 

Financing 

 



 
The World Bank PROJECT CONCEPT NOTE 
NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Scheme - Phase 2 (P158364) 

 
 

For Loans/Credits/Others (US$M) 

 

 

Total Project Cost :   65.00 

Financing Gap :    0.00 

Total Bank Financing :   65.00 

Of Which Bank Financing 

(IBRD/IDA): 
  60.00 

 

Financing Source Amount 

Borrower    4.00 

International Development Association 

(IDA) 
  60.00 

Local Farmer Organizations    1.00 

Total   65.00 

 
 

Borrower : Nepal 

Contact :  Title :  

Telephone No :  Email :  

 

 

Implementing 

Agency : 

Department of Irrigation 

Contact : Rajendra  Prasad Adhikari Title : Director General, Department of Irrigation 

Telephone No : 091561236 Email : rjkip@hotmail.com 

 

 
 

INSTITUTIONAL DATA 

 
Practice Area (Lead) 

 

Water 

 
 

Contributing Practice Areas 

 

Agriculture 



 
The World Bank PROJECT CONCEPT NOTE 
NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Scheme - Phase 2 (P158364) 

 

 
Climate Change and Disaster Screening 

This operation has been screened for short and long-term climate change and disaster risks 

 
OPS Fina ncia l Interme diate Tabl e  

Private Capital Mobilized   Public Private Partnership   

Yes   No   

 
Gender Tag 

 

Does the project plan to undertake any of the following? 

 

a. Analysis to identify Project-relevant gaps between males and females, especially in light of country gaps identified 

through SCD and CPF 

 

Yes 

 

b. Specific action(s) to address the gender gaps identified in (a) and/or to improve women or men's empowerment 

 

Yes 

 

c. Include Indicators in results framework to monitor outcomes from actions identified in (b) 

 

Yes 

 
 

SYSTEMATIC OPERATIONS RISK- RATING TOOL (SORT) 

 
Risk Category Rating 

1. Political and Governance  High  

2. Macroeconomic  Moderate  



 
The World Bank PROJECT CONCEPT NOTE 
NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Scheme - Phase 2 (P158364) 

 
 

Jan 05, 2017   Page iv 
 

F
o
r 

O
ff
ic

ia
l 
U

s
e
 

O
n
ly

 

3. Sector Strategies and Policies  Moderate 

4. Technical Design of Project or Program  Moderate 

5. Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability  Substantial 

6. Fiduciary  Substantial 

7. Environment and Social  Substantial 

8. Stakeholders  Substantial 

9. Other   

10. Overall  Substantial 

 
 

PREPARATION SCHEDULE 

 
Preparation Schedule 

Milestone  Original Revised Actual 

AIS Sign off    Dec 06, 2015 

Concept Review Meeting  Apr 20, 2016 Mar 22, 2017 Mar 22, 2017 

Begin Appraisal  Jul 17, 2017 Sep 25, 2017  

Approval  Nov 14, 2017 Nov 14, 2017  

 
Expenditures 




B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
 

1. Nepal is an under-developed country located in the Himalayan region, with harsh mountain 
topography except for its southern part consisting of a narrow strip of flat land called the Terai region.  The 
economy is largely agrarian-based, with low labor productivity.  The shares of agriculture, services and 
industry in GDP are around 32, 50 and 18 percent, respectively.  The per-capita GDP/yr is around US$700 
(FY16) with 24% of the population below the poverty line.   Nepal experienced its slowest growth in 14 years 
in FY2016.   Real GDP growth, which slowed to 2.7 percent in FY2015 because of a devastating earthquake, 
was further dragged down to 0.6 percent in FY2016 due to the sluggish post-earthquake reconstruction 
activities and the disruption in cross-border trade. 
 
2. The weak economic growth of the past two years has setback the steady reduction in poverty. 
Poverty headcount rate is estimated at 11.8 percent in FY2015, down from 15 percent in FY2010, but is 
projected to increase slightly to 11.9 percent in FY2016, measured at the $1.90 a day line. A contributing 
factor has been the higher inflation. Based on a simulation exercise, other things being equal, a 2 
percentage points increase in overall inflation would raise poverty headcount rate by 0.8 percentage point 
(measured at $1.90), pushing approximately 225,000 people back into poverty. 

 
 

Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 

Agriculture, despite being the mainstay of the rural economy, suffers low productivity in the crop sector  
 
3. Agriculture is the mainstay of the rural economy and a source of income for the majority of Nepali 
with 66 percent of the population engaged in agriculture (small farmers constitute 80 percent of the rural 
population), a 32 percent contribution to the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) (Central Bureau of Statistics, 
FY16), and 50 percent contribution to exports earning.  
 

4. Despite this importance of the agricultural sector, the level of income from agriculture is low by the 
regional and international standards, particularly for the major cereal crops (lower than their potential yield 
by at least 50 percent).   Thus, agriculture in Nepal has not made substantial contribution to improving the 
living standards during the past decades.   
 
5. Nepal’s rural population comprises mainly smallholder farmers and about 80 percent of the rural 
population aged fifteen and above is engaged in agriculture.  The unavailability of sustainable livelihood 
opportunities in the rural areas has led to a large-scale exodus of the population to the cities and more 
recently to the Gulf region.  The absence of able-bodied farm labor, continuation of traditional irrigation 
practice, and limited exposure to modern agriculture practices, have led to reduced farm production.  
Existing farmers are generally unable to benefit from existing modern technologies and inputs. 
 
6. The pressing priority is thus to improve agricultural productivity and foster diversification towards 


high-value products to secure food security for a growing population and to improve rural incomes. 
 
Public investment in improving irrigation is becoming paramount for transforming the agriculture sector  
 
7. The frail mountain terrain limits the agricultural potential area to 2.641 million hectares (ha), of which 
1.77 million ha has irrigation potential.  Irrigation systems in Nepal fall under four distinct categories: (1) 
traditional farmer-managed irrigation systems (FMIS) developed and managed by the communities; (2) a 
range of small to large-scale surface systems developed with full or partial support from the government; (3) 
government-developed tube-well irrigation schemes; and (4) individually-owned and operated tube wells 
and pumps, mostly utilizing shallow aquifers, streams, ponds, and dug wells.  
 
8. At present, the total irrigated area stands at 1.39 million ha of which only 42% has year-round 
irrigation.  There is limited new land that can be brought under farming as most of the economically-suitable 
lands for agriculture have already been exploited, mainly because of the substantial increase in Nepal’s 
population in the past century, with the exception of some potential horizontal expansion in newly-irrigated 
lands of around 0.35 million ha through investing in inter-basin transfers (see government policy below). 
Thus the largest potential for increasing production is by providing better agricultural inputs and assuring 
irrigation to the already-existing cultivated land, namely, a “vertical expansion”.  Modern agricultural 
practices require crop diversification, high-yielding varieties, improved fertilization, and reliable year-round 
irrigation.    
 
9. Of the aforementioned improvements, improving irrigation is critical to agriculture both during the 
monsoon season to overcome the periods of dry spells as well as during the dry season when rainfall is 
negligible.  Agriculture is becoming even more vulnerable to water due to the erratic monsoon rain.  Even 
when recently precipitation during the monsoon has reached 90 to 110 percent of its long-term average 
after two years of low rainfall, farmers get unreliable rainfall with both droughts and intense rainfall/floods 
often occurring in same season.  Thus, transforming the agriculture sector requires upgrading the irrigation 
systems to regulate the irrigation supply.  Only by mobilizing public funding to invest in effective irrigation 
systems, farmers could then focus on the complementary inter-farm/farm-level investments such as 
improving agricultural techniques and inputs and cropping intensity, thus leading to transforming farming to 
more profitable levels. 
 
Government Irrigation Policy and Irrigation Development Program.   
 
10. The Government of Nepal (GoN) has thus recognized the lack of intensive cropping, inadequate 
supply and use of basic agricultural inputs such as fertilizer and improved seeds, and problems with 
deteriorated and inefficient irrigation systems.  
 
11. The Agriculture Perspective Plan (APP) assigns the first priority to accelerating agricultural growth 
through concentrated investment in irrigation. Also one of the key management goals of the APP is to 
expand farmer ownership and operation of irrigation schemes as irrigation is vital to the national 
agricultural production and economic transformation.   


Basic Tenets of Irrigation Policy 2013

 
12. The Department of Irrigation (DoI) is the lead agency in Nepal tasked with developing and improving 
irrigation infrastructure.  The primary effort of DoI has been to design and implement irrigation 
infrastructure to provide irrigation to potential new areas and also to intervene in existing schemes to 
improve their irrigation efficiency and sustainability. 
 
13. The GoN’s strategy for irrigation development and management is reflected in the Water Resources 
Strategy (2002), National Water Plan (2005), Irrigation Development Vision and Action Plan (2006), and 
recently, the Irrigation Policy (2013

1
, Figure below).   The main vision described in these documents is to 

integrate agriculture and irrigation development in order to realize the full benefits from investment in 
irrigation and provide sustainable services to the agriculture sector through well-operating irrigation 
facilities, based on local resources mobilization through a partnership of the users and the government. 
There is an emphasis on: (i) provision of year-round irrigation services to increase the productivity of 
irrigated agriculture and extending the cropping seasons; (ii) the need for a service-oriented management 
approach as a means for providing more reliable and flexible water services to farmers; and (iii) the 
progressive shifting of operation and maintenance (O&M) costs to water users to enhance efficiency, equity, 
and sustainability.   

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

14. As GoN internalized the concept of year-round irrigation through its Nepal Water Resource Strategy 
(2002) and National Water Plan (2005), the DoI aimed to provide year-round irrigation to vast potential 
areas to boost crop production, leading to food self-sufficiency, employment generation and poverty 

                                            
1
 Entitled the “Irrigation Policy for 2070” in reference to the Bikram Sambat (BS 2070) which corresponds to 2013 AD. The policy was approved on July 13, 2013. 

 


reduction.  There are four themes under this DoI goal:  
a) Rehabilitation of existing FMISs;   

b) Design and construction of new irrigation schemes (including the ongoing MoRJKIP and its proposed 
phase 2);   

c) Improve the agency-managed large-scale irrigation projects and handover their management to 
beneficiary farmers (the so called, Irrigation Management Transfer (IMT)), either fully or below the main-
canal level; and  

d) Expand the irrigation area horizontally through investing in “inter-basin water transfers”. 

15. The Tables below reflect some of the DoI target indicators for the next five years, in incremental areas 
and crop yields.    

Table 1:  DOI target for the incremental irrigated area by 2022 
 

Activity Unit Status to date 
Target increment 

after 5 years  

Increment in irrigated area by surface irrigation  Ha 775,000 45,335 

Increment in irrigated area by groundwater Ha 409,013 206,470 

Increment in irrigated area by non-conventional  irrigation 
methods (e.g. solar pumping)  

Ha 5,865 21,100 

Rehabilitation of Farmer Managed Irrigation System (FMIS) Ha 202,299 71,500 

Required financial Resources (in Billion NRs.) 
  

147 

 
Table 2:  Examples for the DOI’s target increase in crop production  (ton/ha) 

 

Before Intervention After Intervention 

Irrigated area Hectare Production 
(ton/ha) 

Irrigated area Hectar
e 

Production (ton/ha) 

Rehabilitation 
of FMIS 

67,000 Paddy 2.2, Wheat 
1.7, Maize 1.76, 
Potato 7.8 

Rehabilitated 
area 

67,000  Paddy 3.6, Wheat 2.7, 
Maize 2.8, Potato 13.0 

IMT projects 102,590 Paddy 2.9, Wheat 
2, Maize 2.1, 
Potato 10 

Management 
Transferred to 
WUAs 

102,59
0  

Paddy 4.7, Wheat 3, 
Maize 4.2, Potato 18.1 

Yields as reported by the Bank-supported Irrigation and Water Resources Management Project (IWRMP, 
August 2016), which supports activities under both the FMIS and IMT categories.   

 
New irrigation schemes   
 
16. The DoI is entrusted with the planning, design and implementation of medium to large-size irrigation 
projects mostly in the hills and Terai region. The Rani-Jamara-Kulariaya Irrigation Project (IP), Mahakali III, 
Babai IP, Sikta IP, Bagmati IP are examples of such large-size undertakings.  The development/modernization 


of medium to small schemes (below 300 ha in hills and below 2,000 ha in Terai) are implemented by the 
Medium Irrigation Project (MIP) and the Non-Conventional Irrigation Technology Project (NITP).  At present, 
the MIP has about 250 new irrigation projects in the pipeline with a combined cultivable command area 
(CCA) of approximately 37,000 ha and the NITP has in the pipeline about 732 small new projects especially 
in the hills/mountains with combined CCA of about 8,450 ha.  The DoI intends to continue the development 
of feasible new irrigation schemes in the future.  In addition, the DoI has started the use of solar energy to 
pump blue water to adjoining river terraces for irrigation.  This activity has already been initiated along the 
Bheri corridor and is under consideration for the Babai river, and the DoI intends to expand its use to all 
feasible areas.    
 
17. The Rani Jamara Kularia scheme (the ongoing Bank-financed Phase 1 and the proposed Phase 2) is 
amongst the largest schemes in the entire country under the category of new schemes, and it benefits one 
of the poorest areas in the Tarai in south west of the Karnali river basin.    

 
Farmer Organizations and Participatory Irrigation Management (or “Joint Participatory Management”, JPM) 
18. Nepal has a long tradition of farmer-managed irrigation systems (FMISs) in the hills, mountains, and 
the Terai.  The FMISs cover about 70 percent of the 1.2 million ha of land with some form of irrigation 
infrastructure in the country. The hill FMISs are generally small in size compared to the FMISs in the medium 
to large irrigation systems in the Terai.  A strong sense of ownership and hierarchical management system 
exists in the FMISs.  They often exist in some form of Water Users Associations/Groups (WUA/WUG), tasked 
with operation and maintenance (O&M) of the schemes, most of which is done through labor contribution.    
 
19. However, improving irrigation services in the existing FMIS schemes requires a combination of 
“hardware” and “software” solutions.  The former involves rehabilitating and modernizing existing irrigation 
and drainage infrastructure to improve reliability of supply and expand the system of secondary and tertiary 
canals.   The latter requires the development of more efficient mechanisms for managing the irrigation 
systems down to the field level, through a clear delineation of responsibilities between the government and 
the WUAs in charge of delivering irrigation services to farmers.  There is also a need to pool funding through 
government and users contributions for O&M and asset replacement over time. 

 
 

Relationship to CPF 
 

20. The proposed project is consistent with the Nepal Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for FY 2014–18 to 
support poverty reduction and shared prosperity in Nepal. The proposed project is aligned with the Pilar 2 of CPS 
– Increasing Inclusive Growth and Opportunities for Shared Prosperity. The proposed project aims to improve 
agriculture and water productivities through modernizing or rehabilitating the lower-order irrigation 
infrastructure, strengthening WUA, and implementing a comprehensive agricultural improvement program (CPS 
Outcome 2.1).  
 
21.  In line with the CPF, the Bank has been engaged in the irrigation and WRM sector through two lending 
projects, namely: (1) Irrigation and WRM Project, which is a collaboration of the Agriculture and Water Global 
Practices (IWRMP, IDA US$114m, closing in June 2018, targets 26,808 hectares); and (2) Modernization of Rani-



Jamara-Kulariya Irrigation Scheme-Phase 1 (MoRJKIP, IDA US$40m, due to close in September 2017, targets 
14,300 hectares).    The Performance and Learning Review (PLR) of the CPS, conducted in October 2016, has 
indicated that by FY2018 the IWRMP and MoRJKP would increase the area under improved irrigation services by 
a total of 50,000 hectares, and would improve the end-users satisfaction with the performance of the WUAs 
from around 5% to 40%. 
 

 
 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
22.  The project development objectives are to improve the irrigation service and to strengthen farmer organizations 
in the irrigated areas of the Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Scheme. 
 

Key Results (From PCN) 

 
PDO indicators:  

 
1. Area provided with new/improved irrigation or drainage services (a Corporate Result Indicator): in hectares. 

2. Farmers reached with agricultural assets or services (a Corporate Result Indicator): in number, with the 
number of females as a supplemental indicator.   

 
D. Concept Description 

 

23.    The proposed operation will focus on modernization of the lower-order irrigation system (sub-branches, 
tertiary canals and water courses) so that irrigation water can reach farmer fields with the optimal flows, 
continuation of the WUA/WUG support program, implementation of a comprehensive agricultural improvement 
program, and support to the river-basin planning process. 
 
24.    The proposed operation is a second phase of the ongoing IDA-supported MoRJKIP.  The ongoing project 
focuses on modernization of the higher-order irrigation infrastructure (intakes, feeder and branch canals, 
including related flood protection), enhancing the capacity of WUAs to operate and maintain the improved/new 
irrigation infrastructure, and preparation and initiation of an agricultural development program.  The MoRJKIP is 
on track toward meeting the PDO.    
 
24.       The proposed phase 2 is very essential in complementing the ongoing phase 1, because of two inter-
related necessities:  
 
1. First, below the main/conveyance system introduced by phase 1, without phase 2 the irrigation distribution 

and application efficiencies would continue to be low compared to the global/regional norms.  Farmers apply 
as much as 2-3 litre/second/ha (the irrigation “hydro-module”) compared to an optimal level of around 1 
litre/second/hectare.  The lack of bulk inter-seasonal water storage needs to be compensated by completing 
the modernization of the system down to the farm level, in order to optimize canal storage and irrigation 
scheduling, thus optimize the root-zone moisture across the crop-growth stages. 

2. Second, the WUAs function is not supposed to stop at the main-system level.  There is a need to utilize the 

immense potential for JPM in the Rani-Jamara-Kulariya community, building on the creation and 
empowerment of WUAs attained under the phase 1, so that the WUAs can also have a major role in the 
O&M of the irrigation subsystem down to the farm level.   
  

20. The envisaged project components are as follows:    
 
Component 1, Scheme Modernization (US$58 million, mainly civil works): will support the construction and 
modernization of the lower-order irrigation infrastructure, including the sub-branch canals, tertiary canals, and 
water courses. The activities will include design and execution of irrigation and drainage subsystems below the 
Branch Canals and down to the Field Outlet levels, including not only the irrigation subsystems but also related 
river-training and flood-protection works, collector and tertiary drains, and control structures. 
 

Component 2, Agricultural Production Support and Strengthening Water Users Associations/Groups 
(WUAs/WUGs) (US$6 million): will support: (i) strengthening WUAs/WUGs to assume responsibility for 
management, operation, and maintenance of the modernized system; and (ii) carrying out a series of 
agriculture-based activities in the project area to internalize the gains made in phase 1 and to increase and 
sustain agricultural production through the promotion of water-smart improved farming practices, crop 
diversification, post-harvest support, farmer training through demonstrations and farmer field schools, and 
other adaptive processes. Thus the second phase will adopt value-chain-based approach to support 
agricultural activities.   
 
Component 3, Project Management (US$1 million, including goods, technical assistance and capacity 
building): will support activities to ensure effective project management, including fiduciary and safeguards 
management and monitoring and evaluation. 

 
 

 
 
    

  SAFEGUARDS 

 

A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 
Located in the Kailali District of the Far Western Development Region, the proposed project will cover eight Village Deve 

lopment Committees (VDC) and Tikapur Municipality. Tikapur Municipality is the main market center in the project area. 
The existing Rani Jamara and Kulariya Irrigation scheme consists of three independent traditional irrigation systems 
constructed, operated and managed by the indigenous Tharu community.  The ethnic composition of the project area 
includes Tharus as the dominant group (48 percent) followed by Chhetri (17 percent), Dalit (15 percent), Brahmin (10 
percent) and others (7 percent).  There are three water users associations and one central committee (federation) that 
has representations of the three WUAs. 
The proposed project is in the Terai (plain) area of Nepal. There are community and state forests in and around the 

project area. Nearest protected area is the Bardiya National Park, which is located across the source river Karnali, in the 
east of the project area. The target area is the 14,300 ha of the Rani, Jamara and Kulariya command area.  Under the 
ongoing phase 1 which focused on the river/ main system level, the Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) has been triggered 
because the Karnali River has protected and endangered aquatic species, including the Gangetic Dolphin, Marsh Mugger, 
and Gharial Crocodile.    Also, the Karnali River corridor (forests) is a wildlife movement route for especially elephant, 
tiger, and rhino.  As some of the phase 1 works have been aligned along the fringes of forest areas, the OP/BP 4.36 on 
Forests was triggered and issues were addressed as part of the Environmental Management Plan.  An Environmental 
Assessment (EA) of the Phase 2 will be commissioned to identify, assess and recommend measures for avoidance, 
minimization, and mitigation of potential adverse environmental impacts as well as to enhance positive impacts related to 
component 1 and component 2 of the project.   
 
The scheme abstracts water from the Karnali River, a major left-bank tributary of the Ganges River. The Karnali River has 

its source in China and flows through Western Nepal into India (where it is called Ghaghara River before it joins the 
Ganges). The Karnali River is thus an international waterway for purposes of OP 7.50.  Due to uncontrolled diversion of 
the Karnali River water into the main canals there is typically excessive water entry, while there is no control of the water. 
The scheme in its current state has very low water use efficiency and large water losses through seepage and water 
logging.  The proposed phase 2 will complement phase 1 in helping to reduce water abstraction from the Karnali River, by 
over 40 percent of the current water abstraction.  There upon, an exception to the notification requirement under OP 
7.50 has been received from South Asia‟ s Regional Vice President on February 24, 2011. A Strategic Environmental and 
Social Assessment (SESA) of the proposed River Basin Management Plan (RBM) will be carried out during implementation. 
 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
The DoI is currently implementing MoRJKIP - Phase 1.  During the preparation of the ongoing MoRJKIP – phase 1, Social 

Assessment (SA) and Environmental Assessment (EA) were carried out, based on which DoI prepared Social Impact 
Management Framework (SIMF) and Environmental Management Plan (EMP) to manage social and environmental 
safeguard issues.  The SIMF prepared under Phase 1 includes a policy framework for land acquisition and resettlement, 
along with Vulnerable Community Development Framework, Gender and Social Inclusion Framework to ensure that the 
benefits from the project reaches the indigenous people, vulnerable people, women and other disadvantaged groups.  A 
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) for the feeder canal was prepared and implemented.  Under Phase 1, private land was 
not affected but a few private structures were affected.  An Indigenous and Vulnerable Community Development Plan 
(IVCDP) was also prepared.  To manage social and environmental safeguard activities, a Senior Sociologist and 
Environmental Specialist have been appointed under Phase 1, yet he started work in a late stage of the project.  The DoI 
have acquired familiarity and experience with Bank’s social and environmental safeguard requirements through the 
ongoing MoRJKIP- Phase 1.  The recent safeguard rating under Phase 1 is moderately satisfactory. Besides the safeguard 

specialist recruited under the project, a Local Environmental Monitoring Committee (LEMC) was formed. LEMC 



consisted of representatives from environmental stakeholders in the area such as Bardia National Park, community forest 
users group, district forest and NGO, played positive roles in monitoring and providing advices / guidance with regard to 

environmental management. However, late recruitment of environmental specialists and turnover of the specialist was 
one of the weak points. The absence of specialist service/ support during initial stage and later as well has affected the 
timely support, monitoring, reporting, and implementing the mitigation activities as well as timely coordination with local 

stakeholders, and regularity of the LEMC meetings and awareness activities.   
 
The proposed project, Phase 2, will build on these existing frameworks and their implementation experience to comply 

with the safeguard policies.  The command area is defined, main canal and branch canal have been modernized in the 
Phase I.  An EA will be conducted for the new proposed system and EMP will be drafted accordingly to address 
environmental issues. The proposed project will intervene in the sub-system and inter-farm areas which are closer to 
privately-owned assets and livelihood. However, technical design of the project is yet to be performed, thus the specific 
nature and scale of the social impacts would be known later amid the pre-appraisal stage. Hence, social management 
framework is proposed. Gaps identified and lessons learnt during the implementation of RJKIP Phase I will be considered 
while revising the existing Social Management Framework.  
 
  
 

 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 
Drona Raj Ghimire, Jun Zeng, Rekha Shreesh 

 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

Same as phase 1. As the project scope under 
Component 1 and Component 2 includes physical 
construction activities, and agricultural production 
support, potential adverse impacts on the natural 
environment and human health and safety are likely. 
Command area is defined and main and branch canals 
are existing (modernized in Phase I).  Hence, EA and 
EMP will be prepared for the modernization and 
agricultural production activities. EA and EMP, inter 
alia, will cover issues related to labour and labour 
camps, and EHS issues (following World Bank Groups’ 
EHS Guidelines).   

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

Was triggered in phase 1 due to working on the main 
system. Karnali and Mohana Rivers are known to have 
important aquatic species (Gangetic Dolphin, Marsh 
Mugger, and Gharial crocodile). Occasional movement 
of wildlife has been reported in the adjoining forests. 
During project preparation, impacts on natural habitat 
and biodiversity will be assessed and appropriate 


mitigations as part of EA and EMP, (or if necessary, 
Stand-alone Biodiversity Management Plan) will be 
prepared.  

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes 

Was triggered in phase 1 due to working on the main 
system. There are community forests adjoining the 
project command area. Some sections of the main/ 
feeder canal constructed in the Phase I was located in 
the community forests.  In the Phase II, sub-branch 
canals, tertiary canals, inter-farm water courses are 
the main construction works.  These structure are 
away from the forest areas.  Hence, there is less 
chance of adverse impacts on forest. However, during 
preparation of the project, each activity will be 
reviewed to see if the project has potential to cause 
loss or degradation (the health and quality) of forest. 
EA will assess potential impacts and propose 
mitigations, if necessary. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

 
Emphasis of Phase II, under Component 2, is to 

increase and sustain agricultural production by 
carrying out a series of agriculture-based 
activities, adopting value-chain-based approach. 
This may lead to introduction of pesticides or 
increased use of pesticides. During project 
preparation, this will be reviewed thoroughly and 
the EA / EMP will have measures, such as 
Integrated Pest Management, to mitigate adverse 
impacts (or if necessary, separate Pest 
Management Plan will be prepared).    

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 TBD 
This was not triggered in the Phase 1.  The ESIA will 
confirm if the project will affect PCR. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 Yes 

The RJKIP project will be implemented in an area with 
Indigenous ethnic minorities. Tharus, indigenous to 
the area, are in a majority (48 percent) followed by 
other indigenous groups from the hill. The project 
areas are also comprised of other vulnerable groups 
such as Dalits, women-headed households.   
SIMF will comprise a Vulnerable Community 
Development Framework (VCDF) and Gender and 
Social Inclusion Framework to guide planning 
approaches on indigenous peoples (and vulnerable 
groups) and interventions under the project. SA and 
VCDP will be prepared for project locations known by 
appraisal while VCDF will be the guiding document for 
the remaining works.  


Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

Major issues of land acquisition are unlikely.  However, 
the upgrading works may require small plots of land 
and have impacts on structures requiring relocation.  
Policy framework for land acquisition and 
resettlement will be included as a part of SIMF will 
provide a legal framework on involuntary 
resettlement. If project locations are known by 
appraisal, SA and RAP will be prepared. In other 
remaining works, where project location is not fixed, 
policy framework will be the guiding document in 
preparation of RAP. RAP will include among others 
entitlement matrix, communication strategy and GRM. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 
Same as phase 1. Project does not include 
construction of dam, neither depends on existing dam. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

Yes 

Was triggered with phase 1 as it focused on works on 
the river and main system.  In phase 2, works on the 
sub-system and inter-farm level are not expected to 
cause any appreciable transboundary water impact.  
The system modernization is expected to reduce water 
abstraction (the hydro-module is currently as high as 3 
liter/sec/hectare) thus will not impact the water 
flowing downstream.  Through a similar rationale 
under phase 1 an exception to the notification 
requirement under OP 7.50 was received from South 
Asia‟ s Regional Vice President on February 24, 2011.  

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No There is no disputed area.  

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Sep 11, 2017 
 

Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
September 2017 
 
 

CONTACT POINT 

 

World Bank 

Ahmed Shawky M. Abdel Ghany 

Sr Water Resources Spec. 
 

 

 

Borrower/Client/Recipient 
 

Nepal 

 

 

 
 

 

























































World Bank Document


Page 1 of 11

COMBINED PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENTS / INTEGRATED 
SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET (PID/ISDS)  

ADDITIONAL FINANCING
Report No.: PIDISDSA19546

Date Prepared/Updated: 24-Nov-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION

  A.  Basic Project Data

Country: Western Africa Project ID: P158983
Parent 
Project ID 
(if any):

P122065

Project Name: Additional Financing for West Africa Agricultural Productivity Program 
(WAAPP- 1C) (P158983)

Parent Project 
Name:

West Africa Agricultural Productivity Program APL (WAAPP-1C) (P122065)

Region: AFRICA
Estimated 
Appraisal Date:

15-Nov-2016 Estimated 
Board Date:

06-Jan-2017

Practice Area
(Lead):

Agriculture Lending 
Instrument:

Investment Project Financing

Borrower(s): Ministry of Agriculture
Implementing 
Agency:

Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Agriculture Livestock and Fisheries, 
Ministry of Agriculture

Financing (in USD Million)
Financing Source Amount
International Development Association (IDA) 60.00
IDA Credit from CRW 8.00
Total Project Cost 68.00

Environmental 
Category:

B - Partial Assessment

Appraisal 
Review 
Decision (from 
Decision Note):

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate

Other Decision:
Is this a 
Repeater 
project?

No


B.   Introduction and Context

Country Context
African agricultural development acquired new momentum when, in January 2014, the African 
Union adopted the Malabo Declaration on Accelerated Agricultural Growth and 
Transformational➢❬¢ in which African Heads of States and Governments recommitted 
themselves to the Comprehensive Africa Agricultural Development Program (CAADP) principles 
and values to uphold the 10 percent target for public spending on agriculture, to double 
agricultural productivity, and thus to sustain annual growth in agricultural GDP at 6 percent or 
higher. 
 
During the same period, there was a renewed commitment of development partners to engage and 
invest in the agricultural sector. Several initiatives are being launched, including from the United 
Nations, the African Development Bank and the World Bank. The United Nation adopted the new 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDG), and the second of the seventeen proposed SDGs is to end 
hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition, and promote sustainable agricultural. The 
African Development Bank launched (Feed Africa: Strategy for Agricultural Transformation in 
Africa, 2016-2025) which aims to end hunger and rural poverty in Africa in the next decade. 
Also, the World Bank has committed itself to twin goals: eliminating extreme poverty by 2030 
and boosting shared prosperity, measured as the income of the bottom 40 percent in any given 
country.
Sectoral and institutional Context
One of the main challenges in West Africa is satisfying the demands of a rapidly growing 
population that is expected to increase from 300 million in 2011 to about 500 million by 2030. 
The 2008 food, fuel, and financial crisis has demonstrated the need to base food security in West 
Africa on the utilization of the region's huge agricultural potential, as this option would 
simultaneously contribute to economic growth and reduction of poverty. Moreover, meta-analyses 
conducted by International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI) have shown that the benefits 
from productivity growth attributed to agricultural research exceed their costs by a factor of 10 or 
more whereas high rates of return on investments in science for agriculture, to the order of 40-60 
per cent, have also been consistently proven. 
 
Gains from smart investments in agricultural R&D were amply demonstrated by WAAPP impact 
analysis completed under the first phase of WAAPP in Mali, Senegal, Ghana, Cote d➢❨ Ivoire 
and Guinea. The analysis found that: (i) WAAPP beneficiaries have increased their yields and 
income by at least 30 percent over the control group; (ii) most of these gains resulted from the 
adoption of new varieties, improved crop management practices and improved small scale food 
processing technologies; and (iii) the immediate pathways exist to achieve rapid growth in 
agriculture through greater focus on productivity enhancement using a regional integration 
approach. The analysis also showed that program beneficiaries experienced a reduction in hunger 
by half and also improved their nutrition standards.

C.  Proposed Development Objective(s)

Original Project Development Objective(s) - Parent
To generate and accelerate the adoption of improved technologies in the participating countries' 
top agricultural commodity priority areas that are aligned with the sub-region's top agricultural 
commodity priorities, as outlined in the ECOWAP.



Page 3 of 11

Key Results 
As it concerns the achievement of the WAAPP in the targeted countries, as of October 2016, the 
project has reached in the four countries a total of more than 1 million direct beneficiaries 
(1,153,000), about 26 technologies have been generated by the NCOS in Benin and Niger and the 
rice research system in Guinea, close to 1.1 million hectares (1,083,000) have been covered by the 
new technologies and more than 650,000 producers/processors have adopted at least one new 
technology. The disbursement performance of the project is also satisfactory; more than 96 
percent of the parent project (WAAPP-1C) financing is disbursed, and an action plan is being 
implemented which will ensure full disbursement by the current closing date of December 2016.

D.  Project Description

The AF will build upon the achievements of the original project to complete, consolidate and 
expand project activities. Therefore there will not be change in the project development objective 
and component structure as well as or safeguard category. The proposed AF will also continue to 
use the implementation arrangements and technical design of the original project. 
However, the primary focus of the AF will be to scale up the adoption the innovations and 
technologies generated by the WAAPP (more than 174 technologies have been released by the 
Program to improve agricultural production, post harvest, processing and mechanization). Thus 
the AF will add a particular focus on marketing of these technologies and innovations in order to 
scale up their adoption and to increase food availability in the sub region, and thereby contribute 
to poverty alleviation and agricultural growth. And since some of these technologies have 
different level of marketability and their scope for adoption also varies markedly the AF will 
among others, include the contracting of a private firm/NGO by CORAF/WECARD to design a 
technology marketing strategy and a technology marketing specialists in each country to 
implement an action plan for the commercialization of the technologies. In this framework the AF 
will finance incubation centers and seed money for job creation for greater citizen engagement, 
youth and women, and provide incentives and mechanisms to actively involve the private sector 
and mobilize some of their resources for the development of the targeted value chains. 
 
And in order to take the above scaled-up activities of the AF into account, the project➢❨ s Results 
Framework will be updated to review the targets of the indicators and also include the new 
indicators on job creation/employment, nutrition, citizen engagement and private sector 
participation. In addition the closing date of the original project will be extended to correspond to 
the duration of the AF. The Risk ratings have been updated to reflect experience gained during 
implementation of the original project.

Component Name
(a) Component 1: Enabling Conditions for Sub-regional Cooperation in the Generation, 
Dissemination, and Adoption of Agricultural Technologies.
Comments (optional)
The AF will: (i) upscale the implementation of common regulations and strategies developed 
under the parent project; (ii) support the development and implementation of a regional strategy 
and national action plans to address the issues of nutrition and food safety in collaboration with 
FAO nutrition unit; and (iii) assist the countries in finalizing the setting up of their sustainable 
funding mechanism for technology generation and dissemination.



Page 4 of 11

Component Name
(b) Component 2: Strengthening National Centers of Specialization/Strengthening of the 
Research System
Comments (optional)
The component will finance: (ii) for Benin and Niger, the implementation of  their action plans to 
transform the National Centers of Specialization (NCOS) into Regional Centers of Excellence 
(RCOE) for agricultural research in maize and livestock, respectively; and (ii) for Togo and 
Guinea, which does not have an NCOS, the upgrading of their adaptive research systems to 
participate more actively in the network of the RCEO and bring and adapt in their countries the 
maximum technologies and innovations from the sub region.

Component Name
(c) Component 3: Support to Demand-Driven Technology Generation, Dissemination and 
Adoption.
Comments (optional)
The  component will finance: (i) financing through the competitive agriculture grant schemes the 
completion of the ongoing research and a limited number of new on-demand projects that may be 
commissioned; (ii) strengthening the regional technology market including organizing local and 
regional technology fairs; (ii) upscaling the adoption of existing technologies and innovations 
with a much greater emphasis on nutrition-sensitive and climate smart agriculture technologies 
that have high potential for accelerating job creation for youth and women (iii) implementing  an 
action plan to scale-up commercialization of the promising technologies to facilitate private sector 
investment and create more jobs for young agro-entrepreneurs; and (iv) strengthen the regional 
seed market and upscale the p

Component Name
(d) Component 4: Project Coordination, Management and Monitoring and Evaluation.
Comments (optional)
The Project will continue to finance the existing Project Coordination Unit (PCUs) in Togo, 
Niger, Benin and Guinea selected additional staffs and specifically a technology marketing 
specialist in each country.

E.  Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis (if known)

The project in each of these fours countries has a national coverage. Although it would be mainly 
developed in R&D centers, newly availed WAAPP technologies will also be expanded to new 
farmers own lands to ensure technologies contribute indeed to alleviate poverty and shared 
prosperity. These technologies would be gender sensitive and youth-driven as the project seeks at 
engaiging more women and youth as citizen for sustainable development.

F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

Abdoulaye Gadiere (GEN07)
Cheikh A. T. Sagna (GSU01)
Emeran Serge M. Menang Evouna (GEN07)



Page 5 of 11

II. Implementation
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 
 
The proposed AF does not foresee any changes in terms of implementation arrangements. The AF 
will be placed under the technical responsibility of the Ministry in charge of Agriculture in each of 
the participating countries and under the responsibility of CORAF for the regional level activities. 
The PCUs in each country and CORAF will therefore continue to coordinate project activities, 
prepare the Annual Work Program and Budgets (AWPB), organize the Implementation Support 
Missions (ISM) and ensure project Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E). The PCUs and CORAF have 
a solid track record for Social and Environmental Safeguards, procurement, financial management 
and M&E, which have consistently been rated satisfactory or moderately satisfactory throughout the 
parent project implementation. CORAF and each PCU will be strengthened with an additional staff 
who will be specialized in Technology Marketing and Commercialization. The Guinea PCU will be 
reinforced with additional staffs including two social and Environmental specialists (each with 
specific responsibilities), a financial management specialist, a procurement specialist and a technical 
expert. Implementation of the AF activities will also be supported by strategic institutional and 
technical partners, as well as service providers (other agencies, NGOs, CSO, etc.) who will be 
contracted through the: i) result-based MOUs for public service providers and other Projects and ii) 
result- based contracts for private service providers and NGOs.

III. Safeguard Policies that might apply

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment 
OP/BP 4.01

Yes The AF is a Category-B project due to the fact that 
potential social and environmental impacts are 
expected to be local, site-specific and easily 
manageable. Because it is a continuation of 
WAAPP-1C the ESMF has been updated, revised 
and adapted within the context of the focus of the AF 
on scaling up technology adoption which follows the 
same line of intervention of the parent project. The 
ESMF includes further provisions for capacity 
strengthening at all levels for the successful 
implementation of the project safeguard measures, in 
compliance with national and Bank safeguard 
policies. The updated version of the ESMF was 
reviewed, cleared by both CORAF and World Bank 
and then disclosed simultaneously both in CORAF 
websites and at the InfoShop on November 18, 2016.

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 No The AF is not supporting any agricultural sites near 
wetlands, mangroves, or other critical habitats . It 
will work on improving productivity on existing 
developed land.

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No The AF is not supporting any extension of cropping 
area and therefore no damage of forests is expected. 



Page 6 of 11

It will develop its activities on land already under 
exploitation.

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes The AF will scale up the parent project 
achievements. The initial PMP was revised, updated 
and adapted to reflect the AF interventions and set 
forth the basic principles each member-country 
would follow to adequately handle the possible usage 
of pesticides, particularly as the AF will focus on 
dissemination of agriculture technologies. Upon 
completion, the updated version of the  PMP was 
reviewed, cleared by both CORAF and World Bank 
and then disclosed simultaneously both in CORAF 
websites and at the InfoShop on November 18, 2016.

Physical Cultural Resources 
OP/BP 4.11

No The project will not finance activities that threaten 
culturral ressources.

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 
4.10

No There are no indigenous peoples in the project area.

Involuntary Resettlement OP/
BP 4.12

Yes The AF is a category B project due to the fact that 
foreseen social and environmental impacts are 
expected to be local, sites specific and easily 
manageable.  OP/BP 4.12 is triggered for Guinea 
only because  of the expected land acquisition, loss 
of assets or loss of access to livelihoods support 
means upon which local beneficiary communities 
depend. To comply with OP/BP 4.12 policy 
principles and guidelines Guinea prepared a 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) on how to 
comply with the above mentioned land use/right 
issues. Upon completion, the RPF was reviewed, 
cleared by both CORAF and World Bank and then 
disclosed simultaneously both in CORAF websites 
and at the InfoShop on November 18, 2016.

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No The AF is not involving any construction or 
rehabilitation of dams.

Projects on International 
Waterways OP/BP 7.50

No The AF does not affect or involve international 
waterways.

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/
BP 7.60

No The AF is not in a disputed area.

IV. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify 

and describe any potential large scale,  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Social (including Safeguards). The AF is expected to have no significant negative social impacts. 
Project beneficiaries are mainly small-scale farmers  in food crop production for national, regional 
and international markets - in which women play a critical role.The Project will work to ensure 



Page 7 of 11

that the circumstances of small-scale farmers, particularly women and youth, are accounted for in 
setting priorities. Adaptive research will be conducted in farmers➢❨  fields. Competitive grants to 
implement R&D will be open to producers➢❨  organizations and agribusiness associations and not 
only to research organizations. The Project will work with development operations and public/
private partnerships to scale up producers➢❨  use of technologies. 
 
As a Category B Project, the foreseen social impacts are expected to be local, mostly sites specific 
and easily manageable. The Involuntary Resettlement operational policy (OP/BP 4.12) has been 
triggered only or Guinea - where the project will cover new commodities and new intervention 
areas, because of the expected land acquisition, loss of assets or loss of access to livelihoods 
support means upon which local beneficiary communities depend. To comply with WB OP/BP 
4.12 policy principles and guidelines, Guinea has prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework 
(RPF) on how to comply with the above mentioned land use/right issues. The RPF was amply 
consulted upon and stakeholders feedback provided in the annexes of the documents. 
 
Environment (including Safeguards). The AF is expected to have a positive environmental impact 
through its support for agricultural technologies that promote better use of land and water 
resources. Potential environmental risks could include point and non-point pollution of water 
sources, other issues associated with the use of agricultural chemicals, and negative environmental 
impacts associated with the rehabilitation of irrigation or small-scale civil works on research 
stations. Research on transgenic crops is neither explicitly planned nor excluded. If it becomes part 
of the research agenda supported under the Project, it will proceed with social and environmental 
safeguards consultants with international good practice and the regulatory framework of the host 
country. In particular, such research must be done in accordance with the obligation of each 
country under international treaties to which it is a party, including the Cartagena Protocol on 
Biosafety (for Burkina Faso and Nigeria). Potential adverse environmental impacts associated with 
the NCoS activities will be of low intensity, minor, site specific, and handled under safeguard 
measures already in place for ongoing activities.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities 
in the project area:
NA

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse 
impacts.
NA

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an 
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
This is an additional financing to a project which was implemented during a 5 year period. During 
the parent project phase a close supervision of the implementation of safeguards measures were 
conducted by the social and environmental safeguards specialists of the World Bank. In addition 
each country and CORAF appointed social and environmental safeguard focal points in charge of 
ensuring that the social and environmental safeguards are well implemented and mitigation 
measures are also identified and implemented. A capacity building plan was also implemented 
including two regional training workshops and several country level workshops for all safeguard 
focal points. The recent ISM in June 2016 rated compliance with safeguards policies as 
satisfactory for the 4 recipient countries and indicates that both the safeguards focal points have 
the required knowledge and are playing a key role in ensuring that safeguards measures are well 
implemented. However, it was convened that each PIU will recruit/appoint one qualified 



Page 8 of 11

environmental safeguards specialist and one qualified social safeguards specialist, to improve the 
safeguards performance. The ESMF and the PMP have been updated, including a better 
clarification of roles and responsibilities for safeguards implementation among the PIU staff; this 
role distribution will be inserted in the Project implementation manual (PIM). An RPF has been 
developed for Guinea as recommended by the policy, since Guinea will be developing a variety of 
new crops which would probably need additional lands acquisition or encroachment of which. in 
public domain, would need a proper handing and payment of compensation to the recipient 
communities. All these documents include measures to ensure that safeguard requirements are 
being properly complied with.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure 
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
A comprehensive set of stakeholder were consulted during the preparation of the safeguards 
documents for the original project. Similarly, consultations were done during the preparation of 
the AF that included various beneficiaries, agricultural, social, and environmental, health agencies 
as well as some NGOs and other civil society agencies. Producers/processors and their 
organizations at the sub region levels (ROPPA) and at national levels were also consulted. 
Following the consultations the original safeguard documents were updated for the AF and each 
country organized a national stakeholder workshop to disseminate and validate the documents. 
Key issues and recommendations of the workshops were used to improve the safeguards 
documents. Recommendations from both the client and the Bank and from the stakeholders 
workshop have been reflected in the final draft of the ESMP, PMP and RPF.

B. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank 11-Nov-2016

Date of submission to InfoShop 18-Nov-2016
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors

"In country" Disclosure

Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process

Date of receipt by the Bank 11-Nov-2016

Date of submission to InfoShop 18-Nov-2016
"In country" Disclosure

Comments:
Pest Management Plan

Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal? Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank 11-Nov-2016



























































World Bank Document


PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
CONCEPT STAGE

Report No.: PIDC21271

Project Name Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project 
(P154447)

Region AFRICA
Country Angola
Sector(s) General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (60%), Public 

administration- Agriculture, fishing and forestry (14%), Irrigation a nd 
drainage (9%), Agricultural extension and research (9%), General water, 
sanitation and flood protection sector (8%)

Theme(s) Rural services and infrastructure (45%), Rural markets (45%), Rural 
policies and institutions (10%)

Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P154447
Borrower(s) Republic of Angola
Implementing Agency Ministry of Agriculture
Environmental 
Category

B-Partial Assessment

Date PID Prepared/
Updated

23-Jun-2015

Date PID Approved/
Disclosed

29-Jun-2015

Estimated Date of 
Appraisal Completion

10-Jul-2015

Estimated Date of 
Board Approval

03-Dec-2015

Concept Review 
Decision

Track II - The review did authorize the preparation to continue

I. Introduction and Context
Country Context
The Republic of Angola, with a total population of 24.3 million inhabitants, covers an area of about 
1.25 million km2 and is located on the Atlantic coast of south-western Africa. According to the 
2014 population census, 52 percent of the total population are women and about 38 percent live in 
rural areas.  
 
Angola became independent from Portugal in 1975. This was followed by a civil war that lasted for 
almost 25 years from 1975 to 2002 and ended with a peace agreement in 2002. Angola is one of 
Africa’s resource-rich countries, with a large potential for economic growth based on many mineral 

resources (particularly oil and diamonds) as well as agriculture. 
 
Agriculture contributes to approximately 10 percent of GDP, the industry sector accounts for  60 
percent of GDP and the services to about 30 percent. However, the economy of Angola is 
predominantly oil based.  The oil sector accounts for almost 45 percent of the GDP, 95 percent of 
total export value and 80 percent of government revenues. Oil prices are at a four years low and 
have declined by about 40 percent since June 2014. Currently oil prices are below US$50 per barrel. 
With the declining international oil prices, the government would like to reduce this dependence on 
the oil sector and promote diversification of the economy, including expanding the role of 
agriculture. 
 
Projections for GDP growth made by the government are: 9.7 percent in 2015; 5.9 percent in 2016 
and 5.1 percent in 2017. Growth is mainly driven by the recovery of the oil sector and an increase in 
public investments in the non-oil sectors. This includes, among others, rehabilitation of roads, 
increase in energy production, and development of new irrigation systems to enhance agricultural 
productivity. The average inflation rate is projected to be about 7 percent by end of 2015. While 
macroeconomic prospects in the medium-term are challenging due to declining oil prices, 
macroeconomic performance and commitment to reforms have been favorable. 
 
While reasonable progress has been made toward achievement of the Millennium Development 
Goals (MDGs), Angola is not likely to meet the MDGs by 2015. Angola ranks low in both the 
human development indicators and business environment indicators. Overall, institutional capacity 
remains weak. There are bureaucratic hurdles and governance challenges that inhibit growth of the 
private sector. 
 
The performance related to social indicators has been mixed. Good progress has been made in 
poverty reduction, primary education and gender equality since 2002. Despite these achievements, 
however, social indicators remain very poor. For example, life expectancy at birth is about 51 years. 
Maternal mortality is 450 out of 100,000 births which is the highest in sub-Sahara Africa. 
Malnutrition is also acute with 30 percent of children less than five years of age suffering from 
stunting and 16 percent are under-weight. 
 
The overall poverty rate has declined from 62 percent in 2001 to about 37 percent in 2009 (about 
nine million people). This is a major achievement. However, there are major regional disparities in 
the poverty rate across provinces as well as between rural and urban sectors. In the rural areas the 
poverty rate is almost 58 percent. On the other hand, the poverty rate in Luanda (the largest city in 
the country) is only about 9 percent. Clearly there is a great need to reduce poverty rates in the rural 
areas. 
 
Angola is estimated to have about 57 million hectares of arable land of which less than 4 million 
hectares are currently under cultivation. Despite enormous potential to increase cropped area and 
crop yields, and diverse agro-climate regions in the country for increasing food production, national 
and household food security continues to depend on imports of various food commodities and this 
cannot be sustained. Angola continues to import a significant share of food consumption, except for 
roots and tubers. For example, the overall output of cereals is currently estimated at 1.9 million MT 
against a total consumption need of 3 million MT. The difference (1.1 million MT or 36 percent of 
the needs) is met through imports. In other words, national food security remains a major 
development issue. 

Global experience suggests that growth in agriculture has much higher potential than in other 
sectors (such as industry) to reduce rural poverty. Inclusive growth in the agricultural sector can 
make a major contribution to diversify the economy, accelerate economic growth, increase food 
security, reduce rural poverty, improve social indicators in the rural areas, and help achieve MDGs. 
The proposed agricultural project envisages a major impulse to the agricultural sector that will not 
only increase productivity and production but will also improve the lives of rural population at 
large, thus providing for structural change and transformation of the agricultural sector in the project 
areas.

Sectoral and Institutional Context
While agriculture accounts for only about 10 percent of the GDP, almost two-thirds of the 
population depend directly or indirectly on agriculture for their income, employment and livelihood. 
About 37 percent of the population is below the poverty line and about 85 percent of the poor are in 
the rural areas and depend on agriculture.  The cropping pattern varies across the agro-climatic 
conditions in the country. However, Central Highlands (Huambo, Bie and Malanje Provinces) 
appear to have a high density of population and a high potential for agricultural production, 
including cassava, maize, beans, potato and horticulture. 
 
Prior to independence, Angola had a long history of exporting agricultural commodities, having 
been once the third largest exporter of coffee in the world. Exportable surpluses, such as coffee and 
maize, were for the most part produced using traditional technologies and few modern inputs. 
During the colonial period (up to 1975), agriculture had a dual structure with a commercial sector of 
about 800,000 ha managed by Portuguese settlers using modern technologies, and a traditional 
sector primarily composed of smallholder family farms cultivating about 3.4 million ha.  
 
After independence, most of the Portuguese settlers left the country and many of the former 
commercial farms and plantations were converted into state farms, which have now been privatized. 
The civil war (1975 to 2002) resulted in a virtual collapse of commercial production as large 
numbers of rural inhabitants either fled or reverted to subsistence agricultural production. 
Infrastructure suffered a great deal with widespread destruction of roads, bridges, irrigation systems 
and warehouses, compounded by the presence of thousands of land mines in the rural areas. 
Although the situation has improved since the end of the civil war with the rehabilitation of main 
roads and bridges, and clearance of mines, agricultural exports are currently negligible. The 
agricultural sector has not yet fully recovered from the de-capitalization experienced during the civil 
war. 
 
With recent developments in the rehabilitation of infrastructure that includes main roads and 
bridges, agricultural production gradually started to increase since 2002.  However, crop yields 
remain very low as compared to other countries in sub-Sahara Africa. According to FAO statistics, 
the average yield in Angola of beans is 0.34 tons/ha compared to 0.6t/ha in the region; groundnuts 
0.38 t/ha compared to 0.88 t/ha in the region and millet 0.24 t/ha compared to 0.7 t/ha in region.  
This implies that there is substantial scope for increasing crop yields and production through 
agricultural modernization and technical change as well as through an increase in cultivated area. 
However, this will require the use of animal traction power, adoption of improved agronomic 
practices, improvements in soil fertility, use of modern agricultural inputs, bringing cropped area 
under irrigation, and disseminating agricultural knowledge to farmers. In addition, there is a 
substantial scope and need to strengthen market linkages, improve commercialization and build 


agro-business facilities through local entrepreneurs.  
 
At present, almost 80 percent of the farmers are smallholders, with weak capacity and limited 
knowledge of improved agricultural practices. Human capital in agricultural education, research and 
extension institutions suffered a great deal during the civil war and have not yet been fully 
strengthened or replaced. The institutional capacity in the agricultural sector, including irrigation 
and agricultural statistics, is extremely weak. The agricultural programs are designed and 
implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture at the national level and by the Departments of 
Agriculture at the provincial levels. The capacity of these agencies needs to be strengthened as well. 
 
The Bank-supported Angola Market Oriented Smallholder Agriculture Project (MOSAP), approved 
by the Board in July 2008 and implemented over the past years, was designed to increase 
agricultural production through the provision of improved agricultural services and investment 
support to rural smallholder farmers. Activities implemented under the project include: (a) training 
of over 44,000 smallholder farmers in the use of improved agricultural technologies to boost 
production of the major crops targeted by the project (the training was provided by service providers 
recruited under the Project as well as training provided by FAO to over 14,000 producers on family 
farms through Farmers’ Field Schools ); (b) training of more than 60 technicians; and (c) provision 
of financial support to over 14,000 smallholder beneficiaries through financing of around 280 sub-
projects ; and (d) capacity building for staff from the Agrarian Development Institute (ADI) of the 
Ministry of Agriculture at targeted municipalities. 
 
In addition to the provision of capacity building, MOSAP contributed to: (i) an increase in 
agricultural production; and (ii) the adoption of improved technologies in the project areas.  The 
crop index during the 2013/14 season was 64 percent against an overall project target of 10 percent.  
The major crops supported under MOSAP were: maize, beans, cassava, and Irish potatoes. About 
66 percent of smallholder famers have adopted an improved technology promoted by the project 
against a project target of 30 percent. 
 
As indicated earlier, with the exception of cassava, the average yield of major crops cultivated in 
Angola, including maize, beans, Irish potatoes, is still extremely low, even compared to yields in 
other countries in Sub-Saharan Africa. There is a large potential for increasing crop yields and 
agricultural production in the country. There are (at least) three major reasons justifying increasing 
public and private investments in the agriculture sector:  
 
(i) To ensure institutional continuity and scaling up of the on-going but limited support to 
smallholder farmers in Angola. As indicated, MOSAP has been critical in promoting agriculture 
recovery following the end of the civil war, strengthening institutions, and bringing formerly 
displaced agricultural producers back to agriculture in the project areas. 
(ii) To improve economic diversification. Angola possesses large and well-endowed natural 
resources including land and water. Almost two-thirds of the Angolans earn their livelihood from 
agriculture, a sector that could become one of the engines of economic growth and source of 
productive rural employment, provided capacity building and investments in public infrastructure 
and private assets take place. Unless investments are made to lay the foundations for future 
agricultural growth, national economic growth and diversification (which are critical in light of 
declining international oil prices), income, employment and foreign exchange earnings/savings will 
be seriously constrained.  
 


(iii) To ensure sustainable use of natural resources.  Despite the low levels of economic activity, 
the country already faces various pressures on its natural resources, such as wastage of water and 
overuse of pastures and subsequent soil erosion (largely attributable to population pressures; 
desertification); and deforestation of tropical rain forest in response to both international demand for 
tropical timber and to domestic fuel use. Investments in an efficient use of water for irrigation and 
promotion of soil conservation techniques, including erosion control and enhancement of soil 
fertility, and natural resource management, will ensure a sustainable use of soil and water and will, 
over time, contribute towards mainstreaming climate smart agricultural practices.  
 
The proposed Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project (SADCP) 
intends to scale-up activities being implemented under MOSAP and will also finance critical  new 
activities, as per government’s medium and long-term agriculture programs. MOSAP is scheduled 
to close on December 31, 2015, i.e. in eleven months.  The implementation of the new project is 
expected to start on January 1, 2016.  Given the popularity of MOSAP in the project areas as well as 
with agencies dealing with agriculture, government indicated preference for keeping the name of 
MOSAP and calls this project MOSAP-2.

Relationship to CAS
The Bank CPS for FY13-16 aims at (i) deepening diversification for inclusive growth; (ii) 
enhancing the quality of decentralization for services delivery; and (iii) building human resources 
capacity. The CPS recognizes the role of agriculture and the need to increase agriculture 
productivity and competitiveness to reduce rural poverty and promote growth. The proposed 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project is a critical instrument to 
contribute to achieving the CPS objectives

II. Proposed Development Objective(s)
Proposed Development Objective(s) (From PCN)
The Project Development Objective is to increase smallholder agricultural production and 
marketing in the project areas.

Key Results (From PCN)
21. The proposed project is expected to provide assistance to about 200,000 smallholder 
farmers in three provinces. The key results expected from the proposed project are: (i) to increase 
yields of selected crops, including cassava, maize, beans and Irish potatoes to the average yield 
levels prevailing in sub-Saharan Africa; (ii) to increase production of selected crops; and (iii) to 
increase the share of crop production that is marketed. In addition to these key results indicators, the 
results framework will also measure intermediate performance indicators for each of the 
components that will be developed during project preparation. These indicators will include the 
percentage of farmers who benefit from training and apply their knowledge; the average yields of 
major crops supported by the project; the percentage of the agriculture produce marketed by the 
smallholder farmers in addition to other indicators that will be discussed and agreed upon during 
project preparation. 
  
22. The strategy to achieve key results under the proposed project is to build upon the outcomes 
achieved under the on-going MOSAP and support smallholder farmers to increase agricultural 
productivity, production and market linkages that generate self-sustaining agricultural growth over a 
larger project area, as compared to MOSAP.  This will be achieved by: (a) building on potential 
synergies with on-going agricultural programs; (b) maximizing opportunities for quick-win results 



by focusing on farmers that received training under MOSAP or other programs and have applied 
their knowledge); (c) strengthening the knowledge and skills of smallholder farmers and their 
associations as well as of agricultural extension staff and agricultural services providers;  (d) re-
capitalizing productive agricultural systems and infrastructures, including irrigated agriculture; (e) 
providing access to demand-driven agricultural services and agricultural markets; and (f) promoting 
rural entrepreneurship in agri-business development. As far as possible, investments will be based 
on a flexible, participatory and demand-driven approach that promotes enhancement in productivity, 
commercialization and sustainability of agricultural activities.

III. Preliminary Description
Concept Description
The proposed project is designed to be climate smart, gender and jobs responsive and nutrition 
sensitive. The project is consistent with the main agriculture development programs in the country. 
Angola tends to experience seasonal rain variability and sometimes even long periods of drought 
that affect agricultural production. The proposed project will promote appropriate adaptation 
practices, including irrigated agriculture, to reduce such production losses. The project will support 
the participation of women in different project components, including farmers associations, 
production, marketing and training. The project will have a positive impact on employment and job 
creation in the rural areas by contributing to increased agricultural production, marketing, agri-
business and value addition as well as increased demand for agricultural inputs and services.  
Finally, since the project will promote the production of beans and vegetables, it is likely to have a 
positive impact on the food security and nutrition of rural households.  
 
The proposed project is a follow up project to the on-going MOSAP.  While broadly similar to the 
original MOSAP project, the new project differs in the following important aspects. First, it is larger 
in scope in terms of absolute funding and number of beneficiaries. Second, it includes a sub-
component to support the development of small-scale irrigated agriculture. Third, in addition to 
food crops (maize, cassava, beans and Irish potatoes), it will emphasize the production of high value 
crops, particularly horticulture. Fourth, it will further strengthen commercialization of agriculture, 
including market linkages, contract farming and agri-business development.  
 
The SADCP project area would cover the whole country for capacity building and institutional 
development activities. However, investment would be limited to the same provinces of Bie, 
Huambo and Malanje but with more coverage to municipalities. MOSAP was limited to three 
provinces covering 12 municipalities and only 50,000 beneficiaries. The proposed project would 
significantly expand the number of municipalities and communes covered under MOSAP and cover 
about 200,000 smallholder beneficiaries.  Besides the high potential for agricultural production, the 
selected provinces also meet the following criteria: 
 
• Well-endowed with resources, in particular land and water. Smallholder farming systems 
are already sustainable and profitable. Smallholder activities in these areas, before the civil war, 
included producing a wide range of crops, including most cereals and high value products such as 
vegetables (notably potatoes and onions). These areas appear to have high agricultural potential. 
 
• High concentration of rural population. The three provinces have around 52 percent of the 
population that is considered rural, as compared to 38 percent nationally. Overall, the three 
provinces account for about 24 percent of the rural population in Angola (2014 Population Census). 

• Proximity to potential markets and possibility of benefiting from the rehabilitated road 
network and railways. Hopefully, this will facilitate the strengthening of market linkages and 
commercialization. 
 
The target groups of the project will be smallholders in the selected provinces with a potential to 
increase agricultural production and commercialization. The potential project beneficiaries will be d 
ivided into the following three categories: (i) Group 1 of 1,000 beneficiaries that are  likely to 
benefit from irrigated agriculture, production and marketing activities (primarily horticulture) with a 
possibility for contract farming; (ii) Group 2 of 49,000 beneficiaries that are  likely to benefit from 
production and marketing activities related to food crops and horticulture; and (iii) Group 3 of 
150,000 beneficiaries that are likely to benefit from capacity building, production and marketing 
related to key food crops. Specialized capacity development training may also be provided to 
beneficiaries in Groups 1 and 2 that may have also benefitted from capacity development under 
MOSAP. 
 
The proposed project will have three components: Component 1 - Capacity Building and 
Institutional Development; Component 2- Support for Agricultural Investment; and Component 3- 
Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation. The proposed project is expected to be 
implemented over a period of five years from January 2016 through December 2020. The total cost 
will be US$125 million, of which US$20 million will be contribution by the Government of Angola 
and US$5 million equivalent will be in-kind contribution by the beneficiaries. A 100 million IBRD 
loan will constitute the remainder of the total cost. Overall, the project is expected to support about 
200,000 beneficiaries (members of about 6,500 farmer associations) with approximately 300,000 ha 
cropped land (on an average, 1.5 ha per beneficiary and with a range of about 0.50 ha to 2.5 ha per 
beneficiary). 
 
 
Component 1. Capacity Building and Institutional Development (US$30 million) 
 
As under MOSAP, this component would focus on strengthening national, provincial and municipal 
institutions, develop technical capacity and introduce participatory processes to accelerate the 
decentralized agricultural development.  This component will also aim to strengthen the technical 
and managerial skills of participants and institutions involved in agricultural production and 
marketing in the project areas. This component entails the following four  sub-components:  
 
a. Formation and strengthening of Farmers’ associations, which would include organizational 
and managerial capacities, and technical skills related to modern agricultural technologies and 
agronomic practices, agricultural production, marketing, investment and entrepreneurship. Training 
of vulnerable groups (e.g. female-headed households) will be given special attention. This will also 
include training of farmers through farmers’ field schools (FFSs), as is being done under MOSAP. 
 
b. Institutional strengthening of local, provincial and national units of the Ministry of 
agriculture (MINAG) to ensure that these institutions can better play their respective roles in the 
sector.  This sub-component would include support for strengthening institutional capacity in 
agricultural extension services (including linkage with research), agricultural research service, small 
scale irrigation, agricultural marketing and agricultural statistics. In addition, the capacity of 
MINAG staff will be enhanced to prepare and implement appropriate agricultural programs and 


policies. There will also be support for strengthening market information systems, linked to farmers’ 
and traders associations. Finally, the project will also support linkages with research programs 
relevant to agriculture that are being undertaken by the Ministry of Science and Technology.  
 
c. To strengthen agricultural research capacity and global knowledge about the latest 
technologies related to selected crops relevant to Angola, support to specific agricultural research 
will also be provided. Possible collaboration with both the International Institute for Tropical 
Agriculture (IITA) and the Brazilian Corporation of Agricultural Research (EMBRAPA) will be 
developed/further strengthened to address agricultural research and disease management issues that 
are critical for existing (cassava, maize and beans) and emerging crops (soybean) in Angola. As part 
of the CGIAR, IITA is responsible for carrying out research related to cassava, maize and beans in 
Africa. EMBRAPA has been working closely with Angola in building agricultural research 
capacity, including breeding for disease and pest resistance, in the context of integrated disease and 
pest management. 
 
d. Strengthening capacities of private and NGO agricultural service providers, especially those 
working closely with the smallholder farmers. Among other activities, this would include support 
for smallholder farmer groups or associations to prepare investment proposals for various sub-
projects for funding under the project as well as support for managerial and business capacities of 
new and existing agri-business entrepreneurs. 
 
Component 2. Support for Agricultural Investment  (US$55 million) 
 
This component supports investments in agriculture assets, both of a public as well as a private 
goods nature, with the aim to improve agricultural productivity, competiveness and market linkages 
of farmer beneficiaries (groups and individuals). The smallholder farmer beneficiaries will be re 
quired to make a small in-kind contribution (of at least 10 percent) to the investments that they 
receive based on criteria to be established during preparation. The investment component will, in 
the first year, consider farmer associations that received training under MOSAP. This component 
consists of the following sub-components:  
 
(a) Support for the Development of Small Scale Irrigation 
 
This sub-component will deal with the rehabilitation of existing and the development of new small 
scale irrigation systems. The Central Highlands, particularly comprising large parts of the provinces 
of Malanje, Huambo and Bie, have excellent conditions and water resources for development of 
small scale irrigated agriculture. Productive soils and water resources are abundant. Topographical 
conditions make it possible to develop irrigation by gravity. Gravity irrigation is particularly 
favorable for the development of small scale irrigated agriculture for smallholders. Some 
smallholder communities have already created and managed gravity irrigation schemes.  With their 
own resources (mainly labor and local materials) they derive water from small streams by 
(temporary) weirs to a network of unlined earthen canals for irrigation. The management and 
operation of these systems requires limited financial resources (the scarcest resources of 
smallholders). However, the efficiency and productivity of these systems will be improved by 
simple and cost-effective measures such as the construction of permanent weirs, the tubing and 
lining of canal stretches with infiltration losses, construction of culverts to cross roads and (natural) 
drainage streams etc.  
 

(b) Support for Agricultural Production Investments 
 
This sub-component will support investments in farm assets. In order to access matching grants for 
investment sub-projects, farmer associations have to submit project proposals. This sub-component 
will assist eligible participants in the preparation of detailed proposals that will allow an informed 
decision about their feasibility from technical, economic, financial, social and environmental 
perspectives. The potential funding proposals (list will be finalized during preparation) will consider 
dealing with any activity that will increase crop productivity and production. Few examples are 
draft animals, simple tools and agricultural equipment, soil fertility/quality improvement, soil 
conservation, seeds of improved crop varieties, fertilizers and integrated pest and disease 
management. In addition, matching grants will also be provided to individual enterprises in the rural 
areas that will provide critical agricultural services to smallholders in the project areas.  
 
A review and evaluation of exist ing schemes will be carried out as part of the project preparation to 
help determine what kind of support might be needed and appropriate.  This assessment will also 
include on-going experiences and scope for the provision of rural financial services in Angola that 
are currently being provided by local and international NGOs. The main goal of this component is 
sustainable increase in agricultural production for the smallholders. 
 
(c) Support for Value Addition and Marketing Infrastructure  
 
This sub-component will support investments related to market linkages and commercialization, 
including value addition, post-harvest management and marketing activities for key crops and 
horticulture. The critical issues that need to be addressed are packaging, storage, small-scale 
processing, and marketing infrastructure and even contract farming. The main focus will be on 
value addition, reduction of post-harvest losses and market linkages. All sub-projects requesting 
financing under this sub-component will prepare a project proposal and a business plan that will go 
through a complete appraisal process to determine the economic feasibility and sustainability. 
Specific list of sub-projects that will be supported under this sub-component will be identified 
during preparation of the proposed project. 
 
Component 3: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (US$10 million) 
 
This component deals with coordination and monitoring and implementation of the project and 
consists of two sub-components: 
 
a. Project Management: 
The purpose of this sub-component is to ensure that the project is implemented correctly, on time 
and in accordance with the Loan Agreement. This would be the responsibility of a Project 
Coordinator and a small team of ex perts located at the national, and provincial or municipal levels. 
The final arrangements for project management will incorporate the lessons learned under MOSAP. 
  
b. Project Monitoring and Evaluation: 
 
The monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system will be established that will be responsible for 
collecting and processing appropriate information to verify the output, effect and eventually the 
impact of project activities over time. Baseline information will also be collected at the beginning of 
the project.

IV. Safeguard Policies that might apply
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No TBD
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖

V. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 95.00 Total Bank Financing: 70.00
Financing Gap: 0.00
Financing Source Amount
 Borrower 20.00
 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 70.00
 LOCAL  BENEFICIARIES 5.00
 Total 95.00

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Digital Solutions for Sustainable Development (P160418) 

 
 

  
Mar 31, 2017 Page 1 of 17  

     

 

 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Cote d'Ivoire P160418  Digital Solutions for 
Sustainable 
Development 
(P160418) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA Oct 02, 2017 Feb 12, 2018 Transport & ICT 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Republic of Cote d'Ivoire Ministry of Digital Economy 
and Post 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
To improve access to affordable broadband in rural communities and leverage electronic platforms to improve farm 
productivity and access to markets. 

 

 Financing (in USD Million)      

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B-Partial Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

Finance OLD 

Financing Source Amount  

International Development Association (IDA)   50.00  

Total Project Cost   50.00  

    
 
 

 
 
     

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

1. Côte d’Ivoire is a lower-middle-income economy with a widening urban/rural gap that hinders the 
achievement of shared prosperity and poverty elimination – With a population of 22.7m, the Gross National 
Income per capita (Atlas method) was US$ 1,420 in 2015, which is 13% lower than the Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) 
regional average (US$ 1,637). Around 54% of its population lives in urban areas, and the population and the 
economy are highly concentrated around the economic capital Abidjan. Rural population in Cote d’Ivoire has 
increasingly suffered from poverty during the last 25 years

1
. Rural poverty has significantly increased since the 

end of the 1980s, and the rural/urban gap has widened. 57% of the rural population is below the national 
poverty line, whereas this rate is 21 percentage points lower for the urban population (36%) and the Northern 
regions are the most afflicted. The widening gap between the North and South of the country help explain why 
Côte d’Ivoire still stands at the 172

nd
 place in the world in the most recent global UNDP-HDI ranking (2016). The 

rural population suffered and still suffers from political crises, deterioration of governance and social services, 
and unstable revenues. At least three main challenges explain the increase in rural poverty over the past 25 
years: (a) political crises; (b) deterioration of governance and social services; and (c) unstable revenues. 

2. The country suffered from a period of civil war from 2002-2004, and a post-election crisis and armed conflict 
from late 2010 to April 2011, that disrupted the economic, social and political cohesion of the country – Côte 
d’Ivoire enjoyed decades of strong economic growth, but the country underwent a series of violent political 
and economic crises during 1999 to 2011 that led to a significant deterioration of living standards. The dismal 
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth rates during this period reflect the impact of the crises: on average -1.2% 
during 1999-2003 compared to 3.9% for SSA, 2.0% during 2003-2010 compared to 5.2% for SSA, and -4.4% for 
2011. However, since mid-2011, the country has made significant progress in consolidating political stability 
and post-crisis economic recovery has proceeded at a rapid and sustained speed. Sound macroeconomic 
management combined with public and private investments have underpinned improved economic growth: 
GDP growth rate is on average 9.5% during 2011-2015 (4.3% for SSA). 

3. The rural population has suffered from deterioration of governance and cuts in expenditures in social 
services as well as poor infrastructure – Since the political crises of the year 2000s, the rural population has 
suffered from a combined deterioration in: (i) the governance structure;

2
 and (ii) cuts in health and education 

expenditure under structural adjustment programs that aimed at reestablishing macroeconomic stability.
3
 The 

infrastructure gap between the more affluent urban areas and the poor rural areas is compelling: 33% of the 
urban population has access to improved sanitation facilities compared to 10% of the rural population; 88% of 
the urban population has access to electricity compared to 29% of the rural population.

4
 For ICT, 16% of 

households in urban areas has access to the internet compared to only 2% in rural areas.
5
 

4. Unstable revenues and poor productivity of the rural economy, especially for agriculture, hinders poverty 
reduction – The agriculture sector is an important driver of Côte d’Ivoire’s economy, accounting for 22% of GDP 
and more than 75% of exports. Three out of four working adults living in rural areas are employed by the 

agriculture sector
6
. Despite its critical importance to the economy, the sector has had only a modest impact on 

income growth and poverty reduction in rural areas. The agriculture sector – and especially primary products – 
are highly sensitive to fluctuations in international prices which in turn have an adverse and volatile impact on 
revenues for rural households. 

5. To tackle these challenges, the country has implemented reforms that have significantly contributed to an 
overall improvement in governance and the business environment, making the country more attractive to 
private investment – The country has been a relatively weak performer on the World Bank Ease of Doing 
Business Index DBI (global rank at 142

nd
 out of 189 countries in 2016

7
). Nevertheless, the business environment 

has improved significantly during the last five years – from 177
th

 in 2013 to 142
nd

 in 2016 based on DBI – 
making Cote d’Ivoire one of the ten fastest reforming countries two years in a row (2014 and 2015). The World 
Economic Forum (WEF) Global Competitiveness Index also capture this improvement, whereby Côte d’Ivoire 
rose from 131

st
 in 2012 to 91

st
 in 2015. The authorities will remain focused on improving crucial infrastructure, 

particularly in the energy and transport sectors, but increasing attention will turn to investment in 
communications infrastructure, as well as the education and healthcare system. They will continue to look 
abroad to finance much of the sizeable infrastructure investment that is underway. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 

B.1 Rural economy and rural agriculture sectoral 

6. The rural economy is dominated by the agriculture sector, which is mostly made of: (i) export-oriented cash 
crops; and (ii) food crops and animal and fish production for domestic consumption – The cash crops subsector 
is made of cocoa, coffee, rubber, oil palm, cotton, and cashews. Cote d'Ivoire is the world's largest producer 
and exporter of cocoa beans and a significant producer and exporter of coffee and palm oil. Cash crops benefit 
from the bulk of agricultural investment and usually involve more sophisticated production techniques. Cash 
crops suffer from limited value chain integration among farmers, intermediaries and processors, which 
prevents the country from increasing downstream transformation of its food production. Cash crop agriculture 
is potentially lucrative, but it also entails considerable risk, as volatile international commodity markets 
determine export prices. The food crop subsector is made of plantains, yams, cassava, maize, rice, and 
livestock. It is characterized by traditional practices and receives little support from either the public or private 
sectors (except for rice and maize). The relatively strong performance of the food crop subsector is critical to 
food security in Côte d’Ivoire and has enabled the country to become self-sufficient in most key staple crops 
(except for wheat, rice and dairy). This subsector is often neglected in agricultural research and sector 
development strategies, and thus food production tends to be small-scale, traditional, and mostly informal. 
Nevertheless, prices of food crops are less impacted by international price volatility, and compared to cash 
crops often represent greater economic security but tend to offer more limited returns. 

7. The traditional food crops are mostly produced in the poorer Northern regions, whereas the cash crops are 
produced in the richer Southern regions – Adding to the North/South social and economic disparities, the 
country falls into two distinct agricultural regions: the dry savannah in the North and the forest region in the 
South. Rural poverty has traditionally been significantly higher in the North – where the potential for 
agriculture has not yet been realized – whereas the South benefits from higher and more reliable rainfall and 
better soils and produces most of the export crops. However, both the North and South suffer from low 

        
agricultural productivity, high cost of inputs, considerable post-harvest losses, inadequate use of modern 
farming techniques, lack of modernization and mechanization, all contributing to a decline in agricultural 
production.

8
 

8. Rural economy, and especially rural agriculture, suffers from five gaps crippling economic productivity and 
related to: (i) Enabling environment; (ii) Access to land; (iii) Access to finance; (iv) Skills and technology; (v) 
Physical capital – Poor performance in agriculture undermines shared prosperity and poverty elimination, with 
five major gaps hindering the development of the rural agriculture sector:

9
 

a. Gap #1: Lack of accurate data and enabling environment gap – The agriculture sector lacks good and 
accurate data; for example, the latest available National Agricultural Census is now 16 years old (2001). The 
lack of accurate data hinders the elaboration and implementation of sound policies and strategies, and 
prevents the design and conduct of impact evaluation research.

10
 The agriculture sector also suffers from an 

inadequate national and foreign investment framework, and the sector is still severely disadvantaged by a 
distortive policy framework (taxes on export commodities), coupled with a strong urban bias in 
development spending. 

b. Gap #2: Access to land gap – Lack of access to land is a major cause of rural poverty in SSA, and Cote 
d’Ivoire is no exception. Small-scale producers of food crops have access to about half the amount of land 
available to large-scale producers of export crops and they suffer from low productivity because of the 
small size of their lands.

11
 The 1998 Law on Rural Land required farmers to register their land within ten 

years, but very few farmers had the knowledge, means, and skills to do so. A new Law in August 2013 
extended the deadline by ten years, and as of 2014 only 0.09% of the total agriculture land is registered (i.e. 
20k out of 23m hectares). Food insecurity risk is twice higher for farmers not owning property than for land 
owners

12
 and lack of land certificates is worse for women farmers who face additional gender-related 

constraints, including legal or social norms that prevent them from inheriting or simply owning land. 

c. Gap #3 – Access to finance gap – Cote d’Ivoire is one of the least developed countries in the region for rural 
development finance, and there is a lack of financing services for the agriculture sector. Access to credit by 
small farmers is acutely limited due to the virtual absence of financing structures such as rural microfinance 
institutions and rural banks. Moreover, private banks are reluctant to provide loans to rural small-scale 
farmers as they see them as cumulating too many risks: low levels of capitalization, unstable revenue flows, 
lack of formal credit history, difficulty in evaluating small farmers’ repayment capacity, lack of collateral 
such as titled land, the influence of exogenous factors such as weather conditions, and the limited legal 
avenues for enforcing contracts. Where credit is available, interest rates are often too high compared to the 
average rate of return of farmers’ investments. This translates into a low bank account ownership rate and 
a low percentage of adults having the possibility to benefit from a mortgage. The financing obstacle faced 

                                            
8
 World Bank, Côte d’Ivoire SCD – From Crisis to Sustained Growth, 2015 (p.54). 

9
 ECOWAS-UEMOA-CILSS, Alliance Globale pour l’Initiative Résilience AGIR, Rapport des Priorités Resilience Pays (PRP) Côte d’Ivoire, 2014 ; World 

Bank, Côte d’Ivoire SCD – From Crisis to Sustained Growth, 2015 (p.55-66). 
10

 Without much sector impact analysis, the sector has been subjected to ineffective policies including high indirect and direct taxes on export 
commodities which have prevented small farmers from earning more revenues: the 2015 World Bank SCD calculated that a 10 percent decrease 
in the export tax would boost net revenue by 22 percent, which in turn would improve the living conditions of roughly 4 million Ivoirians.  

11
 IFAD, Rural poverty in the Republic of Cote d'Ivoire, accessed in January 2016; World Bank, Côte d’Ivoire SCD – From Crisis to Sustained Growth, 
2015, (p.55): “Agriculture in Cote d’Ivoire is dominated by smallholder farmers, the majority of whom use traditional practices and rely on family 
labor. Data from the most recent Agricultural Census (2001) estimated that there are 8.3 million farmers nationwide, of whom 49 percent are 
women. The average cultivated area for each household is about 3.89 hectares, but 80 percent of households cultivate less than 2 hectares.” (). 

     

by the agriculture sector in Cote d’Ivoire is thus similar to the rest of SSA: only about 1% of commercial 
lending in SSA goes to agriculture, mostly to large-scale farmers.

13
 

d. Gap #4 – Skills and technology gap – In 2011, 62% of teenagers in the Northwest region were unschooled 
compared to the national average of 42%, and only 8% of young people aged 15-24 completed their 
secondary education compared to the national average of 27%.

14
 The combination of low level of education 

and other gaps highlighted above (such as access to finance) leads to a low usage of technology and 
agriculture inputs – such as equipment and fertilizers. Several market failures characterize inputs markets, 
including: inconsistent rules and standards requirements, unrealistic standards, and lack of equipment and 
capacity at the rural level to ensure compliance. Moreover, the cost of technology and agriculture inputs for 
smallholders tend to be too high due to several factors

15
: (i) weak bargaining power of smallholders; (ii) 

poor transportation and energy infrastructure; (iii) lack of market information; (iv) lack of knowledge of 
farmers concerning the use of inputs; and (v) limited access to finance.  

e. Gap #5 – Physical capital gap – While several crops such as cashew (anacarde), maize and tomatoes are 
produced in the Northern regions,  principal markets  destinations are located in the Southern regions, 
including the port of Abidjan for exports and urban domestic markets which sometimes offer greater 
opportunities to smallholders than export markets

16
.: This implies that an efficient transportation network 

must be available throughout the whole territory to link production areas to: (i) the port of Abidjan 
international output market; and (ii) the domestic consumption areas spread around the country. Hence, 
having reliable infrastructures – such as road networks, storage facilities, electricity, and 
telecommunications – is essential to the efficiency of the agriculture sector. However, Cote d’Ivoire’s rural 
infrastructure needs additional investments to be rehabilitated and extended. Currently, as much as 90% of 
the paved network in Cote d’Ivoire is between 15 to 40 years old, while routes coatings are generally 
designed and built for a lifetime of 15 years

17
; as a consequence, about 40 percent of the road network is 

not or only partially useable.
18

 In addition to the lack of reliable roads, the lack of efficient public 
transportation services also hinders the economic development of rural agriculture: smallholders often use 
public transportation such as passenger buses to take their products to distant markets, and this 
inadequate transportation mode leads to bruising and damage to the products, thus reducing its quality 
and market value. The electricity network is no better as all departments of the Northern half of the 
country had coverage rates below the national average in 2011. Among them, five departments had less 
than 15% of their localities connected to electricity

19
. The lack of reliable electricity is an impediment to 

well-functioning rural markets as limited access to storage facilities and unreliable electricity supply result in 
post-harvest losses. Most farmers often rely on open-air storage and need to sell quickly their products – 
sometimes at a significantly low price – before it rots. 

9. Several public and private institutions drive the agriculture sector, generating a fragmented knowledge and 
negatively affecting the efficiency of the government’s action on the sector; the sector would thus strongly 
benefit from a stronger coordination for data and knowledge gathering, sharing, and dissemination – The 

            
     

agriculture sector is jointly supervised by the Ministère de l’Agriculture et du Développement Rural (MINADER) 
and the Ministère des Ressources Animales et Halieutiques (MIRAH), with the strong implication of the 
Ministère des Eaux et Forêts (MINEFF) and the Ministère de l’Environnement et du Développement Durable 
(MINEDD). The MINADER and MIRAH both have their own internal statistics and planning department: the 
Direction Générale de la Planification, du Contrôle des Projets et des Statistiques (DGPPS, at MINADER) and the 
Direction de la Planification, des Statistiques et des Programmes (DPSP, at MIRAH). The MINADER and MIRAH 
also supervise – with other ministries – several public institutions in charge of agriculture and rural 
development, including the Agence Nationale d’Appui au Développement Rural (ANADER), the Centre National 
de Recherche Agronomique (CNRA), the Fonds Interprofessionnel pour la Recherche et le Conseil Agricole 
(FIRCA), the Office National de Développement de la filière Riz (ONDR), and the Office d’Aide à la 
Commercialisation des Produits Vivriers (OPCV). Several branches of agriculture also have their own 
organizations, including the Chambres d’Agriculture de Côte d’Ivoire, the Association Nationale des 
Organisations Professionnelles Agricoles de Côte d’Ivoire (ANOPACI), the Conseil Café Cacao (CCC), the 
Association des Professionnels de Caoutchouc Naturel de Côte d’Ivoire (APROMAC), etc. The sector would thus 
greatly benefit from a stronger coordination in data and knowledge gathering, sharing, and dissemination. 

10. To address the main gaps to fast and sustainable development of the agricultural sector, the Government has 
developed several strategies, including the National Agricultural Investment Program (NAIP) and the e-
Agriculture Strategy – The NAIP is the agricultural pillar of the country’s National Development Plan (NDP). The 
first NAIP (NAIP #1) was a US$4 billion program over the 2010-2015 period, aimed at promoting a diversified 
mix of strategic cash and food crops for growth and food security. It was organized around six programs: (i) 
crops productivity and competitiveness; (ii) development of agricultural supply chains; (iii) sector governance; 
(iv) capacity building; (v) sustainable management of fisheries; and (vi) rehabilitation of forest and wood 
industry. The government launch the update of the PNIA in October 2016 (PNIA #2) and the final release is 
expected in May 2017. The Government has also developed a comprehensive national e-Agriculture strategy in 
2012, and updated it in 2014. This strategy has the aim of modernizing the country’s agricultural sector and 
enhancing its productivity with an increase in the country’s export of cocoa, coffee and other produce, and a 
decrease in food imports. The strategy requires suitable access to information services and data centers as part 
of an ICT package aiming to make real-time market information systems available via mobile phones and 
tablets. Finally, other sectoral strategies include: (i) the Loi d’orientation agricole (Loi n° 2015-537 du 20 juillet 
2015); the Stratégie Nationale de Développement de la filière Riz 2012-2020 (SNDR); the Plan Stratégique de 
Développement de l’Elevage, de la Pêche et de l’Aquaculture (PSDEPA 2014-2020); the Stratégie Nationale de 
Développement de la Mécanisation Agricole (SNDMA); and the Programme National de Sécurisation du Foncier 
Rural (PNSFR). 

 
B.2 Digital economy sectoral and institutional context 

11. The ICT institutions and the enabling environment have drastically improved during the last five years thanks 
to the creation and revamping of key institutions and the introduction of new legal and regulatory 
frameworks – Overall, the ICT enabling environment has drastically improved during the last five years. Each 
year, the World Economic Forum (WEF) performs a global ranking of the ICT sector in each country by 
measuring the Network Readiness Index (NRI). One sub-index of the NRI is the ‘ICT Environment sub-index’ 
reflecting both the ‘Political and regulatory environment’ and the ‘Business and innovation environment’. In 
2012, Côte d’Ivoire ranked as one of the worst country in the world regarding the ‘ICT Environment sub-index’, 
being at the 130

th
 place (out of 142 countries). In less than 5 years, Côte d’Ivoire has risen at the 72

nd
 place (out 

of 139 countries) in 2016 for the ‘ICT Environment sub-index’ (on the overall Network Readiness Index, Côte 



d’Ivoire has risen from 122
nd

 to 106
th

 during 2012-2016): no other country monitored by the WEF has enjoyed 
such a drastic rank increase during the 2012-2016 period for the ‘ICT Environment sub-index’. 

12.  The major improvement of the international ranking of the ICT sector in Côte d’Ivoire is partly explained by 
several reforms lead by the five main institutions that drive and supervise the ICT sector – The Ministère de 
l’Economie Numérique et de la Poste (MENuP) is the Ministry in charge of the ICT and digital economy in Côte 
d’Ivoire, and the MENuP has revamped the telecom law in 2012.

20
 The legislation is now aligned with regional 

recommendations and covers major areas such as convergence, universal service, license and authorizations, 
relevant markets and market power, and consumer protection.

21
 The National Regulatory Authority (NRA) is 

the Autorité de Régulation des Télécommunications de Côte d’Ivoire (ARTCI),
22

 a fully-equipped NRA dealing 
with licensing, consumer protection, wholesale market regulation, and telecom spectrum management. The 
three main additional institutions are: (i) the Agence Nationale du Service Universel des Télécommunications 
(ANSUT) that ensures the implementation of universal service programs on behalf of the state and manage 
investment operations funded by the state in the field of ICT; the Agence Ivoirienne de Gestion des Fréquences 
radioélectriques (AIGF) focused on radio frequency management; and (iii) the Société Nationale de 
Développement Informatique (SNDI), a state-owned company under the supervision of the Prime Minister, in 
charge of Information Technology and Information System projects for the Government.

23
 

13. Although the ICT sector, and especially the mobile sector, is performing well in Côte d’Ivoire, it has mostly 
benefited the affluent urban and educated population – The ICT sector in Cote d’Ivoire has consistently 
expanded during the last few years; it generated a total revenue of 982.5 billion FCFA in 2013 (US$ 1.6 billion), 
contributed to 8% of the country’s GDP, and provided around 5,400 direct jobs and 100,000 indirect jobs.

24
 The 

recent performance of mobile service (voice and SMS) in Côte d’Ivoire has been buoyant, driven by a healthy 
competition among the three main mobile operators (Orange, MTN, and Moov). The mobile connection 
penetration (number of total SIM divided by total population) reached 113% at the end of 2015, compared to 
88% for West Africa region and 77% for Sub-Saharan Africa (Figure 1). Despite these robust mobile service 
performances an important share of the population is still offline. As of 2014, only 4% of interviewed 
individuals stated that they have an internet access at home compared to an average of 12% for SSA (Gallup 
survey). The World Bank indicator ‘Internet users’ (percentage of the population that have used the internet – 
from any location and with any type of device – during the last 12 months) show that only 21% of the 
population of Cote d’Ivoire has accessed internet at least once during the previous 12 months in 2015, 
compared to an average of 22% for SSA and 29% for lower-middle-income countries (Figure 2). Moreover, the 
use of internet – mostly through mobile broadband, as fixed broadband connectivity is marginal – is 
concentrated in the most affluent, educated and urban population centers. 15% of the Cote d’Ivoire urban 
population uses internet on a weekly basis, but this rate drops to only 3% for the rural Cote d’Ivoire population 

                                            
20

 Until 2012 the main legislation covering the telecommunication sector was the Law No. 95-526 of 7 July 1995 (Code des Télécommunications); as 
this legislation was outdated, it was fully revamped by the Ordonnance n° 2012-293 of 21 march 2012. 

21
 Moreover, the Government has introduced a tax break for the ICT sector in August 2015 with a VAT exoneration and reduced custom duties for 
ICT and electronic equipment, and this measure should last until the end of 2018 (cf. Abidjan.net, Les prix des ordinateurs, tablettes, téléphones 
portables vont baisser en Côte d’Ivoire, November 2015). 

22
 The ARTCI was created in 2013 by merging two institutions, the previous Agence des Télécommunications de Cote d’Ivoire (ATCI) – in charge inter 
alia of telecom spectrum management, licensing, and wholesale pricing – and the Conseil des Télécommunications de Côte d’Ivoire (CTCI) – in 
charge inter alia of monitoring the market competition dynamics, ensuring the compliance with the license obligations, and solving litigations. 

23
 In 2011, the Government adopted the e-GOUV scheme, which consists of two major axes – e-Administration and e-Services. The SNDI is working 
to implement ICT solutions in all government activities, including finance, health care, and education, with the goal of providing, by the year 
2020, all government services available online in developed countries (cf. IDAL, ICT Ivory Coast market, 2015, p.6). 

(Figure 3). In a similar fashion, only 1% of those having achieved at most primary education level use internet 
on a weekly basis compared to 19% for those having reached at least a secondary education level (Figure 4). 

Figure 1: Evolution of mobile penetration (combined 2G and 3G, % 
population, 2010-2015) 

 

Figure 2: % of internet users (with averages for income grouping of 
countries, 2006-2015) 

 
Data Source: GSMA Intelligence, World Bank Development Indicators. 

Figure 3: % of weekly internet use amongst rural vs. urban 
population (2014) 

 

Figure 4: % of weekly internet use amongst different education level 
(2014) 

 
Data Source: Gallup, Africa Online – Media Use in Sub-Saharan Africa, 2015. 

14. On the supply side, there are significant mobile coverage gaps for rural areas – The regulator ARTCI has 
identified that 48% of the 8,518 localities (localités) in Côte d’Ivoire were not covered by any mobile service; 
the uncovered localities represent 23% of the total population. Mobile operators have confirmed that they 
reached their profitability frontier and that extending their coverage would not be sufficiently profitable at this 
stage due to: (i) the lower population density in rural areas which increases the Capital Expenditure (CAPEX) per 
subscriber; and (ii) the lower purchasing power of subscribers which drives down the Average Revenue Per 
User (ARPU). Mobile broadband coverage with 3G is even worse, with coverage maps showing vast swaths 
without any coverage (. To counter this market failure, the ANSUT is currently deploying a national 7,000 km 
long fibre backbone to cover rural areas, and ARTCI is elaborating a “white zone” program to increase rural 
coverage. However, this will be insufficient to achieve mobile broadband coverage for all as the number of 
mobile sites should be at least tripled: each operator has deployed between 1,600 and 2,000 mobile sites in 
Côte d’Ivoire, a relatively low number compared to European countries that achieved acceptable level of 
coverage and services (in Romania, a country that is 30% smaller in area and with a similar population size, the 
regulator calculated that 6,000 sites were required to cover 99% of the population). 



 

 
Map source: ICT Unit, based on ARTCI data and base maps from United Nations OHCA-CI and CNTIG. 

 
 
Relationship to CPF 
 

15. The proposed project is designed to contribute to the World Bank Group’s twin goals of ending extreme 
poverty and boosting shared prosperity – The project will help the country achieve the twin objectives through 
promoting agricultural growth which is inclusive of smallholder farmers. The proposed project is consistent 
with the Bank’s CPF (FY16-FY19), and especially with ‘Focus Area One: Accelerating sustainable private sector‐
led growth’ which comprises four objectives that the project will directly or indirectly support. 

16. The e-agriculture project will directly contribute to two objectives of the CPF regarding (i) agriculture and (ii) 
infrastructure – (i) The project will contribute to ‘Objective #1: Improve Productivity in Agriculture/Agribusiness 
Value Chains’. Unpredictable weather patterns, unreliable pricing information and crop failure due to diseases 
are a few of the issues that digital services could tackle in Côte d’Ivoire. The project will directly support the 
objective of improving productivity by promoting digital solutions that will: (a) empower smallholder farmers to 
access information and markets, leading to increase in productivity and sales, and reduction in post-harvest 
loss; and (b) enable public institutions to collect and gather agricultural and rural statistics to drive public policy 
and strategy. (ii) The project will also contribute to ‘Objective #2: Strengthen Economic Infrastructure’. By 
extending ICT connectivity in rural areas, the project will directly enhance digital infrastructure and provide 
workarounds to inadequate logistics services. This will positively impact rural agriculture and economy by 
enabling easier access to consumer markets at competitive costs. 


17. The project will also indirectly contribute to two objectives of the CPF regarding (i) business environment and 
(ii) access to land – (i) ‘Objective #3: Improve Business Regulatory Framework and Access to Finance’ will be 
supported by extending the reach of ICT connectivity and facilitating the digitization of economic transactions. 
The spreading of ICT will support both: (a) the increase in mobile banking usage; and (b) the promotion of 
private sector growth with the ability for smallholders to get a credit with traditional banks thanks to a track 
record on which their financial performance can be assessed. (ii) ‘Objective #4: Formalize and Enhance 
Regulatory Access to Land for Business and Agriculture’ will also be supported thanks to the development of ICT 
platforms providing cheap and reliable tools to register land and deliver land certificates. Enhancing the 
registering process of land is fundamental to improve land security and support informed land transactions for 
both smallholders and private investors, and are a prerequisite for shared growth.  

18. The proposed project will leverage ongoing Bank operations in Côte d’Ivoire – The Bank has also been 
supporting the country’s agricultural strategy implementation through the sub-regional West Africa Agricultural 
Productivity Program (WAAPP), which is being implemented in 13 countries of the Economic Community of 
West African States (ECOWAS). The development objective of the Program is to generate and accelerate the 
adoption of improved technologies in the participating countries’ top agricultural commodity priority areas that 
are aligned with the sub-region’s top agricultural commodity priorities, as outlined in the Economic Community 
of West Africa Agriculture Program (ECOWAP). Other development partners such as the International Fund for 
Agriculture Development (IFAD), FAO, the African Development Bank (AfDB) and others have been 
implementing similar projects in support of the sector strategy. 

 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 

 
 
To improve access to affordable broadband in rural communities and leverage electronic platforms to improve farm 
productivity and access to markets. 

 
Key Results (From PCN) 

 

19. The key results expected from the proposed project are: 

a. Coverage of ICT services is significantly increased in targeted areas, and ICT usage (voice, SMS, and internet 
access) is significantly increased in targeted areas for local public and administrative institutions, 
businesses, and population – including vulnerable population (women); 

b. Digital solutions for rural development are made available, with electronic platforms being operational and 
used by: (i) public administrative services in charge of monitoring and informing rural development policies; 
and (ii) end users such as smallholders. 

c. As a result of increased use of digital solutions, smallholders in targeted area benefit from an increase in: (i) 
yields of selected crops (volume of production per ha or per smallholder); (ii) volume of sales of selected 
crops; and (iii) the reduction in postharvest losses by selected producer organizations supported by the 
project. 

Note to Task Teams: The PDO has been pre-populated from the datasheet for the first time for your convenience. 
Please keep it up to date whenever it is changed in the datasheet. 

 



20. The Project will assess the number of ‘beneficiaries’ with a breakdown between both individuals (disaggregated 
by gender) and establishments (disaggregated by central public administrations, local government and public 
administrations, and local businesses). The project will use the following PDO indicators: 

a. Number of beneficiaries accessing mobile communication services (voice and SMS); 

b. Number of beneficiaries accessing the internet; 

c. Share of production of target crops marketed by selected smallholders supported by the project; 

 
 
D. Concept Description 

 

21. To achieve the Project Development Objectives, the proposed project follows an integrated transformational 
solutions approach with three components: 

a. Component #1 ICT Infrastructure – Extending the coverage of ICT services in rural areas, and thereby 
improving the number of individuals, public administrations, and businesses that will be able to access both 
mobile services (voice and SMS) and the internet to improve productivity; 

b. Component #2 Digital services for rural development – Stimulating the development of digital services for 
rural development (with an emphasis on e-Agriculture), improving public service delivery in rural areas, and 
encouraging development of local content, applications, and services, through the setting up of electronic 
platforms and the creation of business incubators; 

c. Component #3 Project implementation – Project management, coordination, monitoring, and evaluation. 

22. Component 1 ICT Infrastructure – Component 1 will contribute to achieving the PDO by increasing coverage of 
ICT services. The coverage increase will be done through a subsidy to investment in connectivity. Depending on 
the targeted region and community, the PPP model will be adjusted. Among the public subsidy options, and 
based on ad hoc economic analysis, the project will subsidize: (i) the rollout of a Radio Access Network (RAN) 
mobile infrastructure focused on passive elements (i.e., towers and energy solutions). The towers will be 
sufficiently dimensioned to ensure that all mobile operators in Côte d’Ivoire can use the passive RAN to install 
their own active elements (i.e. base stations and transmitters) to improve coverage of their network and 
provide voice, SMS, and data services to the offline population; and (ii) the rollout of backhaul segments. The 
fiber optic links will be deployed either through OPGW when available, or buried along roads to points closer to 
the targeted communities. The private operators will then deploy the last mile (e.g. RAN). Because this 
component implies the subsidy of an ICT infrastructure, the identification of target areas (where the passive 
RAN will be deployed) and project design (how they will be deployed) will comply with a set of criteria in line 
with international best practices to maximize “value for money” and support the overarching twin goals of 
shared prosperity and poverty elimination (cf. below Section B). 

23. Regions identified as priority for Component 1 through the selection criteria – Three districts have been 
identified by the client as priority for component 1: (i) District of Denguélé; (ii) District des Savanes; (iii) and the 
Bounkani Region (District of Bouna). These three district are particularly affected by low connectivity and 
productivity issues (see Figure 5 & Figure 6 above). 

24. Component 2 Digital services for rural development – Component 2 will contribute to achieving the PDO with 
two sub-components: 


a. Sub-component 2.1 – Help improve the performance of the rural development public institutions in Côte 
d’Ivoire in gathering relevant, detailed, and recent data to monitor the rural economy and assist in shaping 
public policy; 

Sub-component 2.2 –Provide digital solutions to smallholders for selected crops that will increase crop 
yields, increase volumes of sales, reduce post-harvest loss, and improve market linkages. To that effect, a 
comprehensive program of activities will be implemented under this component that will be geared at: (i) 
improving the outreach and quality of crop extension and advisory services by strengthening the skills of 
public extension workers, promoting ICT in agricultural extension services, and supporting farmer-to-
farmer extension; (ii) developing farmers’ skills to scale-up the dissemination of Good Agricultural Practices 
(GAPs); and (iii) fostering the emergence of a digital innovation ecosystem aimed at providing local content, 
applications, and services for rural development through the creation and leveraging of e-Government 
platforms. The project will specifically aim at incubators and local labs training young women in 
coding/programming, as well as entrepreneurship in general. 

25. Regions and value-chains identified as priority for Component 2 through the selection criteria – Value-chains 
identified by the Ministry of Agriculture as priorities (with an emphasize on staple food) for this component 
are: (a) maze, manioc, rice; (b) plantain, yam (igname); and (c) poultry. Taking into account the regions where 
these value-chains are predominant, the component will target the following districts and regions: regions 
already included in Component 1 – District of Denguélé, District des Savanes, and the Bounkani Region (District 
of Bouna) – plus the District of Sassandra-Marahoué, and the District of Gôh-Djiboua. These crops fall to a large 
extent under the informal agriculture sector. Producers and farmers for these crops are predominantly women.  

Figure 7: Regions identified as a priority for Component 1 & Component 2 

 
Map source: ICT Unit, base maps from United Nations OHCA-CI and CNTIG. 

 

communications as well as Monitoring & Evaluation (M&E), environmental and social studies, their 
implementation and/or the monitoring of their implementation. 

 

 
 
    

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
In terms of infrastructure, the project will target exclusively the three Districts of the northern part of the country: 

District of Denguélé, District of Savanes, and District of Bouna. As part of component 1, the project will finance the 
construction of towers (passive infrastructure) and/or bury fiber optic links. In the case of fiber optic , the fiber will be 
buried along roads or railways, or installed on the ground cable of power lines. Therefore, the fiber optic infrastructure 
will be installed along existing infrastructure, with negligible impact on the environment and the population. Regarding 
the towers, some towers may be installed on private properties depending on the site and expected coverage. However, 
it is again expected that the installation of towers will have negligible impact on the environment, and minimal impact on 
the neighboring communities. Analysis will be carried out on a case by case basis. For the second component project will 
be implemented in the following areas: (i) District of Denguélé; (ii) District des Savanes; (iii) the Bounkani Region (District 
of Bouna); (iv) District of Sassandra-Marahoué; (v) and the District of Gôh-Djiboua 
 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
There are considerable legal and institutional frameworks in the country to ensure compliance with World Bank 

safeguards policies triggered by the proposed project. In Cote d’Ivoire, the Ministry of Sanitation, Environment, and 
Sustainable Development (MINSEDD) is responsible for setting policy guidelines on environmental issues and ensuring 
compliance with national environmental standards. It has different departments among which the National Agency of 
Environment (ANDE, Agence Nationale de l’Environnement) in charge of safeguards compliance of all projects in the 
country. The unit is well staffed and its capacities are acceptable. Based on the preliminary borrower assessment, the 
Agency (ANDE) has sustained resources to carry out the oversight of the safeguards performance during implementation. 
With regard to the PIU, capacity building efforts to support project implementation will be done by implementing 
recommendations contained in the safeguards instruments prepared for the project. The project will also receive 
guidance from the Bank’s environmental and social specialists in the Project team. 
 

D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes The project will fund the construction of towers, ICT 


     

infrastructures and the deployment of fiber optic. 
These constructions may entail potential adverse 
impacts on the environmental components. However, 
as the exact locations of those activities are unknown 
to date, an Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF) will be developed, reviewed, 
consulted upon and disclosed both within Cote 
d’Ivoire and at the World Bank’s Website prior to the 
Decision meeting. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 No 
The project activities will not be implemented in areas 
hosting natural habitats. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No 
The project will not support activities related to forest 
exploitation or management or might have potential 
adverse impacts on forested areas. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 No The project does not involve pest management 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 

Activities supported by the ongoing bank’s funded 
operation such as the construction of towers, ICT 
infrastructures and the deployment of fiber optic will 
unquestionably involve excavations with possibilities 
to discover Physical cultural resources. However, the 
triggering of this policy does not entail the preparation 
of a specific safeguard instrument. Only a specific 
chapter will be included in the ESMF to provide 
guidance in case physical cultural resources will be 
discovered. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 
The Project location does not cover Indigenous 
Peoples as defined by the World bank 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

These planned interventions are not expected to lead 
to significant land acquisition or significant restriction 
of access to sources of livelihood. However, the 
implementation of the pools or antenna my lead to 
lands acquisition. Therefore, a Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF) will be prepared for the activities 
triggered by the OP 4.12  as a due diligence given that 
the specific sites or impacts of envisioned physical 
investments are not known, The  Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF) consistent with OP 4.12 will be 
prepared by the Borrower, reviewed and cleared by 
the team and disclosed in-country and at Bank 
InfoShop prior to appraisal. The RPF will be used as a 
guide to conduct specific Resettlement Action Plans 
(RAPs) as needed, as they relate to land acquisition 
and loss of economic activities issues, as well as 
compensation measures to minimize negative impacts 
on Project Affected People (PAPs). 


Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No The project will not finance dams, not rely on dams. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
The project is not expected to affect international 
waterways 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No The project will not be located in a disputed area. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Oct 02, 2017 
 

Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
The following safeguard instruments are expected to be prepared during the preparation phase: i) an Environmental and 

Social Management Framework (ESMF) and, ii) a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). All these safeguard documents 
will be reviewed consulted upon and disclosed by the Government of the Republic of Cote d’Ivoire, and at the World 
Bank’s Website prior to the Decision Meeting. 
 
 

























































World Bank Document
Project infORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
APPRAISAL STAGE

Report No.:  PIDA646

Project Name Southern Agricultural Growth Corridor of Tanzania Investment 
Project (P125728)

Region AFRICA
Country Tanzania
Sector(s) Agricultural extension and research (75%), General agriculture, 

fishing and forestry sector (25%)
Theme(s) Rural markets (30%), Rural services and infrastructure (20%), 

Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (50%)
Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P125728
Borrower(s) Ministry of Finance & Planning
Implementing Agency Office of the Prime Minister
Environmental Category A-Full Assessment
Date PID Prepared/Updated 19-Jan-2016
Date PID Approved/Disclosed 20-Jan-2016
Estimated Date of Appraisal 
Completion

22-Jan-2016

Estimated Date of Board 
Approval

03-Mar-2016

Appraisal Review Decision 
(from Decision Note)

I. Project Context
Country Context
Tanzania has been experiencing high rates of economic growth. This growth has been driven by 
economic liberalization, sound macroeconomic policy management, and expanding public sector 
spending. Growth accelerated from an average of 3.5 percent during the 1990s to around 7 percent 
over the past decade.  Improvements in tax administration and provision of foreign aid created 
space for a significant expansion in public spending, which increased from less than 16 percent of 
GDP in 2000 to almost 28 percent in 2011. Inflation was low from 2000 to 2005, but picked up 
pace from 2006 to 2011. It was briefly in double digits, and has now settled back to around 7 
percent. Fiscal policy has been largely prudent accompanied by strong growth in tax revenues.  
However, the government needs to keep its debt and debt service to reasonable levels, reduce the 
growing deficits of certain parastatals, and manage the commitments under the public pension 
scheme. There are a number of recent developments (including discovery of natural gas) that are 
expected to contribute to Tanzania’s positive economic performance. Looking forward, the 
economy is likely to remain on its current growth trajectory in the near future. 


Notwithstanding the country’s solid economic growth record, poverty rates have not declined 
significantly. In November 2013, the government announced the new official poverty figures. The 
basic needs poverty level in Tanzania mainland has fallen from 33.34 percent in 2007 to 28.2 
percent in 2012. Rural poverty has declined from 39.4 percent to 33.4 percent over the same period. 
Despite impressive macro-fiscal performance, and decades of concerted efforts to lift rural masses 
out of poverty, agricultural incomes have grown slowly. Economic growth has been concentrated in 
urban areas and in capital-intensive sectors, such as the mining, communication, construction, and 
banking sectors. In comparison, the growth in agricultural value added has been less than two 
percent per worker. This growth in the agriculture sector has not been high enough to reduce 
poverty in rural areas, where more than 80 percent the country’s poor reside.  
Limited opportunities for commercialization are at the heart of small farmers’ problems in 
Tanzania. The majority of smallholder farmers sell little of their production. Approximately three 
quarters of all maize, and approximately half of all paddy, is consumed within the village in which 
it is produced. The expansion of smallholder production of these food crops, as well as a range of 
cash crops such as cotton, tea and coffee is undermined by low productivity, and high transport and 
marketing costs. New strategies for agricultural commercialization are needed. 
The top leadership of the country is strongly committed to share prosperity more widely, and 
recognizes the economic importance of agriculture for rural growth and poverty alleviation. The 
government at the highest levels has made transformation of agriculture a major national priority. 
Learning from the experience of other countries, the Tanzanian government has embarked on an 
ambitious program to strengthen agriculture value chains and integrate larger numbers of small-
scale farmers into these competitive trade partnerships. These initiatives target the transformation of 
large numbers of semi-subsistence producers to become successful commercial farmers. There is a 
market failure in service provision to these smallholders to enable them to link up with modern 
agriculture value chains (which enables them to acquire modern technologies and markets; and 
learn by doing); hence government is committed to correcting this market failure by incentivizing 
agribusinesses through matching grants. The matching grants would help underwrite the risks 
agribusinesses face in bringing in more smallholders into their value chains, and smallholders 
would gain from the experience of more targeted modern services and improved markets for their 
output.

  

Sectoral and institutional Context
Tanzania has witnessed an expansion in agribusiness investment with supply chain links with 
smallholder farming. A growing number of these agribusinesses are pursuing contract or out-
grower farming with smallholders. These include investments in out-grower sugar, tobacco cotton, 
sorghum, barley, cocoa, dairy and horticultural crops. Agribusinesses are experimenting with 
alternative strategies for strengthening this co-investment. 
 
The Government of Tanzania (GoT) recognizes that the private sector is a critical partner in 
delivering development benefits. Particularly when it is linked to smallholder production potential, 
it can provide an important engine of agricultural growth. In 2001, the government adopted a new 
Agricultural Sector Development Strategy (ASDS) targeting achievement of a green revolution in 
agriculture. To better implement this strategy, the government then prepared the Agricultural Sector 
Development Program (ASDP), highlighting the need for stronger public-private partnership to 
promote the commercialization of smallholder production. This commitment was reinforced in 
2009 with the signing of the Kilimo Kwanza (Agriculture First) resolution calling for greater 
investment in agriculture, and inclusive commercialization. 


The Southern Agricultural Growth Corridor of Tanzania (SAGCOT) Program was developed by the 
GoT to operationalize the Kilimo Kwanza. The SAGCOT Program, as articulated in its core 
document, the Investment Blueprint, highlights commitment to a strategy of joint public-private 
investment targeting the development of agribusiness value chains across the country’s southern 
corridor. In aggregate, the Blueprint proposes that a public investment of USD1.3bn can leverage 
an additional USD2.1bn in private investment in order to bring 350,000ha of agricultural land into 
commercial production over the next twenty years. Tens of thousands of smallholders are expected 
to become successful commercial farmers, more than two million people are to be lifted out of 
poverty and food security will improve. The primary emphasis of the SAGCOT Program is to 
expand partnerships between agribusinesses and smallholder farmers in building larger and more 
competitive value chains.   Agribusiness investors are sought who are willing to work 
collaboratively with smallholder communities to raise productivity and incomes. Early successes 
have been highlighted for sugar and rice, where out-growers have achieved higher levels of 
productivity and income compared with smallholders in neighboring regions. Similar examples are 
cited for tea and horticultural crop farmers.

II. Proposed Development Objectives
To support the adoption of new technologies and improved market access by small-holder farmers 
through expanding and creating partnerships between small-holder farmers and agribusinesses in the 
Southern Corridor of Tanzania.

III. Project Description
Component Name
Strengthening of SAGCOT Support Institutions (total USD14.33 million, IDA USD5.95 million)
Comments (optional)
This component will strengthen the capacity of SAGCOT Support Institutions in order to pursue 
their functions of information and data provision, support of investment planning and guidance, 
government/private sector intermediation, business enabling environment and investment 
promotion.  The component will support two institutions: 
 
(i) SAGCOT Centre  
(ii) Tanzania Investment Centre (Government institution)

Component Name
Strengthening Smallholder Business Linkages (total USD85.76 million, IDA USD55.65 million)
Comments (optional)
The objective of this component will be to link smallholder farmers to agricultural value chains. The 
component will: (a) expand the number of smallholders linked to agribusinesses in successful 
commercial partnerships; and (b) improve the benefits derived by smallholders and rural 
communities from these partnerships in the form of growth in agricultural productivity, income and 
employment. This component will comprise two sub-components: 
 
(i) Fund Management 
(ii) Matching Grants

Component Name

Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation (total USD8.41 million of which USD3.80 
million were provided by two Project Preparation Advances, IDA USD8.41 million)Comments (optional)
The component will establish project management and M&E systems and provide financing for 
salaries, office equipment, transportation and technical assistance services. Complementarities will 
particularly be sought with other IDA funded programs such as the Private Sector Competitiveness 
Project and the Agricultural Sector Development Program.

IV. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 75.00 Total Bank Financing: 70.00
Financing Gap: 0.00
For Loans/Credits/Others Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT 5.00
International Development Association (IDA) 70.00
Total 75.00

V. Implementation
The Project will be overseen by the Prime Minister’s Office (PMO). A Project Steering Committee 
(PSC) meeting quarterly and on specific demand has been established. It is chaired by the 
Permanent Secretary (PS) of the PMO, and amongst others comprises PS from key line ministries, 
the Chief Executive Officers of the TIC, SAGCOT Centre, SAGCOT Catalytic Trust Fund (CTF), 
Rufiji Basin Development Authority (RUBADA), and representatives from smallholder farmers. 
The PSC will: (a) ensure coordination and cooperation among all participating agencies; and (b) 
endorse annual work plans and budgets for all project-related activities. 
 
The PMO has proposed that the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) originally created for the IDA 
funded Private Sector Competitiveness Project be expanded to also coordinate the SAGCOT 
Investment Project. This PCU will have management oversight and reporting responsibilities for all 
components of the Project. This entity will integrate the financial and technical progress reports 
from each of the agencies being funded, and carry out the overall M&E for the Project. The PCU 
will also take overall procurement and financial management responsibility during the first six to 12 
months of the Project implementation until sufficient capacity has been built in the other 
implementing agencies (an assessment will be undertaken to assess the agencies capacity). The full 
staffing of this PCU as set out in the Operational Manual. All participating institutions will prepare 
annual work plans and budgets to be submitted to the PCU for approval by the PSC. 
 
IDA financing agreed with the Ministry of Finance that will flow to agencies other than the PCU, 
will be governed by subsidiary agreements acceptable to IDA (these agencies are the SAGCOT 
Centre and the SAGCOT Catalytic Trust Fund). These subsidiary agreements lay out the fund flow, 
implementation and reporting requirements of the two entities. Direct funding to these entities may 
only begin once these subsidiary agreements, and an associated set of fiduciary systems including 
financial management and procurement systems acceptable to IDA, are in place. It is estimated that 
this will take place in the first year of implementation. 
 
The SAGCOT Centre will be the responsible implementing agency for sub-component 1.1 activities. 
Funding for the SAGCOT Centre will be committed in parallel with other Development Partners 
(initially DfID and USAID) to support the operations of the Centre as a whole. A Memorandum of 



Understanding (MoU) has been signed on September 30, 2014 between the SAGCOT Centre, GoT, 
DfID, the World Bank, Norway, EU, and UNDP. The MoU states that the funding will be 
committed against an indicative five year budget, and against an approved annual budget agreed by 
the SAGCOT Centre Board.  
 
TIC will be the responsible implementing agency for sub-component 1.2 activities.  The TIC will 
directly implement these activities and be responsible for procurement, financial management, 
input/output and progress reporting.  In the first instance, procurement under the Project will be 
implemented by the PCU until such time as TIC has reinforced its procurement capacity. 
 
Component 2 will be implemented through the SAGCOT Catalytic Trust Fund. The institutional 
structure of the catalytic fund management is designed and specified in a Trust Deed. A Board 
comprising five members has been established. The Board has recruited an Executive Secretary and 
initiated recruitment of a Fund Manager, estimated to be selected soon after the approval of the 
Project.   
 
The grant application process under the Matching Grant Fund (MGF) will be managed by a 
professional and competitively recruited Fund Manager. The Fund Manager will periodically (at 
least twice a year) invite applications from eligible partnership between smallholders and 
established agribusinesses, and through a two phased process select those applications which satisfy 
the core criteria (benefits to smallholders, safeguard compliance, sustainability, etc.). The Fund 
Manager will have a specific duty to provide support to applicants, in particular to help ensure 
benefit flows to smallholders, and that smallholder interests are well represented in the application 
and the partnership. The final applications will be submitted to the independent Investment 
Committee to be appointed by the Board to review all grant proposals and make recommendations 
to the Board on those that warrant funding. The eligibility, selection process and implementation 
arrangements are detailed in the Trust Deed and further specified in the MGF Operational Manual. 
Grants will be funded on a reimbursement basis with expenses pre-financed by the investors and 
may be tranched. Grants payments made through the agribusiness may be allocated to the 
agribusiness investor, smallholders or some combination thereof, as requested in the application, 
and set out in the grant agreement.

VI. Safeguard Policies (including public consultation)
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖


























































World Bank Document


Page 1 of 13

COMBINED PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENTS / INTEGRATED 
SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET (PID/ISDS)  

ADDITIONAL FINANCING
Report No.: PIDISDSA20175

Date Prepared/Updated: 23-Jan-2017
I. BASIC INFORMATION

  A.  Basic Project Data

Country: Congo, Democratic Republic 
of

Project ID: P159037

Parent 
Project ID 
(if any):

P092724

Project Name: DRC Agriculture Rehabilitation and Recovery AF (P159037)
Parent Project 
Name:

DRC - Agriculture Rehabilitation and Recovery Support (P092724)

Region: AFRICA
Estimated 
Appraisal Date:

23-Jan-2017 Estimated 
Board Date:

15-Mar-2017

Practice Area
(Lead):

Agriculture Lending 
Instrument:

Investment Project Financing

Borrower(s): DRC Ministry of Finance
Implementing 
Agency:

PARRSA PIU

Financing (in USD Million)
Financing Source Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT 0.00
International Development Association (IDA) 75.00
Total Project Cost 75.00

Environmental 
Category:

B - Partial Assessment

Appraisal 
Review 
Decision (from 
Decision Note):

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate

Other Decision: The Decision Meeting granted a conditional authorization to proceed with 
appraisal subject to resolution of the outstanding safeguard issues and RVP 
approval of the exception waiver.

Is this a 
Repeater 

No
?

B.   Introduction and Context

Country Context
Between 2010 and 2014, the overall economy grew at 7.7 percent and the extractive industry 
grew at 25 percent , making the DRC one of Africa's fastest growing economies. Extractive 
industry exports account for about 95 percent of DRC➢❨ s exports.  While mining revenues have 
contributed to strong macroeconomic growth and poverty reduction, high export concentration 
exposes the country to exogenous shocks and instability .  The recent trends of falling world 
commodity prices, lower export revenues, and the associated slow-down in DRC➢❨ s mining 
sector have contributed to a tight fiscal environment. In this context, the government has placed 
significant priority to economic diversification and has identified the Agriculture sector, 
DRC➢❨ s second biggest sector- as a key sector for expanding its export base and buffering the 
economy against oil price shocks. 
 
Despite high rates of macroeconomic growth, poverty and malnutrition remains widespread in 
DRC.  The national poverty rate is 64 percent, with poverty rates only slightly higher in rural 
areas (65 percent) relative to urban areas (62 percent). Almost one quarter of children are 
underweight. In rural areas, deficiencies in food storage and market access create seasonal food 
shortages. In urban areas, import tariffs (commonly 10 percent) and low domestic production, 
thus requiring sizable food imports, result in food prices that are amongst the highest in Africa.  
About six million people are classified as food insecure in the country. 
 
Climate change will exacerbate droughts, floods, and other extreme weather events. Although the 
Congo basin seems to be less exposed than dryer parts of Africa, Congolese farmers are 
particularly poor and isolated, therefore vulnerable to climate impacts and other external shocks. 
 
In addition, DRC is undergoing a process of decentralization. Last year, the number of provinces 
officially grew from 11 to 26. Equateur Province, where PARRSA is located, has been sub-
divided into five new Provinces, three of them falling under the project area (Sud Ubangi, Nord 
Ubangi, and Mongala). Within the decentralization process, the provincial services of the 
ministries are being revitalized to better serve the rural population. However, some new provinces 
lack the structures and fiscal resources to function independently. Consequently there is a need for 
new investments, including agriculture investments, to make these new provinces more fiscally 
secure. 
 
Socio-Political System. Following the African Union led dialogue, the 2016 elections were 
postponed and a second more inclusive dialogue led by the Conference Episcopale Nationale du 
Congo (CENCO) is still underway but has already achieved an agreement for a new government 
of national unity and a commitment from the President to not run for a third term. Presidential 
elections are expected to be held in December 2017, but this date has been viewed as not credible. 
The majority of the provinces are under-resourced (human and financial) and ill equipped. As a 
result, the majority of the provinces have increased taxes in order to cover their operational costs. 
Democratic process in the DRC faces a myriad of challenges, including a legacy of exploitation 
and conflict, lack of physical and communications infrastructure, extreme poverty and continuing 
pockets of insecurity.  
 



Page 3 of 13

Governance system, conflict and institutional fragility. The factors blocking an economic 
development in the country include: (a) a crisis resulting from contested 2011 election results; (b) 
weak governance; and (c) the weakness of state institutions in implementing appropriate policies. 
As a result, the agricultural sector is operating in an environment of fragile socio-political context, 
low quality human capacity with an outdated skills base, an unattractive business environment, 
rent based economy with low agricultural productivity, dilapidated infrastructure and under 
developed service markets (agricultural inputs, logistics services, financial services). 
 
Enabling environment and tax burden. The macroeconomic indicators for the country have 
remained relatively stable with annual inflation stable at 1.6 percent over the past 5 years. Real 
interest rates have remained at about 17 percent. This is illustrative of a business enabling 
environment which is characterized by: (i) high import taxes; (ii) high sales taxes; (iii) unofficial 
taxes levied across road, rail, river and air transport; (iii) high port handling fees; (iii) unreliable 
electricity supply; (iv) corruption; (v) ➢❨ red tape➢❨  bureaucratic procedures that make it more 
costly to close a transaction or sell a product; and (vi) very high logistical hurdles and costs. In 
addition, the agricultural sector has outdated laws and regulations on seed, land, food quality and 
control. Because of poor transport infrastructure, it is much harder to reach markets and the net 
effect is reduced competitiveness of domestically produced products in local, national and 
regional markets. Under-developed input markets and fragmented value chains further reduce the 
competitiveness of locally produced commodities, but itpresents opportunities for private 
investors.
Sectoral and institutional Context
Agriculture currently accounts for about 20 percent of GDP and employs some 70-75 percent of 
the economically active population. Related agro-industries employ another 10 percent of the 
population. Jobs in agriculture tend to be informal, with low value added per worker (US$227/
year ), often providing only for subsistence. Agriculture and other sectors are hampered by the 
fact that DRC is recovering from more than 15 years of civil war, which has created serious 
infrastructure and institutional vacuums. The country faces systematic challenges in its business 
environment and enabling services such as rural connectivity, power infrastructure, and extension 
systems. Public spending is constrained by weak budgetary processes, inefficiencies, and poor 
coordination. 
 
The Government➢❨ s objective is to reduce rural poverty by 2020 by restoring and modernizing 
agricultural production systems, improving nutrition and food security, and mobilizing significant 
public and private sector investments. In recent years, agriculture has become a top priority for 
DRC Government as evidenced by the allocation of 8 percent of total budget in 2016 (up from 3 
percent) in line with the Africa Heads of State Maputo Declaration. The 2013 Programme 
National d➢❨ Investissements Agricoles (PNIA), with a total estimated cost of US$5.7 billion 
over seven years, builds upon five pillars: (i) fostering value chains and agribusiness; (ii) 
achieving food security; (iii) enhancing research, extension, and training; (iv) improving sector 
governance, gender participation and institutional capacity; and (v) adapting to climate change. In 
2014, the Government launched the agro industrial park strategy to boost agribusiness and 
agroindustry, and attract private investments in the sector. 
 
The proposed AF project is aligned with the Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for DRC as it 
aims at contributing significantly to the Government➢❨ s efforts to alleviate extreme poverty and 
malnutrition (MDG1). It is also fully aligned with the fourth outcome of the CAS FY13-16, 



Page 4 of 13

addressing fragility through ➢❨ increased agriculture productivity and production and access to 
markets➢❨ . It is also consistent with major strategic initiatives for DRC, the Great Lakes region, 
and sub-Saharan Africa, including the second pillar (vulnerability and resilience) of the World 
Bank➢❨ s Africa Strategy and Africa Climate Business Plan. By supporting the development of 
agricultural value chains with strong economic potential, the proposed AF project is in line with 
the national strategy of DRC and the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Program 
(CAADP). 
 
Several policy documents govern the agriculture sector, including the National Agriculture 
Investment Plan (NAIP), the Agricultural Code, a new proposal for Integrated Rural Development 
Centers, and the Agro-industrial Action Plan. In practice, ownership of these policies at the 
provincial level ➢❨  and even occasionally at the central level ➢❨  is low.  There is weak 
coordination and harmonization across the different policies and implementing agencies, and 
human, technical, and financial capacity to implement agricultural strategies is poor. 
 
DRC➢❨ s green revolution will require a technological leapfrog combined with progress on 
cross-cutting infrastructure, institutional and business climate issues in order to facilitate private 
investment and access to markets. From an operational perspective, DRC➢❨ s green revolution 
would pursue a two-track approach: (i) enabling traditional small-scale farmers to transition from 
subsistence farming to small holder commercial farming ; and (ii) promoting private investment 
in commercial agriculture using modern technologies geared toward mechanized farming and 
agro-processing for domestic and regional markets. 
 
DRC➢❨ s agro-industrial action plan (2015) proposes to privatize several government-owned 
farms, establish agro-industrial parks across all provinces, and has identified 60 abandoned   
farms for development. A focus on large commercial farms has the advantage of tackling many 
constraints simultaneously to promote faster growth in a challenging environment, albeit in a 
limited geographical area. Concentrating resources and political will in specific commercial zones 
can also serve to demonstrate the benefits of specific policy interventions, so that these could be 
scaled up.  Furthermore, incorporating smallholders into agro-industrial revitalization schemes 
will be critical for promoting peace, stability, and inclusive growth.

C.  Proposed Development Objective(s)

Original Project Development Objective(s) - Parent
The project development objective (PDO) is to increase agricultural productivity and improve 
marketing of crops, and animal products by smallholder farmers in targeted areas.

Proposed Project Development Objective(s) - Additional Financing
To increase agricultural productivity and improve marketing of crops and animal products crops 
and animal products in targeted areas.

Key Results 

D.  Project Description

The proposed Additional Financing will provide additional resources to reinforce the basic 
production capacity (staple crops and livestock) of smallholder farmers in three provinces to 



Page 5 of 13

ensure food and nutrition security, relaunch the perennial crops production and embark on 
commercial farming by selling surplus production on local markets. The AF will support the re-
emergence of a sustainable mixed farming system which is prevalent in the project areas. It will 
also revamp the extension and advisory services in the project areas giving a more prominent role 
to government institutions and involving the private sector. The AF will also assist the 
Government in setting up a sustainable feeder roads maintenance program and strengthening 
agriculture research and development. The AF will introduce information and communication 
technologies at different levels of the activities to enable mobile banking, remote sensing and 
other innovations to the beneficiaries. It will also expand a demand driven matching grant facility 
and combine it with free technical assistance so different actors can fully participate in the project 
activities. Finally the proposed AF also aims to promote climate adaptation (new technologies and 
management practices) and build community resilience (micro projects storage facilities, 
warehouses, processing centers, nurseries etc.). A partnership with the Central African Forest 
Initiative (CAFI) Fund is to be confirmed. The potential CAFI financing in the amount of US
$3.64 million as a grant would help enhance the environment benefits of the subprojects and 
increase the project efforts to reduce or mitigate deforestation and forest degradation.

Component Name
Component 1: Improving agricultural and animal production
Comments (optional)
Component 1 will consolidate and further develop the activities undertaken under the parent 
project which sought to increase the capacity of smallholder farmers in targeted areas to produce 
staple crops and small stock including chicken. The scope will be broadened to include the two 
additional territories and perennial crops like coffee and cocoa. The AF will support the private 
sector or small private enterprises interested in investing in commercial crops.  Cross-cutting 
issues such as nutrition, gender, climate smart agriculture, and employment will be fully 
embedded into the AF activities..

Component Name
Component 2: Improving marketing infrastructure
Comments (optional)
Component 2 aims to continue with the rehabilitation and maintenance of feeder roads and 
construction of key local markets and storage facilities across the three provinces with a focus on 
building capacity at local and provincial levels to ensure that all infrastructure investments are 
maintained and sustainable.

Component Name
Component 3: Capacity Building support to the Ministry of Agriculture and Ministry of Rural 
Development, and project management
Comments (optional)
Component 3 will support the government efforts to: (i) re-engineer the national agriculture 
extension and advisory services so it is responsive and inclusive (non-governmental 
organizations, private sector and producer organizations as advisory service providers); (ii) 
strengthen the planning, coordination and monitoring and evaluation capacity at national and 
provincial levels (statistics and georeferenced data system); and (iii) strengthen the agricultural 
research and development for efficiency and effectiveness gains in their service delivery and 
conduct a skills needs assessment in the areas of agribusiness and agronomy; (iv) introduce 



Page 6 of 13

landscape management planning at local and provincial levels to support climate adaptation and 
community resilience; and (v) manage the project.

E.  Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis (if known)

The Additional Financing will be implemented in South Ubangi, North Ubangi, Mongala and 
Kinshasa.

F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

Abdoulaye Gadiere (GEN07)
Antoine V. Lema (GSU05)
Claude Lina Lobo (GENDR)
Lucienne M. M'Baipor (GSU01)

II. Implementation
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
The same structure that governed the implementation of the parent project will remain, with a 
National Project Implementation Coordination Unit in Kinshasa and three Project Implementation 
units at provincial level, one per each newly created province. The delegated management contractor 
will be responsible for implementing the infrastructure component with an extension of UNOPS 
contract. For each province, a provincial coordination monitoring committee will be established to 
oversee the project's planning process and implementation.

III. Safeguard Policies that might apply

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental 
Assessment OP/BP 
4.01

Yes Project activities will generate impacts on environment, 
especially the ones relating to the rehabilitation and 
maintenance of feeder roads and construction of key local 
markets. In addition to this, the ongoing operation intends to 
fund sub-projects such as storage facilities, warehouses, 
processing centers, nurseries, etc. These activities will 
unquestionably induce adverse impacts on environmental 
components. However, adverse impacts are expected to be 
moderate, site specific and easily manageable. Besides, the 
exact locations of these investments are unknown to date. 
Consequently, an Environmental and social Assessment 
Framework (ESMF) which is the proper safeguard instrument 
in such a case has been prepared, reviewed, consulted upon 
and disclosed both in DRC on January 13, 2017 and at the 
Infoshop on January 17, 2017.

Natural Habitats OP/
BP 4.04

Yes This policy is triggered in the preventive way because of the 
potential of the project to cause loss or degradation of natural 
habitats, whether directly or indirectly. This policy is also 
triggered to draw attention when activities may be undertaken 



Page 7 of 13

near Natural habitats, with the possibility to impact them. The 
ESMF was prepared in line with the OP/BP4.01 includes a 
section handling this matter.

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes The policy on Forests is triggered preventively as the project 
will be implemented in forested areas with the possibility of 
impact on the natural or plantation forests, and/or can bring 
some changes in management or protection of these forests. 
This is to avoid any significant conversion (loss) or 
degradation. This concern was taken in account in the ESMF.

Pest Management OP 
4.09

Yes Activities in the component 1 aims to improve agricultural and 
animal production where the main focus will be on improved 
access to fertilizers, pesticides, veterinary drugs and access to 
high quality and affordable agro-veterinary services. 
Consequently an Integrated Pest Management Plan (IPMP) 
about the safe use of agricultural pesticides and a promotion of 
the use of biological or environmental control methods was 
developed as a separate document. This safeguard tool has 
been reviewed, consulted upon and disclosed within DRC and 
at the Infoshop respectively on January 13 and January 17, 
2017.

Physical Cultural 
Resources OP/BP 
4.11

Yes In order to anticipate and to be sure that all the precautions 
have been taken to protect and safeguard physical cultural 
resources, a section addressing these concerns was included in 
the ESMF.  This is because activities related to the 
rehabilitation and the maintenance of feeder roads and other 
infrastructure works will induce excavations with potential 
discoveries of physical cultural resources.

Indigenous Peoples 
OP/BP 4.10

Yes As the project is focusing mainly on rural areas, and as there 
are Indigenous People in the project area, the Indigenous 
People Policy Framework (IPPF) of the parent project has been 
updated. Once the project site is clearly identified, the project 
will prepare an Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP).

Involuntary 
Resettlement OP/BP 
4.12

Yes This policy is triggered because of the potential restriction of 
access to assets or sources of livelihood as a result of the 
proposed project activities. Since the exact geographic 
coverage of proposed activities is still to be determined, the 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) of the parent project 
has been updated by the Borrower for the project to clearly 
outline the basic principles and guidelines for mitigating any 
potential impact that may require compensation in the event of 
land acquisition and in some cases involuntary resettlement in 
the broad sense.

Safety of Dams OP/
BP 4.37

No The project will not finance dam works or activities associated 
to existing dams.

Projects on 
International 

Yes Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 is triggered 
because of planned irrigation activities. An exception to the 



Page 8 of 13

Waterways OP/BP 
7.50

Riparian Notification Requirement under OP 7.50 (Projects on 
International Waterways) was approved by the RVP on 
December 15, 2016. Due diligence was also completed under 
the parent project and an exception to the Riparian Notification 
Requirement was approved by the RVP on Oct 27, 2009..

Projects in Disputed 
Areas OP/BP 7.60

No The project will not be located in a Disputed Area.

IV. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify 

and describe any potential large scale,  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The Additional Financing will support activities related to the rehabilitation and the maintenance 
of feeder roads, the construction of key local markets, storage facilities, warehouses, processing 
centers, nurseries, etc. These civil works will unquestionably induce environmental and social 
adverse impacts in terms of trees cutting, dust, noise, waste management, and security and health 
issues both for populations and for employees. However, most of adverse impacts associated with 
these investments will likely be site-specific, so manageable at an acceptable level.  
In addition, those civil works will take place in forested areas. Potential adverse impacts could 
occur on forests and natural resources. The civil works could also induce impacts on Physical 
cultural resources.  
 
On social level, the rehabilitation/maintenance of feeder roads and the construction of local 
markets as well as warehouses may induce the displacement of populations. In addition, 
Indigenous people are present within areas where some civil works will be undertaken with the 
possibility to some adverse impacts on them.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities 
in the project area:
Anticipated negative environmental and social impacts of the project would result mainly from 
civil works associated with rural roads rehabilitation, but also from increase and intensified crop 
production. The consequence would be change in routine activities, use of fertilizers and 
pesticides, generation of solid and liquid waste, acquisition/taking of private land. In addition, the 
potential use of quarry materials for consolidation of rural roads could also be sources of negative 
impacts on both the natural and physical environment, which will require restoration actions after 
use.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse 
impacts.
Not relevant.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an 
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The project remains EA category B and triggers eight safeguards policies which are OP/BP 4.01; 
OP/BP 4.04, OP/BP4.36; OP4.09; OP/BP4.11, OP/BP7.50; OP/BP4.10 and OP/PB 4.12.   
 
Considering that the exact geographic locations of project specific interventions are not yet 
determined with certainty, the Borrower updated four environmental and social safeguards 
instruments, namely an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), a 



Page 9 of 13

Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), the Indigenous People Policy Framework (IPPF) and a 
Pest Management Plan (PMP) in compliance with the core requirements of the triggered 
safeguards policies : OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment), OP 4.09 (Pest Management), OP/
BP.4.10 (Indigenous People) and OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement).  The ESMF has also 
made provision to address basic requirements from both OP/BP 4.36 (forestry) and OP/BP 4.04 
(Natural Habitats). Both the ESMF and the PMP were reviewed and cleared by the Bank and the 
Government and disclosed both in-country on January 13, 2017 and at the InfoShop on January 
17, 2017. The RPF and the IPPF was were also reviewed and cleared by the Bank, and disclosed 
both in-country on  January 13, 2017 and at the InfoShop on  January 17, 2017. 
 
During the parent project implementation, screening of sub-projects has taken place to ensure 
proper identification and mitigation of any adverse impacts. Consequently, many ESIA, RAP and 
IPPs have been prepared, disclosed and implemented as guidance/guidelines prior to activities 
implementation. As the parent project, the ongoing AF will follow the same process regarding the 
safeguard aspects.  
 
There is a recently recruited safeguards specialist in the PIU, who is familiar with project activities 
in the parent project, he has also been implicated in the preparation stage. For Component 2, the 
Contractor (UNOPS) has equally recruited a safeguards specialist, as well as the Netherlands 
Development Organization (Stichting Nederlandse Vrijwilligers/SNV) that implemented the IPP 
of the parent project, also has a safeguards specialist in the team. To supervise the implementation 
of social measures, it is recommended that the project recruit a social expert. 
All the environmental and social safeguard specialists involved in the team will ensure that all the 
sub-projects to be financed under the AF are in full compliance with Bank safeguards policies and 
in line with the national regulatory framework. Furthermore, the National Agency in charge of 
environmental impact assessment and safeguards monitoring (Agence Congolaise de 
l➢❨ Environnementale-ACE) is also involved in the environmental and social aspects monitoring.  
 
Lastly, the safeguards specialists at the World Bank, part of the project team, will ensure that all 
the project staff are trained on safeguards on the one hand and will be part on supervision missions 
on the other hand with the aim to make sure safeguards aspects are properly handled.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure 
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders are the beneficiary communities, Ministries in charge of Agriculture, 
fisheries and livestock, rural development, transport, Environment and sustainable development 
(and their relevant agencies/departments), municipalities, NGOs and other relevant institutions. 
 
One of the key principles of this project from the outset was to foster participation of all relevant 
stakeholders. This approach will be sustained throughout project implementation. The 
environmental and social assessment studies, namely the ESMF, IPMP. IPPF and RPF, were also 
carried out according to the same principle, using broad-based public consultation approach, 
involving the above stakeholder groups. The objective was to raise awareness of project activities 
and impacts and foster ownership on their part. All the relevant bodies have been adequately 
informed of the Project. Concerns of the communities and some details of consultations have been 
taken into account in the body of the different reports and other results provided as Annexes. The 
key concerns raised during the consultation process included: (i) permanent information and 
sensitization of the population, (ii) compensation process for those impacted by the project, (iii) 
participation of local population as employee on works they qualify for, (iv) the involvement of 



Page 10 of 13

NGOs and state technical services during the execution of works. All these concerns have been 
addressed in the alternatives proposed through the developed safeguards instruments.

B. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank 28-Nov-2016

Date of submission to InfoShop 17-Jan-2017
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors

"In country" Disclosure
Congo, Democratic Republic of 13-Jan-2017
Comments:

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank 22-Nov-2016

Date of submission to InfoShop 17-Jan-2017
"In country" Disclosure

Congo, Democratic Republic of 13-Jan-2017
Comments:

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank 27-Nov-2016

Date of submission to InfoShop 17-Jan-2017
"In country" Disclosure

Congo, Democratic Republic of 13-Jan-2017
Comments:

Pest Management Plan
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal? Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank 20-Nov-2016

Date of submission to InfoShop 17-Jan-2017
"In country" Disclosure

Congo, Democratic Republic of 13-Jan-2017
Comments:

If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:




























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Benin: Gazetted Forests Management Project (P167678) 

 
 

  
Feb 28, 2019 Page 1 of 13  

     

 

 
 
      

 

Combined Project Information Documents /  
Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (PID/ISDS) 

 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 04-Apr-2019 | Report No: PIDISDSA26271 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Benin P167678 Benin: Gazetted Forests 
Management Project 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA 02-Apr-2019 31-May-2019 Environment & Natural 
Resources 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Economy of the 
Republic of Benin 

Ministry of Environment 
and Sustainable 
Development 

 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
To improve the integrated management of targeted GFs, to increase access of the main consumption cities to 
fuelwood produced sustainably, and to strengthen selected NTFP value chains for forest-dependent communities 

 
Components 

 

 
 

PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
   

SUMMARY-NewFin1  
 

Total Project Cost 75.00 

Total Financing 75.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 75.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 

 
   
DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 75.00 

          IDA Grant 75.00 

    



 

The World Bank  
Benin: Gazetted Forests Management Project (P167678) 

 

 

  
Feb 28, 2019 Page 3 of 13  

 

Environmental Assessment Category 

B-Partial Assessment 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate     
 
 

 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
B. Introduction and Context 

 
Country Context 

Benin is a coastal State in West Africa located in the tropical zone with a total surface area of 114,763 km². It is bordered 

by Togo (West), Nigeria (East), Burkina Faso and Niger (North), and the Atlantic Ocean (South).  In a politically stable 

and democratic regime for nearly 30 years, the Government of Benin (GoB) maintains a decentralized territorial 

administration comprising 77 municipalities (elected) in 12 departments. The population was estimated at 11.2 million in 

2017, of which 51 percent are women, 52 percent are 18 or younger, and 55 percent live in rural areas (national census, 

RGPH4). If the current growth rate of 3.2 percent per year is maintained, the population could reach 17.6 million by 2030. 

With a per capita income of just US$820 in 2016, Benin is among the poorest countries in the World.  The share of the 

population living below the national poverty rate was estimated at 40% in 2015, of which 63.5% earn less than a dollar/day 

(EMICov 2015).  Poverty rate is higher in rural areas (42%) than in urban areas (32%).  In 2014, youth (15-29 years old) 

unemployment rate was at 14.3% and the percentage of youth in the informal sector was 89.6% (ETVA 2014).  The 

country ranks 163 out of 189 on the UNDP Human Development Index (HDI) 2017. 

In addition to transit trade with neighboring countries, especially Nigeria, Benin’s economy relies heavily on agriculture 

(cotton, in particular). The agriculture sector is the second largest contributor to GDP (25 percent) and employs around 

70 percent of the labor force (15-64 years old)1. Benin's agriculture—primarily extensive, slash-and-burn—is one of the 

major drivers of deforestation and forest degradation.  

 
 

Sectoral and Institutional Context 

The Benin's forest areas are divided into two categories: 

                                                           
1 The informal economy represents 65 percent of GDP, engaging 90 percent of the labor force and more than 95 percent of the female labor 
force. Services and agriculture, accounting for approximately 50 and 25 percent respectively of total value added, are both dominated by the 

informal sector. The large share of services reflects Benin’s role as a transit and trade hub for landlocked countries in the north, primarily Niger 

and Burkina Faso, but also the large amount of informal re-export trade and commerce with Nigeria, which amounts to some 20 percent of GDP 

and 25 percent of government revenue. (Source: Benin CPF 2018) 

 

 

a) the Classified Estate Domain (CED), a national heritage belonging to the Central State, is managed 
by the Directorate General of Water, Forests and Hunting (DGEFC: Direction Générale des Eaux 

et Forêts et Chasse), the National Office for Wood (ONAB: Office National du Bois), and the 

National Center for the Management of Wildlife (CENAGREF), all three entities being under the 

authority of the Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development (MCVDD: Ministère du 

Cadre de Vie et du Développement Durable). The CED includes: (i) 46 Gazetted Forests (GFs), of 

which 39 (as well as seven Reforestation Perimeters) are managed by the DGEFC and seven 

managed by ONAB mainly for timber production for export; and (ii) two National Parks (Pendjari 

and W) with three hunting zones managed by the CENAGREF. 

b) the Protected Estate Domain (PED), which comprises the rest of the forest areas in the Rural 
Domain. The PED forests, authorized for multiple usages, including agriculture, are under the 

territorial jurisdiction of the municipalities and managed by the mayors under the supervision of the 

DGEFC. 

 

The forest policy (law 93-009 of July 1993) that governs the forest regime in the Republic of Benin was 

revised in 2012.  It is currently being updated with funding from the European Union to incorporate new 

guidelines for sustainable forests management and is expected to be submitted to Parliament approval by 

mid-2019. A number of policy and strategy documents have also been produced to improve the 

management of forest and natural resources, including the: (i) National Program for Sustainable 

Management of Natural Resources (2008); (ii) National Strategy for Rural Wood Markets (2008); (iii) 

National Strategy and Action Plan on Biodiversity 2011-2020 (2011) and (iv) National Strategy for Climate 

Change mitigation and adaption (2018). In addition, Benin has also ratified several international 

conventions relating to the management and conservation of forest resources. 

Despite this institutional context for management of the sector, the decrease of Beninese forest cover, 

particularly over the decade from 2007-2016, is concerning:  Benin’s national forest cover, estimated at 

8.12 million hectares in 2007 (70.4% of the national territory), fell to 7.9 million hectares in 2016 (68.5% 

of the territory), a loss of over 215,000 ha. If the current deforestation rate is maintained, the per capita 

forest area, which more than halved from 1.63 ha in 1980 to 0.87 ha in 1995, will fall even further, to 0.29 

ha by 2025 (MEHU/DGFRN 2012).  

The root cause of deforestation and forest degradation in Benin is the weak capacity of the Forest 

Administration to ensure management operations in Gazetted Forests. The Administration has personnel in 

the field who, although technically competent, lack adequate operational means to monitor the GFs. This 

presence in the field is limited by serious shortcomings in physical assets, most glaringly in forest rangers 

living quarters, which are in poor condition (lacking in access to water, electricity, means of 

communication). With surveillance being carried out sporadically and in half-measure, Gazetted Forests 

have become the theater of: (i) expansion of clandestine farms, which rely on extensive slash-and-burn 

agriculture; (ii) transhumance or the settling of herds in GFs; (iii) unregulated removals of fuelwood; and 

(iv) establishment of human settlements in GFs. 

The indirect causes of deforestation include increasing demographic pressure and climate change, the latter 

of which is slowing down the forest cover regeneration process and reducing biomass in the GFs through 

faster drying up and silting of streams, more frequent flooding, and increased soil erosion. 

 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
Development Objective(s) (From PAD)  


To improve the integrated management of targeted gazette forests, to increase access of the main consumption cities 
to fuelwood produced sustainably, and to strengthen selected NTFP value chains for forest-dependent communities. 
 

Key Results 

PDO Level Indicators 
(i) Forest areas under sustainable management (ha); 
(ii) Sequestration of CO2 in target areas (in metric tons/CO2 eq.);  
(iii) Wood energy plantations established for supply to the three major consumption hubs (ha); 
(iv) Communities adjacent to targeted GFs with increased access to income sources through NTFP 

value chains (number). 

(v) Direct beneficiaries (of which women); 
(vi) Satisfaction of beneficiaries (level of engagement, by gender and age per target area). 

 
 
D. Project Description  

The project will consist of four components: 
1) Support to Forests Governance; 
2) Integretaed Management of Gazetted Forests; 
3) Development of Selected Non-Timber Forests Products Value Chains; 
4) Project Management. 
 
E. Implementation 

 
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 

An Integrated Projects Management Unit (IPMU) will be responsible for the implementation of all WB-

financed environment, forestry and NRM projects, under the responsibility of the Ministry of Environment, 

and Sustainable Development, including West Africa Coast Areas (WACA), the GFM project and the 

upcoming Green Climate Fund (GCF) project.   

The current WACA PIU will be upgraded to an IPMU.  It will be composed of the following shared units 

by all projects under its responsibility: (i) Financial Management, (ii) Procurement, (iii) Safeguards, (iv) 

Monitoring & Evaluation, (v) Communication and (vi) administrative support, as well as a shared Steering 

Committee.  The shared Steering Committed will be in place before project effectiveness. These units will 

be strengthened as needed with fiduciary, safeguards, M&E and Communication staff to support the GFM 

project implementation.   

Each project under the IPMU will have a dedicated project coordinator and a Technical Assistant depending 

on the project workload. For the GFMP, the dedicated coordinator will be supported by an international 

top-notch forestry specialist. Both will be recruited competitively before project effectiveness.  

The Director General of DGEFC in his role as National Coordinator of the Government Forestry Program, 

will be the Director of the GFMP to mainly ensure synergies with that Program. The decentralized 

Technical Forests Management Units (CTAF) in the field will ensure technical execution of project 

activities.  The CTAF will report to the GFM project coordinator, who will in turn report to the General 

Director of DGEFC.  The headcount of CTAF employees has been increased by the Government to include 

personnel fully dedicated to project implementation, especially for timely implementation of production 

forests activities. 


F. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 

The project will be nationwide. 

 
 
G. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 
 

Abdoulaye Gadiere, Environmental Specialist 
Gertrude Marie Mathilda Coulibaly Zombre, Social Specialist 

 
 
 

SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The project will finance works for the physical 
demarcation of conservation areas, the restoration 
of selected urban GFs in major cities as urban parks. 
The operation under preparation will also support 
the development of timber production, fuelwood 
production as well as the Income Generating 
Activities(IGA)such as animal husbandry, vegetable 
gardening and Non Timber Forest Products(NTFP) as 
well. Such activities are most of the time, associated 
with potential adverse impacts on environment even 
though these impacts are considered as being 
moderate. However, the locations of specific 
investments will not be known with certainty prior 
to board approval. Consequently, an Environmental 
and Social Management Framework (ESMF) was 
developed ,reviewed, consulted upon and disclosed 
both in Benin and on the Bank’s website on March 
12, 2019. 

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No This policy is not triggered under this project. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

Activities related to the physical demarcation of 
conservation areas, the restoration of selected 
urban GFs in major cities as urban parks, the 
development of timber production, fuelwood 
production as well as the Income Generating 
Activities could impact negatively Natural Habitats if 



 

The World Bank  
Benin: Gazetted Forests Management Project (P167678) 

 

 

  
Feb 28, 2019 Page 7 of 13  

 

not well managed. The ESMF developed in line with 
OP4.01, includes a chapter related to Natural 
habitats  proper management during physical works. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes 

Some activities such as the agro-forestry, the 
physical demarcation of conservation areas, could 
also impact forests. In addition, the objective of the 
Government objective to increase the volume of 
timber produced annually from the current 65,000 
to 250 000 m3 through large-scale plantations in 
selected GFs (Alibori Supérieur, Ouémé Superieur, 
Dogo and Lama) in order to increase the sector 
contribution to the economy could lead to some 
forests overexploitation. A specific section focused 
on forest resources protection was developed and 
included in the ESMF. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The project will support adoption of agricultural 
intensification and agroforestry methods through a 
stocktaking of existing successful national and 
regionally employed agroforestry methods and 
agricultural intensification techniques in order to 
recommend those practices most suitable to the 
project target zones. For that reason the O4.09 is 
triggered. Consequently, a Pest Management 
Plan(PMP) was developed and included in the ESMF 
to guide any potential use of chemical products as 
part of the project. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 

The project intends to support the physical 
demarcation of conservation areas as well as IGA 
such  vegetable gardening. Such activities could 
induce excavations with potential cultural properties 
discoveries. In order to anticipate and to be sure 
that all the precautions were taken to protect and 
safeguard physical cultural resources, the ESMF 
includes a section on how to handle in a proper way 
chance finds of cultural assets within the project 
area. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 
There are no Indigenous People as per the definition 
of the policy in the project areas. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

No involuntary resettlement is anticipated. 
However, the demarcation of conservation areas 
could lead to the limitation of access of resources. 
To anticipate any issue related to these aspects,  the 
project has prepared a Process Framework. Once 
prepared, that document was reviewed, consulted 



 

The World Bank  
Benin: Gazetted Forests Management Project (P167678) 

 

 

  
Feb 28, 2019 Page 8 of 13  

 

upon and disclosed in Benin and on the Bank's 
website on March 13, 2019. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No The project will not finance dams nor rely on dams. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
The project is not expected to affect international 
waterways. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No The project will not be located in a Disputed Area. 

 
 

KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Overall, the Benin-gazetted forests management project aims at safeguarding gazetted Forests as well as restoring 
degraded areas. Based on that, it will induce essentially positive impacts. However, some activities such as the physical 
demarcation of conservation areas, the restoration of selected urban GFs in major cities as urban parks, the 
development of timber production, the fuelwood production as well as the Income Generating Activities(IGA)such as 
animal husbandry, vegetable gardening and Non Timber Forest Products(NTFP) might produce potential adverse 
impacts. However,such adverse impacts are expected to be moderate, site specific and manageable at an acceptable 
level. That is why the project is rated as a category B. 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
The Benin-gazetted forests management project aims to protect the forests by limiting significantly their degradation. 
This measure could involve  a reduction of the agricultural productions' yield by stopping the itinerant agriculture. The 
impossibility to expand henceforth farming areas in conjunction with demographic explosion could exacerbate land 
disputes.  
However, the project will support adoption of agricultural intensification and agroforestry methods through a 
stocktaking of existing successful national and regionally employed agroforestry methods and agricultural 
intensification techniques in order to recommend those practices most suitable to the project target zones.  
 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. 
N/A 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower 
capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
As the exact geographic locations of project specific interventions are not yet determined with certainty, the Borrower 
has developed two environmental and social safeguards instruments, namely an Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) including a Pest Management Plan,  in compliance with the triggering of  OP/BP 4.01 
(Environmental Assessment) and OP 4.09 (Pest Management)  and a Process Framework(PF) as per OP/BP 4.12 
(Involuntary Resettlement) triggering. 
Further to that, the ESMF includes two chapters focusing on Natural Habitats and Forests safeguarding. Both chapters 
make the project fully in compliance with the OP4.04 and OP4.36. Additionally, a section related to a procedure of 


 

“chance find” was also included in the ESMF in line with the triggering of the OP4.11. 
The ESMF lays out procedures for screening and mitigating impacts from construction and operation of the irrigation 
schemes, and includes the following: (a) checklists of potential environmental and social impacts and their sources; (b) 
procedures for participatory screening of proposed sites and activities and the environmental and social 
considerations; (c) procedures for assessing potential environmental and social impacts of the planned project 
activities; (d) institutional arrangements for mitigating, preventing, and managing the identified impacts; (e) typical 
environmental management planning process for addressing negative externalities in the course of project 
implementation; (f) a system for monitoring the implementation of mitigation measures; and (g) recommended 
capacity building measures for environmental planning and monitoring of project activities.  
 
The Pest management’s section deals with safeguard measures to be taken in the case of the use of pesticide to fight 
against agriculture predators. However, organic fertilizers and biological technics are supplies recommended to be use 
first. Moreover, that section sets up guidance and guidelines with the aim of protecting population health and 
environment integrity in promoting best practices. 
 
Specific ESIAs will be prepared for relevant activities before project implementation along with Environmental and 
Social Management Plans (ESMPs). The ESIAs will provide mitigation measures for all the potential impacts as a result 
of the triggering of the above-mentioned safeguard policies. 
The Process Framework will guide new modalities of gazetted forest as well as restored areas access and use of their 
resources. 
Responsibility and oversight of the Project’s overall compliance with national legislation and Bank safeguard policies 
will rest with the environmental and social specialists in the PIU, as the main persons in charge of project 
implementation and monitoring of safeguard aspects. They will be working in close collaboration with the national 
entity responsible for ensuring the compliance of the project’s activities with the national legislation namely 
ABE(Beninese Environment Agency). That government’s body will conduct periodic monitoring of project’s compliance 
with proposed mitigation. It also receive guidance and technical support from bank’s environmental and social 
safeguard specialist during implementation support missions or through sessions of training. 
 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, 
with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The populations who will be impacted by the project activities are mainly the rural communities. They are the forest 
owners, the farmers, the hunters, the coalmen and forest loggers. During the  project preparation, these various socio-
professional layers have been consulted. In addition, these consultations have concerned the Civil Society 
Organizations (CSO) such as  the NGOs opening in the environmental management and the natural resources fields , 
producers organizations, associations, private operators, deputies, etc. These meetings are held in the form of 
workshops, of meetings, meetings of work.  
After the preparation of safeguard instruments, a validation workshop with the participation of the ABE  and all the 
above-mentioned stakeholders was held on February,2019. At this occasion, comments and suggestions from 
participants were taken in both documents. 
 
 

B. Disclosure Requirements  

 
OPS_EA_DISCLOSURE_TABLE Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other 

Date of receipt by the Bank Date of submission for disclosure 
For category A projects, date of 
distributing the Executive Summary of 
the EA to the Executive Directors 

20-Feb-2019 08-Mar-2019  

   

"In country" Disclosure   
 

  
OPS_RA_D ISCL OSURE_T ABLE  

 

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process 

   

Date of receipt by the Bank Date of submission for disclosure  

20-Feb-2019 08-Mar-2019  

   

"In country" Disclosure   
   Benin 
  12-Mar-2019 

Comments 
 

     
OPS_ PM_D ISCL OSURE_TA BLE  

 

Pest Management Plan 
 
Was the document disclosed prior to 
appraisal? Date of receipt by the Bank Date of submission for disclosure 

Yes 20-Feb-2019 08-Mar-2019 

   
"In country" Disclosure   
 

 
OPS_PM_ PC R_TAB LE  

 

If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to 
be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.  

If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why: 

N/A 

 
 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project 
decision meeting)  

 
OPS_EA_COMP_TABLE OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
  
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes   
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report? 
Yes   
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan? 
Yes   

OPS_ NH_C OM P_TA BLE  

 

OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
  
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of critical natural habitats? 
No   
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the 
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank? 
No   

OPS_ PM_C OM P_TA BLE  

 

OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
  
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes   
Is a separate PMP required? 
No   
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or PM?  Are PMP requirements included in 
project design?  If yes, does the project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
NA   

OPS_ PCR_C OM P_TA BLE  

 

OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources  
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes   
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes    

OPS_IR_ CO MP_TA BLE  

 

OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 

 
 

Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes  
 

 

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager review the plan? 

 

 

  
OPS_F O_C OM P_TA BLE  

 

OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
  
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints been carried out? 
NA   
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these constraints? 
NA   
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include provisions for certification system? 
NA      

OPS_ PDI_ CO MP_TA BLE  

 

The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 

 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for disclosure? 
Yes   
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language that are understandable 
and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs? 
Yes  

 
 
All Safeguard Policies 

 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of 
measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 

  
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost? 
Yes 

  
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures 
related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 

  
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately 
reflected in the project legal documents? 
Yes 

 
 

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Integrating Innovation for Rural Competitiveness in Honduras - COMRURAL II (P168385) 

 
 

  
Sep 14, 2018 Page 1 of 15  

     

 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 04-Nov-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSC25608 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Honduras P168385  Integrating Innovation 
for Rural 
Competitiveness in 
Honduras - COMRURAL 
II (P168385) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

LATIN AMERICA AND 
CARIBBEAN 

Jan 22, 2019 May 31, 2019 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Republic of Honduras Inversion Estrategica - 
Honduras (INVEST-H) 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The PDO is to improve access to markets and climate-smart practices and contribute to the economic inclusion of 
targeted beneficiaries in select agricultural value chains. 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 330.00 

Total Financing 330.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 150.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 150.00 

          IDA Credit 150.00 

Non-World Bank Group Financing 

     Counterpart Funding 30.00 


          LOCAL: BENEFICIARIES 30.00 

     Commercial Financing 150.00 

          Unguaranteed Commercial Financing 150.00 

   
 

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B - Partial Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
1. High rates of poverty and inequality remain a persistent development challenge in Honduras. Poverty reduction 
in Honduras over the last decades has been slow compared to regional averages for Central and Latin America. Of 
Honduras’ national population of about 9.1 million people, 70 percent live at or below the national poverty line and about 
1 in 6 of the total population lives in extreme poverty (less than US$ 1.90 per day). Honduras’ rate of economic inequality 
is among the highest in Latin America, with a Gini Index of .50. World Bank data indicate that about 54 percent of income 
in Honduras is held by the highest-earning 20 percent of the population and only 3 percent of income is held by the 
lowest-earning 20 percent.  Unemployment in 2017 was estimated at 4.5 percent, with unemployment among youth at 
8.2 percent. 
 
2. The absence of a robust economic base for generating more and better jobs remains a central challenge for 
poverty and inequality reduction in Honduras.  Average earnings per worker vary widely across and within sectors in 
Honduras, with self-employment in agriculture as the least remunerative activity of all (average monthly earnings of  
L 2,404 per person in 2016, in contrast to formal wage work at an average of L 9,300). Informal work persists across all 
sectors (agriculture, industry, services) and in both urban and rural settings, and is characterized not only by low earnings 
but also by low quality and productivity, undermining GDP growth. Inclusive approaches to rural growth will require 
promoting diversification of rural incomes through combining formal and informal work, non-farm activities, and the 
intensification of agricultural activities.  
 
3. Honduras is considered significantly vulnerable to climate and weather events, with poorer populations in 
particular having a low capacity to cope and adapt. Honduras is seen as one of the countries most affected by extreme 
weather events and has increasingly felt the impacts of climate change, El Niño, and other weather-related events that 
have affected landscapes and infrastructure (communications, housing, public health, etc.). In 1998, Hurricane Mitch 
generated economic damages estimated at around 81 percent of GDP.  In addition, the 2015 drought season affected 1.3 
million people and small-scale farmers had an average loss of agricultural production of about 80 percent. Several 
underlying factors limit capacity to cope with these impacts, including a lack of means to recuperate lost assets, limited 
livelihood options, and lack of basic support services.  
 


Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 

4. The agriculture sector continues to be a strong pillar of economic growth in Honduras.  Underpinned by 
favorable agro-ecological conditions, agriculture, forestry, and fishing together the sector grew by 10.7 percent in 2017, 
accounting for 12.9 percent of GDP (primary production only) and representing a 5-year peak in sector growth. This figure 
understates the importance of agriculture in the Honduran economy, however, as it does not reflect the many backward 
and forward linkages between primary agriculture and other sectors, both upstream and downstream. Based on 
experiences from other countries in the region, the contribution to Honduras’ GDP of its broader food and agriculture 
system would be about 1.5 times higher than that of primary agriculture alone. 
 
5. Notwithstanding strong agriculture sector performance in recent years, much more needs to be done given the 
scale of poverty and food and nutrition insecurity in rural areas. In Honduras, more than half of the poor, and two-thirds 
of the extreme poor, live in rural areas. Rural poverty is most heavily concentrated in the western and southern areas of 
the country, known as the “Dry Corridor” (Corredor Seco). The rural poor overwhelmingly rely on agriculture as their 
principal livelihood source, with an estimated 72 percent of agricultural families in Honduras engaged in semi-subsistence 
farming. This type of farming is typically characterized by low productivity and competitiveness, low revenue generation, 
and high vulnerability to shocks.  
 
6. Climate change and the increasingly frequent occurrences of extreme weather events are widely recognized as 
one of the most important risks affecting the Honduran agriculture sector. Honduras’ endowment of water, fertile soils, 
forests, and other natural capital is a central foundation for much of the country’s economic activity. However, the health 
of these resources is highly vulnerable to climate change, El Niño, and other weather-related events, as well as to 
environmental mismanagement. These vulnerabilities exacerbate rural poverty and food and nutrition insecurity.  
 
7. Investing in rural productivity, resilience, and innovation to boost export competitiveness will be a critical 
component of efforts in Honduras to reduce poverty and inequality. While the 2008 launching of the Dominican 
Republic–Central America Free Trade Agreement (DR-CAFTA) has increased access to foreign markets, it has also exposed 
rural producers to new and increasingly competitive markets. Honduras benefits from strong comparative advantages in 
the agriculture sector: proximity to major regional and international markets, and agro-ecological conditions favorable 
to diverse agricultural value chains that are capable of meeting market quality demands. 

 
8. The COMRURAL project is currently GoH’s flagship project for promoting agricultural competitiveness and 
exports in Honduras. COMRURAL, approved by the World Bank Board of Executive Directors in 2008 and extended 
through an Additional Financing in 2017, is widely recognized throughout Honduras for its success in linking smallholder 
farmers to domestic and international markets. This success has been achieved through support to commercial 
production and post-harvest value addition structured under the “productive alliances” model.  

 
9. The decade-long implementation of COMRURAL has shown that Honduras needs to work on several fronts to 
enhance its business-enabling environment and promote agribusiness development.  Regulations and financial services 
that enable and incentivize entrepreneurship in the agriculture sector have not been a subject of sufficient public-sector 
attention. The modernization of critical public services is required for governance and the agricultural business climate 
to be stronger. The National Service for Agri-food Health and Safety (SENASA: Spanish acronym) and the Sanitary 
Regulation Agency (ARSA: Spanish acronym) are also in need of modernization. The public sector in Honduras can 
significantly improve its efficiency and the returns of agriculture public expenditures, and there is a general need to 
redefine the spaces for public-private coordination and partnerships in agribusiness, potentially by drawing on the 
concept of “Maximizing Financing for Development” (MFD). 



 
10. Poor agro-logistics has also shown to be a critical barrier to improving agricultural competitiveness in Honduras.  
Lack of adequate agro-logistics, both hard (infrastructure) and soft (services), is a major bottleneck. The 2018 World Bank 
Logistics Performance Index awarded Honduras an aggregate ranking (according to 6 dimensions of logistics over the 
period 2012 to 2018) of 106 out of 167 countries, based on evaluations by its international trading partners. Honduras 
ranked particularly low, including lower than the regional averages for Latin America, in terms of customs regulations 
and timeliness. Investing in the upgrading of agro-logistics infrastructure will be critical for enabling Honduran farmers 
to diversify into higher-value, often perishable agriculture products that cannot thrive under the country’s current agro-
logistics infrastructure. 

 
11. Harnessing recent innovations in technology and data collection will be critical for improving competitiveness 
and creating new employment opportunities. Developing countries around the world are improving the competitiveness 
of their products through well-established research programs as the basis to promote the use of innovation, big data 
analysis and the Internet of Things. Honduras ranks 129 on the information and communications technology (ICT) 
Development Index 2017 (out of 176 countries worldwide). According to the International Food Policy and Research 
Institute (IFPRI), the total agricultural research spending index is US$ 8.0 million and the spending as a share of 
agricultural GDP for Honduras is 0.17 percent, the lowest in LAC. Honduras’ rapidly growing Information Technology 
Services sector may position it well for developing similar agricultural “intelligence” services and other innovative 
platforms to modernize and innovate in the agriculture sector.  

 
12. The Government of Honduras (GoH) through the 2020 Plan has defined a new development strategy to promote 
the transformation and modernization of the agro-industrial and agribusiness sectors, showing a keen appreciation 
for needs on the ground as well as strong commitment to supporting agriculture sector development. A recent GoH 
exercise identified and prioritized value chains based on the commercial potential and the country’s comparative 
advantages, as well as their impact on the generation of new jobs and income for rural families. Primary value chains 
prioritized include: livestock (beef), avocado, soy, cocoa, coffee and specialty coffee, black and red beans, cashew, 
vegetables, pitahaya, tilapia, coconut and agro-forestry initiatives, which all together have a required investment 
program estimated at US$ 1,200 million. The development of these value chains requires a business model guided by 
private public initiatives, and GoH's vision for these value chains includes the generation of up to 120,000 new full-time 
jobs. 

 
13. GoH considers the continuation of the COMRURAL approach to be one of the pillars to support implementation 
of the 2020 Plan. As requested by GoH, the proposed project – informed by valuable lessons learned during 10 years of 
COMRURAL implementation – will help to fulfill the 2020 Plan objectives by expanding the “productive alliance” model 
to agribusiness initiatives in additional regions and value chains and deepening the participation of the private financial 
sector in financing small rural producers.  
 
Relationship to CPF 
 
14. The proposed project is in line with GoH’s vision and the with all the focus areas of the World Bank Group's 
Honduras Country Partnership Framework FY16-FY20 (CPF) Report No. 98367-HN, as discussed by the Executive 
Directors on December 15, 2015. The World Bank’s strategic engagement for reducing poverty and inequality in Honduras 
are structured into the following three pillars: (i) fostering inclusion; (ii) bolstering conditions for growth; and (iii) reducing 
vulnerabilities to enhance resilience. The proposed project will contribute to all three of these focus areas by supporting 
financial inclusion, technical assistance, and market access for small rural producers, improving the enabling conditions 



for agribusiness and rural entrepreneurship, and reducing agriculture sector resilience to climate change and other 
weather-related threats. 
 
15. The proposed Project is aligned with the IDA18 overarching theme, “Towards 2030: Investing in Growth, 
Resilience and Opportunity” and with the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).  The Project will contribute to 
implementing several themes prioritized by the World Bank Group: (i) Maximizing Finance for Development, (ii) climate 
change; (iii) gender; (iv) jobs and economic transformation; and, (v) governance and institutions, which present specific 
development challenges in the case of Honduras.   

 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
The PDO is to improve access to markets and climate-smart practices and contribute to the economic inclusion of 
targeted beneficiaries in select agricultural value chains. 
 
Key Results (From PCN) 

 
The achievement of the project development objective would be measured through the following indicators: 
 

• Number of beneficiaries (farmers and agri-entrepreneurs) adopting climate-smart practices promoted by the 
project, disaggregated by gender, youth, Indigenous, Afro-descendants (“climate-smart” indicator) 

• New jobs created under subprojects financed by the project (“economic inclusion” indicator) 

• Percentage increase in the value of gross sales of agricultural enterprises based on implementation of the 
business plans approved in the first 3.5 years of project implementation (“access to markets” and “economic 
inclusion” indicator) 

• Percentage of rural producer organizations (RPOs) working under a productive alliance approach 24 months 
after first disbursement (“sustainability” and “access to markets” indicator) 

 
D. Concept Description 

 
A. Concept 
 
Description 

 
16. The proposed project is an Investment Project Financing (IPF), comprising an IDA credit of US$ 150 million that 
is expected to leverage an expected additional US$ 150 million in private commercial finance and US$ 30 million in 
Rural Producer Organization (RPO) contributions. The proposed IPF will be implemented over an 8-year period and 
modeled on the well-established success of COMRURAL. The total project cost is estimated to be US$ 330 million. 

17. The proposed project aims to improve access to markets and climate-smart practices and contribute to the 
economic inclusion of targeted beneficiaries in select agricultural value chains. Innovation, defined as approaches that 
are new and/or different for project beneficiaries, will play an important role in achieving this objective in the form inter 
alia of practices, technologies, and systems. Moving beyond a focus on specific value chain nodes or aspects, the project 
will promote competitive improvements along the full spectrum of backward and forward value chain linkages.  

 
Beneficiaries 
 


18. The proposed project will benefit farmers and agri-entrepreneurs in the Honduran agriculture sector directly 
and indirectly. The direct beneficiaries will be: (i) members of the agricultural or agribusiness enterprises (formal groups, 
associations, or cooperatives of small/medium size producers and agri-entrepreneurs) participating in subprojects (about 
100,000 farmers and their families); and (ii) other agricultural enterprises (either other groups/cooperatives or private 
individual firms) participating as partners/allies in the proposed subprojects (as agro-processors, aggregators, 
wholesalers, traders, etc.) or providing essential services for their successful operation (e.g. the rental of agricultural or 
processing specialized equipment etc.) and receiving matching grant funds. The project will also have secondary 
beneficiaries: participating public sector agencies and their staff (the capacities of which will be strengthened and 
modernized by the project) and participating private commercial financiers (who will gain capacity through the project 
for engaging with the agriculture sector). The proposed project will also have indirect benefits for a much broader range 
of stakeholders in the agriculture sector through enhancing the overall agriculture sector business environment and 
through strengthening and modernizing the public entities that provide services to those engaged in the agriculture 
sector (nearly one million Hondurans). 

 
19. The project will be national in scope and will target select GoH-prioritized value chains. The institutional 
strengthening and business climate enhancing activities (as in Component 1) will have a national coverage. For 
Component 2, project interventions will be identified through a geospatial approach to prioritizing value chains and 
agribusiness initiatives by region. 

 

20. The PDO will be achieved through the following Components: 
 

21. Component 1: Support to the Modernization of Honduras’ Agribusiness Environment The purpose of this 
Component will be to contribute to the modernization and strengthening of select public sector services and institutional 
capacity to enable and promote competitiveness in the agriculture sector. This Component will finance works, goods, 
technical assistance, consulting and non-consulting services, and operational costs to support: (i) institutional 
modernization of the Secretariat of Agriculture and Livestock (SAG: Spanish acronym), National Service for Agri-food 
Health and Safety (SENASA: Spanish acronym), and Agency of Sanitary Regulation (ARSA: Spanish acronym) for the 
improved provision of public services and governance structures in the agricultural sector; (ii) operation of the National 
Agricultural Council and its technical unit, including for the provision and adoption of ICT and facilitate uptake of other 
innovative solutions for market intelligence, agro-climate systems, agro-finance, and agro-logistics to promote a better-
informed decision-making process for effective policy dialogue; and (iii) increasing the quantity and quality of the 
agricultural man-/woman-power required for enabling the agribusiness environment in project areas by supporting the 
modernization of agricultural technical training facilities, e-learning training programs, innovation labs and incubation 
centers, among others.  
 
22. Component 2: Support to enhance the competitiveness of agribusiness initiatives. The purpose of this 
Component is to support competitive agribusiness initiatives (“subprojects”) in prioritized agricultural value chains. This 
would be achieved through improving and expanding the productive alliances model, increasing complementarity 
between public and private investments, as well as expanding the participation of private commercial banks and micro 
finance institutions in financing small rural producers. Specifically, this Component would finance: (i) works, goods, 
technical assistance, and services for the selection, preparation, and implementation of selected subprojects by 
participating partners; (ii) incentives for the adoption of innovative agribusiness practices and technologies to improve 
productivity, market access, and climate resilience, and (iii) complementary investments in small-scale agro-logistics 
services and infrastructure. These subprojects will contribute to improved management of water resources in project 
activities, particularly in the Dry Corridor, to ensure the viability and sustainability of the agribusinesses that they support. 
A minimum threshold for women and youth participation will be determined, and separate procedures to promote the 



 
The World Bank  
Integrating Innovation for Rural Competitiveness in Honduras - COMRURAL II (P168385) 

 
 

  
Sep 14, 2018 Page 8 of 15  

     

inclusion of Indigenous and Afro-descendant communities as beneficiaries in more favorable conditions, and adapted to 
their sociocultural reality, will be included. In addition, the proposed project will target a minimum number of small 
farmers with sufficient potential to exit PROSASUR (which focuses on the extreme poor in the Dry Corridor) as well as 
bring in poor farmers beneficiaries from the social protection program mainly known as Vida Mejor. 
 
23. Component 3: Project management support.  This Component will finance the overall project management, 
coordination, and implementation. 

 

24. Component 4: Contingency Emergency Response (CER). This Component will provide immediate response to 
eligible emergencies. As such, in the event of such an eligible emergency (as defined in the Contingency Emergency 
Response (CER) Operational Manual prepared and adopted by the GoH), this Component would finance emergency 
activities and expenditures through the reallocation of funds from the Project. 

 
 
 
    

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
The project will be national in scope focusing on rural areas of Honduras. Priority agricultural products have been 

identified as coffee, cattle, cacao, avocado, cashew, leaf vegetables, fruit and non-traditional products, among others. 
The specific locations of the specific subprojects to be financed will not be known during the preparation of the project, 
but it is highly likely that indigenous peoples and afro-descendant communities may be present in the area of influence of 
the project, particularly in areas such as La Esperanza and Copan. There is a significant incidence of crime and violence in 
the country. This project will include private sector funds contributing to the co-financed resources for the project. In that 
regard, the environmental and social requirements will apply to all the funds administered under the COMRURAL II. 
 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
The main agency involved in the implementation of the project, INVEST-H, has experience implementing safeguards 

policies and World Bank procedures because of their implementation of the COMRURAL I and its additional financing 
project since 2007 (P101209). COMRURAL I has a tracking system for the subprojects, and beneficiary organizations are 
required to have environmental management plans. The environmental and social management capacity of INVEST-H, 
however, will be assessed during project preparation, and it is expected that the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) will be 
improved based on the results of the due diligence, strengthening their procedures and frameworks for monitoring 
environmental and social sustainability to enhance effective implementation and monitoring of the safeguards 
instruments that will be developed. 
 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 
Andrew Francis Drumm, Environmental Specialist 
Rodolfo Tello Abanto, Social Specialist 

 
D. Policies that might apply 


 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The aim of the project is to support the development 
of increased economic benefits for small farmers in 
particular, through the creation of strategic alliances 
with technical service providers, financial institutions 
and markets, and to increase agricultural productivity 
through capacity building and value chain integration. 
Component 1 activities are expected to mostly finance 
the rehabilitation of existing infrastructure and the 
acquisition of equipment for activities like the 
modernization public agricultural schools and public 
agricultural universities. Component 2 will fund 
agribusiness initiatives across the country, such as 
water harvesting and water storage, construction of 
small-scale irrigation and drainage schemes, on-farm 
irrigation technologies, low-cost pumping systems 
(including solar), the acquisition of agricultural 
machinery and vehicles the construction of modules to 
store agricultural products and the maintenance of 
vehicles, mounting structures, etc. The infrastructure 
to be funded is expected to be small-scale only. The 
overall impact of the project is expected to be positive 
and the foreseen activities are not expected to 
generate significant risk or irreversible adverse 
impacts. As such, based on the available information 
this project has been classified as Category B. 
 
Potential adverse environmental impacts include 
degradation of natural habitat, including forests, 
streams and rivers and health and safety of farmers 
through pesticide mismanagement. The main social 
impacts and risks of the project associated with OP 
4.01 are related to community health and safety, 
particularly in relation to health risks for local 
populations in areas surrounding the agricultural 
projects (including health impacts associated with the 
use of pesticides), as well as labor conditions, 
including those related to the working conditions of 
agricultural employees, including those in the supply 
chains, and the possibility of situations involving child 
and/or forced labor, migrant workers, and potential 
gender exclusion. 
 
To manage the impacts and risks of the project, the 
Borrower will prepare, prior to Appraisal, a Social 



Assessment (SA), with a strategic focus on the 
agricultural sector, with an emphasis on the issues 
mentioned in the previous paragraph, and the 
identification of vulnerable and disadvantaged 
populations, with a gender, ethnic, and generationally 
sensitive approach. The SA will include potential risks 
related to threats to human security through the 
escalation of personal, communal or interstate 
conflict, crime or violence. The SA will build upon the 
SA prepared for the COMRURAL I project in 2007 
(P101209) and for its additional financing (2016). The 
SA will also identify and analyze the main social risks 
identified in the COMRURAL I project and its social 
management measures, incorporating the lessons 
learned in that operation. Agribusiness subproject 
allocation will be demand-driven and that subprojects 
will be selected during implementation. Since the 
specific locations and impacts of the subprojects 
cannot be clearly defined during project preparation, 
the Borrower will prepare an Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF), in consultation with 
stakeholders, to identify, manage and mitigate 
potential adverse impacts during implementation, and 
guide the preparation of specific EAs, SAs, and ESMPs 
for each of the subprojects to be defined during 
project execution. The ESMF will guide the 
strengthening of elements like a Grievance Redress 
Mechanism, gender strategy, labor influx, and the 
system to track the environmental and social aspects 
in the subprojects. The ESMF will include guidelines 
for the development of labor management procedures 
(to prevent forced and child labor) and community 
health and safety plans for the subprojects. The ESMF 
will also include a screening mechanism to assess the 
environmental and social impacts of the subprojects, 
and will exclude from project funding subprojects 
likely to cause irreversible or significant environmental 
or social impacts (Category A), excluding activities that 
would impact protected areas, key biodiversity areas, 
and other terrestrial and aquatic natural habitats. 
High-risk agribusiness activities, such as palm oil 
plantations, will be also excluded from the program. 
The ESMF will also incorporate criteria for the use of 
water resources, taking the analysis of watersheds in 
the analysis. The ESMF will also include a table of 
mitigation activities, implementation arrangements, 

     

capacity building plan, and a monitoring and 
evaluation framework as well. The ESMF will also 
include a specific section describing the requirements 
for preparing the safeguard aspects of the CERC 
(Component 4), describing the potential emergencies 
and the types of activities likely to be financed and 
providing a preliminary identification of potential risks 
and mitigation measures associated with them, taking 
into account the Bank Guidance on Contingent 
Emergency Response Components. The ESMF will 
include the WBG EHS General Guidelines, and the 
specific Guidelines on Annual Crop Production 
 
The project will also promote the participation of the 
local communities and other relevant stakeholders, 
preparing and implementing a Stakeholder 
Engagement Plan (SEP), to guide the stakeholder 
engagement process throughout preparation and 
implementation, strengthening the existing 
Participation Plan. The SEP will build upon the Social 
Participation Plan prepared for COMRURAL I in 2007. 
The ESMF and SEP will be disclosed and consulted 
prior to appraisal. The disclosure arrangements will 
include virtual disclosure and availability of physical 
copies of such instruments in accessible locations. 

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No 
The project will not finance activities that are 
implemented by a private entity. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

Project activities will not involve significant loss or 
degradation of natural habitats. In fact, prioritization 
of investments in organic production will enhance 
positive impacts on aquatic habitats, particularly in 
areas that currently have issues with pesticide and 
fertilizer runoff. 
 
Any investment funded under the project will be 
screened for its potential to cause negative impacts to 
natural habitats under the ESMF procedures, including 
critical natural habitats. Any activity likely to cause 
irreversible or significant damages to habitats will be 
excluded from project funding.  

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes 

The ESMF will guide assessment of potential impacts 
of the planned productive investments upon forests. It 
will include a negative list of activities/impacts that 
could lead to degradation or conversion of forests to 
exclude them from financing. In general, the project 



promotes use of agroforestry and silvo-pastoral 
practices on already cleared land. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The project finances agricultural activities expected to 
involve use of different types, quantities and 
management styles of agrochemicals or natural 
products/measures for pest management. The project 
will emphasize Integrated Pest/Crop Management 
through technical assistance. The ESMF will provide 
the necessary initial guidance for related screening 
and good practices. Procurement will screen any 
proposed purchases of agrochemicals to secure 
exclusion of red or yellow label chemicals and those 
prohibited by national regulations. During 
implementation, proposed business plans will be 
assessed in detail and managed based on good IPM 
practices. A Pest Management Plan (PMP) will outline 
the various elements of and actions needed to be 
taken to adequately address concerns during project 
implementation. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 

Project activities are not expected to involve any 
major civil works. No major movement of earth or 
excavation is anticipated, nor is it expected that 
natural features and landscapes with some level of 
cultural significance might be adversely impacted by 
the project. As such, it is unlikely that known physical 
cultural resources will be impacted. Nevertheless, as a 
precautionary measure, chance finds provisions will be 
included in the ESMF. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 Yes 

Given the presence of Indigenous Peoples such as 
Lenca, Maya- Chortis, Tolupan, Misquito, Pech, 
Tawakas o Sumos located in specific areas of the 
country, as well as afro-descendant communities, and 
considering that agribusiness subprojects will be 
demand-driven and will be selected during 
implementation, an Indigenous Peoples and Afro-
descendants Planning Framework (IPAPF), which will 
be prepared and disclosed as a standalone document, 
will define the guidelines for the development of 
separate procedures to promote the inclusion of 
indigenous communities as beneficiaries of the project 
in more favorable conditions, adapted to their 
sociocultural reality and with provisions to reduce the 
potential impoverishment risks for the indigenous and 
afro-descendant beneficiaries. The IPAPF will build 
upon the Indigenous Peoples Development Plan 
prepared in 2007 for the COMRURAL I project 




(P101209) and for its additional financing prepared in 
2016. The SA to be prepared will include OP 4.10 
requirements specific for IPs and will to inform project 
design and preparation of the IPAPF. The IPAPF will 
define the criteria and procedures for the preparation 
of specific Indigenous Peoples and Afro-descendent 
Plans (IPAP), through open, fair and culturally 
appropriate processes, including free, prior and 
informed consultation processes leading to broad 
community support for the sub-projects. The IPAPs 
will assess the potential impacts to Indigenous Peoples 
and define the necessary mitigation measures, as well 
as provide information on practical ways in which the 
Indigenous Peoples and Afro-descendants can become 
project beneficiaries, and to ensure that they do so in 
a culturally appropriate manner. 
 
Gender considerations will also be addressed so that 
indigenous women and men are able to benefit from 
the project. The IPAPF and IPAPs will also identify 
culturally-specific mechanisms that can be adopted to 
address any grievances that may arise through project 
implementation, as part of the project’s Grievance 
Redress Mechanism. The IPAPF will be prepared, 
disclosed and consulted with Indigenous Peoples 
Organizations at the national and regional levels prior 
to appraisal. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

Project activities are not likely to involve involuntary 
resettlement. Subproject allocation will be demand-
driven and that subprojects will be selected during 
implementation. Since project locations are not know 
yet, the project will include a Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF) to guide the preparation of specific 
Resettlement Action Plans (RAP) or Abbreviated 
Resettlement Plans (ARAP) to address the cases of 
involuntary resettlement and land acquisition if they 
are identified during project execution. The RPF will be 
disclosed and consulted prior to appraisal as a 
standalone document, along with the ESMF 
consultation process. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 
Project activities will not involve dams and project 
activities will not rely on the performance of any dam. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

TBD 

The locations of Project activities is not yet known so it 
cannot yet be determined if activities will  take place 
in 
international waterways. 


     

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
Project activities will not be located or take place in 
disputed areas. If an area were to be in dispute, it 
would not be eligible for financing under the project. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Jan 15, 2019 
 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Some environmental and social safeguards related studies and management instruments will be prepared during the 

project preparation process (October 2018 - January 2019), while others will be prepared after project approval. The 
safeguards instruments to be prepared alongside the project, and disclosed and consulted before the project’s appraisal 
process has concluded, are the following ones: SA, ESMF, SEP, IPAPF, and RPF. The safeguard instruments to be prepared 
after project appraisal or approval, when the subprojects have been preliminarily defined but before finalizing their 
approval process, are the following ones: SAs and ESMPs for each of the specific subprojects, which will provide the 
necessary information to determine if additional social management instruments, such as PMPs, IPAPs, RAPs or ARAPs, 
will need to be prepared. 
 
 

























































World Bank Document


PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
CONCEPT STAGE

Report No.: PIDC13820

Project Name Ecuador - Sustainable Family Farming Modernization Project (P151963)
Region LATIN AMERICA AND CARIBBEAN
Country Ecuador
Sector(s) General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (56%), Irrigation and 

drainage (37%), Agricultural extension and research (4%), Agr o-industry, 
marketing, and trade (3%)

Theme(s) Rural services and infrastructure (50%), Water resource management 
(20%), Rural markets (20%), Climate change (10%)

Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P151963
Borrower(s) REPUBLIC OF ECUADOR
Implementing Agency Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, Aquaculture and Fisheries
Environmental 
Category

B-Partial Assessment

Date PID Prepared/
Updated

30-Oct-2014

Date PID Approved/
Disclosed

03-Nov-2014

Estimated Date of 
Appraisal Completion

18-Feb-2015

Estimated Date of 
Board Approval

02-Jul-2015

Concept Review 
Decision

Track II - The review did authorize the preparation to continue

I. Introduction and Context
Country Context
1. During the last decade, Ecuador has seen a period of relative political stability. The 
Government of Ecuador (GoE) has invested heavily in infrastructure and social sectors in an effort 
to stimulate growth, reduce inequality and promote inclusion for a total population of slightly more 
than 15.7 million inhabitants.  
 
2. The Ecuadorian economy relies largely on the extraction and export of oil, and on the 
export of natural resource-based products and services. The agricultural sector accounted for 7.8 
percent of the GDP in 2013. With more than 60 percent of its agricultural production destined for 
export, Ecuador could benefit significantly from stimulating productivity through integrated rural 
development approaches. 
 
3. Growth combined with falling inequality has led to important gains in reducing poverty and 
promoting shared prosperity. Over the last decade (2003-13), GDP per capita growth in Ecuador 
was above regional average levels (2.7 percent vs. 2.5 percent), while progress in reducing 
inequality has exceeded regional trends. Income distribution was significantly improved, as 
expressed by the Gini coefficient, declining from 0.54 in December 2006 to 0.49 in June 2014. 
Likewise, between 2006 and 2014, income poverty at the national poverty line fell from 37.6 
percent to 24.5 percent, while extreme poverty fell from 16.9 percent to 8 percent.  
 
4. Despite the significant reduction in poverty and growth of the middle class, more than half 
of the population in Ecuador remains poor or vulnerable to falling back into poverty, particularly in  
rural areas. In 2014, 4.2 percent of the urban population lived in extreme poverty compared to the 
16 percent for the rural population. The difference was less pronounced at the moderate poverty 
line, but even in this case the rural headcount was more than twice the urban headcount (41.7 
percent versus 16.3 percent).

Sectoral and Institutional Context
5. The proposed project is fully aligned to the National Development Plan for 2013-2017, the 
National Strategy for Diversification of the Productive Matrix, the institutional objectives of 
Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, Aquaculture and Fisheries (MAGAP) and with the Irrigation 
National 2012-2027 Plan, which are: (i) to improve the lives of farmers and rural communities 
through the strategies: social inclusion of small and medium producers; (ii) to promote the 
modernization of agriculture; and (iii) to strengthen capacity of the Autonomous Decentralized 
Provincial Governments (GADPs) to assume the transferred competencies of constructing, 
operating and maintaining irrigation systems and promoting agricultural activity. 
 
6.  Ecuador has 1.1 million agricultural households with land size between 1 ha and 20 ha, 
regarded as small and medium producers, who own about 1.6 million hectares (25% of total area at 
national level). This segment of farmers is crucial for many value chains such as rice (49% of 
national production), potatoes (64%), maize (76%) and onions (80%). Nevertheless, the 
development of this segment of farmers and its capacity to contribute to the diversification of 
productive matrix at national level are limited by the size of land, the access to market, and by the 
poor access to efficient water management in agriculture. Out of the 304,000ha irrigated by small 
and medium producers, 284,000ha are still under traditional irrigation methods with very low water 
efficiency and limited water storage capacity. The proposed project aims at supporting MAGAP’s 
initiative to strengthen this category of farmers in their effort for intensification and modernization 
of agriculture. 
 
7. The 2008 Constitution of the Republic of Ecuador defined the decentralization framework 
recognizing the political, administrative, and financial autonomy of the Decentralized Provincial 
Autonomous Governments (GADPs) at their different levels (canton, province, and parish). This 
decentralization grants each province jurisdiction to plan, build, and maintain the infrastructure 
(transportation, water, and sanitation) under its competencies and to promote the development of the 
productive sector within its territory. 
 
8. Within the competences of Provincial Governments under the current Constitution are: (i) 
planning, building and maintaining the road system at provincial level; (ii) planning, constructing, 
operating and maintaining irrigation systems and; (iii) promoting agricultural activity. Therefore, 

the implementation of new development projects and the sustainable operation of existing irrigation 
projects are limited by the level of capacity for project preparation, implementation and financing 
by the Provincial Governments.

Relationship to CAS
9. The World Bank Group's Interim Strategy Note (ISN) for Ecuador approved on April 9, 
2013, identified agriculture and rural development as key priorities for the Government and the 
Bank to contribute to the country's goal for inclusive and sustainable growth. 
 
10. The proposed Project is fully consistent with the World Bank’s ISN for Ecuador for the 
period 2014-2015, which focuses on investment project financing in three strategic areas: (i) Pillar I 
-  Sustainable and Inclusive Growth; (ii) Pillar II - Access to Social Protection and Quality Services 
for All, and (iii) with the country’s Plan Nacional para el Buen Vivir, where five out of twelve key 
objectives outline the importance of enhancing the productive water access in a sustainable manner 
as key intermediate priorities to ensure quality of life and social cohesion for its farmers and rural 
communities. 
 
11. It is expected that the proposed Project will contribute to the reduction of extreme poverty, 
to the increase of shared prosperity and equality of access to opportunities in targeted provinces 
across the country by increasing agricultural revenues and resilience of Ecuador's family farming 
sector, promoting diversification and increase of agricultural production, and improving access to 
markets for smallholders and their organizations.

II. Proposed Development Objective(s)
Proposed Development Objective(s) (From PCN)
12. The project development objective is to enhance the profitability and sustainable production 
of small and medium farmers in targeted areas by improving productivity and by supporting more 
efficient and climate-smart uses for land and water. 
 
13. To reach its objective, the project will support technical assistance, capacity-building 
activities, on-farm and complementary off-farm investments geared toward a more efficient use of 
natural resources, especially water, an increased adaptation to climate change, improvement in 
productivity and market access. On-farm investments are made within the farmer's plot. Off-farm 
investments are referring to interventions on irrigation and drainage networks upstream of the intake 
of the farmer’s plot. 
 
14. Project beneficiaries. The project beneficiaries are small and medium-sized family farmers, 
including indigenous communities. Small and Medium farmers are established by MAGAP 
according agroclimatological regions:  
• Sierra: 0 - 5 ha. (small farmers) – 5 to 20 ha. (medium farmers)  
• Costa: 0-20 ha. (small farmers) - 20 to 40 ha (medium farmers)  
 
15. Project areas. While the project is national in scope, the Sierra Central and the Coastal 
regions are the main target areas for investment subprojects where climatological conditions justify 
investments in water storage and irrigation to foster diversification and intensification of agriculture.

Key Results (From PCN)
16. The key indicators at the beneficiary level would measure changes in: (i) profitability of 

agricultural activities and; (ii) climate-resilience and sustainability of the improved production 
systems.  
 
17. Intermediate outcome indicators would include: (i) Profitability (margin) by unit of land 
(hectare), by unit of water (cubic meters) and by household (family); (ii) Reduced volatility of yield 
from year to year for main crops; (iii) Hectares of areas and number of beneficiaries with new/
improved irrigation and drainage services like drip or sprinkler (core indicator); (iv) Number of 
clients who have adopted an improved agricultural technology promoted by the project (core 
indicator); (v) Number of Operational Water User Associations created and/or strengthened (core 
indicator); (vi) Sub-projects for which arrangements for community engagement in post-project 
sustainability and/or operation and maintenance are established (core indicator) and; (vii) Hectares 
of area with change in land use (increase of cropping intensity and diversification of crops).

III. Preliminary Description
Concept Description
18. The Project supports a framework program to strengthen sustainable modernization and 
intensification of agriculture systems with an emphasis on beneficiary and community participation. 
The Project will support: (i) demand-based investment subprojects; (ii) capacity-building activities 
that strengthen national and local institutions (MAGAP, GADP, mainly) and farmers’ organizations; 
(ii) climate-smart project planning; (iii) training and technical assistance to enhance productivity, 
increase value-added and improve market access; and, (iv) small investments to protect natural 
resources linked to the subprojects (see details of Project Concept in Annex 3). 
 
19. In order to maximize the positive impact and sustainability of activities, the project will 
seek to coordinate its actions with existing government programs aimed at agricultural development 
such as the MAGAP’s Hombro a Hombro Program (national extension program for family farming) 
and the agricultural component of the Plan Nacional Buen Vivir 2013-2107; as well as programs 
developed by Provincial Governments in thematic support agricultural production and marketing. 
The project should also ensure that rural credit programs and/or micro-credit (Cooperative Savings) 
will be accessible to project beneficiaries. 
 
20. The proposed Project will build on the successful model of the PIDD (see details of project 
description and main lessons learned in Annex 3). The PIDD or Proyecto de Inversiones de 
Desarrollo Productivo (P094784), which closed in June 2014, financed subprojects of 
modernization works for 55 small and medium scale collective irrigation systems, benefiting 4,685 
ha and 7,900 families. The most important lessons learned from the PIDD, taken into account in the 
proposed project’s design are the following (details in Annex 4): 
a) Combining physical investments with capacity building. The PIDD followed an integrated 
approach with rehabilitation and modernization of irrigation systems and strengthening of the 
capacity of Water Users Association and improving farmers’ irrigation and agricultural practices 
and the commercialization of agricultural produce.  
b) Frontloading technical assistance and training to the institutional stakeholders. This capacity 
building needs to be done in technical screening, design, supervision of sub-projects), and fiduciary 
aspects (procurement, in financial management and safeguards). 
c) Increasing ownership and sustainability. Irrigation component follows a demand-driven and 
participatory approach in which WUAs/farmers’ groups participate in subproject design, financing, 
execution and supervision and are fully responsible for Operation & Maintenance. This approach, 

by ensuring subproject ownership, increases subproject sustainability and effective use and will be 
used for the new operation.  
d) Thinking scalability. The project cycle developed by the PIDD, especially the effective 
participation of beneficiaries from the design to the construction, has been adopted by the Provincial 
Government of Chimborazo as a public policy to develop any investment intervention in the future.  
e) Building Partnerships. Several partnerships between different organizations and institutions 
at local, national and international level have been developed during the preparation and 
implementation of the PIDD, and will be replicated in the new operation.  
 
21. The proposed project will also be designed taking into account some lessons learned from 
other similar operations in the region such as, for example, the PSI Sierra in Peru (P104760), which 
has very similar scope, activities and target group, or the PROSAP (P106684) in Argentina, which 
can bring experie nce on the construction of the project framework and the progressive process of 
delegating responsibilities to the sub-national level (Provinces). 
 
22. The proposed project (US$60 million in IBRD financing) will be implemented over a 
period of five years and comprises four components: (1) Investments for productive sub-projects; 
(2) Capacity building for institutional stakeholders and beneficiaries’ organizations; (3) Natural 
Resources Management Enhancement and; (4) Project Management. 
 
23. Component 1: Investments for productive sub-projects (estimated amount US$ 50M.). This 
component will finance subprojects aligned with the project objective and provincial priorities 
related to the following investments: (i) individual and/or collective small water storages (ponds); 
(ii) collective and/or individual on-farm investments for modernization of irrigation techniques 
(drip, sprinkler or modern gravity techniques) and; (iii) complementary works aiming at improving 
off-farm irrigation and drainage networks.  
 
24. Subproject proposals will be reviewed against a set of objective criteria in order to be 
eligible for financing, including consistency with project objectives and scope. To ensure the 
balanced and equitable allocation of public funding, subproject preparation will include specific 
selection criteria to be applied early on in the selection and approval process, which will include: (i) 
demand expressed by the potential beneficiaries, which should have sufficient organizational 
capacity to manage sustainable infrastructure; (ii) formal prioritization by the relevant Provincial 
Government preferentially in their Provincial Irrigation Plan; (iii) compliance with the requirements 
of beneficiaries’ profile (small and medium farmers); (iv) valid water use concession granted by 
SENAGUA; (v) financial profitability presented in the project profile and validated by the Project 
Implementation Unit (PIU) of the Project; (vi) social and environmental sustainability justified in 
the project profile and validated by the PIU; (viii) compliance with investment criteria (e.g. - 
investment ceiling per beneficiary family, per hectare, per sub-project, etc.); (ix) financial 
contribution of beneficiaries to investment costs and; (x) subproject activities that may affect 
International Waterways will not be eligible. Details will be elaborated in the implementation 
manual. 
 
25. Component 1 will finance works, consulting and non-consulting services, training and 
workshops and goods and equipment. Retroactive Financing may be provided for this Component 
under BP 10.00 for a selection of subprojects. The selection will be done during appraisal stage 
within the current MAGAP’s pipeline of subprojects and will be subject to the criteria identified in 
the operation manual.  



 
26. Component 2: Capacity building for institutional stakeholders and beneficiaries’ 
organizations (estimated amount US$ 5 M.). This component will support a range of services that 
provide support for: (i) agricultural modernization and intensification to the beneficiaries and their 
organizations (Water Users Organizations and Farmers Organizations) and; (ii) institutional 
strengthening to the main institutional stakeholders (MAGAP central and regional offices, 
Provincial Governments / GADPs). 
 
27. Component 2 will finance consulting and non-consulting services, training and workshops 
and goods and equipment. Activities will include: (i) Extension services, training and Technical 
Assistance and; (ii) Institutional and organizational capacity building (see details in Annex 3). This 
training will be focused on improving and supporting the outcomes r elated with the subproject 
investments. 
 
28. Component 3: Natural Resources Management Enhancement (estimated amount US$ 1.5 
M.). This component aims at laying the foundations for conservation and sustainable management 
of watersheds and natural resources, in areas where investments on irrigation sub-projects will be 
developed. 
 
29. Component 3 will finance small investment and management subprojects of natural 
resources protection (reflorestation, protection of páramos, and conservation of watersheds) linked 
to the subprojects of Component 1. The component will adopt an integrated and participatory 
approach to watershed management intended to make rural populations more accountable and 
encourage them to manage their land and natural resources in a more sustainable manner. Thus, the 
component would contribute to: (i) protect watersheds by reducing or preventing erosion and 
sedimentation; (ii) increase the productivity and sustainability of agricultural production based on 
agroecological and agroforestry technologies; and (iii) strengthen the management of natural 
resources to improve the environment and living conditions.  
 
30. Component 3 will finance small works, consulting and non-consulting services, training and 
workshops and goods and equipment (see details in Annex 3). This component will be placed under 
the responsibility of the regional offices of MAGAP who, depending on the local capacities and the 
existence of services, will enter into agreements with the GADPs, consulting firms, local ONGs or 
community organizations for the preparation and implementation of subprojects. The procedures 
will be detailed in the operation manual. 
 
31. Component 4: Project Management (estimated amount US$ 3.5 M.). This component will 
support the functioning of the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) to be installed within the Sub-
Secretary of Irrigation and Drainage in the MAGAP in Quito and some eligible costs related to the 
Project on the regional offices of MAGAP and Provincial Governments/GADPs. The component 
will also finance Monitoring and Evaluation, impact evaluations, progress reports, and audits.  
 
32. The Project Implementation Unit (PIU) will be responsible for the overall administration of 
the Project, within the MAGAP in Quito. Component 4 will finance: consulting and non-consulting 
services, training and workshops, small works, goods and equipment and operating costs.

IV. Safeguard Policies that might apply

Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No TBD
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖

V. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 77.30 Total Bank Financing: 60.00
Financing Gap: 0.00
Financing Source Amount
 Borrower 6.00
 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 60.00
 Local Govts. (Prov., District, City) of Borrowing Country 6.15
 LOCAL  BENEFICIARIES 5.15
 Total 77.30


























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Niger Forcibly Displaced Support Project (P164563) 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 22-Feb-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSC22908 
     

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Niger P164563  Niger Refugees and 
Host Communities 
Support Project 
(P164563) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA Jun 11, 2018 Sep 12, 2018 Social, Urban, Rural and 
Resilience Global 
Practice 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministère du Plan Cabinet du Premier Ministre, 
Projet de Gestion des 
Risques de Catastrophes et 
de Développement Urbain, 
Stratégie de Développement 
et de Sécurité dans les zones 
sahélo sahariennes du Niger 
(SDS) 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The project development objective is to improve access to basic services and economic opportunities for refugees and 
host communities in select areas. 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 80.00 

Total Financing 80.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 80.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 80.00 



          IDA Credit 47.50 

          IDA Grant 32.50 

   
 

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B - Partial Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

 

Niger is one of the world’s poorest and least developed countries in the world, with a per capita income of 
US$390 in 2015 and almost half of Nigeriens living beneath the poverty line (45.7 percent in 2014). In 2015, 
Niger ranked last of 188 countries on the United Nations Human Development Index. The Nigerien economy is 
highly dependent on its agricultural sector and a few commodities (uranium, oil and gold), making it vulnerable 
to climate and price shocks. With a variable and changing climate, the country suffers from recurrent drought 
and food crises. Niger has one of the fastest population growth rates in the world (4 percent in 2015) and the 
youngest population in the world, with a dependency ratio of 113 in 2015. Niger has significant institutional 
deficits, ranking 99 of 168 countries in the 2015 Corruption Perceptions Index. 

 

Niger meets the very definition of a country at risk of fragility, conflict of violence. The country—which held 
presidential and general elections in March 2016—has managed to remain stable in a difficult regional 
environment. Some of the factors that account for this achievement include: (i) a relatively strong social 
cohesion and (ii) a political settlement in which the elites manage to solve their disputes in a regulated manner. 
However, several factors contribute to the country’s fragility. These include demographic trends combined 
with notable climate change–related events and the deterioration of natural resources in the most populated 
areas; the contestation of the political elite and state institutions; external stresses; and a lack of economic 
opportunities. Because several risk factors — such as climate-related events or the tightening of the elite 
coalition — could trigger instability and violence, Niger remains a country at risk. 

 

Niger is hosting over 280,000 people displaced by conflict: approximately 158,000 refugees, 109,000 Internally 
Displaced People (IDPs) and 16,000 Nigerien nationals who returned from Nigeria as a consequence of the 
conflict. This displacement has been caused by two regional conflicts: the crisis in Mali (accounting for 22 
percent of the total displaced) and the Boko Haram regional crisis (78 percent).  



 

Since 2011, there has been an increasing number of attacks on Niger’s territory. The country, which held 
presidential and general elections in March 2016, has managed to remain an “island of stability”, but the 
relatively strong social cohesion is fragile. Niger is part of internationally-supported military efforts against 
Boko Haram (through the Joint Multi National Force) and in Mali, but increased military spending is putting a 
severe strain on public finances. The Risk and Resilience Assessment (RRA) highlights the security and economic 
impacts of regional conflicts and forced displacement on Niger, including the crises in Libya, Mali and Nigeria 
and notes that the expansion of Boko Haram into Niger has had an adverse impact on economic activities in 
the Diffa region and also raises concerns about the weakness of the Nigerien Army (e.g. following the attack in 
Bosso, Niger had to call on Chad for military assistance). The RRA argues that each military defeat raises the 
risk of a military coup in Niger. 

 

Overall, the situation remains in flux. Despite a recent slowdown, further flows of population may be caused 
by Boko Haram until the region is fully stabilized. The authorities are eager to demonstrate the normalization 
of the situation both in the Diffa region and along the Mali-Niger border, but insecurity remains very high. On 
the one hand, there may be pressures to eventually encourage the return of forcibly displaced people in the 
Diffa area, on the other hand there seems to be a degree of acceptance that the situation along the Mali-Niger 
border may last.  

Across all forced displacement situations, the conditions for women and girls are very specific. Gender-based 
violence and survival sex are relatively prevalent. Early marriages are often the norm, including within host 
communities and economic opportunities and access to education are very limited for women and girls. Unless 
the gender dimension of the situation is effectively dealt with, progress is likely to remain elusive. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 

 

Niger has adopted a relatively progressive approach to managing refugee situations. This is also reflected in 
the solidarity demonstrated by host communities in particular in the Diffa Region. The overall legal and 
protection environment in Niger is conducive to an effective socio-economic response to the forced 
displacement crisis. Niger is a party to applicable international conventions on refugees, IDPs, and stateless 
persons, and it has domesticated some of these instruments. In particular, refugees are to be treated equally 
under the law with respect to key socio-economic rights: property ownership, security, access to the courts, 
access to basic services, and freedom of expression and movement. Efforts are underway to strengthen the 
legal framework applicable to IDPs in light of the situation in the Diffa Region. 

 

Niger is party to the 1951 United Nations Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees (1951 Convention), 
1967 United Nations Protocol Relating to the Status of Refugees (1967 Protocol) and 1969 Organization of 
African Unity Convention Governing Specific Aspects of Refugee Problems in Africa (OAU Convention), without 
any reservations. Niger has also domesticated these instruments: the government has affirmed both in national 
legislation and at representations to the CERD that refugees are to be treated equally under the law with 
respect to all rights: property ownership, security, access to the courts, access to basic services, and freedom 
of expression and movement (CERD 2013). Article 10 of the 1997 law ensures the equal treatment of refugees 
in the protection of property; freedom of movement; and access to health, education, and housing. Elsewhere, 


the Labor Code prohibits discrimination on the basis of nationality in hiring, and Décret n° 87-
076/PCMS/MI/MAE/C of June 18, 1987, permits foreigners to be contracted for employment provided that the 
contract is approved by the Ministry of Labor. 

 

Niger is also party to the African Union Convention for the Protection and Assistance of Internally Displaced 
Persons in Africa (Kampala Convention), but has yet to domesticate it. Preliminary discussions are underway 
for the domestication of the convention and authorities have indicated willingness to improve the legal 
framework on IDPs, especially in light of the situation in the Diffa Region. Finally, Niger is signatory of both 
1954 Convention on the Status of Stateless Persons (Convention on Statelessness) and 1961 Convention on the 
Reduction of Statelessness. Efforts to align domestic legislation with the provisions of both conventions are 
underway, with an ongoing review of the domestic legislation on nationality and civil status registration. 

 

Malian refugees are recognized on a prima facie basis and enjoy a favorable protection environment with 
the right to settle where they wish and to access basic social services and the formal and informal job market. 
A tripartite agreement between UNHCR and the Governments of Niger and Mali, signed in 2014 provides a 
legal framework for voluntary returns in respect of the related international standards. The parties consider 
that the conditions in parts of northern Mali are not yet conducive to returns in safety and dignity. As a result, 
voluntary repatriation is currently not promoted. Persons that wish nevertheless to return to Mali are 
counseled on the prevailing situation and sign a Voluntary Repatriation Form. They receive one-time cash 
assistance to pay for their transport (UNHCR 2016). Out-of-camp policy applied in Malian refugee-hosted areas 
with success, leading to the creation of so-called Zones d’Accueil des Réfugiés. Several institutions work closely 
with UNHCR to process status determinations for refugees, including the Comité National d’Eligibilité (CNE), 
the Comité d’Appel, the secretariat within the Direction Générale de l'État Civil et des Réfugiés, and the Comité 
de Recours Gracieux (CRG).  Regional administrations such as those in Diffa are also key partners to the national 
government and international NGOs.  The Direction Générale de l'État Civil et des Réfugiés is in charge of 
ensuring administrative protection to refugees and asylum seekers. 

 
Relationship to CPF 

 

The CPF recognizes the need to mitigating the three negative consequences of forced displacement in Niger: 
(1) the effect on the economy of increased insecurity and the subsequent outlays on security and humanitarian 
assistance; (2) increased food insecurity (exacerbating the effects of drought, environmental degradation, high 
grain prices and poor food access); and (3) increased poverty due to the loss of productive assets (land, 
agricultural tools and inputs, seeds, animals, etc) caused by forced displacement. Specifically, within the 
objective 5 of the CPF namely “Improved Social Protection System and Ability to Manage Forced Displacement” 
the CPF includes two expected outcomes to which this operation directly contributes: 5.3 Refugees who benefit 
from a vulnerability-based assistance system and 5.4. Refugees who benefit from country systems in the health 
sector The CPF also tracks the “percentage of refugees who benefit from a vulnerability-based assistance 
system” in its Result Matrix.  

 

The successful support to displaced and host population would require synergies among the proposed project 
together with (i) the Disaster Risk Management and Urban Development project, (ii) the Safety Net Project, (iii) 


the Skills Development for Growth project and (iv) the Community Action Project – Phase 3. Each of these four 
projects target chronically poor or vulnerable households living in disadvantaged and marginal areas which 
may also overlap with areas hosting refugees. 

 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The project development objective is to improve access to basic social services and economic opportunities for forcibly 
displaced and host communities in select areas. 

 
Key Results (From PCN) 

 

a. Number of direct beneficiaries out of which 

i. percentage of refugees 

ii. percentage of internally displaced persons 

iii. percentage of returnees 

iv. percentage of host population 

v. percentage of young 

vi. percentage of female 

 

b. Number of sites with access to social and economic services measured by an indicator 

i. no access 

ii. access with major constraints 

iii. access with minor constraints 

 

c. Reported increase in income/welfare/food security by beneficiaries of individual-level resilience 
activities (disaggregated by type of service, gender and target groups).  

 

d. Increased government capacity to manage refugee fluxes, as measured by capacity assessment surveys 
(Survey rating) 

 
 
D. Concept Description 

 

The project will finance activities aimed at initiating the revitalization of socio-economic economic opportunities in the 
Diffa region and at equipping refugees along the Malian border with portable skills.  

 

Activities  

The activities listed below are a comprehensive representation of the government strategy on durable solutions for 
refugees and host communities as identified in the refugee development policy letter received for the IDA18 refugee sub-
window. The list reflects the entirety of needs under the government’s strategy in the targeted regions. The evaluation 
period (between September 2017 - March 2018) will allow for further assessments and an extensive consultative process 
to identify those activities within this framework that will be directly financed through this project. The overall 
comprehensive list of activities will be developed into a comprehensive monitoring and evaluation framework to enable 



 
The World Bank  
Niger Forcibly Displaced Support Project (P164563) 

 
 

  
Jul 18, 2017 Page 7 of 12  

     

the government in leading and coordinating the overall program, inclusive of all different partner activities, in the targeted 
regions. The identification of the specific type of activities in the targeted regions will be based on a rapid Markets and 
Needs Assessment. 

 

Components 

Activities identified under the government strategy are grouped below into three main project components along the 
three resilience levels targeted for improvement: 1) community, 2) individual, and 3) local authorities.  

 

COMPONENT 1 - Community level resilience: Access to basic social services and local capacity building 

This component will aim to build resilience on the community level through investment in community infrastructure and 
services; capacity building to government authorities; and social cohesion measures.  Investments will be identified in 
consultation with communities by updating and/or preparing the Local Development Plans. Communes/communities will 
be responsible for the identification and preparation of the subproject proposals as well as the supervision of their 
implementation and operation and maintenance. Final subprojects selection and contracting will be done by the 
respective line agencies in accordance to the national planning process. 

 

This component will focus on two main types of activities: 

A. Investment in community infrastructure and services: 
1. Municipal services: Reconstructing and repairing small water supply facilities, latrines and other sanitation 

infrastructure, as well as solid waste management infrastructure and service delivery. 
2. Education: Reconstructing and repairing damaged school infrastructure such as classrooms, offices, fences, 

playground, latrines, labs, and other associated service delivery interventions. 
3. Health: Reconstructing or rehabilitating health center buildings, and other associated service delivery 

interventions in respect of staff, furniture and supplies. 
4. Economic infrastructure: Constructing or rehabilitating of rural markets, community storage facilities, rural 

roads, small bridges, culverts, and small irrigation schemes.   
5. Natural Resources: Restoring and protecting natural resources and supporting environmental management 

measures to decrease environmental impacts of protracted refugee presence. 

 

B. Community Resilience and Social Cohesion Measures: 
1. Community associations: Setting up and strengthening community associations that bring together local 

authorities (government, traditional and religious) and representatives of all different segments of the 
population in order to build and reinforce social cohesion.  

2. Small social cohesion grants: Supporting initiatives that address key drivers of the conflict and needs 
emerging in the post-conflict period such as out-of-school children and youth literacy, sports for peace 
activities, community radio programing, cultural activities that promote common identities, sexual and 
gender based violence prevention campaigns and de-stigmatization campaigns. 

3. Community-based psychosocial support: Providing targeted support to communities to address potential 
mental health risks resulting from the forced displacement experience.   

 

COMPONENT 2 - Individual level resilience: Strengthening economic opportunities and professional training 

This component will focus on two main types of activities: 

A. Transitional Support towards Stabilization and Self-Reliance by (a) increasing and improving the access to basic 
necessity kits; (b) restoring immediate access to productive assets by providing agricultural inputs and livestock 
for farming families and trading commodities for non-farmers; and (c) setting-up Cash for Work programs to 


support community assets recovery and reconstruction. The cash-for-work component activities will be closely 
linked to the priority infrastructure investments in component 1. 

B. Support to Business Development and Individual Skill Building: provision of professional education, on-the-job 
training,  “portable skills” and support of small business development opportunities for youth/women. provide a 
package of interventions that combines short-term trainings (including basic financial literacy) and accompanying 
mentoring/technical assistance, access to small matching grant, and citizen engagement mechanisms. The focus 
of skills trainings might differ between locations based on an assessment of the market and needs in the region.  

 

COMPONENT 3 - Capacity building of local authorities 

This component will focus on two main types of activities: 

A. Local planning and decentralized service delivery: Providing capacity building interventions for communes and 
local implementing institutions to ensure adequate capacities in the areas of community‐driven planning process, 
local development management, service delivery capacities enhancement, mainstreaming of project 
interventions with the government’s development planning and budgeting process, as well as coordination of all 
development stakeholders on the local level and community level. 

B. Preparedness of Government institutions to manage displacements:  Strengthening government actors to be 
more prepared for potential future displacements by supporting their administrative management capacity (i.e. 
supporting and coordinating biometric registration of population) as well as humanitarian management capacity 
(i.e. contingency planning for displacements). 

 

COMPONENT 4 - Contingency Emergency Response Component 

This contingent emergency response component is included under the project in accordance with OP/BP 10.00, 
paragraphs 12 and 13, for situations of urgent need of assistance. This will allow for rapid reallocation of project funds in 
the event natural or manmade crisis in the future, during the implementation of the project. This component will have 
no funding allocation initially, but will be used to draw resources from the unallocated expenditure category and/or allow 
the government to request the WB to reallocate financing from other project components to cover emergency response 
and recovery costs, if approved by the WB. 

 

COMPONENT 5 - Project Management 

This sub-component will cover: (a) strengthening the capacity of the Project Steering Committee for overall Project 
coordination; and (b) strengthening the capacity of the Project Implementation Unit for project management, 
coordination, monitoring and evaluation, including: (i) fiduciary (i.e. financial and procurement management); (ii) 
environmental and social assessments; (iii) preparation of project reports; and (iv) monitoring and evaluation. 

 
 
    

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
The specific sites for infrastructure investments and their scope will be determined during project preparation based on 

the government’s detailed assessments of priority needs within the target regions in consultation with local population 
and authorities and detailed technical studies to be undertaken. The general areas include sites hosting refugees in Diffa 
region and along the Malian border in Tillaberi, Tahoua and Agadez regions. 
 


B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 
 
The Government of Niger has previously successfully implemented Bank-financed projects for which Environmental and 

Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs), Environmental and Social Management Frameworks (ESMF), Resettlement Policy 
Frameworks (RPFs), Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) and Pest Management Plans (PMPs) were approved by the Bank.  
The Bureau des Evaluations Environnementales et des Études d’Impacts (BEEEI), the National Environmental Agency 

(NEA), and its decentralized structures, have the capacity to assure the external monitoring of the implementation of the 
of the ESMF, RPF and PMP under the project, including ensuring and validating that the provisions of the ESMF and RPF, 
leading to further sub-projects environmental and social assessments, are followed (i.e., sub-projects categorization, 
review, clearance and monitoring of the sub-project-specific EIAs/EMPs and RAPs), on behalf of the Government.  
Overall project environmental and social safeguards compliance, with national laws and regulations and applicable World 

Bank operational policies and procedures, will be devolved to BEEEI. 
 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 
Demba Balde, Social Safeguards Specialist 
Emmanuel Ngollo, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 

 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The project will rehabilitate and upgrade 
infrastructures in several locations. As the sites and 
works are not yet finalized, an Environmental and 
Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be 
prepared, consulted upon, and disclosed both in-
country and at the World Bank Website before 
appraisal. The ESMF will formulate standard methods 
and procedures, along with clear institutional 
arrangements for screening, review, approval, 
implementation and monitoring of sub-project-specific 
safeguards instruments (Environmental and Social 
Management Plans ESMPs, Environmental and Social 
Impact Assessments ESIAs) as necessary. These 
instruments will also be consulted upon and disclosed 
in-country and at World Bank Website. A Social 
Assessment will be conducted in parallel to 
complement the safeguards documents. 

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No  

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 No 

Due to the location of interventions in areas were 
infrastructure and/or productive activities were 
already in place, no negative impacts to critical or 
sensitive natural habitats are expected. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No 
No interventions are financed in forest areas, nor do 
they involve forests. 




Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

Although procurement of pesticides is not envisaged 
under the project, it is expected that intensification of 
agricultural production and productivity will likely lead 
to an increased use of pesticides. 
The Government will update its existing Pest 
Management Plan and submit it to the Bank for 
clearance and then disclosure in-country and at World 
Bank website, prior to appraisal. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 

The Physical Cultural Resources Policy (OP 4.11) is 
triggered because Niger is viewed as a rich cultural 
heritage area. Though it is unknown at this time which 
sites may contain such resources, due to the lack of 
specifics on the locations, size, scale of planned 
investments under the project. Chance Find 
Procedures will be applied as indicated in the ESMF. 
The ESMF will address potential impacts and includes 
suggested mitigation measures. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project area. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

OP 4.12 is triggered due to the potential impacts 
related to civil works, which may lead to minor land 
acquisition, loss of assets and/or access to resources. 
A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be 
prepared, consulted upon, approved and disclosed in-
country and at the World Bank website prior to 
appraisal. The RPF will formulate standard methods 
and procedures, along with clear institutional 
arrangements for screening, review, approval, 
implementation and monitoring of sub-project-specific 
safeguards instruments such as Resettlements Action 
Plans (RAPs) if necesary. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 

The project will not finance the building of dams and is 
not supporting dam infrastructure. Subject to 
technical studies the project may finance local flood 
prevention structures that may temporarily retain 
excess water during peak volume events, but which do 
not pose dam safety issues. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 

OP 7.50 is not triggered as there are no infrastructure 
investments likely to affect water flow of Niger or 
Komadougou international waterways under the 
project. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
OP 7.60 is not triggered as there are no known 
disputes over project areas. 

 


     

E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Feb 13, 2018 
 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be 

developed, the Pest Management Plan (PMP) will be updated. All three documents will be submitted to the Bank for 
clearance and then disclosed in-country and at the World Bank website, prior to appraisal. 
 
 


























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Integrated Project for Source Sustainability and climate Resilient Rain-fed Agriculture in Himachal Pradesh 
(P165129) 

 
 

  
Jun 04, 2019 Page 1 of 16  

     

      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document (PID) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 07-Jun-2019 | Report No: PIDISDSC23122 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

India P165129  Integrated Project for 
Source Sustainability 
and climate Resilient 
Rain-fed Agriculture in 
Himachal Pradesh 
(P165129) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

SOUTH ASIA Nov 25, 2019 Feb 27, 2020 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Department of Economic 
Affairs 

Department of Forest, 
Government of Himachal 
Pradesh 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
To increase the sustainable use of water resources in Himachal Pradesh by improving upstream watershed 
management and increasing agricultural water productivity in selected Gram Panchayats 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 100.00 

Total Financing 100.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 80.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) 80.00 

Non-World Bank Group Financing 

     Counterpart Funding 20.00 



          Borrower/Recipient 20.00 

   
 

Environmental and Social Risk Classification Concept Review Decision 

Moderate  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
Not applicable. 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

 
1. India’s growth remains robust but has moderated from prior high levels in the past fiscal year (FY18/19).  After 
growing at 7.2 percent in FY17/18, economic growth slowed to 6.8 percent in FY 18/19, with quarterly growth falling to 
5.8 percent (y-o-y) in Q4. Growth remains broad-based, but the impact of accelerating industrial growth was 
counterbalanced by decelerations in services and agriculture growth, on the production side. On the demand side, 
consumption has been bolstered by public spending, but investment growth has decelerated.  In FY18/19, the current 
account deficit is estimated to have reached 2.6 percent of GDP but a strong rebound in foreign investment over the 
second half of the year allowed foreign reserves to remain at a comfortable level of US$411.9 billion, as of end-March 
2019 (equivalent to about 9.7 months of imports). Going forward, output growth is projected to recover and stabilize at 
around 7.5 percent, thanks primarily to resilient private consumption, but also to a rise in exports of goods and services 
and a gradual recovery in investment. The current account deficit is projected to narrow to 1.9 percent of GDP in 
FY19/20 but external headwinds—in the form of re-escalating trade tensions and elevated oil prices – could put pressure 
on the balance of payments. 
 
2. Since the 2000s, India has made remarkable progress in reducing absolute poverty. Between FY2011/12 and 
2015, poverty declined from 21.6 to an estimated 13.4 percent at the international poverty line (2011 PPP US$ 1.90 per 
person per day), continuing the earlier trend of robust reduction in poverty. Aided by robust economic growth, more 
than 90 million people escaped extreme poverty and improved their living standards during this period. Despite this 
success, poverty remains widespread in India. In 2015, with the latest estimates, 176 million Indians were living in 
extreme poverty while 659 million, or half the population, were below the higher poverty line commonly used for lower 
middle-income countries (2011 PPP US$ 3.20 per person per day). Recent trends in the construction sector and rural 
wages, a major source of employment for the poorer households, suggest that the pace of poverty eradication may have 
moderated. 
 
3. India is the world’s third largest emitter of greenhouse gasses (GHGs) and is highly vulnerable to climate 
change. It has ratified the Paris Agreement (COP21) and is committed to “enhancing adaptive capacity, strengthening 
resilience, and reducing vulnerability to climate change”. India’s federal intended national determined contributions 

(INDC) commits to reduce the energy intensity of GDP from one-third and to increase the share of renewable energy 
(including from hydro generation). It also commits India to expand its existing carbon sink by 2.5 – 3.0 billion mt of 
carbon dioxide. Large areas of India are likely to be under water stress: 54 percent of the country’s area is subject to 
high or extremely high water stress, and almost 600 million face disruptions from surface water supply disruptions. 
Punjab and Haryana – major rice and wheat producing states – are particularly affected. More than half of the country’s 
groundwater wells are dropping, 16 percent by more than one meter per year.1 With shared water resources and given 
the region’s complex history, the region could see escalating tensions over water use in the future. 
 

Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
4. Himachal Pradesh (HP) is a Special Category state in the Himalayan mountains. Special Category status is 
afforded due to inter alia: (i) mountainous terrain; (ii) low population density (123 per km2); (iii) significant population of 
scheduled tribes; (iv) HP’s strategic location bordering neighboring countries; (v) it’s ‘backward’ status in terms of 
economic development and infrastructure; and (v) non-viable nature of the state’s financial situation (the fiscal deficit for 
FY2019/20 is projected to be 4.4 percent of the state’s GDP). With an altitude ranging from 350 meters above mean sea 
level [msl] to 6,975 msl, much of the state’s area is sloping, with inclines of between 0.5 – 70 percent. Land with a slope 
of up to 40 percent is already typically under agricultural production; in some areas farming is practiced on even steeper 
gradients of 60 – 70 percent. Of a total of 3,243 Gram Panchayats (GPs) in HP, 551 (or 17 percent) have been declared 
‘backward’ status and therefore subject to special programs from the Government. Scheduled tribes are scattered 
throughout the state with concentrations in Kinnaur and Lahaul and Spiti, and parts of Chamba amounting to 6 percent of 
the total population of which 32 percent are located in Scheduled Areas of the State; there is also a considerable scheduled 
caste population of 25 percent. Himachal Pradesh is among India’s leading States on gender equality and social 
development. It has the highest female labor force participation rate in the country2, even though it has declined since 
2005. Much of the state’s female workforce participation is driven by women’s self-employment in agriculture, still the 
mainstay of the state’s largely rural economy. Women’s higher participation in agriculture, horticulture, and livestock 
sectors is socially and culturally embedded in the state, largely due to traditional out-migration of men for jobs that leaves 
the women behind to provide labor and supervisory inputs to pre-harvest and post-harvest activities. However, their 
access to ag-tech & climate resilient technologies, markets and finance, as well as to skills and entrepreneurship 
opportunities remains limited. Non-farm jobs for rural women remain limited. New opportunities in agribusiness are 
important to reverse the decline in women’s participation in agriculture.  
 
5. HP has a particular role to play in contributing to India’s INDC commitments. Its topography and available water 
resources are well suited to hydro generation with an installed capacity of 3,421 MW controlled jointly by the GoHP (8 
percent) and GoI (92 percent), against an estimated potential of over 27,000 MW. Only 14 percent of India’s total 
generation is from hydro, of which 8 percent is from HP.3 Meeting the INDC commitments on reducing the carbon intensity 
of India’s energy generation will depend on further exploitation of hydro in states like HP.  Improved watershed and 
catchment area management upstream of hydro reservoirs can reduce operational costs from siltation and water turbidity  
. Similarly, HP enjoys around 1.126 million ha of forest cover, representing 25 percent of the land area in the state and 1.5 
percent of India’s total forest cover of 70.827 million ha.4 Although currently a small share of the overall area, HP has 
substantial potential to further expand forest cover (including through increased density) and therefore will play a major 
role in contributing to the national commitments on carbon sequestration.  

         

 
6. The Government of Himachal Pradesh (GoHP) is already well experienced in management of its natural 
resources as a driver for development but recognizes the need to increase the quality and sustainable use of these 
resources. Over two-thirds of the total land area in the state is formally categorized as forest land, of which, 46 percent 
supports coniferous and broadleaved forests while the remaining 54 percent includes high altitude areas above the tree 
line, snow peaks, alpine pastures, and river beds. The state has zoned 23 percent of the legally classified forest area as 
protected areas (5 national parks, 26 wildlife sanctuaries and 3 conservation reserves) and HPFD manages these to protect 
biodiversity and promote ecotourism. These forests provide catchment areas for 5 major river basins. Despite 
considerable investments to date in catchment treatment and afforestation, forest quality (measured as canopy density) 
remains poor in HP. The gross area of forests is increasing due to better law enforcement, afforestation to offset forests 
cleared for development, and the partial lifting of the felling ban in 2018, which allowed for selective felling of older trees 
and subsequent regeneration. However, the quality of forests has not improved over the past six decades due to several 
factors, including poor afforestation techniques, lack of maintenance, incorrect site/plant selection, and uncontrolled 
grazing and fires.  The state has enjoyed significant success in agricultural development in particular fruit production and 
as a major source of off-season vegetables exported to other parts of India. Fruit production exceeds 600,000mt of which 
three-quarters is apples) while over 1.8 million mt of vegetables are produced annually. However, the majority of 
agricultural land (85 percent) remains under rain-fed agriculture and the land under irrigation reports a low intensity of 
137 percent (i.e. only one-third is used for more than one crops a year). Given changing weather patterns already observed 
(annual and monsoon rains declining by 2.26mm and 2.85mm per year respectively; mean annual temperature increasing 
on 0.02 degrees Celsius per year) progress could be easily reversed unless the state invests in adaptation strategies to 
increase resilience. 

 
7. Natural resource management (NRM) therefore remains pivotal to the state’s long-term economic and social 
development, especially in the context of climate change. A profile of climate smart agriculture (CSA) in the state, 
commissioned as part of project preparatory tasks highlighted critical aspects of both the mitigation and adaptation 
agenda in the state: 

 

• Mitigation: Agriculture is a minor source of the state’s GHG emissions, constituting only 1.8 percent (164,000mt 
of CO2 equivalent) of the total. Of these, 90 percent are attributable to rice cultivation over 43,450 ha of area; 
crop residue burning adds a further 8 percent and enteric fermentation contributes less than 2 percent. 
 

• Adaptation: There are many examples of CSA technologies already being deployed in cereals, horticulture, 
vegetable and livestock sectors. However, observed adoption rates are typically less than 30 percent, meaning 
there is considerable scope for scaling these up throughout the state. Adoption rates in the horticulture and 
higher-value vegetable sectors are typically higher. This is because the financial incentives are stronger but also 
because the farmer endowments that drive past diversification out of cereals are the same as those that make 
adoption easier. CSA technologies are not scale neutral, they are risky, and there are significant up-front 
investment costs. Integrating CSA technologies more thoroughly into the existing Krishi Vigyan Kendra (KVK; i.e. 
research and extension) system is essential.  
 

simultaneously both the direct cause and the victims of degradation. Supporting GPs to lead community-based 
development has and will continue to be a key tenet of the GoHP’s approach moving forward. 
 
9. GoHP has a clear and relevant vision for its NRM sector. First, it seeks to continue its impressive trajectory of 
rural transformation by raising agricultural productivity, strengthening market linkages and diversifying production 
patterns to increase agricultural value addition, while maintaining biodiversity and ensuring sustainable land and water 
use. Second, GoHP recognizes its role as custodian of a unique landscape with a special set of critical natural resource 
endowments that provide critical environmental services not only for its own population but for other states and indeed 
globally. Therefore, it recognizes the importance of reconciling the imperative of delivering results in terms of continued 
development for its population without undermining its natural resource base.  
 
10. The project addresses several elements of outstanding agendas in the realm of NRM, forestry and agriculture. 
A review of ex poste assessments (implementation completion reports and project or thematic evaluations) reports a 
positive track record of past interventions that have delivered on their project objectives, although considerable effort is 
required to achieve the necessary outcomes. This is in part a question of scale – past interventions have been necessarily 
focused – whereas in other aspects additional transformation and innovation is required. Notable innovations include the 
greater role of GPs in taking responsibility for, and managing investments in, sustainable landscape management and the 
development of CSA practices and their integration into existing farmer extension systems. Other innovations include the 
successful application for climate change financing and achievements in diversification into higher value market-oriented 
fruit and vegetable production, leveraging HP’s position as a major off-season producer serving distant Indian markets. 
The major challenges moving forward are to further scale-up these successes by utilizing Bank support to address specific 
institutional and technical constraints for doing so – i.e. not just the financing of scale-up which can in principle be deferred 
to GoHP’s own resources. 



 
The World Bank  
Integrated Project for Source Sustainability and climate Resilient Rain-fed Agriculture in Himachal Pradesh 
(P165129) 

 
 

Relationship to CPF 

 
11. The World Bank Group’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF) juxtaposed: (i) India’s development priorities as 
outlined in its FY2017-19 action agenda as well as national missions and programs; (ii) the assessment of India’s challenges 
in sustaining progress towards the twin goals as set out in the Bank’s Strategic Country Diagnostic (SCD); (iii) the WBG’s 
comparative advantage in the country; and (iv) lessons derived from decades of WBG engagement in India. The CPF 
identified three substantive areas: (i) promoting resource efficient growth; (ii) enhancing competitiveness and enabling 
job creation, and (iii) investing in human capital. In addition to these focus areas, the CPF also set out four operating 
modalities. These are: (i) leveraging the private sector; (ii) strengthening public sector institutions; (iii) engaging a Federal 
India; and (iv) promoting a “Lighthouse India” that connects practical know-how for the benefit of India and the wider 
world. 

 
12. The project is consistent with the CPF by delivering outcomes for resource efficient growth in targeted GPs in HP 
and in enhancing competitiveness of farmers and related agribusinesses in selected value chains. It also seeks to 
strengthen public sector institutions while leveraging the private sector and will contribute significantly to Lighthouse 
India by demonstrating approaches in challenging agro-ecological conditions of wider interest across the Himalayan range. 

 


     

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
13. To increase the sustainable use of water resources in Himachal Pradesh by improving upstream watershed 
management and increasing agricultural water productivity in selected Gram Panchayats 
 
Key Results (From PCN) 

 
14. Proposed PDO-level indicators are as follows: 

• Increased sustainability of perennial water sources in targeted watersheds 

• Selected upland areas managed in accordance with site-specific management plans 

• Increased agricultural water productivity among participating farmers 

• A more institutionally integrated approach to multi-sectoral watershed-level decision making 

• Increased adoption of climate-smart technologies among participating farmers 
 
 
D. Concept Description 

 
15. The overarching problem statement the project seeks to address is that HP is facing increased demand for, and 
reduced supply of, water resources and therefore needs to manage these better if it is to maintain its economic growth 
without jeopardizing continued downstream supply to the grain basket of Punjab.  HP’s population increased 13 percent 
over the decade 2001 – 2011 with an ever-greater share now residing in urban areas. Niti Aayog reports5 that half of all 
springs are now dry or seasonal. Addressing this challenge requires progress under three pillars: 

 

• Sustainable land and water resource management; 
 

• Improved agricultural productivity and value addition; and 
 

• Institutional capacity of GoHP to sustainably manage watersheds and resource use trade-offs and to effectively 
deliver environmental services. 

 
16. Each element contributes to the overall theory of change that underpins the proposed project design, as follows 
and summarized in the Figure below: 

 

• Land and water management: Current land use practices in upstream watersheds is resulting in excessive soil 
erosion and degradation, rain-water run-off and depleted rates of recharge of critical aquifers. Soil run-off results 
in reduced natural soil fertility (with a resulting loss on productivity or additional costs for replacement of 
inorganic fertilizers) and reservoir and intake sedimentation with the consequent loss of hydro generation 
capacity and damage to turbines, and/ or reduced availability of stored water for drinking or irrigation. This is 
compounded by retreating glacial sources and changes in rainfall patterns linked with climate change. 
 

• Existing agricultural productivity remains low – both in terms of physical yields (mt/ha) and value (Rs/ha). The 
use of irrigation is extremely limited across the state, with surface irrigation predominating and more limited use 
of the drop or sprinkler systems required for higher value crops, which can lead to substantial increases in water 

                                            
5 Niti Aayog (2018) Report of Working Group 1: Inventory and Revival of Springs in the Himalayas for Water Security  



productivity. The absence of irrigation remains a binding constraint on farmers’ ability to increase incomes (and 
therefore undermines the policy objective of doubling farmer incomes) and renders them vulnerable to climatic 
shocks; a situation that is becoming increasingly precarious with climate change. 
 

• The GoHP lacks robust institutional mechanisms for making trade-offs and investments to ensure sustainability 
of environmental services into the future. It cannot properly evaluate relative values of competing uses for the 
states’ natural resources, especially in terms of the states’ overall management of environmental services. There 
is an absence of underlying analytical foundation for such trade-offs to be evaluated, and no formal structures to 
facilitate integrated decision-making. Moreover, fragmentation amongst ministries and agencies means that any 
investments in upstream watersheds are typically insufficient and/ or inconsistent and therefore not adequate or 
efficiently delivered. 

 
Figure 2: Summary of the Theory of Change 
 

 
 
17. The project will deploy institutional and technical solutions to address these challenges. These are explained in 
more detail below with each proposed project component corresponding to the constraints thereby completing the 
project’s theory of change. 
 
Component 1: Sustainable Land and Water Resource Management 

 
18. This component promotes participatory and sustainable land and water management through financing the 
planning and implementation of investments in selected catchments based on the Sutlej Basin Comprehensive CAT 
(CCAT) plan, and micro-catchment plans in other river basins. For each of these, range-level site-specific management 
plans (SSMP) will be prepared to specify detailed activities by location. The main implementers and beneficiaries will be 



HP Forest Department (HPFD) staff and relevant community organizations, particularly Joint Forest Management 
Committees (JFMCs). The component will include a combination of TA, investments, and partnerships with other agencies 
and will lead to improved forest cover (and hence carbon capture), increased water and sediment regulation, reduced 
erosion, and improved community participation in and benefits from forest management.  

 
Subcomponent 1A: Improved planning for participatory and sustainable land and water management 
 
19. Subcomponent 1A will strengthen landscape planning. Specifically, it will: (a) review progress and revise the 
existing Sutlej Basin CCAT plan; (b) prepare micro-catchment plans in other project river basins; (c) support additional 
diagnostic studies, designs, and assessments; and (d) develop SSMPs through a participatory process led jointly by the 
HPDD and JFMCs. The CCAT plan review will identify the most cost-effective interventions implemented to date and 
propose revisions to plan investments and locations based on new hydrological and sediment load modeling. The CCAT 
plan review will include the design and implementation of a comprehensive M&E system for CCAT plan investments 
initially across the Sutlej Basin and later replicated in other project catchment areas and will include measurement of 
water flows and sediment loads to refine the hydrological models and ensure that investments maximize silt retention 
and surface water absorption. 

 
Subcomponent 1B: Implementation of participatory and sustainable land and water management investments 
 
20. This subcomponent will finance the implementation of activities identified in the SSMPs will contribute to 
improved forest cover and quality (including carbon emission reductions and sequestration), as well as improved water 
and sediment regulation. Activities supported by this subcomponent include, but are not limited to, the following areas: 

 

• Soil and water conservation measures. Vegetative measures, such as af/re-forestation, grass seeding, grass turfs, 
brushwood, live hedges, and spurs, as well as mechanical measures, such as check dams, drop structures, crate 
wire spur structures, bunds and water harvesting, and drainage line treatments, like gully plugging.  
 

• Development of high-quality seed stands. Establishment of a geo-referenced seed production system; 
construction of a centralized seed center to process, treat, store, and test seed; and construction of a climate-
controlled seed bank.  
 

• Nursery development. Provision of machinery and equipment to produce the additional seedlings. 
 

• Forest management. Planting and management of trees in open and medium density forests and slopes vulnerable 
to soil erosion and protection of plantations 
 

• Pasture management. Introduction of rotational grazing, delineation of forest areas for the supply of fodder, and 
the introduction of voluntary systems to prevent livestock from grazing in young forest. 
 

• Forest fire prevention and suppression. Organization of community fire protection groups; provision of locally-
appropriate firefighting equipment to the HPFD offices and participating communities; and training of 
communities on controlled burning, and the collection and use of pine needles. 

 
 
 


     

Component 2: Improved Agricultural Productivity and Value Addition 
 
21. This component would support interventions in downstream areas where the primary (existing or potential) 
water use is for irrigation in agriculture. It would seek to augment the use of irrigation as a principle strategy for shifting 
from low-value cereal production to higher-value fruit and vegetable production but would do so with a focus on 
increasing water productivity so as to maximize the financial returns to water use. Key interventions include infrastructure 
to increase high-productivity water utilization (drip and sprinkler irrigation plus the necessary primary and secondary 
distribution systems) 
 
Subcomponent 2A: Increasing value addition through improving water productivity  
 
22. Subcomponent 2A will support investments in the provision of water by investing in primary and secondary 
distribution infrastructure and matching grants for the purchase of on-farm equipment for drip and sprinkler (i.e. high-
tech) irrigation technology. It will support decentralized water infrastructure development under the Pradhan Mantri 
Krishi Sinchai Yojana (PMKSY) based on robust micro-watershed plans across clusters of GPs in locations. By focusing on 
water productivity rather than water availability it will only invest in increasing water utilization in GPs where: (i) upstream 
investments in source sustainability are being implemented under Component 1; and (ii) where productivity of subsequent 
use will be maximized thereby ensuring ‘more crop for the (incremental) drop’. 
 
Subcomponent 2B: Adoption of Climate Smart Technologies and Diversification into High-Value Crops 
 
23. This component supports the adoption of climate smart agriculture (CSA) practices for existing cropping 
patterns in beneficiary GPs and also facilitates farmers to diversify into high-value crops, either in conjunction with 
high-tech irrigation equipment. The project will leverage HP’s agricultural research and extension system and existing 
Government-backed interventions to expand the adoption of contemporary CSA practices among participating farmers. 
CSA practices will apply to both existing cropping patterns and to new higher-value crops. Where the evidence of what 
constitutes CSA practices in these new crops is limited, the project will collaborate with the research institutions to 
strengthen the evidence base. This component will leverage and support the Government’s own KVK farmer extension 
system and their Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY; now known as the Remunerative Approach for Agriculture and Allied 
Sector Rejuvenation). By focusing on the market, and in conjunction with Subcomponent 2C, the approach adopted here 
will take a value chain perspective with competitiveness at the fore.  
 
24. This sub-component will also support greater use of Non-Timber Forest Products (NTFPs) as part of the 
diversification agenda, and as a mechanism for incentivizing community participation in sustainable land and water 
management. This will create alternative livelihood opportunities, by removing barriers to investment in NTFP value 
chains, and increase local incomes from sustainable production and increased value addition. This sub-component targets 
NTFP collectors, often women, and producers interested in cultivation of NTFPs (medicinal, aromatic plants) and other 
high-value commodities identified for value chain development. Alignment with the relevant line departments (e.g., 
agriculture, horticulture, and animal husbandry) will be ensured. In addition to improving local livelihoods, the proposed 
activities will reduce pressure on watersheds and contribute to increased carbon sequestration and storage and reduced 
erosion. Strengthening NTFP value chains and institutions with a focus on women, will enhance livelihood diversification 
and improve communities’ resilience to climate change. 

 
25. There is potential for securing climate change finance for on-farm and/ or community investments in 
reforestation and/ or economic trees. HP successfully secured the first ever Clean Development Mechanism subproject 



in project under the Kyoto Protocol was registered with the UNFCCC in March, 2011. This was implemented in 11 
watershed divisions and covering 140 GPs it generated carbon credits trough reforestation activities supported under the 
MHWDP. A scoping assessment supported by the World Bank has identified significant potential for similar carbon 
financing via Indian private sector conglomerates seeking to invest in carbon offsets for their industrial enterprises as well 
as for corporate social responsibility (CSR) motivations.  
 
Subcomponent 2C: Support to farmer groups linked to agri-business clusters 
 
26. This component will promote agribusiness clusters among several GPs in high-potential areas already 
benefitting from project interventions under Component 2. Fostering value addition, agribusiness and agro-industry 
clusters requires coordinated planning and investments by a range of departments. The key objective is typically to 
aggregate production to internalize economies of scale and provide sufficient volume to meet the minimum efficient scale 
of agro-processors hereby stimulating private investment by agribusinesses and promoting value addition. There may be 
other efficiencies for instance in waste treatment and the clustering of ancillary businesses. The project will seek to 
aggregate via clusters in collaboration with farmer organizations (which will also be strengthen under the project). This 
component will coordinate such investments to promote clusters which will connect groups of beneficiary farmers, via 
their respective farmers’ associations, to agribusiness to facilitate processing and value addition.  
 
27. Interventions will include technical assistance to farmers’ groups and prospective agribusinesses as well as 
some (likely modest) infrastructure provision to locate participating agribusinesses. This will fall short of ‘agro-business 
park’ models but could include specific locations for the establishment of agro-businesses close to the producing areas 
and including last-mile infrastructure as well as facilities for storage, packaging and waste management. 
 
Component 3: Institutional capacity building for integrated watershed management and making policy trade-offs. 
 
28. The objective of this component is two-fold: first, is to support a more comprehensive and holist approach to 
managing the state’s water resources recognizing competing uses both within HP and downstream in other states in 
particular Punjab; second to facilitate a better alignment of institutional mandates for IWM and strengthen the HPFD’s 
institutional structure and capacity for improved forest service delivery. It will be implemented through a combination of 
TA and investments.  
 
Subcomponent 3A: Improving the governance structure for integrated watershed management 
 
29. Through the convening power of the HPFD and its role in managing watersheds, this subcomponent will provide 
TA to support improving integrated watershed management (IWM). The subcomponent will support an IWM 
institutional assessment to (a) identify the institutions that affect water supply, quality, use, and management and their 
roles, responsibilities, and mandates; (b) conduct a strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats analysis of the 
current institutional framework and highlight any overlaps and/or gaps that undermine IWM; (c) identify opportunities 
for institutional coordination and synergy; and (d) build consensus on the need for reform and develop the goals and 
vision for institutional collaboration, a time-bound action plan, and an implementation road map. The results of this 
assessment are expected to inform the GoHP on the necessary longer-term reforms to the relevant state institutions that 
will result in effective interagency cooperation and, ultimately, IWM.  
 
Subcomponent 3B: Institutional reform and strengthening of the Himachal Pradesh Forest Department 
 


30. This subcomponent will support the institutional development of HPFD. It will provide TA and investments to (a) 
conduct a functional review of forest institutions (FRFI) that will produce a vision, goal, and time-bound action plan for 
change; (b) implement an initial set of prioritized HPFD institutional reforms; and (c) strengthen the HPFD’s capacity to 
deliver its core mandates. This subcomponent will also support an initial set of prioritized institutional governance reforms 
through TA and investments. These reforms include the (a) development and implementation of a comprehensive HPFD 
IT and knowledge strategy that integrates all relevant applications on a common geospatial platform and allows for 
watershed-level planning;6 (b) development and implementation of a comprehensive HPFD monitoring and evaluation 
(M&E) system; (c) establishment of a centralized staff performance monitoring system; and (d) development of regulatory 
and management standards for pastures. Finally, this subcomponent will finance training and capacity-building activities 
based on a comprehensive training plan. The trainings will cover diverse subjects and will be designed with a climate 
change lens to build climate resilience.7 Training will include all project participants. 
 
Subcomponent 3C: Improve water resource coordination and decision making at the macro-level 

 
31. This subcomponent will operationalize some of the opportunities for institutional coordination and increasing 
synergy between the different institutions involved with water resource management, identified in subcomponent 3A. 
Coordination. Successfully managing watersheds and water supply/use, both the upland and downstream areas, will 
require managing tradeoffs between the different treatments, uses and beneficiaries. There are a great number of 
stakeholders involved, including numerous state departments (e.g. HPFD, Agriculture, Animal Husbandry, Horticulture, 
Irrigation and Public Health etc.), individuals and the private sector, donor supported projects, NGOs, local governments, 
and local communities. This component will set up a high-level decision-making process (based on improved data collected 
by the project), in a transparent and participatory process to provide strategic guidance and to manage the trade-offs 
necessary to ensure sustainability.  
 
Component 4: Project Management. 

 
32. This component would support the project management function including key staff and operational costs. The 
precise nature of the project management entity is to be determined (see below) although at least in the medium-term 
financing will be required for staff on secondment from other Departments and externally recruited staff in areas with 
skillsets outside the current bureaucratic endowment. A key example is agribusiness for which few existing staff of 
Departments have the required expertise. It would also support the project monitoring and evaluation functions as well 
as grievance redress apparatus, and project communications and outreach including the contribution to Lighthouse India 
by which project lessons can be shared with other states. 
 
33. The component would also support a robust evaluation of impact. The team will consider options for statistically 
robust evaluative techniques (randomized control treatment GPs; discontinuity methodologies utilizing similar treatment 
and control GPs etc.) as a foundation for project evaluation. 

 
Information and Communication Technology 

 
34. The project would specifically seek innovations in information and communication technology (ICT) in all 
aspects of the project (building on experience in other agricultural projects in HP and across India). ICT and geospatial 

                                            
6 The preparation of the IT strategy will include the analysis of the most appropriate disruptive technologies. 
7 The subjects will include management of seed stands, nursery management, range management, forest protection, community 
mobilization, and institutional development. 


analysis would be utilized to inform project planning and implementation and a web-based GIS platform will be established 
to report progress, and to allow stakeholders to report implementation concerns. Furthermore, there are opportunities 
for ICT-based tools to quickly assess soil type (for optimum fertilizer application) which when used offer direct benefits to 
farmers while also helping construct a detailed soil map of the state. Remote monitoring systems can provide real-time 
data on weather, water flows and turbidity and can play important roles in weather-related risk mitigation, irrigation 
scheme-level and farm management decision-making and in project monitoring. The use of blockchain technology is 
increasingly being deployed to facilitate traceability of fresh produce in agricultural value chains and will be encouraged 
by the project. Greater use of cell phone-based market information systems can increase market efficiency and empower 
farmers to supply more remunerative markets and to negotiate higher prices. 
 
Proposed Project Locations 

 
35. Project locations will be identified based on a robust and objective set of criteria. The primary criteria will be to 
identify (i) high priority micro-watersheds that are in urgent need of remedial steps to maintain their perennial water 
sources and then to overlay these with (ii) locations with high potential as agricultural and agribusiness clusters. Once 
these areas are identified, further criteria will be to select specific GPs recognizing the need for a qualitative approach. It 
is expected that in total around 900 GPs will be included. 
 
36. The project will be applied in all districts of HP with the exception of the two high mountain districts of Kinnaur 
and Lahul and Spiti. There are seven main river basins in HP and in principle the project could select micro-watersheds 
within any basin. However, a modified approach will reflect those basins for which activities similar to those proposed in 
Component 1 are already being supported by other Development Partners (DPs) (for instance, KfW supported HP Forest 
Eco-System Climate Proofing Project in Kangra and Chamba Districts and the JICA supported Project for Improvement of 
Himachal Pradesh Forest Ecosystems Management and Livelihoods in Bilaspur, Shimla, Mandi, Kullu, Kinnaur and Lahul 
and Spiti Districts). In such cases, this project would collaborate closely with those interventions, gap-filling Component 1 
where necessary and focusing more on delivery of Component 2. 

 
37. The project will also consider the merits of structured phasing. For instance, one option would be to defer 
interventions in Sutlej basin until the Comprehensive Catchment Area Treatment (CCAT) plan revision is completed as this 
would help better target the resulting investments under Components 1 and 2. Conversely, there may be proposed project 
areas which are already high priority with an underlying analytical foundation for the rapid delivery of interventions under 
Components 1 and 2 (perhaps those in areas supported by KfW and/ or JICA projects). 
 
 
    
 
Legal Operational Policies                                  Triggered? 

Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50 TBD 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60 No 

 
Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts 

 
The project will undertake measures to improve the state of water resources in Himachal Pradesh towards ensuring 
sustainability and climate resilience in the agriculture sector. It will achieve this through interventions across the areas of 



natural resource management, forestry and agriculture. In particular the project will: i) promote participatory and 
sustainable land and water management through strengthened landscape planning and ii) implement NRM activities 
from the plans such as soil and water conservation measures like check dams, bio-engineering structures, etc, 
development of high quality seed stands, nursery development, forest and pasture management and forest fire 
prevention and suppression; iii) provide water through primary and secondary distribution infrastructure and matching 
grants for the purchase of on-farm equipment for drip and sprinkler irrigation technology; iv) support the adoption of 
Climate Smart Agriculture (CSA) practices for existing cropping patterns and facilitate diversification into high value 
crops; v) strengthen NTFP value chains; vi) promote agribusiness clusters including technical assistance to farmers groups 
and infrastructure provision to facilitate storage, packaging, waste management as well as last-mile linkages and vii) 
undertake institutional capacity building for integrated watershed management and making policy trade-offs focusing on 
the Himachal Pradesh Forest Department (HPFD). 
The environmental risk rating of the project is ‘Moderate’. Overall, the impacts of the project financed activities on forest 
cover and quality, water and sediment regulation, water use efficiency and carbon sequestration are expected to be 
positive.keeping in view the proposed activities envisaged at this stage of the project, it is understood that “no adverse 
impacts to critical habitats are expected.” Because activities will be outside critical natural habitats or any activities that 
would impacts on critical habitats will not be financed. No adverse impacts to critical habitats or cultural heritage are 
expected. The risk seems to be moderate. 
Potential for adverse social impacts come from i) infrastructure (aggregation, processing, soil and water conservation, 
water distribution, pasture and nursery development); and ii) access and use restrictions related to natural resource 
management, NTFP value chains and forest fire prevention interventions. Other potential social risks are exclusion of 
small and marginal farmers, nomadic tribes, scheduled castes and scheduled tribes from project institutions and benefits 
that relate to on farm irrigation inputs, seeds and other improved farming inputs and training. Community level conflicts 
could also arise from water sharing infrastructure and systems, any land use restrictions mentioned above.While most 
interventions are likely to be small scale, and the impacts are not expected to be significant, the capacity of the borrower 
to implement and manage the above social risks as well as those related to labor, community health and safety and 
sustained stakeholder engagement raises the risk profile to moderate. 

 

 

























































World Bank Document

PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
CONCEPT STAGE

Report No.: PIDC10068

Project Name National Agricultural Higher Education Project (P151072)
Region SOUTH ASIA
Country India
Sector(s) Agricultural extension and research (50%), Tertiary education (30%), 

Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (10%), Public administratio n- 
Education (5%), Information technology (5%)

Theme(s) Education for the knowledge economy (35%), Managing for development 
results (5%), Rural services and infrastructure (30%), Improving labor 
markets (20%), Rural policies and institutions (10%)

Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P151072
Borrower(s) Republic of India
Implementing Agency Indian Council of Agricultural Research
Environmental 
Category

B-Partial Assessment

Date PID Prepared/
Updated

17-Mar-2015

Date PID Approved/
Disclosed

17-Mar-2015

Estimated Date of 
Appraisal Completion

07-Aug-2015

Estimated Date of 
Board Approval

27-Oct-2015

Concept Review 
Decision

Track II - The review did authorize the preparation to continue

I. Introduction and Context
Country Context
India is a lower middle-income country with per-capita GDP of US$ 1,499 (2013).  From 2001 to 
2011, India’s economy performed well, with sustained annual GDP growth of 8%.  High rates of 
investment and savings contributed to this growth, as did strong exports. Yet more than 400 million 
people in India still subsist on less than US$ 1.25/day.  India faces challenges in reducing extreme 
poverty, curbing high malnutrition and achieving shared prosperity.  The Government of India has 
emphasized increased farm productivity as fundamental to India’s poverty reduction and growth 
strategy. Building relevant skills sets has been a persistent challenge across the economy.  
Educational institutions, particularly at the tertiary level, are critical to accelerate India’s emergence 

in global markets, yet teaching is poorly linked with labor market demand, research and 
development, thereby producing graduates with limited problem-solving skills.

Sectoral and Institutional Context
Agriculture in India employs 52% of the labor force and is the main source of livelihood for 80% of 
the rural poor, but contributes only 14% to GDP and 10% to total exports. Women constitute about 
60% of the economically active population in agriculture and livestock. The Green Revolution in 
the late 1960s and 1970s, with investment in new seeds, production technologies, cultivation 
methods and irrigation practices, improved agricultural productivity and made India food-secure.  
Where the Green Revolution flourished – Haryana and Punjab – are today among the higher income 
states in the country.  However, agricultural productivity growth declined in the 1990s, rebounded 
in the 2000s, and today still remains low. Moreover, this growth has been largely price driven and 
heavily reliant on inputs rather than efficiency gains.  
 
At current Total Factor Productivity (TFP) growth, India’s domestic agricultural output will meet 
59% of the country’s 2030 projected food demand (GAP Report 2014).  Agricultural higher 
education can be the engine for increasing productivity through better skilled technicians, 
innovative research and extension linked to technologies and practices, common under the Land 
Grant model.  A 2014 Bank agricultural sector study argues that while India doubled investment in 
agricultural research and extension (0.4% of AgGDP in 1981 to 0.96% in 2011), the quality of 
innovation has suffered along with institutional capacity to adapt and remain relevant.  
Reawakening the “research-education-extension nexus” intrinsic to the Land Grant model can 
propel India’s agricultural innovation, farmers’ technology adoption and agriculture’s overall 
transformation.  In Brazil, for example, the Coordination for the Improvement of Higher Education 
Personnel (CAPES) and the National Council for Scientific and Technological Development 
(CNPq) have worked together to build and maintain high-quality faculty in universities nationwide. 
 
The National Agricultural Education System comprises 56 State Agricultural Universities (SAUs), 
one Central Agricultural University, and four Research Institutes with deemed-to-be university 
status.    The first SAU – G. B. Pant University of Agriculture and Technology, Pantanagar – was 
established in 1960 based on the US Land Grant model emphasizing the integration of research, 
education and extension.  Under the Indian Constitution, statutory control of agriculture (including 
agricultural education) lies with the respective State Governments while the Union Government 
coordinates and sets educational standards. In 1996, the Indian Council of Agricultural Research 
(ICAR) began voluntary SAU accreditation to establish norms and quality standards for agricultural 
higher education.  ICAR continues its financial support to SAUs for accreditation; to date, ICAR 
has accredited 43 SAUs.   
 
The face of Indian agriculture has changed.  Women producers must participate in and benefit from 
agricultural research, education, and extension. There is also growing private sector demand for 
skilled labor in all aspects of agriculture, particularly high-value agro-industry, food processing, and 
specialized knowledge-intensive areas such as water efficiency, food safety, and trade.  A 2014 
assessment of human resource requirements shows an annual deficit of 14,000 in satisfying the 
demand for degree holders in agricultural and allied sciences.   A 2010 National Academy of 
Agriculture Research Management study found a jobs deficit of 50% in agriculture and allied 
sciences relative to the anticipated demand in 2020.   SAUs must adapt to the rapidly changing 
agricultural sector and its increasing knowledge intensity, and prepare the high-quality human 
resources essential for any technology and innovation system to succeed.   



 
Yet the once-impressive SAUs established during the Green Revolution have become less effective 
and less relevant in stimulating transformative change in Indian agriculture. The research-education-
extension synergy — strong in earlier years — has waned substantially and academic inbreeding 
has stunted teaching curricula, eroded faculty quality and weakened research and extension 
outcomes.  As a result, the SAU system is not attracting high-quality students to equip the next 
generation of talent to lead India’s agricultural growth, principally in the private sector. 
ICAR has taken the lead in analyzing the challenges facing agricultural higher education in India.  
This has led to an ambitious reform agenda for SAUs, spelled out in the 2013 Bhubaneshwar 
Declaration, emphasizing: (a) transparent governance; (b) financial and academic autonomy; (c) 
adequate and consistent funding; (d) standards and accreditation; (e) public-private partnerships; (f) 
revamped teaching curricula and methodologies; and (g) international cooperation.   Several 
challenges confront SAUs, among these: 
 
• Poor governance: Vice-chancellors tend to be political appointees and often have little role 
in setting budget priorities or allocations.  Overall accountability is weak and not linked to desired 
academic outcomes. 
• High faculty vacancy rates and pervasive academic inbreeding: Some 56% of SAU faculty 
positions are vacant, with minimal recent recruitment, leading to heavy workloads, poor teaching 
performance and scarce time available for research or extension. Limited contacts with national or 
international centers of excellence and weak linkages with industry, farms and the private sector 
have led to academic stagnation, at a time when competitiveness requires more such interaction. 
There are few incentives to spur faculty productivity in teaching, research or extension. 
• Disconnect between agricultural education and employment: The private sector generates 
nearly one-half of agricultural employment, yet curricula remain focused on the shrinking 
opportunities in the public sector. Importantly, curricula lack a problem-solving orientation. SAUs 
must strengthen job-driven programs, including entrepreneurship-focused courses, to build avenues 
for off-farm work and facilitate technology transfer from lab-to-land.  
• Capital development and financial management:   Salaries comprise up to 90% of SAUs’ 
budgets, funding is almost entirely sourced from the public sector and has not kept pace with 
increasing student admissions.  In contrast, Michigan State University, a model for Indian SAUs, 
sources 10% of its annual budget from public funds. SAUs must begin to raise their own resources 
through fee-based/market-oriented programs, sales of proprietary seed/planting material, 
consultancies and capital development initiatives. 
• Meeting globalization: Greater infusion of frontier science subjects (e.g., biotechnology, 
nanotechnology, precision and climate-resilient agriculture, information and communication 
technology), good trade practices, ethics of intellectual property rights and genetically modified 
crops, and market intelligence have become critical to promote efficiency, awareness, equity, and 
competitiveness in agriculture as India strives to cement its role as a global player in agriculture. 
• Forging service market development: Staffing of Agricultural Technology Management 
Agencies (ATMAs) and Krishi Vigyan Kendras-KVKs (Agriculture Science Centers) and other 
professional private and public agricultural service providers will require business and technical 
skills to meet the knowledge demanded by farmers, particularly women.  
 
The World Bank and ICAR have a long and fruitful collaboration, most recently through the 
National Agricultural Innovation Project (NAIP), National Agricultural Technology Project (NATP) 
and sector work.  The current ICAR reform priorities require further refinement and focus, and 
ICAR has requested World Bank support as a knowledge adjunct to the proposed project. 

The challenges faced by SAUs mirror those faced in general by higher education in India.  The 
needs of the agricultural sector resonate with other sectors, i.e., highly trained workforce and 
relevant cutting-edge research.  The Bank’s Agriculture and Education Global Practices are 
collaborating on the proposed project to ensure that the SAU reform process benefits from 
innovations in both sectors across India and internationally.  Through strategic priority interventions 
at the Central and State levels, the proposed project would have far-reaching and long-term impacts 
on agricultural higher education in India.  The project would also incorporate disbursement-linked 
Indicators (DLIs) to build time-bound financial incentives for SAUs and ICAR in pursuit of the 
proposed reform agenda.

Relationship to CAS
The proposed project supports the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) 2013-17 and addresses the 
three engagement areas of integration, transformation and inclusion. These engagement areas 
foresee increased agricultural productivity and also support quality improvements of higher 
education to create a more skilled workforce that continuously improves the productivity of key 
sectors, including agriculture.   Further, by working with SAUs in low-income states, the proposed 
project supports the CPS strategy of improving their economic performance.  
 
The proposed project is a multi-Global Practice collaboration (Agriculture and Education) and is 
expected to support activities and results directly related to cross-cutting strategic areas of climate 
change, jobs, gender and public-private partnerships.

II. Proposed Development Objective(s)
Proposed Development Objective(s) (From PCN)
The project development objective is to increase educational relevance and quality in selected State 
Agricultural Universities. 
 
Equity, especially gender and caste-based equity, is a cross-cutting theme of the proposed project 
and would be tracked through the key performance indicators.

Key Results (From PCN)
The following key performance indicators are proposed: 
 
1. Percentage change in SAU faculty scientific effectiveness as measured by h-index [quality]; 
2. Percentage change in level and source(s) of SAU revenue [quality]; 
3. Increased awareness and uptake of locally-relevant agricultural research [relevance];  
4. Increased student retention rates, disaggregated by gender and SC/ST [quality, relevance 
and equity]; and  
5. Increased satisfaction rates of students, farmers and agribusinesses with SAU curricula and 
service provision [quality and relevance].

III. Preliminary Description
Concept Description
The proposed project addresses strategic reforms in agricultural higher education at the state level 
(targeting SAUs) and the central level (focused on ICAR).  Selected SAUs would pilot a range of 
innovations in education, research and extension under diverse settings.   In so doing, these SAUs 


will test options to create 21st century educational institutions to successfully meet the current and 
future challenges facing India’s agricultural sector. These institutions will attract a diverse cadre of 
high-quality students, train them with labor-market relevant skills, nurture research talent and 
ensure knowledge flows between lab and land. The second set of reforms will empower ICAR by 
strengthening its capacity to provide strategic support to SAUs nationwide.     
 
The project would likely consist of three components: 
 
Component 1 – Support to State Agricultural Universities – addresses the need to raise educational 
quality and relevance in SAUs and create knowledge and technology hubs for priority themes in 
support of agricultural transformation.  The component, which would absorb most of project 
finance, would have two sub-components: 
 
Sub-component 1a – Investments toward 21st Century State Agricultural Universities – would 
target reform-ready SAUs and States (applying verifiable criteria) and support Institutional 
Development Plans (IDPs), developed through multi-stakeholder processes, that undertake key 
governance reforms, finance new and refurbished research and teaching facilities, curricula and 
faculty development, training for administrators, strengthening locally relevant research, student 
placement and technical assistance. Supported IDPs would also emphasize universities’ exploring of 
alternative income streams, such as: tuition; alumni contributions; competitively-selected research 
projects; patents; joint ventures; extension services; consultancy services; and special courses for 
mid-career professionals. These diverse activities would not only generate own financial resources 
for SAUs, but also link them to the national and global knowledge economy, thereby further 
enhancing their relevance.  By focusing on income-earning capacity, SAUs would also create 
openings for sustained private sector participation.  Suitable twinning arrangements with foreign 
universities would also be explored, as would innovative pilots for research dissemination and 
mechanisms for internal revenue generation.  
 
Sub-component 1b – Investments in Centers for Advanced Agricultural Science and Technology – 
would support SAUs in establishing interdisciplinary centers for teaching, research and extension on 
critical agriculture and rural development topics (e.g., agricultural adaptation to climate change; 
land and water use efficiency, scalable technology and mechanization, agro-industry, agro-
entrepreneurship).  Multi-stakeholder consultations would inform the selection of geographic 
locations and core themes under the sub-component.  The sub-component would finance research 
and teaching equipment, faculty and scientist development fellowships, scholarships, and costs 
associated with twinning arrangements with similar centers outside and within India. 
 
Component 2 – Investments in ICAR for Leadership in Agricultural Higher Education – would: (a)  
empower ICAR by financing its own internal reforms to enhance its effectiveness in coordinating, 
guiding and managing agricultural research and education nationwide; and (b) support ICAR in its 
interactions with SAUs and key stakeholders nationwide through interventions that increase the 
quality and relevance of agricultural education.   The component would have two sub-components: 
 
Sub-component 2a – Investments in ICAR to support excellence in SAUs – would leverage ICAR’s 
comparative advantage in assessing systemic challenges ac ross all SAUs and incubating solutions.  
Among the interventions financed would be: (a) digital information systems for SAU data collection 
and analysis to improve quality metrics in agricultural higher education; (b) an improved curricula 
review process to tighten its relevance in today’s dynamic job market; (c) enhanced methods to 



consolidate and disseminate global best-practices (e.g., benchmarking) in agricultural higher 
education; and (d) institutionalization of stakeholder and advisory inputs to better inform research, 
education and extension across the SAU system.          
Subcomponent 2b – ICAR innovation grants to SAUs – would be open to all SAUs nationwide and  
support interventions that would include: (a) quality assurance (e.g., accreditation); (b) next-
generation management information and financial management systems to increase transparency 
and administrative efficiency; (c) campus student placement offices to facilitate stronger linkages 
between academics and future employment opportunities; (d) theme-based competitive grants to 
students, faculty and academic departments to promote inter-state and international collaboration, 
including matching funds from the private sector; and (e) needs-based equipment, training and 
technical assistance.  
 
Component 3 – Project Management and Learning – would support ICAR’s project management, 
primarily through its Education Division, to administer, supervise, monitor and evaluate overall 
project implementation.  The component would also support the formation of an external advisory 
board to guide ICAR throughout project implementation.

IV. Safeguard Policies that might apply
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No TBD
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖

V. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 165.00 Total Bank Financing: 82.50
Financing Gap: 0.00
Financing Source Amount
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 82.50
 International Development Association (IDA) 82.50
 T

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Land Allocation for Social and Economic Development Project III (P171331) 

 
 

  
Jun 16, 2019 Page 1 of 10  

     

      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document (PID) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 28-Jun-2019 | Report No: PIDC27269 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Cambodia P171331  Land Allocation for 
Social and Economic 
Development Project III 
(P171331) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC Feb 28, 2020 Jun 19, 2020 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Kingdom of Cambodia Ministry of Land 
Management Urban 
Planning and Construction 
(MLMUPC), Ministry of 
Agriculture, Forestry and 
Fisheries (MAFF), National 
Committee for Sub-National 
Democratic and 
Development Secretariat 
(NCDDS) 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The project development objective is to help improve target beneficiaries' access to agriculture resources and selected 
infrastructure and social services in project communities. 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 100.00 

Total Financing 70.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 60.00 

Financing Gap 30.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 



     International Development Association (IDA) 60.00 

          IDA Credit 60.00 

Non-World Bank Group Financing 

     Counterpart Funding 10.00 

          Borrower/Recipient 10.00 

   
 

Environmental and Social Risk Classification Concept Review Decision 

High  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

 
1. Over the past two decades, Cambodia has undergone a significant transition, reaching lower middle-
income economy by raising its per capita income from USD 250 in 1995 to an estimated USD 1,230 in 2017. Driven 
by garment exports and tourism, Cambodia has sustained an average growth rate of 7.7% between 1995-2018, 
ranking sixth in the world1, among the fastest-growing economies in the world and has achieved impressive gains in 
poverty reduction. As global demand peaks in 2018, economic growth is estimated to have reached 7.5%, compared 
to 7% in 2017. Growth is expected to remain robust over the medium term. Growth was accompanied by a significant 
decline in poverty incidence, which dropped from 47 percent in 2007 to about 13 percent in 2013 thanks largely to 
high agriculture commodity prices globally as well as strong job creation in manufacturing and services. Around 3.6 
million jobs in industry and services were created over the past two decades. Cambodia’s growth has been pro-poor. 
The percentage of Cambodians living under the national poverty line fell from 47.8 percent in 2007 to 13.5 percent 
in 2014, according to official estimates. The Gini coefficient declined to 0.30 in 2014 from 0.34 in 2009. Cambodia 
has made significant progress in attaining the Millennium Development Goals. Since 1990, the country has more than 
halved extreme poverty and maternal mortality, achieved nearly universal primary education enrollment, and made 
significant progress in combating HIV/AIDS. Poverty reduction was particularly dramatic from 2007 to 2009, when 
poverty declined by 25 percentage points and 3.3 million people escaped poverty, owing in large part to an expansion 
of cultivated area and high international food prices which benefited both farmers and agriculture workers. 

2. Among the main drivers of growth have been exports of goods and services and foreign capital inflows. 
Since opening its economy to international trade and capital flows in 1992, Cambodia has become one of the East 
Asian countries most open to trade and foreign investment. Exports of goods and services grew at an average of 18 
percent during 1994-2017, with Cambodia ranking 4th in the world in exports during that period. Notably, its export 

                                            
1 World Development Indicators. Four countries that experienced a recession during this period are excluded.  


 

success is driven by a few products, with final garments and footwear accounting for nearly three-quarters of total 
exports and has been facilitated by preferential access to key markets. Cambodia is also among the top countries in 
the world in terms of attracting foreign direct investment (FDI), which has facilitated entry into some global value 
chains (GVCs).  
 
3. With an aspiration to become an upper middle-income country by 2030, Cambodia needs to strengthen 
its existing drivers, which are weakening, while building new drivers of growth. The end of the commodity super-
cycle, coupled with adverse weather shocks, have resulted in a sharp slowdown in agriculture growth. Meanwhile, 
Cambodia’s labor-intensive, export-oriented garment and tourism sectors are facing rising wages and greater 
competition from abroad. There is evidence that all merchandise export growth, tourist arrivals, as well as FDI into 
manufacturing have slowed during 2013-2017.  Moreover, the EU is considering the suspension of preferential 
market access for Cambodian exports under the Everything-but-Arms (EBA) scheme, which could mean tariffs of 
about 12 percent for Cambodian garment exports, threatening sector competitiveness. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 

 
4. Growth has also been driven by the country’s rich and diverse natural capital, which supports the 
livelihoods of millions of Cambodians. Agriculture, which depends heavily on natural resources and ecosystem 
services, contributed 27% of the annual gross domestic product (GDP) in 2018. More than five million people depend 
on agriculture and fisheries, to supplement their income and support their food security, and 88 percent of the 
population still relies on traditional biomass for cooking. Cambodians are also the largest consumers of freshwater 
fish per capita, with fish and other aquatic resources contributing to 37 percent of total protein consumption. 
Tourism, another engine of economic growth, is also becoming increasingly dependent on natural resources and 
environment. 
 
5. Going forward, Cambodia may not be able to rely on the same factors that drove strong growth and 
poverty reduction over the past two decades. In the case of agriculture, the outlook for commodity prices is not 
positive, and Cambodia’s scope for further gains in cultivated area is more limited nowadays, especially considering 
the need for environmental sustainability. Risks posed by the degradation of natural resources could affect economic 
sustainability. It is crucial to maintain and develop natural resources while strengthening climate resilience. Low 
prices for agricultural commodities along with rising salaries will require improvements in productivity to remain 
competitive. Given the continued importance of the agricultural sector to growth and poverty reduction, Cambodia 
will need to foster a gradual transformation of the sector through intensification, diversification, and value addition. 
The public sector could facilitate expanded irrigation, knowledge, and technology adoption in collaboration with the 
private sector and strategies of quality differentiation by enhancing systems for managing quality and food safety 
and introducing an overall coherent approach to ‘brand’ Cambodian food and agriculture.  
 
6. The benefits of economic growth and the reduction of poverty has not been shared equitably among 
Cambodian citizens. Disparities in income and access to opportunities remain, particularly in rural communities. 
Rural communities which are still heavily relying on land, forests, and other natural resources for their livelihoods are 
still faced with widespread poverty in rural Cambodia.  Landlessness and access to natural resources remains a 
problem. 
7. Inequality in ownership and/or access to productive assets such as land is a major concern because it 
implies the likelihood of a trend to growing inequality of production, income and consumption in the future. In the 
absence of dramatic expansion of off-farm employment or livelihood opportunities to absorb landless labor, the 

concentration of land in fewer hands implies a growing gap in the opportunities available to different types of 
households.  
 
8. Key reforms are needed for Cambodia to sustain pro-poor growth, foster country’s competitiveness, 
sustainably manage natural resource wealth and improve access to and quality of public services. Cambodia 
continues to have a serios infrastructure gap and would benefit from greater connectivity and investing in rural and 
urban infrastructure is essential.  
 
9. The Royal Government of Cambodia is making growing efforts to address landlessness and tenure 
insecurity, including increasing Indigenous Communal Land Titling (ICLT). Commune-based and national Social Land 
Concession projects, both Government and donor funded have been established, addressing rural poverty and 
providing a social safety net or retirement benefit for demobilized soldiers. Where accompanied by adequate 
infrastructure and service provision, these projects have shown to be able to provide sustainable livelihoods. 
However, needs (and demands) of landless and tenure-insecure population groups and the challenges in addressing 
them remain significant. Landlessness and poverty remaining an issue in rural areas. 
 
10. Under the original LASED and the second phase LASED II projects, participatory planning of agriculture 
and livelihood activities has progressively led to the adoption of good practices in agriculture production in the 
land recipient communities. 5,000ha of agricultural land are newly under perennial or annual crops, on 3,000ha 
beneficiaries apply improved production technologies that help raising incomes and protect natural resources.    
Accompanying investments in infrastructure, including the planned and ongoing support to small-scale irrigation 
schemes, have further increased sustainability of agriculture-based livelihoods, making sure products and production 
processes respond to market demands and are resilient to the short and long-term climate changes affecting the 
areas. At the same time, road linkages to and from the SLC areas benefit not only the direct land recipients but many 
more stakeholders that travel to and from the area, providing new business opportunities, decreasing transaction 
costs, and stimulating economic and social exchange.  A new, third phase and project would expand and extend 
activities and benefits to new target groups in new provinces.  
 

Relationship to CPF 
 

11. The Project supports the achievement of the World Bank’s twin goals to end extreme poverty and promote 
shared prosperity through its emphasis on expanding the benefits of poverty-targeted land distribution and 
infrastructure and service provision, as well as reduce climate risk vulnerability to a broader segment of the poor and 
marginalized population in rural areas.  The Project is also consistent with, and part of the World Bank Group’s Country 
Partnership Framework (CPF) for Cambodia 2019-2023 which received Board approval in May 2019.  Furthermore, it 
supports the objectives in the government’s Rectangular Strategy IV (RS4), particularly the objectives of poverty 
reduction, agriculture development, diversification and commercialization, and improving rural infrastructure and 
services. The project supports the achievement of Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 1 on eradicating extreme 
poverty and SDG 2 on preventing hunger and improving nutrition. 

 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
12. The project development objective is to help improve target beneficiaries' access to agriculture resources 
and selected infrastructure and social services in project communities.  

Key Results (From PCN) 


13. The key results that the Project would achieve include: 

 

• Tenure security for formerly landless or land-poor, and other marginalized groups or individuals, i.e. 
indigenous communities. 
Achievements would be measured by the number of registered land rights (including titles) and the area 
(ha) that was provided to beneficiaries.  

• Infrastructure and service provision in the project areas, benefitting not only the direct target group but 
supporting broader area development. 
Achievements would be measured by the number of people that live along newly built or upgraded 
roads and who benefit from improved connectivity and market access. 

• Sustainable, agriculture-based livelihood development for individuals and groups in the project 
communities. 
Achievements would be measured by increased incomes from farming, and improved food security (and 
nutrition) amongst the target beneficiary families.  

 
14. With a potentially nation-wide coverage, implementation will focus on the existing LASED provinces, plus 
the Northeastern Provinces of Mondulkiri, Rattanakiri, Stung Treng and Preah Vihear.  A total of 30-40 project sites 
(sub-projects) would be included, covering a total of approximately 10,000 -15,000 direct beneficiary households.  
Benefits from improved infrastructure availability and usage will accrue to a broader beneficiary group in the project 
areas. 

D. Concept Description 
 

Component 1: Social Land Concession (SLC) and Indigenous Communal Land Titling (ICLT) Investment 
Planning and Prioritization (approx. US$20million) 

 
15. This would continue support for: (a) participatory preparation and updating of SLC or ICLT plans for the new, 
and where necessary also existing sites, respectively; (b) identification, prioritization and planning of appropriate 
technology and infrastructure investments, including the collection of project baseline data at additional sites, and 
responding to increased monitoring requirements; and (c) processing of individual SLC land titles for eligible land 
recipients in the existing sites. Additional and adjusted activities would include (d) facilitating incorporation of climate 
smart/climate change resilience considerations, and where appropriate specific NRM protection in new and or 
existing land use plans for project areas; and (e) processing of communal land titles in areas where the project sites 
include indigenous communities with respective demands. 

Component 2: Land Preparation and Infrastructure Development (approx. US$50million) 
 
16. This would support the settling-in requirements as well as the required land preparation and prioritized 
infrastructure investments at new project sites. These include the: (a) provision of settling-in assistance to newly-
installed land recipients; (b) provision of initial land preparation assistance including a first cover crop; and (c) 
provision of productive/economic and social community infrastructure investments such as rural roads, small-scale 
irrigation systems, water supply and sanitation facilities, school buildings, teachers’ houses, health posts and 
community centers, among others. Based on the experiences in existing SLC areas and responding to the significant 
infrastructure gaps in rural areas expected to be encountered at the proposed new project areas, it is expected that 

the Project’s largest investments would be provided for rural climate resilient roads, with benefits of those expanding 
beyond the direct beneficiaries, including entire communes and areas.  With the substantial increase in project area, 
the absolute amount for infrastructure investments will be considerably larger than under LASED II.  The second 
largest item for project investments concerns water infrastructures, both for climate change resilient small-scale 
irrigation schemes or water reservoirs and for provision of safe water supply and sanitation.  

Component 3: Agriculture and Livelihood Development (approx. US$20million) 
 
17. This would primarily support the improvement of climate-change resilient agricultural production systems, 
livelihoods and food security of new land recipients, including facilitation and provision of support services and 
technical assistance. These would include support for: (a) community organizing and development; (b) provision of 
agricultural service and extension support following a pluralistic service provider approach; (c) establishment of 
farmer-managed demonstration plots and model farms; (d) establishment and/or strengthening of farmers 
organization, agriculture cooperatives, production and marketing groups and other community interest groups; and 
(e) provision of community fund to strengthen successful local initiatives. Agriculture and livelihood support would 
be adjusted, where applicable, to the specific sociocultural and biophysical environments of new project areas, in 
particular in IP areas. Promotion of nutrition-sensitive agriculture will be part of the training curricula prepared and 
implemented by MAFF and PDAFF.  Adaptation and expansion of existing MAFF materials on nutrition-sensitive 
agriculture production will be part of the support.  

18. The Project will build on the experiences with LASED interventions, which highlight the need of strong 
agriculture development support to quickly integrate farming systems into the local and wider economy, 
strengthening agriculture-based livelihoods and provide quick returns and strong incentives to land recipients.  
Taking into consideration that additional project locations under the Project will include areas in provinces with 
important natural habitats, the Project will incorporate in its agriculture and livelihood development plans activities 
for protecting private, communal and public lands.  Where applicable, community forestry activities will be supported 
alongside private agriculture activities.   

19. An additional focus of agriculture and livelihood development under LASED III will be a specific response to 
climate change challenges.  In order to (further) strengthen the resilience of agriculture and food systems in the 
existing and new sites under the Project, responses to short- and long-term climate changes will be an integral part 
of support.  This will particularly include irrigation and water management support, integrating site specific planning 
into ongoing or prospective broader area development approaches.  

Component 4: Project Management, Coordination and M&E (approx. US$10million) 
 

20. This component would support adjusted project administration and coordination activities. It would ensure 
in particular the timely and transparent flow of funds, procurement, auditing and reporting. It would also support 
project implementing entities at all levels (including the new provinces and new communes) to establish (where 
needed) and strengthen their fiduciary, administrative and reporting capacities. Clear assignments for procurement 
and FM responsibilities of each IA will guide effective an efficient implementation. Ministry of Land Management 
Urban Planning and Construction (MLMUPC) will be the executing agency, with participation from the Ministry of 
Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries (MAFF), National Committee for Sub-National Democratic and Development 
Secretariat (NCDDS) as implementing agencies for this proposed project.  They will carry out procurement activities 
at national level for their respective activities in the components and sub-components, respectively.  Communes and 
communities will carry out procurement activities at the sub-national levels if and as applicable.  

21. Specific attention and support would also be provided to adapt and strengthen the Project’s M&E system, 
and further expand and enhance the Project and SLC/ICLT-related management information system as input to the 
site planning and prioritization. Support would include technical assistance, training, incremental operating costs, 
vehicles and equipment, among others. 

    
 
Legal Operational Policies                                  Triggered? 

Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50 No 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60 No 

 
Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts 

 
The overall environmental and social risk classification is high. The screening of risks and impacts is based on discussion 
with the task team, consultations and observations undertaken during a mission, secondary data, and specialist 
experience with LASED II. 
 
The project will support the process for SLC and ICLT, establishment of sustainable infrastructure and livelihood systems 
including land preparation, provision of social and economic infrastructure, agriculture support and livelihood 
development. Restrictions on access to land and natural and cultural resources resulting from these activities may impact 
on nature-based livelihoods and tenure of vulnerable or marginal households and communities where decisions may not 
be managed in a participatory manner. While the project aims to deliver a range of benefits including economic 
development and community livelihood opportunities, project activities have the potential to generate significant social 
impacts, direct and indirect, due to the range of activities related to land consolidation, indigenous community lands, 
agriculture and infrastructure. The scale of the proposed activities, across sensitive locations (indigenous areas) and new 
focus on ICLT presents risks related to collective registration of indigenous communities’ lands.  
 
Nine of the standards have be screened as relevant. Standard ESS9 on Financial Intermediaries is not considered 
relevant. 
 
The implementing agencies have good competency in implementing projects in accordance with national requirements 
and World Bank Safeguards Policies but have less familiarity with and experience in delivering projects in line with the 
Environmental and Social Framework. Prior to project appraisal an Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) 
will be prepared which will take into account the need to ensure budget, staffing and operational arrangements for 
project environmental and social risk management. For new sites involving indigenous communities as sole beneficiaries, 
to understand and address project related risks and impacts, a social assessment will be prepared prior to appraisal to 
inform project design and project level social risk management framework, also to be prepared prior to appraisal. The 
assessment will inform revisions to existing social risk management frameworks and plans, including on stakeholder 
engagement, at both project and community level. 

 

 
























































World Bank Document


 

PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 

APPRAISAL STAGE 

Report No.: 110552  

Project Name Land Bank Financial Intermediation Loan (P150008) 

Region AFRICA 

Country South Africa 

Sector(s) General finance sector (30%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry 

sector (20%), SME Finance (50%) 

Theme(s) Rural markets (50%), Other Financial Sector Development (50%) 

Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing 

Project ID P150008 

Borrower(s) Land and Agricultural Development Bank of South Africa 

Implementing Agency Land Bank 

Environmental Category F-Financial Intermediary Assessment 

Date PID Prepared/Updated 12-October-2016 

Estimated Date of Board 

Approval 

23-January-2017 

Appraisal Review Decision 

(from Decision Note) 
 

Other Decision  

I. Project Context 

 Country Context 

 

More than twenty years after the end of apartheid, unemployment, poverty and inequality remain 

important development challenges in South Africa, despite substantial progress in overcoming the 

legacy of the past. While total employment increased from 9 million in 1996 to 16 million in 2015, the 

unemployment rate has stayed stubbornly high in the range of 20-26 percent. In 2015 approximately 5.4 

million South Africans were unemployed, of which about 40 percent were new entrants.  A 30 percent 

increase in per capita GDP since the late 1990s and a sharp expansion of the social grant coverage 

enabled a significant decline in the poverty rate—from 43.5 percent of the population living below 

ZAR219 (inflation-adjusted) a month in 2000 to 36.7 percent (or 18.3 million people) living below R501 

in 2015. Nevertheless, pockets of poverty remain deeply entrenched, mostly among the historically 

disadvantaged population. With a relatively stagnant income Gini coefficient of around 0.69 in 2011 

(versus 0.72 in 2006) and expenditure Gini of 0.634 in 2015 (versus 0.67 in 2006), South Africa has one 

of the highest inequality rates in the world. Land distribution, in particular, is one of the most unequal in 

the world. Threatening progress in poverty alleviation is the impact of the drought on agriculture and the 

widening gap between those with and without jobs. 

Recent developments in economic activity are not indicative of major improvements in growth or 

employment. South Africa’s annual GDP is estimated to have increased by 1.3 percent in 2015, 


compared to 1.5 percent in 2014 and 2.2 percent in 2013, a result of depressed global conditions, as well 

as labor unrest and electricity shortages which compounded structural constraints. This weak growth is 

well-below the projected 5 percent growth needed to drive down unemployment. Inflation was relatively 

subdued in 2015 amid lower food and fuel prices (5.2 percent as of December 2015, up from 4.8 percent 

in November). However the Reserve Bank increased the repurchase rate by a total of 125 basis points 

from start 2015 to end March 2016 due to a deterioration of the inflation outlook as a result of the effects 

from rising food prices due to the drought, the risk of a higher pass-through from the sharp depreciation 

of the rand (depreciated by more than 30 percent against the dollar in 2015 and continued to weaken in 

January 2016, before showing a subsequent moderate recovery) and subdued global growth. 

A weaker growth environment will pose a challenge in the management of the fiscal deficit, which in 

turn increases the sovereign credit risk.  In an effort to mitigate sovereign credit risk, the National 

Budget Speech of February 2016 announced a strong fiscal adjustment effort, bringing the fiscal deficit 

from 3.9 percent of GDP for 2015/16 to 2.8 percent by 2017/18. The original target of the 2015 budget 

had been 2.5 percent, however deterioration in the growth outlook rendered the target unrealistic. In 

December 2015, Fitch and Standard and Poor’s (S&P) downgraded South Africa’s creditworthiness 

rating to BBB-, one notch above speculative grade, and S&P placed its rating on negative watch. The 

turmoil in markets experienced in December 2015 when a weakening in the government’s commitment 

to fiscal discipline was perceived, hints at the potential fallout from a further ratings downgrade.  

A substantial reduction in poverty and inequality will be hard to achieve without a major success in rural 

development. As stated by South Africa’s National Development Plan (NDP), the main challenge for 

rural development in South Africa is to “combat the marginalization of the poor”. While the rural share 

of poverty fell from 70 percent in 1993 to 58.3 percent in 2011, partly due to migration of the poor to 

townships and informal settlements around urban centers, rural areas remain characterized by greater 

poverty and inequality than urban areas.  The contraction in agricultural production at double-digit 

rates in the first three quarters of 2015, as extreme weather conditions related to El Nino led to the most 

severe drought in almost 20 years, pushed an estimated 50,000 South Africans into poverty. 

Agriculture development and successful land reform are key pillars of the strategy laid out by the NDP 

for integrated and inclusive rural development. South Africa’s agriculture sector is characterized by 

dualism: a modern, market-oriented capital intensive farming sector consisting of a small number of 

large commercial farms (around 40,000 farming units) and a large number of subsistence and 

small-scale or emerging farms, many in the former homeland areas. In addition, there is growing 

consolidation in the industry with a number of mergers taking place and the acquisition of smaller 

players. While improving economies of scale, this consolidation may also lead to lower competition in 

the market. Around 2006, over 80 percent of South African farmers worked on a piece of land of one 

hectare or smaller, and another 11 percent on one to five hectares. Only 3 percent had access to land of 

larger than 20 hectares. It is estimated that there are 2.5 – 3.5 million households engaged in subsistence 

farming, about 350,000 – 700,000 who can be classified as emerging farmers, producing part of their 

output for the market, and between 11,000 – 15,000 small to medium scale farmers who are 

commercially oriented. 

The progress of land reform has been slow and a large number of land reform beneficiaries are not using 

the land productively. The government committed itself to transfer 30 percent of the 82 million hectares 

of agricultural land owned by whites in 1994 to historically disadvantaged farmers by 2014, a total of 

24.5 million hectares, through both land restitution and land redistribution. According to the Twenty 

Year Review published by the Presidency, only 9.4 million hectares have been redistributed since 1994 

through both land restitution and redistribution. Achieving the objective of “productive use” of 

redistributed and restituted land requires even greater efforts and innovation. Land reform in South 

Africa to date has involved the transfer of relatively large commercial farms in their entirety to groups of 



beneficiaries. Land reform beneficiaries are typically resource-poor, risk-averse, and inexperienced 

historically disadvantaged farmers. Support provided to them after their takeover of the land, that is 

post-settlement support, has been inadequate. Land reform beneficiaries have experienced numerous 

problems accessing services, such as credit, training, technology extension, transport, plowing services, 

veterinary services, and marketing services. The well-developed agribusiness sector that services 

large-scale commercial agriculture has not been seen extending its operations to emerging farmers who, 

in most cases, would be cash-strapped and incapable of paying for such services anyway. As a 

consequence, there is limited integration of small farmers into the value chain.  

Support for small-scale farmers is equally crucial to job creation. Employment in the formal agriculture 

sector declined from 1.1 million in 1992 to 739,000 in 2014 despite output growth. Nevertheless, the 

NDP believes that with successful rural development and land reform the agriculture sector has the 

potential to create 1 million new jobs by 2030. The NDP counts on small-scale/ emerging farmers for 

over 35 percent of the job creation target, in addition to a 10 percent share from subsistence farmers, a 10 

percent share expected from better use of the land that has already been redistributed or restituted to land 

reform beneficiaries, and a 30 percent share from expansion of labor intensive commercial farming.   

 
 

Sectoral and institutional Context 

 

South Africa’s financial sector is the most developed in Sub-Saharan Africa and is significantly larger 

and more diversified compared to regional and income-group peers. It is supported by an elaborate legal 

and financial infrastructure and a generally effective regulatory framework. South Africa’s financial 

system totaled approximately ZAR 10 trillion in assets as of year-end 2014 (US$ equivalent of 1,026 

billion). As of end 2014, the banking sector constitutes almost 40 percent of the financial system assets, 

with pension funds and long-term insurers each contributing roughly 35 and 18 percent, respectively. 

The banking sector is highly concentrated, but at the same time commercially driven and professional. 

The ‘big four’ banks in South Africa, two of which are foreign owned, account for over 83 percent of 

total banking assets. This concentrated ownership structure has led to limited competition and distorted 

incentives for these banks to serve the lower end of the market, especially micro, small, and 

medium-sized enterprises and the low-income population. Nevertheless, the banking system generally is 

highly professional and commercially driven, and does not suffer from distortionary policies.   

Provision of agricultural finance and support  

One of the main challenges for rural and agriculture development is affordable access to working capital 

for emerging farmers and medium to long-term finance for small and medium-sized agricultural 

enterprises. While the financial services needs of the large commercial farms are generally well catered 

for by the private sector, farmers in rural areas experience many of the challenges faced by their peers in 

other African countries, ranging from difficulties in accessing markets, poor infrastructure, and little or 

no physical assets that could be used as collateral for accessing financing. With few exceptions, 

emerging and small-scale farmers are unable to use the land that they farm on as collateral given that the 

state owns most of the land in the former homelands. FinScope’s 2010 Small Business Survey estimates 

that of the roughly 700,000 emerging and small commercial farmers, only 5.6 percent used formal credit 

services and only 2.5 percent from a bank. In contrast, nearly half of those farmers used formal savings 

and/ or payments services and about 30 percent formal insurance. 

Without adequate collateral, rural farmers face challenges in accessing credit from traditional 

commercial banks. While the ‘big four’ commercial banks have made efforts to become more inclusive, 

their business models and cost structure do not lend themselves to serving the agricultural sector. Some 



banks are funding value chain off-take agreements with large processors and retailers for on-lending to 

smaller farmers, but such lending is small compared to the overall loan book of commercial banks. 

According to the Department of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries (DAFF), total farming debt 

amounted to ZAR 116,576 million (US$10,137 million) in 2014, out of which ZAR 66,345 million 

(US$5,769 million) was from commercial banks and ZAR 30,580 million (US$2,659 million) from the 

Land Bank. Compared to total commercial bank loans and advances of ZAR 2,967 billion (US$258 

billion), agricultural lending amounts to about 1 percent of their total loan book. 

A wide range of programs have been implemented by the government to provide financial support to 

land reform beneficiaries and small-scale farmers. In 1994 the government introduced the 

Settlement/Land Acquisition Grant (SLAG) to enable individuals and groups to finance the purchase of 

land from a willing seller. Until 2000, redistribution policy centered on the provision of a grant of ZAR 

16,000 (~US$1,034) to qualifying households with an income of less than ZAR 1,500 (~US$97) a 

month. In 2001 the Land Redistribution for Agricultural Development (LRAD) Grant was introduced to 

establish and promote emerging farmers. LRAD offered higher grants, paid to individuals rather than to 

households, and made greater use of loan financing through institutions such as Land Bank to 

supplement the grant. A few years later, the slow pace of land reform led to the introduction of the 

Proactive Land Acquisition Strategy (PLAS) in 2005-06. The use of grants for land acquisition was 

discontinued and the focus was shifted to the acquisition of strategically located land through PLAS by 

the state. Since its inception, PLAS has become the biggest single program area within redistribution, in 

terms of both budget and land area. 

There are also initiatives designed to provide post-settlement support to land reform beneficiaries. The 

LRAD policy for example sets out to close the post-settlement support gap that prevailed under SLAG. 

In addition, the Comprehensive Farmer Support Program (CFSP) provides two grants, one for capacity 

building and one for on-farm infrastructure. In order to access on-farm infrastructure grants ranging 

from a minimum of ZAR 5,000 to a maximum of ZAR 100,000 (~ US$323 to 6,462), beneficiaries must 

make an ‘own contribution’ along a sliding scale similar to that of the LRAD grant program. It is a 

once-off support package designed for LRAD beneficiaries. The Comprehensive Agricultural Support 

Program (CASP) supported by DAFF offers grants to support short-term operating expenses and small 

operating needs such as machinery. These grants are managed at the provincial level and come from 

funds that are transferred from the national to the provincial level. Combined land acquisition grants, 

both for redistribution and restitution, totaled ZAR 13.6 billion (US$1.61 billion) between 2008 and 

2012 while grants for movable equipment and fixed improvements amounted to ZAR 3.4 billion 

(US$1.58 billion) between 2004 and 2012 (DAFF). Borrowing for working capital needs to operate and 

expand farms has been one of the most acute challenges for emerging and small farmers as well as land 

reform beneficiaries due to the reasons mentioned above.  

Value chain integration is an opportunity to address significant skills and financing gaps of emerging 

farmers. In South Africa, there is a growing recognition in government and the private sector that value 

chain integration may be an effective way of building up a new class of commercial emerging farmers. 

Drawing on the successful experiences in the sugar, poultry, cotton, tobacco and forestry sectors, the 

government and private sector are joining forces to scale up efforts in these and other sectors. A new 

area opening for value chain integration is in the supply of fresh fruits and vegetables to retail 

supermarkets. With new BBBEE procurement policies government is encouraging the private sector to 

get involved. For example, Walmart-Massmart has established a supplier fund to support emerging 

farmer integration into their supply chain. The South African Poultry Association through the creation 

of the Developing Poultry Farmers Organization (DPFO) facilitates technical and financial assistance to 

access contracts with egg and poultry businesses. 



Land Bank 

In addition to government grants, financing from Land Bank has been expected to play a critical role in 

land reform and agriculture development. Land Bank was established in 1912 and is governed by the 

Land and Agricultural Development Bank Act of 2002. Land Bank was given a mandate of 11 aspects, 

which fall into five broader areas: (i) access of the historically disadvantaged population to land; (ii) 

agriculture productivity, growth and job creation; (iii) gender equity; (iv) environmental sustainability; 

and (v) food security. The NDP published in 2011 continues to call for a key role of Land Bank in 

providing financial support to land reform beneficiaries and to help them overcome difficulties in entry 

into commercial farming. 

As the leading development financial institution in the rural and agriculture sector in South Africa, Land 

Bank had an approximately 29 percent market share in agricultural financing as of July 2015. The bank 

has achieved a significant turnaround during the past five years. It is now on a sustainable trajectory with 

profits of ZAR 420 million in 2014/15 (up 61 percent from 2013/14), and a Return on Average Assets of 

1.12 percent and a Return on Average Equity of 6.78 percent. Total assets stood at ZAR 39.4 billion in 

2014/15 with a performing loan book of ZAR 36 billion. Non-performing loans (NPLs) under Land 

Bank methodology were at 3.72 percent in 2014/15 and the cost-to-income ratio was 54.9 percent. Fitch 

Ratings upgraded Land Bank from AA to AA+ in January 2014. The rating was maintained at AA+ in 

December 2015. The bank does not take general deposits and funds itself mainly through the debt and 

capital markets, issuing instruments such as promissory notes.  

Land Bank is fully owned by the South African government and supervised by the National Treasury. It 

follows prudential guidelines as issued by its Board of Directors. It is consequently not prudentially 

supervised by the South African Reserve Bank (SARB). The bank is audited by the Auditor General. 

Land Bank is engaged in both wholesale lending through intermediaries as well as direct lending. 

Intermediaries are mainly credit providers, cooperatives, or agri-businesses.  

In 2015, Land Bank adopted a new strategy following the completion of its organizational review. The 

review was undertaken following conditions set by NT pursuant to the issue of a Government guarantee, 

aimed at enabling the Land Bank to raise longer term funding. The review was completed in August 

2015 and subsequently an implementation plan was approved by the Land Bank Board. Land Bank has 

started implementing the new strategy and key changes are planned to be put in place over a two-year 

period in line with the priorities of Land Bank. The changes focus on: (i) a strategy to optimize the retail 

commercial banking segment of Land Bank, the long term viability of which was a concern owing to 

loan losses and significant operational costs; (ii) new initiatives to potentially expand the development 

portfolio of Land Bank for emerging farmers in a sustainable and commercially viable manner by 

adopting a project finance approach in partnership with large corporates and intermediaries to integrate 

the emerging farmers into established value chains; and (iii) steps to align Land Bank financial 

soundness indicators, credit appraisal processes and risk management practices with international 

banking standards.  

Following the adoption of this new strategy, Land Bank has two main business lines: Corporate Banking 

(CB) and Commercial Development Banking (CDB). The new CDB business line is a combination of 

previous Retail Emerging Markets (REM) and Retail Commercial Banking (RCB) business lines. In 

2014/15, CB accounted for 83.6 percent of the bank’s loan book and CDB accounted for 16.4 percent, of 

which 1.3 percent was composed of loans provided under REM. 

Under CDB, the REM sub-business line continues to focus exclusively on lending to emerging farmers 

for development purposes. Farmers supported under REM typically have no or limited access to 

commercial funding and little or no collateral, but can be commercially sustainable and viable with 



financing and technical support. Subsistence farmers are not supported under REM. Lending is based on 

cash-flows and non-financial support (end to end on-farm support) is provided by Land Bank 

intermediaries and agricultural specialists based in Land Bank branches. REM uses wholesale as well as 

direct lending and offers production financing, installment sale finance, and medium-term loans. The 

total REM portfolio amounted to ZAR 489 million in 2014/15 (increase of ZAR 97 million in that year).  

Intensive and high-quality extensions services under the REM program are effectively provided by Land 

Bank’s intermediaries. These intermediaries have a comparative advantage in providing these services 

due to their close interaction with the beneficiaries. The non-financial complementary services, 

especially extension services, are critical for emerging farmers to develop. The costs for the extension 

services are embedded in the overall cost structure under REM and are borne by the intermediaries. 

While the provision of extension services is costly, especially for new emerging farmers, intermediaries 

can generate profits from these clients over time due to the long-run and comprehensive nature of 

engagement between intermediaries and their clients. The current model of providing extension services 

is considered to be of high quality according to the assessment carried out during project preparation. 

Under CDB, the RCB business line which was exclusively focused on direct retail lending to medium 

scale farmers, through 27 Agriculture Finance Centers (AFCs), has been significantly restructured to 

improve its long term sustainability. RCB was loss-making due to high operating costs of the large 

branch network and had NPLs of 11 percent in 2014/15. RCB was losing clients to commercial banks 

and agricultural enterprises who started to lend in that space and could offer a wider range of products. 

The competitiveness and long-term viability of RCB was therefore questionable. The new strategy aims 

at consolidating the branch network into 9 provincial offices in strategically important geographical 

locations which will also result in significant staff reduction. Importantly, the consolidated branch 

network’s role will specifically focus on facilitating effective partnerships in their respective regions 

with corporate retailers, emerging farmers, government programs, as well as technical and financial 

intermediaries to leverage on high impact and high value chain finance deals. 

Importantly, as part of the new strategy, Land Bank aims to scale up financing support to emerging 

farmers in a sustainable and commercially viable manner through their integration in established value 

chains. The approach is anchored in identifying high-potential value chain projects in a given 

geographic region and securing buy-in from large agriculture corporates or technical partners to assist in 

supporting emerging farmers’ integration into the chain. The agriculture corporates will provide 

technical support (directly or indirectly) to the emerging farmers, building up their capacity to be 

sustainable suppliers to the chain. Land Bank has identified selected potential value chain projects and 

agriculture corporates to partner with in the grains, winery, horticulture and livestock sectors for this 

type of financing. 

The CB business line is the corporate part of the bank and the most viable business line. The CB 

business line involves both direct and wholesale lending. Lending takes place primarily through 

intermediaries (cooperatives and agri-businesses). CB operates through two offices in Pretoria and Cape 

Town. The total portfolio of CB amounted to ZAR 31 billion in 2014/15. While CB targets commercial 

farmers, the workers employed on these farm tend to be part of the low-income population.  

Land Bank aims at increasing its developmental focus in both CB and CDB business lines by 

strengthening its wholesale business as well as its direct lending to emerging farmers. Both business 

lines contain a development portfolio with “development” referring to a focus on supporting the 

historically disadvantaged population in line with Broad-Based Black Economic Empowerment 

(BBBEE). International experience with development banks suggests that wholesale lending is more 

likely to be successful than retail lending. The key reason is that wholesale lending does not require a 

large branch network which is costly to build and maintain but rather leverages the networks already 



built by other financial service providers. Wholesale lending is also more market enabling and does not 

aim at competing with the private sector.  Direct lending via value chain financing leverages the 

corporate partner’s ability to provide technical support to the borrower, building up their capacity to be 

sustainable suppliers to the chain. As such, emerging farmers in this scheme have the potential to 

increase their revenues and thus a greater likelihood of fulfilling debt obligations to the bank. The 

project will therefore focus on supporting Land Bank in scaling up its wholesale portfolio as well as 

expanding direct lending through LB’s new approach of integrating emerging farmers into established 

value chains. Using long-term financing to fill existing funding gaps will additionally help Land Bank 

meet its investment needs as well as improve its asset liability management.  

Land Bank is making an important contribution to job creation. Land Bank estimates that the impact of 

its loan disbursements on employment opportunities in South Africa was close to 400,000 in 2013-2014. 

This estimate is comprised of over 23,000 new employment opportunities generated and over 370,000 

jobs maintained during the year. One employment opportunity constitutes 240 days worked per year. 

The estimated new jobs created are arising out of the medium and long-term loans Land Bank is 

providing.  

II. Project Development Objective(s) 

 
The project’s development objective is to sustainably scale up Land Bank’s financing, specifically to 

benefit emerging farmers. 

III. Project Description 

 Component Name 

 Line of Credit for Agricultural Financing 

 Comments (optional) 

 

Land Bank will provide both wholesale finance to participating PFIs for on-lending to commercial 

and emerging farmers and direct financing, in partnership with large agriculture corporates, to 

emerging farmers to support their integration in established value chains. It will do so through two 

main financing windows 

Window 1: Wholesale finance to commercial and emerging farmers. This window will provide a 

wholesale line of credit to Land Bank. Land Bank will on-lend the funds to participating financial 

intermediaries (PFIs) which comply with eligibility criteria agreed with the World Bank. The PFIs 

will on-lend funds to eligible agriculture enterprises, commercial and emerging farmers, communal 

property associations and other eligible borrowers supported under the Land Bank’s CB and CDB 

business lines. Currently, the wholesale line under CDB primarily includes the REM portfolio, 

however, over the life of the project this may change to include other wholesale loans under CDB. 

Window 2: Financing to integrate emerging farmers into established value chains. This window will 

provide a line of credit to Land Bank to finance direct lending to emerging farmers for integrated value 

chain finance. For direct lending to value chain finance/development projects, Land Bank will finance 

eligible emerging farmers and agriculture enterprises in collaboration with large agriculture 

corporates and/or technical partners in a targeted value chain. 

. 

IV. Financing (in USD Million) 



 Total Project Cost: 95.00 Total Bank Financing: 95.00 

 Financing Gap: 0.00  

 Financing Source Amount 

 Borrower 0.00 

 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 95.00 

 Total 95.00 

. 

V. Implementation 

 

The project is a financial intermediary loan (FIL) of US$95 million to Land Bank as the borrower and 

implementing agency with a guarantee of the Republic of South Africa. The project has one component: 

a Line of Credit for Agricultural Financing in the amount of US$95 million. 

 

The loan will be extended to Land Bank as the borrower and implementing agency with a guarantee of 

the Republic of South Africa. Land Bank will use the funds under the LOC component for on-lending to 

PFIs. Land Bank will be responsible for project implementation and monitoring. Dedicated staff in Land 

Bank has been identified for managing all aspects of the project, including reporting on implementation 

progress and monitoring and evaluation, ensuring compliance with environmental and social safeguards 

as well as with financial management and procurement arrangements. 

 

Land Bank will report on the PDO and intermediate indicators on a semi-annual basis. The data will 

come from Land Bank’s internal reports and from information provided by the PFIs. Land Bank will 

prepare quarterly Interim Financial Reports for the project. The specific reporting templates will be 

defined in the Project’s Operational Manual. Land Bank’s financial performance will be audited 

annually by the Auditor General. 

VI. Safeguard Policies  

 WBG Performance Standards Applicable  Yes No 

 
PS 1: Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks 

and Impacts 

X  

 PS 2: Labor and Working Conditions X  

 PS 3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention X  

 PS 4: Community Health, Safety, and Security X  

 PS 5: Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement X  

 
PS 6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living 

Natural Resources 

 X 

 PS 7: Indigenous Peoples  X 

 PS 8: Cultural Heritage  X 

 Comments (optional) 

  



























































World Bank Document


PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
CONCEPT STAGE

Report No.: PIDC27800

Project Name Guangxi Rural Poverty Alleviation Pilot Project (P153892)
Region EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC
Country China
Sector(s) General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%)
Theme(s) Other rural development (20%), Rural services and infrastructure (40%), 

Rural markets (40%)
Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P153892
Borrower(s) PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA
Implementing Agency Guangxi Foreign Capital Poverty Reduction Project Management Center
Environmental 
Category

B-Partial Assessment

Date PID Prepared/
Updated

29-Jun-2015

Date PID Approved/
Disclosed

30-Jun-2015

Estimated Date of 
Appraisal Completion

30-Jun-2016

Estimated Date of 
Board Approval

15-Dec-2016

Concept Review 
Decision

Track I - The review did authorize the preparation to continue

I. Introduction and Context
Country Context
Background. China's success in reducing extreme poverty during the economic reform period 
(1978?2014) is widely recognized. Over the last three decades, China has lifted over 750 million 
people out of poverty, which represents 89 percent of global poverty reduction during that period. 
World Bank estimates show that the number of absolute poor (that is, those people consuming less 
than $1.25 per day in PPP terms) in China declined from 84 percent in 1981 to 6.3 percent in 2011. 
Based on different poverty lines, official government estimates confirm a similar sharp decline in 
poverty over these years, and the number of the people who lived on less than US$2 per day was 
approximately 367 million or 27.2 percent of the total population. Using China's rural poverty line 
of annual per capital net income below CNY 2,300 (2010 constant process and which is slightly 
above the 1.25US$/day in PPP terms), the number of poor people living in rural areas declined to 
70.2 million in 2014. This represents continued decline of rural poverty from 17.2 percent in 2010 
to 8.5 percent in 2013. 

 
Economic growth has been a key driver for poverty reduction in China. From 1981 to 2011, real 
GDP per capita grew at average annual rate of 9.1 percent. The relationship between annualized 
GDP growth and poverty reduction during this period suggests that poverty headcount index 
(measured by US$ 1.25 per capita PPP line) fell annually by 0.99 percentage points for each 
percentage point increase of the GDP per capita. Improvements in access to public services, such as 
education and health, has been another driver of poverty reduction. All levels of education, 
employment in non-agricultural activities, and migration have been identified as critical forces 
driving poverty reduction. 
 
Geographically, the remaining pockets of poverty, including chronic poverty, are largely 
concentrated in rural areas, especially in mountainous and remote areas in western provinces of 
China with ethnic minorities. These areas are usually characterized by challenging natural 
environment with water scarcity, low soil fertility and poor endowment with natural resources. The 
Government has classified 14 zones (crossing provincial boundaries) as the focus for its poverty 
alleviation efforts. The 14 zones contain 680 nationally designated poverty counties which benefit 
from special financial support under the government??s rural poverty alleviation programs. Majority 
of these poverty counties are concentrated in mountainous areas of central and western China and 
among ethnic minority and other disadvantaged groups, including people with disabilities and 
elderly.

Sectoral and Institutional Context
Guangxi ranks the fifth province in the nation in terms of the absolute poor numbers.  Out of its 
total population of 52.4 million in 2013 there were 6.3 million poor people Guangxi which gives 
poverty incidence rate of 14.9 percent.  Majority of these poor live in rural areas and over 80 
percent of the poor people are from ethnic minority groups. Some 17.1 million people belong to 
various ethnic minority groups, making it a largest ethnic minority population in China. The 
province has 28 national level designated poverty counties and it is a recipient of a significant 
portion of national poverty reduction funds from the central government. In 2013, the net income 
per capita in these counties remained 59.6 percent of the national average.  The main causes of the 
poverty are low levels of human capital (poor education attainment levels and lack of skills needed 
to participate in modern economy) in particular in mountainous rural areas; poor natural resources 
base and limited infrastructure (roads, water and electricity). 
 
China has seen a rapid growth in the number of farmer cooperatives since the Law on Specialized 
Farmer Cooperatives promulgated in 2006. In March 2015 there were about 1.3 million specialized 
cooperatives in China. In some of the proposed project counties, formally registered cooperatives 
were almost non-existent before 2009. Their numbers are now growing rapidly and cooperatives are 
allowing both enhanced presence of the agribusiness sector and small entrepreneur initiatives. 
However, while most cooperatives are now recognized as economic entities, they are often small-
scale and lack management skills. The project is expected to benefit from the national legal 
framework for farmer cooperatives, which is expected to be updated in 2015.

Relationship to CAS
The proposed project is consistent with the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS), approved in 2012.  
The project would support the CPS's strategic theme two: promoting more inclusive development, 
by geographically focusing on lagging regions and small towns and by supporting policies and 
demonstration projects that address inequalities. It would contribute to the CPS outcome 2.3: 


enhancing opportunities in rural areas and small towns, by piloting new ways to boost rural incomes 
and reduce poverty under the umbrella of the new Poverty Reduction for China's Rural Areas 
Strategy (2011-2020) and by promoting inclusive innovation to decrease disparities.

II. Proposed Development Objective(s)
Proposed Development Objective(s) (From PCN)
The proposed PDO is to increase income opportunities for rural households in selected poverty 
counties of Guangxi.

Key Results (From PCN)
The achievement of the PDO would be measured by: (a) the number of project beneficiaries joining 
a new organizational arrangement decomposed by poverty levels and gender; and (b) the number of 
project supported cooperatives making profit.

III. Preliminary Description
Concept Description
Project Area: The proposed project areas are located in the rural areas of the Dian Gui Mountain 
Degraded Area. Within this area 10project counties under the two cities of Baise and Hechi are 
proposed. These include: Tiandong, Tianlin, Leye, Donglan, Bama, Fengshan, Dahua, and Pingguo 
County, and Yizhou City. All of the selected counties/city are characterized by a particular high 
level of poverty combined with poor natural resource conditions, difficulties in water management, 
limited availability of farm land,low levels of technology and a high percentage of ethnic minorities. 
 
Proposed Project Components: The proposed project would consist of the following four 
components with a preliminary cost estimate of US$182 million including a Bank loan of US$100 
million and counterpart funding of about US$82 million equivalent implemented over five years: 
 
a) Component 1: Improvement of Pro-Poor Value Chains. The component aims to address 
market failures in the development of agricultural and non-agricultural rural value chains and key 
industries with a particular focus on linking poor rural households with higher value markets. The 
component would finance the Cooperative Development Fund (CDF), which would provide grant 
financing to newly or existing cooperatives. It would also aim to establish Competitive Grant Fund 
for Enterprises which would provide matching grants to finance enterprise investments in order to 
demonstrate linkages and benefit sharing with poor farmers/households.  
 
b) Component 2: Improving Public Infrastructure and Services. The component would support 
the establishment and strengthening of public infrastructure and service systems in support of value 
chain/key industry development under the Component 1. It would provide financing for rural 
infrastructure such as rural roads, small-scale irrigation and drainage infrastructure, small water 
storage facilities, land levelling, IT infrastructure, public market facilities, etc. The component 
would also support public services, such as product certification, developing and registration of 
local/regional brands, branding and protection of ethnic minority product features, market and 
production risk management as well as strategic product marketing and promotion.  
 
c) Component 3: Enhancing Investments in Poor Areas. The component would improve and 
facilitate investments in poor areas by existing and new entrepreneurs and business entities such as 
Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs), migrant returnees, or cooperatives through establishing 



business incubation centers and risk management instruments.  
 
d) Component 4: Project Management and M&E. The component would strengthen and 
develop the administrative and technical capacity of staff of the Project Management Offices. It 
would aim to establish a monitoring and evaluation and impact evaluation system

IV. Safeguard Policies that might apply
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No TBD
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖

V. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 182.00 Total Bank Financing: 100.00
Financing Gap: 0.00
Financing Source Amount
 Borrower 82.00
 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 100.00
 Total 182.00

VI. Contact point
World Bank
Contact: Paavo Eliste
Title: Lead Rural Development Special
Tel: 5788+7681 /
Email: peliste@worldbank.org

Borrower/Client/Recipient
Name: PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA
Contact: Licheng Yao (Mr.)
Title: Director, Ministry of Finance
Tel: 86-10-68552064
Email: yaolicheng@sina.com

Implementing Agencies
Name: Guangxi Foreign Capital Poverty Reduction Project Management Center






























































World Bank Document


Page 1 of 14

COMBINED PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENTS / INTEGRATED 
SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET (PID/ISDS)  

ADDITIONAL FINANCING
Report No.: PIDISDSA20550

Date Prepared/Updated: 15-Dec-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION

  A.  Basic Project Data

Country: Bolivia Project ID: P158532
Parent 
Project ID 
(if any):

P127743

Project Name: Additional Finance BO Rural Alliances Project II (P158532)
Parent Project 
Name:

Rural Alliances Project II (P127743)

Region: LATIN AMERICA AND CARIBBEAN
Estimated 
Appraisal Date:

14-Dec-2016 Estimated 
Board Date:

23-Feb-2017

Practice Area
(Lead):

Agriculture Lending 
Instrument:

Investment Project Financing

Borrower(s): GOVERNMENT OF BOLIVIA
Implementing 
Agency:

EMPODERAR

Financing (in USD Million)
Financing Source Amount
Borrower 0.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 100.00
Local Farmer Organizations 29.30
Financing Gap -4.30
Total Project Cost 125.00

Environmental 
Category:
Appraisal 
Review 
Decision (from 
Decision Note):

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate

Other Decision: The Environmental Category of the parent project (B) remains unchanged, since 
there is no significant variation with respect to parent project; no major negative 
environmental impacts are expected; it is a low-risk project.

Is this a No

Repeater 
project?

B.   Introduction and Context

Country Context
Bolivia's recent economic growth, one of the highest in Latin America, has brought about 
significant benefits to the poor, with poverty decreasing from 63 to 39 percent in the last decade. 
As in other Latin-American countries highly dependent on extractives industries, Bolivia's 
economy has been affected by multiple global factors, particularly by low commodity prices. The 
overall economy slowdown will make it difficult for countries like Bolivia to maintain the levels 
of investment that characterized the previous decade. Furthermore, damaging weather events, 
such as floods in 2013 and a severe drought in 2016, have taken a huge toll on Bolivia➢❨ s 
economy, particularly in the agricultural sector, where prices of domestic staple products have 
risen considerably, disproportionately affecting urban and rural poor. Changes in climate patterns 
will exacerbate climate variability, and therefore, their impacts on vulnerable populations.
Sectoral and institutional Context
The proposed AF, with its scale-up to reach poor producers countrywide, is consistent with WBG 
and GoB development agendas for 2016-2020, which prioritize inclusive economic growth, 
reducing poverty and inequality, and building capacity to cope with climate change. The AF is 
aligned with the World Bank Group Country Partnership Framework (CPF- 2016-2020) for 
Bolivia, Pillar 1 (Promoting broad-based and inclusive growth), particularly under Objective 3 
(Improving opportunities for income generation, market access, and sustainable intensification); 
and also supports Pillar 2 (Addressing environmental sustainability and resilience to climate 
change). In relation to government priorities, PAR II will contribute to reaching the targets set 
forth in the General Economic and Social Plan (PGDES), particularly under Pillar 1, Result 2 
(reducing moderate poverty), and under Pillar 6 (sovereignty with productive diversification). It is 
important to note, that as part of its Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDCs), the 
Government of Bolivia has committed to triple the irrigation area and double food production 
under irrigation by 2020; the Project is also aligned with those priorities. 
 
Key results. The AF will scale up activities to enhance the impact of a well-performing project 
that has proven effective in improving rural income and reducing poverty; the alliance approach 
will also help small-scale producers cope with climate variability. With an expanded geographical 
area countrywide, the AF will reach directly an additional 30,000 rural and majority-indigenous 
households, via supporting about 850 productive alliances. Public infrastructure subprojects will 
reach out to about 70,000 indirect beneficiaries. As in the original project, the AF will continue 
promoting strong engagement by women in the subprojects. Maintaining the menu of activities of 
the original project, the AF will make extra efforts to improving efficiency in water use. As a 
result, the bulk of additional funds (up to 75%) allocated to alliances will not only serve to 
improve access to markets, as PAR has been doing over the past ten years, but also strengthen 
resilience to a harsher climate.

C.  Proposed Development Objective(s)

Original Project Development Objective(s) - Parent
The objective of the Project is to improve accessibility to markets for small rural producers in the 
Selected Areas by: (a) promoting productive alliances between different small rural producer 



Page 3 of 14

organizations and purchasers; (b) empowering rural producers through the establishment and 
strengthening of self-managed grass-root organizations; (c) increasing access to productive assets, 
technologyand financial services;  (d) promoting more effective, responsive and accountable 
service organizations at the local level; and (e)enhancing environmental sustainability of 
productive practices. The Project is a follow on operation to the successful PAR I, whichtested the 
model for improving market access.

Proposed Project Development Objective(s) - Additional Financing
The re-written PDO would be: ➢❨ The Objective of the Project is to improve accessibility to 
markets and climate resilience for small-scale rural producers in the country➢❨ 

Key Results 
The Project will track progress against the PDO through the following indicators: 
 
- Increase in the average volume of sales of the product(s) involved in the alliance 
- Producer Organizations (SPOs)➢❨ s members that apply climate -related resilience practices/
measures as defined in the business plans 
- Producer organizations that maintain or improve their commercial relations (alliances) for at 
least two productive cycles 
- Direct project beneficiaries (disaggregated by men and women): Direct producer beneficiaries 
from SPOs (disaggregated by men and women) and Beneficiaries of public investment sub-
projects (there is not disaggregation).

D.  Project Description

PAR II project aims at strengthening market access and climate resilience for small scale 
producers by: supporting producers➢❨  collective action via the establishing and strengthening of 
small producer-based self-managed grass-root organizations; strengthening farmers➢❨  linkages 
with buyers; and increasing their access to productive assets, climate-resilience technologies/
practices, knowledge, and financial resources. As in the parent project, Small Producer 
Organizations (SPOs) will identify opportunities for business upgrades; consolidate those 
opportunities into Business Plans (BPs); and co-fund and implement those plans. Although the 
Project will maintain its demand-driven focus, it will introduce mechanisms to contribute to shape 
the demand by SPOs, in alignment with the increased resilient emphasis of the project's 
investments. In fact, in the AF phase, the Project will more strategically support climate resilient 
investments via irrigation modernization and climate smart practices. Investments under the BPs 
will be complemented with off-farm investments under Municipal Subprojects to improve 
productive infrastructure and facilitate market linkages. 
 
PAR II safeguard performance has consistently been rated as satisfactory. The track record of 
EMPODERAR carrying out PAR and PAR II, confirms strong capability to monitoring 
compliance with environmental and social safeguards throughout the lifespan of subprojects. 
Over the years, the PIU has put in place a set of standards and procedures, which has proven 
effective in diverse environments and social contexts, and which form the basis for the 
instruments that the PIU will use countrywide in the AF. These tools are included in the Social 
Assessment & Management Framework, the Resettlement Policy Framework, and the 
Environmental Management Framework, and will allow the PIU to conduct permanent social and 
environmental analysis, reinforce information and consultation, strengthen women➢❨ s 



Page 4 of 14

participation, and define site-specific mitigation measures, among other multiple actions.

Component Name
Institutional Strengthening
Comments (optional)
This component will continue supporting pre-investment activities for the creation and 
strengthening of Rural Alliances. As in the parent project, this component will support alliance 
pre-investment activities to: (i) promote the project concept and outreach, viacommunication and 
dissemination campaigns; (ii) strengthen capacities of eligible Small Producer Organizations to: 
form Rural Alliances, identify potential business opportunities, fully prepared business plans, 
formalize their organizations, and improve their marketing and business skills; (iii) strengthen 
capacities of service providers and local governments; and (iv) appraise alliances.

Component Name
Implementation of Rural Alliances
Comments (optional)
This component would provide grants to co-finance investments found technically and financially 
feasible under component 1. These include grants to co-finance the implementation of 
competitively selected business plans / rural alliances (Subcomponent 2a); and co-finance the 
implementation of public infrastructure subprojects (Municipal Subprojects Subcomponent 2b). 
Support to SPO via advisers (acompanantes) would be provided under Subcomponent 2c.

Component Name
Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation
Comments (optional)
This component would support the incremental costs associated with project administration and 
monitoring, to support project activities, such as: updating and operation of the Geo-referenced 
Management Information System (SIGG, for its acronym in Spanish) and of the public 
information system; baseline information collection and the impact evaluation of the Project. The 
component will also support the undertaking of studies.

E.  Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis (if known)

In the additional financing phase, PAR II will expand opportunities to farmers countrywide. The 
expanded geographical coverage of the project, includes a variety of six ecological regions 
spanning from high-altitude valleys to tropical humid forests. The Borrower has finalized an 
Environmental Assessment (EA) including a guide of good environmental practices that 
complements and updates the earlier assessments of environmental characteristics and problems 
relevant to the Project by each ecological region, including projected concerns of climate 
vulnerability. The Borrower conducted a complementary social assessment (SA) for the extended 
project area. The SA analyzed the particular social, cultural, and productive features in each of the 
eco regions, with emphasis on the TCO/TIOCs and their regulations. The social instruments that 
were part of the original SA in the parent project (e.g. those for detecting potential social 
dynamics that might affect the subproject) were revised taking into account the new project area.  
 
To facilitate the application of the social tools, the Social Assessment was broken down into 3 
items.  



Page 5 of 14

- The Social Assessment (Part I) includes the analysis of social context, poverty aspects, cultural 
diversity, gender and cross-generation issues in the 6 eco regions (Amazonia, Yungas, Altiplano, 
Valles, Oriente and Chaco), covering 339 municipalities. The preparation of this document also 
included a systematic consultation process, which was based on an initial stakeholder analysis.  
- The Social Management Framework (Part II) provides technical criteria and customized tools 
for assessment of feasibility of alliances through social lens; systematizes pertinent information 
for social monitoring and evaluation; and includes criteria to retro-feeding the beneficiaries➢❨  
organizations with valuable recommendations to ensuring cohesion and sustainability.  
- The Social Management Framework (for Indigenous Peoples/Part III) includes specific tools and 
procedures to strengthen consultation processes with indigenous peoples; those tools are 
particularly useful to analyzing the conditions and specific regulations of minority groups located 
in the TCO/TIOCs and conducting Free, Prior and Informed Consultation processes 
- The Resettlement Policy Framework has been updated to reflect the geographic expansion of the 
project. A land donation protocol has been included to address the land cession for municipal 
infrastructure subprojects. 
  
Overall the institutional arrangements of the Parent project will remain unchanged, including 
responsibilities in the supervision of environmental and social aspects. To strengthen 
implementation capacity, with the expansion of project coverage, the PIU will hire additional 
safeguard specialists for the Departmental Units and provide them with pertinent training, with 
support from the Task Team.

F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

Angela Maria Caballero Espinoza (GSU04)

Juan Carlos Enriquez Uria (GEN04)

II. Implementation
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
In order to streamline the implementation of subcomponent 2.2 (Municipal Subprojects), in the AF, 
the National Fund of Productive and Social Investment (FPS) would take responsibilities in the 
administration of financing resources aligned with Subcomponent 2.b activities.  Under the original 
design, EMPODERAR performs most of the activities for subcomponent 2b, such as: defining the 
Municipal Subprojects pipeline; funding the preparation of pre-feasibility/feasibility studies, and 
paying contractors. Meanwhile, the FPS was only assigned with the function of appraising the 
Municipal Subprojects, and procuring and overseeing (from a technical and safeguard perspective) 
the civil works. 
 
The proposal to assign fiduciary responsibilities to the FPS in the implementation of subcomponent 
2.b activities derives from recent changes in public procurement rules, which are slowing-down the 
implementation of Municipal Subprojects, particularly resulting from cumbersome registration 
procedures and new requirements for registering procurement processes. To reverse these unforeseen 
obstacles that emerged during implementation, EMPODERAR will hand over to FPS the 
responsibility of managing the financing resources for Subcomponent 2b, including the payment for 
contractors that perform the civil works. This will allow FPS to register the budget for subprojects 
and manage the procurement in a more straightforward manner. It is important to note that, besides 
this change, the AF will maintain the same distribution of roles and responsibilities as in the Parent 



Page 6 of 14

project.

III. Safeguard Policies that might apply

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental 
Assessment OP/BP 
4.01

Yes As in the original project, no large-scale impacts are expected 
given the limited, producers-based nature of Project activities. 
In the AF phase, most of the alliances will be devoted  
to agricultural /livestock primary production. A number of 
associated small municipal public works will also be financed 
such as road rehabilitation and improvement and small 
vehicular bridges. The AF will place strong emphasis on 
irrigation and water management both on-farm and in 
municipal subprojects. To account for it the project has 
triggered OP/BP 4.37 (Safety of Dams) and OP/BP 7.5 
(Projects in International waterways). An EA was conducted 
by the Borrower to reflect the expanded coverage area (six 
eco-regions). The EA report includes an updated 
Environmental Management Framework (EMF) at the Project 
level reflecting management measures in compliance with OP 
4.37 (Safety of Dams), instructed in the Environmental 
Management Manual. The updated EMF will be included as an 
annex to the Operational Manual.

Natural Habitats OP/
BP 4.04

Yes The updated EMF includes a comprehensive exclusion list to 
be applied at the early stage of subproject evaluation in order 
to prevent any negative impacts on natural habitats. No 
activities will be eligible within the core zones of protected 
areas, but specific activities such as beekeeping can be 
financed within their buffer zones, provided pertinent 
authorizations have been obtained and the activities are 
compatible with the area's Management Plan.

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes As in the original project, the updated EMF contemplates 
deforestation risks of humid or dry forests related with 
expansion of croplands or pastures that might be induced by 
some of the beneficiary rural alliances or other Project effects. 
On the other hand, rural alliances focused on eco-tourism and 
gathering of non-timber forest products could effectively 
promote natural habitat conservation by rural producers. PAR 
II, has however, financed very little (if any) of these types of 
productive activities.

Pest Management OP 
4.09

Yes As in the original project, Pest management is expected to be 
one of the main risks to environmental management. To 
minimize this risk, the PIU revised and improved the pest 
management plan, which is part of the EMF, taking into 
account the extended project area (and new crops).

Physical Cultural 
Resources OP/BP 

Yes Considering the portfolio of investments supported by the 
original project and expected to be financed in the AF, the 



Page 7 of 14

4.11 major risks regarding OP/BP 4.11. are associated with civil 
works such as roads and irrigation canals that could possibly 
uncover significant cultural property. This risks did not 
materialize in the original project. As in the original project, 
management plans in individual subprojects will be developed 
to manage specific issues if identified. It is possible that 
excavations could unearth cultural artifacts. The ESMF 
includes measures to ensure that chance finds are timely 
determined and respected before proceeding with approval of 
municipal subproject financing.

Indigenous Peoples 
OP/BP 4.10

Yes Given the fact that most of the potential beneficiaries identify 
themselves as indigenous (58% of the targeted population), 
PAR II AF will operate further as an Indigenous People 
Project in compliance with the OP/BP 4.10. 
The PIU will encourage minority groups inthe lowlands to 
benefit from the intervention. Project documents and the 
Operational Manual will include key procedures and activities 
to ensure culturally adequate implementation, which 
essentially consists of using their native languages to the 
greatest extent possible, as well as respecting their traditional 
and functional social structures and deliberation forms. 
Furthermore, the project will include regular consultations at 
the local, regional and national levels, following the principle 
of Free, Prior and Informed Consultation processes.  
Finally, the project will pay special attention to the traditional 
and valid gender roles in production. By doing so, the PIU 
seeks to avoid any negative impact derived from the 
interference or disruption of social and productive traditional 
networks. IP rights and women rights will be mapped during 
all the project cycle.

Involuntary 
Resettlement OP/BP 
4.12

Yes As in the parent project, the Involuntary Resettlement Policy 
(OP/BP 4.12) will continue triggered in the AF because of the 
possibility of minor physical impacts on land (up to 5% of the 
property) and assets,  in complementary municipal 
infrastructure investments. The PIU updated the Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF) to reflect the new project area and 
included more specific mitigation measures related to access to 
services, natural resources and physical impacts on land, 
infrastructure and assets. A land donation protocol has been 
included to address land cession for municipal infrastructure 
subprojects.

Safety of Dams OP/
BP 4.37

Yes Although PAR II does not finance the building of any large 
dam, this policy is newly triggered in the AF because of the 
emphasis on irrigation. In the event that a subproject depends 
on water supplied from an existing dam, the EMF stipulates 
that, before financing the subproject, the PIU will require a 
preliminary specialized dam safety assessment.



Page 8 of 14

Projects on 
International 
Waterways OP/BP 
7.50

Yes This policy is newly triggered because of the renewed 
emphasis of the AF on supporting irrigation investments. The 
exception to riparian notification has been requested because 
the project will essentially rehabilitate and improve efficiency 
in existing irrigation systems. Moreover, the proposed project's 
activities are not likely to damage the quality or quantity of the 
water flowing to downstream riparians; similarly, the Project 
will not be affected by other riparians' possible water use.

Projects in Disputed 
Areas OP/BP 7.60

No No project activities are contemplated in disputed areas.

IV. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify 

and describe any potential large scale,  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
It is not anticipated that the AF would generate negative environmental impacts, based on the 
experience of the original project. As in the parent project, the bulk of the investments in the AF 
will continue to be of a small scale and be led by the beneficiaries themselves. In addition, the 
projected investments in irrigation, both on-farm and off-farm, will focus on improving efficiency 
of water use and, therefore, are likely to generate positive environmental impacts. Based on the 
experience gained with PAR I and PAR II, the PIU has incorporated into the revised EMF multiple 
good practices that have proven effective in minimizing environmental impacts, such as crop 
rotation, terracing, reforestation, and soil protection. 
 
By applying the revised EMF, PAR II AF is likely to result in positive long-term environmental 
impacts, at least, on the following three fronts: (i) reducing risk of soil erosion through the 
adoption of practices such as crop rotation, pasture management and terracing; (ii) reducing 
negative effects of pesticides on health and environment as a result of the reduction of toxicity of 
products used and through awareness-building training; and (iii) improving efficiency in water use 
through implantation of modern irrigation systems. 
 
 
Findings from the consultations for the AF phase, highlighted the importance of continue 
strengthening women participation in project activities. In Amazon and Chaco regions, the 
participation of women in the project activities is lower as a result of diverse constraints that they 
face. Under these considerations the project will continue promoting the participation and 
empowerment of women in the 6 ecoregions but particularly in the Amazon and Chaco ecoregions 
by improving the access to opportunities of training and decision making in the Alliances. The 
project will continue promoting women participation and empowerment by, among others, 
facilitating their access to and engagement in training and decision making in the subprojects. In 
particular, the PIU will make extra efforts to hire more female technical staff for training, technical 
assistance and technology transfer, so that the project can reach out to women in a more effective 
manner. 
 
Additionally, in alignment with the up-coming new safeguard requirements, the SA includes 
instruments to better understand the possible risks of the project associated with child labor issues 
and possible mitigation measures to address them if identified. The prohibition of the management 



Page 9 of 14

and use of pesticides by minors is introduced. 
 
EMF, including subproject screening, has been updated to mitigate potential risk.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities 
in the project area:
AF is expected to benefit approximately 850 new SPOs in nine Departments. The ongoing project 
experience shows that PARII has the ability to significantly increase capacity building in the 
SOPs, and promotes inclusion by women and youth. In the original financing, women➢❨ s 
participation in subproject identification and implementation was strengthened. As a result, 30 
percent of the participants in alliances were women. However, the SA recommend strengthening 
gender-related activities in some regions (Amazons and Chacho).

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse 
impacts.
It is expected that the social impact of the project in general is positive. Mitigation measures 
incorporated into the project design and/or reflected in the Operations Manual of the project 
include mechanisms for: a) improving information and transparency, and adopt participatory 
monitoring at the SPO level; b) integrating vulnerable groups within farmers' groups to the 
processes of decision-making on priority needs, as well as the implementation, maintenance and 
equal access to benefits of subprojects, and c) promote the inclusion of women.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an 
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Based on previous experience, for the PAR II project, EMPODERAR has developed a series of 
criteria and instruments for the environmental management, monitoring and control process. The 
instruments developed serve to identify and assess possible environmental impacts and establish 
mitigation and control measures that are necessary for each type of activities. In the same way, it 
has developed instruments for the process of control and monitoring of climate threats and 
measures to adapt to climate change. In the case of Municipal Subprojects, FPS will have the 
responsibility to follow and comply with the EMF. 
 
EMPODERAR has in place reasonable standards and procedures for the implementation of the 
social safeguards policies. In the AF, the PIU will take advantage of those instruments to ensuring 
information and consultation for indigenous minorities during the project cycle. The use of those 
instruments will be an integral part of  the assessment of proposals from the social perspective.  
In addition, the PIU will identify opportunities to strengthening women's participation and 
developing further the existing GRM mechanisms, which thus far comprise the following three 
elements:  
(i) The regional units use a protocol to assessing and, to the extent possible, solving conflicts by 
identifying key stakeholders and their views, interests and needs; this tool seeks to anticipate risks 
and tensions that can either strengthen or weaken the Alliances, and to handle expectations and 
possible conflicts before escalating.  
(ii) The regional units also offer an open space, where individuals can file complaints, affectations 
or recommendations; The NCU receives and processes the claims. To strengthen this mechanism, 
each regional unit will make available a Community Book of Complaints.  
(iii) The PIU will put in place a public transparency platform to track beneficiaries' satisfaction 
and provide public information; the NCU will monitor the system on a regular basis.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure 
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.



Page 10 of 14

The key stakeholders of the project are community members, including ingenuous populations, 
women, government agencies, and the private sector. 
 
In the AF phase, extensive stakeholder consultation took place during project preparation, and will 
continue through implementation. Particularly vulnerable groups, such as women and minority 
indigenous groups, were specifically targeted. This process included six consultation workshops 
and various group interviews held in the following ecoregions (Valles (Cochabamba), Altiplano 
(La Paz), Yungas (Chimore) and Amazon (Rurrenabque). Each consultation comprised two stages: 
(i) discussion on the project concept, its development objectives and eliciting suggestions, the 
project components and discussion on how best to implement and develop partnerships, and (ii) 
discussion on potential risks and how to avoid or mitigate them, listening and answering to 
consultations. As a result, the exercise made it possible to gather a comprehensive set of 
recommendations, in particular with respect to  minority indigenous groups  and gender issues. 
 
Consultations with a total of 496 participants were held between August and September 2016. In 
addition, through structured interviews and questionnaires the PIU collected and analyzed valuable 
socio-economic data for the social assessment. In addition to these primary sources of data and 
inputs from stakeholders, secondary sources such as existing studies and project reports were  
reviewed to ensuring appropriate design and targeting in terms of indigenous groups, gender, cross 
generation needs and priorities, and mitigation of social risks and impacts.

B. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank 08-Dec-2016

Date of submission to InfoShop 14-Dec-2016
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors

"In country" Disclosure
Bolivia 14-Dec-2016
Comments:

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank 13-Dec-2016

Date of submission to InfoShop 14-Dec-2016
"In country" Disclosure

Bolivia 14-Dec-2016
Comments:

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank 08-Dec-2016

Date of submission to InfoShop 14-Dec-2016
"In country" Disclosure


























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Congo Commercial Agriculture Project (P159979) 

 
 

  
Mar 22, 2017 Page 1 of 25  

     

 

 
 
      

 

Combined Project Information Documents /  
Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (PID/ISDS) 

 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 15-May-2017 | Report No: PIDISDSA21309 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Congo, Republic of P159979 Congo Commercial 
Agriculture Project 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA 21-Mar-2017 06-Jul-2017 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Republic of Congo Ministry of Agriculture, 
Fisheries and Livestock 

 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
The project development objective (PDO) is to improve productivity of farmers and market access for producer groups 
and micro, small and medium agribusiness enterprises, in selected zones, and provide immediate and effective 
response in the event of an eligible crisis or emergency.  
 
 
Components 

Component 1: Direct support to producer groups and agribusiness MSMES 
Component 2: Improving public infrastructure and the business climate for commercial agriculture 
Component 3: Strengthening institutional capacities to support the development of commercial agriculture 
Component 4: Contingency emergency response 

 
 

Financing (in USD Million) 

 

Finance OLD 

Financing Source Amount  

International Development Association (IDA)  100.00  

Total Project Cost  100.00  
    
 

Environmental Assessment Category 

B - Partial Assessment 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the preparation to continue     
 
 
 
 
Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

1. The Republic of Congo (ROC) is sparsely inhabited, with a population of 4.4 million people 
and ranks among the least densely populated in the world (12.8/km

2
). The country has an   

urbanization rate of about 62 percent, with more than half of the population living in 

Brazzaville and Pointe-Noire, its two largest cities. Oil’s share of total GDP increased from 

56 percent in 2000-2004 to 66 percent in 2010-2014 and – despite the recent oil price decline 

– still accounts for more than half of GDP and more than 80 percent of total exports. 

Agricultural exports (palm oil, sugar, and cocoa) are stagnant and the country suffers from a 

rapidly deteriorating trade balance for food. ROC’s cereal import dependency ratio is 94 

percent
1
.  

 

2. ROC is highly endowed in natural resources, but with poor social indicators. The 
country is largely covered by the Congo Forest Basin, with 31 percent of its total surface area 

comprising cultivable land. The country is also endowed with significant hydrocarbon 

reserves with an estimated 1.6 billion barrels of oil reserves and with a proven 90 billion m
3
 

of natural gas, respectively the 4
th

 largest oil reserves and the 5
th

 largest natural gas reserves 

in Sub-Saharan Africa. In addition, the country is significantly endowed in mining ore such 

as iron, potash and magnesium. However, ROC’s key social indicators, notably health and 

education outcomes, as well as service delivery in these sectors, are much lower than 

countries with similar resource endowments, evidence of the Country’s inability to harness 

its potential into dividends for its citizens. 

 

3. High vulnerability of the economy and inequality. Despite steady GDP growth of 5 
percent over the past 10 years, ROC continues to suffer from high rates of poverty and 

inequality due to jobless growth. 63 percent of the population are self-employed in either 

agriculture or the informal services, with youth severely affected by unemployment. The 

unemployment rate for those aged 15-29 is 32.7 percent.
2
 The country has a Gini coefficient 

of 0.45 with a poverty incidence of 74.8 percent in rural areas against 32.3 percent in urban 

areas. Gender and disability have an indirect impact on poverty as women and disabled 

persons exhibit lower levels of education and employment opportunities. The ROC’s Gender 

Inequality country index is 137 out of 157 countries. Cultural division of labor and a 

preference for boys regarding expenditure on education often work against women. The 

malnutrition rate remains high (32 percent), with a total of 1.4 million people estimated as 

                                                           
1
 FAO food security indicators. Figure is from 2010. 

2
 Poverty Report Republic of Congo 2016 

Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here. 



 

malnourished
3
 and 31 percent of children stunted. Food and nutrition insecurity is driven by: 

(a) inadequate access to quality food; (b) poor hygiene practices and lack of awareness of 

food and nutrition requirements; and (c) unsafe food.    

 

4. Business climate and access to financial services. ROC was listed the 177
th

 country out of 

190 in the ranking of the World Bank Doing Business report 2017, which noted it takes an 

average of 50 days to register a business well beyond the regional average of 27.3. Access to 

finance is cited as the second highest constraint by businesses
4
. Bank credit to agriculture 

accounts for 6 percent of short-term credit and 17 percent of medium-term credit, and is 

focused primarily on the forestry industry
5
. Microfinance institutions are mostly focused on 

urban markets, and agriculture accounts for only 2 percent of Mutuelles Congolaises 

d’Epargne et de Crédit (MUCODEC)’s portfolio (the largest microfinance institution). Low 

penetration of financial services in rural areas, knowledge of the agriculture sector and 

collateral requirements limit access to credit for producer groups and micro, small and 

medium agribusiness enterprises (MSME).  

 

5. Private sector development. The private sector in ROC is largely fragmented with little or 
no structured public-private dialogue taking place to improve the enabling environment for 

business. The contribution of the private sector to growth is limited, as reflected by the level 

of private investments (excluding oil), which represents only 5 percent of GDP (against 14 

percent on average in Sub-Saharan Africa and 25 percent of GDP in Asia). Sectors with 

strong growth potential identified by the Government include transport services, 

agribusiness, forestry and mining. 

 

6. Environment. As part of its Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation 
(REDD+) agenda, ROC is developing an Emissions Reductions Program in the Sangha and 

Likouala departments. The government program seeks to access a variety of REDD+ funding 

sources like the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility (FCPF), the Forest Investment Program 

(FIP), and the Central Africa Forest Initiative (CAFI). ROC’s forests are at risk of 

deforestation due to mineral extraction, road development, illegal logging, agricultural 

expansion and charcoal collection. In addition, trends
6
 indicate that exposure to periods of 

intense rainfall has been increasing. ROC, in its recently submitted Intended Nationally 

Determined Contribution (INDC), has highlighted agriculture among its priority areas. 

Climate actions with regards to agriculture will embrace adaptation and mitigation through 

the promotion of agro-forestry plantations, an increase in the number of producer 

associations, and production of bioenergy. 

                                                           
3
 Undernourishment means that a person is not able to acquire enough food to meet the daily minimum dietary 

energy requirements, over a period of one year. FAO defines hunger as being synonymous with chronic 
undernourishment. Food Hunger Map 2015. 
4
 Enterprises Survey Report surveyed in 2009  

5
 The Republic of Congo ranks 118 out of 190 countries in access to credit according to the World Bank Doing 

Business report 2017. In rural areas, 58 percent of rural adults save, but only 8 percent do so in a financial 
institution. 
6
 Country Adaptation and Risk Profiles (Republic of Congo). 

http://sdwebx.worldbank.org/climateportal/countryprofile/home.cfm?page=country_profile&CCode=COG 



Sectoral and Institutional Context 

7. Agriculture, including forestry, employs about 40 percent of the labor force and contributes 
5 percent of GDP. Approximately 498,000 people are actively engaged in agricultural 

production, of which 70 percent are female. With an average rainfall of 1,200 mm per year 

and only 2 percent of the 10 million hectares of arable land exploited, the agricultural sector 

holds potential for growth. ROC has three types of agricultural production systems: (i) 

subsistence agriculture, mainly composed of small-scale producers farming 1 to 2 hectares 

per household, and accounts for 90 percent of agricultural output. Subsistence producers 

cultivate primarily staple crops such as plantain, cassava, ground nuts, maize, potatoes, 

beans, banana, and yam. Yields of these crops are lower on average than in other Sub-

Saharan countries mainly due to the poor quality of planting materials, the low use of 

fertilizer and the limited access to improved technologies and mechanization; (ii) urban and 

peri-urban agriculture is mainly composed of producers with small-scale gardens and semi-

modern commercial farms producing for urban consumers; and (iii) agro-industrial 

production systems, mainly monocultures geared towards export markets or niche urban 

markets. Apart from that of sugar cane, the production of traditional export and cash crops 

(e.g. coffee, cocoa, palm oil and rice) collapsed over the past couple of decades. A few large 

private agribusiness investors have recently started to invest again in these crops (including 

large-scale maize cultivation and the revival of palm oil and cocoa plantations). 

 

8. The cumulative effects of the different production systems have left an undeniable 
impact on the environment. Studies revealed that the sector contributes a total of 79 percent 

of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions
7
. Subsistence farming has promoted deforestation 

through slash and burn shifting cultivation techniques. As a result, particularly in the 

Province of Plateau, producers are experiencing: (i) earlier planting times and longer crop 

cycles; (ii) soil degradation, which makes some crops no longer suitable; and (iii) greater 

occurrences of flooding. Lastly, peri-urban vegetable and fish farming are competing with 

growing demand for water from urban dwellers. 

 

9. Gender in agriculture. Women are underrepresented in politics and higher levels of 
government, even though the Family Code protects them against racial, ethnic and sexual 

discrimination. Women earn less than men and are more likely to be self-employed as they 

do not have equal opportunities for accessing secondary education and paid employment. 

Labor market analyses show that gender employment gaps result from unequal access to 

education and skills training. Lack of education gives women limited power in business and 

social dealings with men, who typically are better educated. Women are customarily 

encouraged to focus on subsistence farming, family and child-rearing activities (fertility rate 

is high at 3.8 percent) and, as a result, 70 percent of the country’s agricultural workforce are 

women. Congolese women face additional barriers compared to men in accessing credit, 

agriculture inputs, land ownership and labor.   

 

10. Agricultural skills, competencies and jobs. Access to formal paid wage job is very limited 

for the youth who are more likely to be unemployed. If they manage to find a job, those aged 

15-29 are more likely to be employed by a household (15 percent) or by an SME (12 

percent)
8
. There is only one institute for higher education in agriculture, Ecole Nationale 

Supérieure d’Agronomie et de Foresterie (ENSAF), with approximately additional 7 

agriculture vocational skills training centers. They are under resourced and do not offer all of 

the relevant skills and entrepreneurship training. Internship arrangements with the private 

sector are difficult to organize and the capacity to train masters and doctoral students is 

limited. 

  

11. Demand for food is high and growing in domestic and regional markets. ROC is highly 
dependent on food imports, with a negative trade balance. Food imports increased from US 

$197 million to US$240 million between 2007 and 2013, and spiked to US$353 million in 

2011. Volumes of imported food in 2013 included 104,567 tons of wheat, 50,581 tons of 

palm oil, 45,878 tons of chicken meat, 41,541 tons of rice and 38,455 tons of wheat flour
9
.
 

The domestic cassava market is valued at US$ 174 million with some value addition already 

taking place. Cassava is consumed by 90 percent of the population. There is a high 

consumption of chicken at household level and consumption of other livestock products is 

expected to grow significantly, e.g. 80 million eggs and 15,000 tons of pork per annum by 

2020
10

. Demand for milk (and milk-based products) is high and growing. Fish consumption 

is at 24.4 kg per head per year, one of the highest in Africa. Other regional markets present 

sizable opportunities as well, for instance the Kinshasa market (over 12 million inhabitants) 

in the Democratic Republic of Congo, or other neighboring countries such as Angola, Gabon 

and Cameroon.  

 

12. Food safety concerns are huge and compounded by the absence of a food policy and 
regulatory framework. No analysis has been done to understand the national cost of food 

borne diseases (e.g. loss of human lives, cost of treatment and loss of income especially on 

poor households). Food safety issues from imports include: (i) food spoilage; (ii) absence of 

harmonized food and product standards; (iii) poor product quality (e.g. expired food, 

deceitful labelling and high levels of preservatives in food); (iv) limited coordinated national 

surveillance and inspection capacity; and (vi) no laboratories for food testing. In addition to 

the risks created by limited awareness amongst consumers and low levels of hygiene 

standards (e.g. unregistered food street vendors & unsanitary urban markets), additional food 

safety risks from domestic agriculture include: (i) the use of animal waste and sewage on 

crops as agriculture fertilizer; (ii) poor harvesting and post-harvest handling (raises risks of 

mycotoxins and aflatoxins); and (iii) unhygienic agricultural transport systems.          

 

13. Every segment across the agriculture value chain is characterized by under 
development and fragmentation. Most inputs are imported, at high cost with no quality 

assurance. Agricultural production is performed in a rudimentary, inefficient, low input-

output model making unit costs of production much higher than imported commodities. The 

               

transport sector is managed by cartels that fix the transport prices, making it difficult for 

producers to transport commodities and processors to source primary material. There is only 

a few domestic agro-processing companies and the distribution and retail of food is done 

mostly through formal open markets, informal markets and small corner stores. There are 

only seven registered retail outlets (supermarkets) in urban areas selling mostly imported 

food.  

 

14. Commercial agricultural production is constrained by a multiplicity of factors. The 
competitiveness of domestic production – in value chains such as poultry, piggery, and fish 

for livestock, cassava and groundnuts for staple crops, and cocoa and palm oil for cash crops 

– is hampered by: (i) sector specific legislative and governance constraints (seed policies, 

land access, food safety policies and guidelines, taxes and registration procedures for the 

legal status of cooperatives); (ii) weak producer organizations (iii) non-existent agricultural 

extension and veterinary services and obsolete Research and Development (R&D) capacity;  
(iv) high costs of agricultural inputs (seeds, fertilizers, land, animal feed, credit); (v) an 

ageing and under skilled workforce; and  (vi) poor road and communication networks and 

costly logistics and energy services.  

 

15. A substantial number of smallholders have the potential to engage successfully in 
commercially demanding value chains.

11
 These producers are found amongst farms located 

outside cities and towns (urban and peri-urban) as well as within specific value chains (e.g. 

cocoa, palm oil).
12

 These producers work in groups but are often marginalized from higher-

value markets due to high unit costs of production, poor infrastructure and limited access to 

credit and technical assistance. Three main profiles have been identified in the ROC of SMEs 

that are currently operating in the agribusiness sector and could establish business 

relationships with producer groups for commercial agriculture: (i) suppliers of critical inputs 

(e.g. day-old chicks, veterinary medicine and technical assistance provided by 

Transcontinental Business Néerlandais (TBN) in Pointe-Noire); (ii) off-takers for agricultural 

products (e.g. tropical fruits to produce concentrate bought by Bayo in Brazzaville); and (iii) 

firms that are both input suppliers and off-takers (e.g. supplying cassava cuttings then 

purchasing of cassava for saka-saka processing by Agridec in Dolisie).    
 
 
 

                                                           
11

 M.H. Collion, Rural Productive Partnerships: An Inclusive Agribusiness Model for Overcoming Small-holder 
Market Barriers, World Bank, 2012. This finding is echoed by studies in Africa and Asia which indicate that 50-70% 
of farmers are unable to move out of subsistence (S. Ferris et alt., Linking Smallholder Farmers to Markets and the 
Implications for Extension and Advisory Services, MEAS Discussion Paper 4, 2014). 
12

 The Ministry of Agriculture holds a Registry of Farmer Cooperatives that totals 1,055 cooperatives nation-wide, 
out of which 25% (approximately 250) are estimated to be active according to a survey conducted by the Ministry 
in 2015.  According to records from ongoing projects (PDARP, PADE), there are approximately more than 500 
additional active producer groups that are not registered with the Ministry since they registered at the 
Department level or they decided to register as an Association with the Ministry of Interior instead. There are 
therefore approximately 800 active producer groups (associations/cooperatives) in Congo, totaling approximately 
16,000 smallholders. 




C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 

 
 
Development Objective(s) (From PAD)  
The project development objective (PDO) is to improve productivity and market access for producer groups and micro, 
small and medium agribusiness enterprises, in selected zones, and provide immediate and effective response in the 
event of an eligible crisis or emergency.  
 
 
 
Key Results 

1. Direct beneficiaries, of which Female beneficiaries (Percentage) (Core); 

2. Average seasonal yield per standard area of specific crops among targeted farmers; and  

3. Increase in marketed production volume of raw and processed products by producer groups 

and MSMEs supported by the project. 

 
 

 
D. Project Description  

16. Key issues to be addressed. Through the support of the emergence and the revival of a 
competitive commercial agriculture sector, the project will address: (a) access to market 

with: (i) consistent supply of high volumes of quality produce meeting market requirements 
for commercial and industrial production; (ii) high quality value added agricultural products; 

(b) an enabling business environment with: (i) favorable legislation; (ii) a partnership 

framework for public-private dialogue between agricultural stakeholders; and (iii) an 

enabling institutional framework for private investors in the agricultural sector; and (c) an 

ecosystem of services that provide actors with: (i) appropriate inputs (feed for livestock, 

seeds, organic fertilizers, finance, processing technology, micro-irrigation equipment, etc.); 

(ii) a qualified workforce,; (iii) marketing infrastructure (logistics, agricultural feeder roads, 

storage); and (iv) access to water and electricity. 

 

17. Additional development challenges to be considered. The project will also help address 
nutrition and food insecurity by promoting producer groups’ access to nutrition and climate 

sensitive technology, agriculture extension services, and by supporting MSMEs to produce 

fortified and enriched foods in the market. Skills development and job creation for youth 

challenges (auto-employment, semi-permanent, temporary jobs, etc.) will be addressed 

through support to internship arrangements between institutes of higher learning and the 

private sector. 

The gender gap 

with respect to 

access to 

services, inputs 

and finance and 

ownership of 

economic 

resources will be 

reduced by 

promoting female 

producer groups’ 

access to 

matching grants. 

Female owned 

MSMEs will also 

be promoted 

through access to 

a tailored 

technical 

assistance 

package for 

women MSMEs 

(business 

leadership, 

entrepreneurship 

training, 

mentorship and networking support).  Targeting principles and the approaches by component 

are described in Box 1. 
 
 

A. Project Components 

Component 1: Direct support to producer groups and agribusiness MSMEs (IDA: US$25 million)  

18. Component 1 seeks to increase productivity and value addition along value chains, and 
improve food and nutrition security. Support provided under this component will be through 

a matching grant program financing technical assistance and productive investments to 

support production, marketing and processing activities. This component has two sub-

components. 

Box 1: Targeting Principles 

Two basic principles will guide project design: (i) an open menu approach with 

respect to the selection of value chains, subsectors and business opportunities; 

and (ii) a geographical concentration and targeting of project interventions where 

commercial opportunities and the need for support have been identified and 

expressed by market actors (producers, processors and others). The rationale for 

an open menu is to avoid excluding any potentially viable value chain and 

business opportunity. The project’s geographical focus will start where 

commercial agriculture has the strongest potential: the three main cities of 

Brazzaville, Pointe Noire and Dolisie and in the North of the country. In its first 

component, the project will directly support private sector initiative in agriculture 

by facilitating market access for producer groups and agribusiness MSMEs. 

Support to producer groups will follow a Productive Alliance approach through 

which these producer groups target new markets and seek to establish commercial 

relationships with buyers and off-takers. Support to MSMEs will focus on 

helping agribusiness firms to connect with specific off-takers and markets (both 

domestic and export), through  sound business plan development, supply chain 

development for sourcing quality raw materials, and access to know-how to 

improve processing techniques, relevant market information and/or equipment, 

etc.  

 

The second component will support public investments in agricultural service 

roads and other improved public infrastructure (e.g. access to electricity and 

water supply for agro-processing) selected based on the location (clustering) of 

the demand for sub-projects from producer groups and agribusiness MSMEs in 

Component 1. Producer groups and agribusiness MSMEs will need to identify 

(along with their expression of interest) if their value chain development activities 

are constrained by the lack of viable infrastructure. Activities in Component 2 

will also contribute to improving the business climate for commercial agriculture. 

Lastly, the project will support the strengthening of institutional capacities for 

commercial agriculture development in its third component. 


Subcomponent 1.1: Sustainable intensification and commercialization of crop and animal 

production (IDA: US$ 20 million)  

19. Objective and instruments used. This subcomponent will support producer groups in 
Productive Alliance arrangements with buyers and markets for increased production, value 

addition and improved marketing of their products. It will support the intensification of 

production and commercialization of products within supported value chains through 

technical assistance and financing of business plans using a matching grant scheme 

administered through a Productive Alliance approach.  

 

20. Productive Alliance approach.
13

 Productive Alliances will aim to develop the managerial 

and technical capacity of producer groups and help them implement business plans that 

include support for productive investment (access to inputs, production facilities, nutrition 

and climate-sensitive technology) and technical assistance (agriculture advisory, extension 

services and business development skills and practices). The project will also seek to 

strengthen existing business arrangements between producer groups and buyers and/or 

support new ones.  

 

21. Business plans. Producer groups will be supported to translate their vision and strategy into 
a business plan that clearly identifies specific markets, marketing plans and technical and 

financial needs. Business plans are expected to finance a series of investments (depending on 

market requirements, the supply chain and associated constraints), such as: (i) improved 

access to quality inputs (e.g. seeds, cuttings, chicks, fertilizer, feed, water through small 

pumped and piped irrigation systems, etc.); (ii) infrastructure and/or equipment for 

processing; and (iii) infrastructure and/or equipment to improve the storage and transport to 

reach target markets. Investments will systematically be accompanied with technical 

assistance to install and maintain the investment and to improve the producer group’s 

marketing skills and management of its business and finances. The matching grants, 

however, will be awarded based on a competitive process. Applicants will have to meet a set 

of eligibility criteria to present their business plan, which will then be assessed on the basis 

of additional relevant prioritization criteria
14

. In forest areas, application of REDD+ 

principles will for instance be a precondition for relevant value chains. Female producer 

groups will receive tailored technical assistance that will include business leadership 

networking support to enable them to access markets and manage business operations. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

                                                      

 

Subcomponent 1.2: Development of agro-industrial activities (IDA: US$ 5 million) 

22. Objective and instruments used. This subcomponent will support the competitiveness of 
MSMEs involved in agribusiness, from input supply to the production, processing and 

distribution of agricultural products, as well as the delivery of agri-based services. These 

actors face efficiency challenges linked to the cost of processing, packaging and marketing 

their products. Efficiency gains in operations will result in higher quality agricultural 

products (nutritional and safety standards compliant), jobs (full, part-time and seasonal), and 

a secure market that rewards farmers with quality produce with higher prices. Female owned 

MSMEs will access a technical assistance plus package (business leadership, 

entrepreneurship training, with additional mentorship and networking support) to support 

them to bridge specific gender related challenges. This subcomponent will aim to allow 

MSMEs to have better access to training, equipment and skills they need to develop their 

business. 

 

23. Business plans. Agribusiness MSMEs will be able to apply for grants on a competitive basis 
through the same matching-grant scheme as the one described for Subcomponent 1.1. They 

will have to submit a business plan that identifies market demand for the firm’s products and 

services and shows returns on investment and financial sustainability of the firm’s 

operations, while clearly demonstrating that the investment contributes to addressing at least 

one of the following challenges: product upgrade, process improvement, new product 

development, volume increase, or reduction of the environmental footprint. The matching 

grants will cover technical assistance and equipment. Technical assistance will systematically 

accompany equipment requests to ensure the proper use and maintenance of the investment. 

Eligibility and prioritization criteria will be applied to maximize the transparency of the 

Promotion plans and 

activities targeting 

potential members of 

productive alliances. 

This process 

continues during the 

call for proposals 

phase.

Public calls for 

potential productive 

alliance partners (i.e. 

producer groups, 

input suppliers, 

buyers, etc.) to 

present business 

plans. 

The calls will be 

accompanied by a 

communications 

campaign, as well as 

field information and 

training workshops.

Evaluation of 

expressions of 

interest (EOI) from 

producer groups with 

the following criteria: 

(i) compliance with 

basic eligibility criteria 

and safeguards; (ii) 

location based on 

pre-identified areas; 

and (iii) commitment 

by producer groups 

to co-financing.

Producer groups, 

whose profiles are 

approved, receive 

technical assistance 

for the formulation of 

their business plan.

Groups that do not 

meet basic criteria 

receive capacity 

building support.

EOI and business 

plans identify public 

infrastructure gaps to 

help prioritize 

infrastructure support 

under Component 2.

5. Evaluation of 

proposals

Evaluation of the 

commercial, technical 

and financial 

soundness of 

business plans 

conducted by an 

independent entity. 

Safeguards 

evaluation and 

inclusion of mitigating 

measures, if required, 

are carried out by the 

project unit.

4. Formulation of 

business plans

3. Evaluation of 

expressions of 

interest

2. Call for 

proposals

1. Marketing 

strategy and 

promotion

6. Implementation

of business plans

Implementation of 

subprojects by 

producer groups, with 

systematic technical 

assistance to improve 

organizational, 

managerial, business 

and risk-management 

skills. 

Other agents (e.g. 

input suppliers, 

buyers, technical 

assistance providers) 

implement agreed 

measures separately. 


selection process and the sustainability of the investments made and assistance received
15

.  

  

Component 2: Improving public infrastructure and the business climate for commercial 

agriculture (IDA: US$ 45 million) 
24. This component aims to foster the development of commercial agriculture by lifting 

constraints in terms of infrastructure and business climate. This component consists of two 

sub-components:  

 

Subcomponent 2.1: Public infrastructure for the development of commercial agriculture (IDA: US$ 

37 million)  

25. Objective and instruments used. This subcomponent will contribute to the development of 
basic infrastructure essential for the promotion of commercial agriculture and the emergence 

of an agro-industry. It will include public investments in the rehabilitation and maintenance 

of the feeder road network and improved access to other public infrastructure (e.g. access to 

electricity and water supply for agro-processing, and other public infrastructure) in a targeted 

way.  

 

26. Prioritization criteria. High logistical costs and limited access to markets are major 
obstacles faced by the private sector. To address these important issues, the project will make 

a provision to ensure public investments in infrastructure: (i) are identified by the 

Government as infrastructure of a public nature; and (ii) are located in targeted geographic 

zones where producer groups and MSMEs promoting commercial agriculture development 

express interest in receiving Productive Alliance and / or MSME support (see Component 1). 

 

27. Sustainability of investments. Technical assistance will also be provided through this 
subcomponent to selected departmental councils to implement the new road maintenance 

strategy developed with the assistance of the Agricultural Development and Rural Roads 

Rehabilitation Project (PDARP) in order to make such maintenance more sustainable.  

 

Subcomponent 2.2: Governance and regulatory framework for commercial agriculture (IDA: US$ 8 

million) 

28. Objective and instruments used. This subcomponent aims to improve the legal and 
regulatory framework for commercial agriculture. It will do so by: (i) establishing and 

financing platforms for public-private dialogue on commercial agriculture at the 

departmental and national levels to identify needed reforms; (ii) providing technical 

assistance to draft the identified legislation and regulations; (iii) policy advocacy with 

parliamentarians (e.g. policy notes, sensitization, training); and (iv) conducting sensitization, 

dissemination and training activities toward relevant stakeholders (i.e. ministries and public 

institutions, producer groups, agribusiness MSMEs and other private sector actors, etc.) on 

drafted legislations and regulations pertaining to commercial agriculture. 

 

29. Public-Private Dialogue (PPD) on commercial agriculture. The project will build on the 
mechanism for public-private dialogue put in place with the support of PADE to start a 

                                                           
 

public-private dialogue specifically on commercial agriculture by providing technical 

assistance and budget support to set up and operate PPD platforms
16

 on commercial 

agriculture at the departmental and national levels. The platforms are expected to identify and 

contribute to building consensus around changes to legislation and practices that constrain 

commercial agriculture.    

 

30. Identified reforms. Some of the needed improvements to constraining legislation specific to 
commercial agriculture have already been identified with stakeholders and their drafting will 

be supported by the project. The legislation pertains to: (i) compliance with the Organisation 

pour l’Harmonisation du Droit des affaires en Afrique (OHADA) Uniform Act on 

Cooperatives; (ii) National Seed Policy in compliance with the norms of the Economic 

Community of Central African States (CEEAC); (iii) Rural Code to clarify and secure land 

access; and (iv) food safety policy and regulatory framework, standards and the certification 

of products
17

. 

 

Component 3: Strengthening institutional capacities to support the development of commercial 

agriculture (IDA: US$ 30 million) 

31. The objective of this component is to strengthen the capacity of public and non-public 
service providers involved in the implementation of project activities and / or supporting the 

development of commercial agriculture in the Republic of Congo. At the same time, it will 

ensure and oversee the successful management and implementation of the project, while 

making a provision to enable an immediate response in case of declared crisis or emergency. 

This component has three sub-components: 

 

Subcomponent 3.1: Capacity-building of institutions providing support to commercial agriculture 

(IDA: US$20 million) 

32. Objective and instruments used. The subcomponent will provide equipment, training and 
operating cost support to government and non-government actors that are necessary for 

commercial agriculture to succeed, including a number of technical departments of the 

Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries (MAEP).  

 

33. Targeted institutions. These capacity-building efforts will target institutions involved in key 
areas related to: (i) agricultural statistics services; (ii) the access to improved genetic 

materials; (iii) the implementation of the reform of the national public system for agricultural 

extension and advisory services; (iv) the agricultural vocational and higher education training 

systems; and (v) the policy framework for food safety, quality standards and product 

certification supported in Subcomponent 2.2
18

. 

                                                           
16

 When business practices and legislation identified by these sector-specific PPD platforms are economy-wide in nature (e.g. easing business 
entry and business exit, facilitating trade across borders, etc.), the project will share these inputs with PADE, which is better placed to address 
them. When identified reforms are specific to commercial agriculture, and if a strong consensus can be built with stakeholders from the public 
and private sectors around them, the project will provide support for their drafting through this subcomponent. 
17

 See Annex 1 for more detail on the reforms that have been identified. 
18

 A list of the institutions identified for capacity-building support includes: (i) the Studies and Planning Department 
of MAEP; (ii) the Ministry of Scientific Research and Technical Innovation through the Institut National de 
Recherche Agronomique (IRA) and the Centre National de Semences Améliorées (CNSA), among others; (iii) the 




Subcomponent 3.2: Project management, coordination and monitoring at national and provincial 

levels (IDA: US$ 10 million)  
34. This subcomponent will support project management, coordination, communication, 

monitoring and evaluation, adequate monitoring of the environmental and social safeguard 

policies, at the national level as well as at the departmental levels. Under this subcomponent, 

a strong fiduciary management system will be introduced and an effective monitoring and 

evaluation framework will be designed, which will not only monitor impact indicators, but 

will also ensure real time data collection that will facilitate the adoption of corrective 

measures in a timely manner and even attempt to integrate the data into the national 

agricultural statistics database.  

 

35. Through this subcomponent, the project will finance a baseline study, mid-term review study, 
final impact assessment, the recruitment of staff, consultancy services, the acquisition of 

property and equipment, and will support relevant seminars and training, as well as diverse 

operating costs to supervise the project activities. 

 
Component 4: Contingency emergency response (IDA: US$ 0.0M) 

36. This component will provide support for immediate response to an eligible crisis or 
emergency, as needed. A crisis or emergency eligible for financing is: an event that has 

caused, or is likely to imminently cause, a major adverse economic and/or social impact to 

the Borrower, associated with a natural or man-made crisis or disaster. Rapid disbursement 

of funds will allow the Government to request a reallocation of project funds to partially 

cover emergency response and recovery costs. This component will be triggered if: (i) the 

Government has determined that an eligible crisis or emergency has occurred and has 

furnished to the Bank a request to include said activities in the Contingency Emergency 

Response Component (CERC) for emergency response; (ii) the Government has prepared 

and disclosed all safeguards instruments required for said activities; (iii) the Borrower has 

adopted the CERC Operations Manual (OM) in form, substance and manner acceptable to the 

Bank. A specific OM for this component will be prepared detailing financial management, 

procurement, safeguards, and any other necessary implementation arrangements. While 

Components 1, 2 and 3 focus on pre-crisis disaster risk mitigation and climate resilience 

enhancement measures, Component 4 will help to strengthen the Government’s capacity to 

respond effectively to an eligible crisis or emergency. 
 
 
E. Implementation 
 
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 

37. The institutional arrangements proposed for this project, under the supervision of the 

                                                                                                                                                                                           
Cooperative Action Department of MAEP and Agricongo among others; (iv) the Ministry of Higher Education 
through the Ecole Nationale Supérieure d'Agronomie et de Foresterie (ENSAF), among others; and (v) institutions 
identified through the food safety reform supported in Subcomponent 2.2. See Annex 1 for more detail on the 
institutional capacity-building work of Subcomponent 3.1.    



 

Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries (MAEP), includes the following supervisory 

and implementation bodies: (i) a Steering Committee; (ii) a National Coordination Unit of 

the project (including a Matching Grant scheme); (iii) Project Implementation Units at 

departmental level; (iv) technical service providers (public, private, NGOs); and (v) financial 

institutions, which will render financial services to the private sector (producer groups, 

agribusiness MSMEs) (See Figure 2). 

 

38. Public service providers will participate in the project through the structures of the MAEP, 
The ongoing reform of MAEP and the introduction of specialized agencies is an opportunity 

for re-thinking and repositioning the role of public technical services, including agriculture 

advisory and extension services.  

Steering Committee (CP)  
39. A high level Steering Committee will be officially established before effectiveness. It will be 

chaired by the Minister in charge of Agriculture and composed of representatives of key 

project stakeholders (relevant ministries, private sector, and civil society including producer 

groups) in the project. The Steering Committee will be responsible for the strategic direction, 

operational oversight, communication and overall good governance of the project. 

 

National Project Coordination Unit (NPCU)  

40. It is proposed that the current PDARP national project coordination unit, with a proven track 
record in administrative and fiduciary management, be retained and strengthened to 

coordinate and manage the Commercial Agricultural Project. The NPCU will be responsible 

for project implementation, management, coordination, monitoring and evaluation, and 

supervision. The NPCU will rely on specific expertise, including the hiring of an independent 

firm contracted for the management of the matching grant program of Component 1.  

 

Project Implementation Units (PIUs) 

41. Four Project Implementation Units will be established at departmental level to support 
specific zones targeted by the project. They will ensure project activity monitoring and 

evaluation as well as receive and process complaints related to the implementation of the 

project in collaboration with the authorities and civil society.  
 
 

 
 
 .    
F. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 

The project envisages to target 3 main high potential agricultural zones as defined in the Schema National 
d’Amenagement du Territoire (National Spatial Master Plan). These are (i) agri-zone 1 South Corridor 
Brazzaville - Pointe Noire, (ii) agri-zone 2 Central Corridor Konda- Oyo-Lekye- Gambona, including special 
economic zone Oyo-Owando where fisheries and palm oil are being promoted; and (iii) agri-zone 3 North 

Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal. 

 


special economic zone Ouesso where cocoa, coffee and palm oil are being promoted. 

 
 
G. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 
 

Lucienne M. M'Baipor,Grace Muhimpundu,Claude Lina Lobo 

 
 
 

SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

Activities from Subcomponent 1.1: Intensification of 
Agricultural and Livestock value chains; 
Subcomponent 1.2: Development of logistic, trade 
and business services; and Subcomponent 2.1: 
Public Infrastructure for Agribusiness and Agro 
industrial Development are expected to impact 
environment and these impacts are evaluated to be 
moderate, localized and manageable; so the project 
is classified to the EA category “B”. And the 
Environmental Safeguards Policies triggered are 
PO/PB 4.01 "Environmental Assessment"; PO/PB 
4.04 "Natural Habitats"; OP/PB 4.09 "Pest 
management and pesticides"; PO/PB 4.10 
"Indigenous Peoples"; PO/PB 4.11 "Physical Cultural 
Resources"; OP/PB 4.12 "Involuntary Relocation"; 
PO/PB 4.36 "Forests"; OP/PB 7.50 Projects relating 
to International Waterways; PO/PB 17.50: Right of 
access to information. 
To ensure that any environmental issues by the 
project activities are appropriately addressed, the 
safeguard instrument elaborated according OP/BP 
4.01 is the Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF). This one is also designed to 
serve as a guide for developing ESIAs and ESMPs as 
needed, when the exact sites of sub-projects will be 
known. In particular, the ESIA will include a 
diagnostic of the project areas, potential 
environmental adverse impacts, potential issues 
related to labor influx, and mitigation measures to 
manage properly expected adverse impacts. The 
ESIA will highlight specific provisions that need to be 


included in construction/installation contracts to 
ensure that contractors’ ESMPs address relevant 
mitigation measures. 
The ESMF include specific sections to address all 
issues related to OP/BP 4.04 on Natural Habitats; 
OP/BP 4.36 on Forests and OP/BP 4.11 on Physical 
Cultural Resources. 
 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

OP/BP 4.04 is triggered to enable the project to 
perform the screening of the identified sites and 
their vicinities relative to natural habitats, the aim is 
to avoid project activities to create significant 
degradation of natural habitats. Project will also 
seek to identify appropriate conservation measures, 
follow-up, assessment and management of natural 
habitats within the project area. The Government 
will be encouraged to provide necessary information 
to the people and to provide them with the right 
incentives to protect and to support the 
conservation of natural habitats and to facilitate, if 
necessary, the rehabilitation of degraded habitats. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes 

This project could possibly impact the health and 
quality of forests or the rights and welfare of people 
and their level of dependence upon the interaction 
with forests, and it may lead to changes in the 
management, protection or utilization of natural 
forests or plantations. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

OP/BP 4.09 is triggered because the project supports 
activities that requires the use of pesticides, 
fertilizers, vaccines and other chemicals like in the 
production of eggs, of cattle feed and veterinary 
products in the poultry, goats, pigs, cattle, fish 
farming and aquaculture, and some projects 
activities will lead to a surge in the use of pesticides 
and fertilizers which can create negative effects on 
the environment. This policy supports the integrated 
pest control approaches. It identifies pesticides that 
can be financed under the project and develop an 
appropriate plan of pests to deal with risks. To 
comply with this policy a Plan of Management of 
Pests and Pesticides (PMPP) was prepared in 
separated document from the ESMF. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 
This policy, OP/BP 4.11, is triggered by the project 
because during implementation of project activities, 
it is possible to discover or to affect some cultural 


relics. The Physical Cultural Resources Policy aims to 
protect cultural resources, to avoid any significant 
conversion (loss) or degradation of these resources. 
To be in compliance with this policy, project has 
developed, into a separate document, the Physical 
Cultural Resources Framework (PCRF). 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 Yes 

Indigenous Peoples are found on a large part of the 
Republic of Congo’s rural territory, and a number of 
the areas visited under project preparation and 
evaluation phase are known to inhabit Indigenous 
Peoples (IPs). This includes the Cuvette (Oyo-
Owando), in the Sangha (Ouesso), and Plateau (Oyo, 
Gamboma). Since the project will be implemented at 
the national level, with specific zones of 
interventions yet to be identified (based on targeted 
crops, agribusiness, and in accordance to the 
national agricultural plan), the project has prepared 
an Indigenous Peoples Policy Framework (IPPF), 
which will establish the framework for consultation 
and inclusion of IPs in the project areas. The project 
will identify various IPs associations and IP 
communities in the selected zones as collaborators, 
as well as potential CSOs and local NGOs. Once the 
specific sites are known, an Indigenous Peoples Plan 
(IPP) will be development, and it would identify the 
targeted IPs, and ensure their inclusion as 
beneficiaries of project activities, in a culturally 
appropriate and inclusive manner. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

Activities suggested in Component 2, Subcomponent 
2.2 “Public Infrastructure for Agribusiness and Agro 
industrial Development”, may require acquisition of 
land. Due to low population density in rural areas, 
however, the risk of physical resettlement is 
minimal, although there may be potential economic 
displacement or loss of assets.  
The project has prepared the Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF) since the exact site locations are 
yet unknown, and eventually Resettlement Action 
Plans (RAP) or Abreviated Resettelement Action 
Plans (ARAP) will be prepared to mitigate potential 
negative impacts.  
This new project is to some regards an extension of 
the Agricultural Development and Rural Roads 
Rehabilitation Project (P095251, and Additional 
Finance P145627). The project established an escrow 

US $500,000 for resettlement 
compensation. Since the project did not require any 
land acquisition and therefore did not induce any 
resettlement (physical or economic displacement), 
no RAPs were prepared for the project. The funds in 
the escrow account remain unused, and the account 
will be transferred to the new project in order to 
fund potential compensation cases for the new 
Commercial Agriculture project.  
 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 
This Safeguard Policy is not trigged because no 
project activities involved in dams or located in their 
vicinities. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

Yes 

OP 7.50 is applicable to the Project because 
activities may have an impact on the Congo, 
Oubangui and Sangha river basins, all of which are 
international waterways. ROC is one of the riparians 
of the Congo-Oubangui-Sangha basin together with 
DRC, Central African Republic, Cameroon, Gabon, 
and Angola. The proposed Project covers primarily 
high potential agricultural zones around the main 
cities of Brazzaville, Pointe Noire and Dolisie, the 
south corridor along the national road from 
Brazzaville to Bouenza and Kouilou and the northern 
part of country, Sangha and Likouala. The planned 
rehabilitations of irrigation systems are very small in 
size. Most of these schemes will be located around 
the three big cities and markets of Brazzaville, Pointe 
Noire and Dolisie (using the rivers of Djoué, Niari, 
Kouilou … ), the country’s bread basket and where 
70% of the population live. The task team has 
carefully considered any potential impacts of the 
proposed investments, and because that: (i) the 
project will not cause appreciable harm to the 
riparian countries; and (ii) no activities are expected 
to have any adverse effects on the water quality or 
quantity, no notification is required under OP 7.50 
since the project deals only with micro/minor 
irrigation rehabilitation, and thus falls under the 
exception to the notification requirement under 
paragraph 7 (a) of the Policy. An exception memo 
has been prepared and was approved by the AFRVP 
on May 15, 2017. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No This Safeguard Policy is not triggered. 

 
KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
In agricultural development and infrastructure implementation, the expected negative impacts are inherent in 
deforestation and the loss of biodiversity; soil erosion, silting of rivers, degradation of water courses; pollutions and 
nuisances, the generation of construction waste, rubble and other demolition residues, disruption of activities on land 
rights, etc.  
In the operational phase, the risks relate to pollution and degradation of watercourses linked to the use of pesticides 
and fertilizers; pollution and nuisance due to solid and liquid waste from agricultural activities, pollution of the 
environment by sewage and solid waste disease, risk of accidents, risks (HIV / AIDS) and development of water-related 
diseases (malaria, bilharziasis), social conflicts related to local customs and practices; losses of land and socio-
economic income sources; influx of the population as a result of the installation of structuring facilities, strong 
pressure on land and water with increasing development.  
Terrestrial and aquatic habitats (wetlands) can be altered mainly during the start-up and implementation phase of 
agricultural. But globally, all these impacts are evaluated to be moderate, localized and manageable. 
 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
This project would increase agricultural productivity, enhance food security and nutrition. No adverse long term or 
indirect environmental or social impacts are expected. 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. 
There are no significant negative impacts of the project, designed on the contrary to have positive social and 
environmental impacts. No alternatives were therefore considered to avoid impacts. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower 
capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Based on experience gained through the implementation of the Agricultural Development and Rural Roads 
Rehabilitation Project, a Category B project, the capacity of the Implementing Agency housed in the Ministry of 
Agriculture to implement the Bank’s environmental and social safeguards policies is considered high. An 
environmental specialist has been included as part of the PIU core team, and the project will recruit a social specialist. 
The two specialists will monitor and supervise the environmental and social measures as recommended in the various 
safeguards instruments for the project. The current environmental specialist, as well as the Project Coordinator have 
both benefitted from the World Bank organized capacity-building initiative in November 2016.   
Finally, to manage and monitor safeguards implementation in a timely manner, the PIU will prepare quarterly reports 
of the implementation of the safeguards instruments. The Project will equally ensure that all the instruments (in 
accordance with OP 4.01, OP 4.10, OP 4.11 and OP 4.12) put in place and the Grievance Redress Mechanisms (GRMs). 
The project will monitor indicators set forth in the safeguards instruments. To this extent, the two safeguards 
specialists in the PIU, will closely collaborate with the M&E specialist in the PIU, and reflect the findings in the 
quarterly reports. 
An important lesson learned under the previous Agriculture project was the poor management of grievances. The 


mechanism as established in the safeguards documents were not appropriate or applicable to existing local structures. 
The PIU has drafted a new GRM to manage complaints ensuing from the new project.  
 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, 
with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders outside of government structures are agricultural producers, civil society, private sector (MSMEs 
and SMEs), Indigenous Peoples communities and representatives. Overall, the design of the project has been 
participatory at various levels, through consultation with the different stakeholders throughout preparation. This is 
complemented with additional consultations as part of the review of safeguards instruments.  Representatives of the 
national government formulated the design of the project, while regional governments, local authorities, and 
conservation actors provided inputs. The project will be implemented with the participation of local stakeholders. 
 
 

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Transformation of Agriculture Sector Program 4 PforR (P161876) 

 

Program Information Documents (PID) 
 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 09-Apr-2018 | Report No: PIDA146849 
 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Program Data 

Country Project ID Program Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Rwanda P161876 Transformation of 
Agriculture Sector 
Program 4 PforR 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA 29-Mar-2018 15-May-2018 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency 

Program-for-Results Financing Republic of Rwanda Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Resources 
(MINAGRI) 

 
Proposed Program Development Objective(s) 
 
To improve the capacity of selected public agricultural institutions and to enable an increase in commercialization of 
agriculture value chains in Rwanda 

  
COST & FINANCING 

 

SUMMARY (USD Millions) 
 

Government program Cost 3,700.00 

Total Operation Cost 289.92 

Total Program Cost 289.92 

Total Financing 289.92 

Financing Gap 0.00 

 
   
FINANCING (USD Millions) 

Total World Bank Group Financing 100.00 

     World Bank Lending 100.00 
 

Total Government Contribution 189.92 
     
B. Introduction and Context 

 
Country Context 

 

1. Rwanda is increasingly recognized as a global exemplar in the pursuit of the Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDG) and in meeting the global challenges of climate change. Rwanda’s economy has 
been amongst the fastest growing among the sub-Saharan African (SSA) region. Despite remaining one of 
the poorest on the continent with per capita incomes of US$1,720 (2015, in purchasing power parity 
terms) the economy is nevertheless undergoing rapid structural transformation. Overall Gross Domestic 
Product (GDP) growth has averaged 7.6 percent per annum (p.a.) over 2000 – 15, with urbanization rates 
of 7 percent p.a. over the same period. 
 

2. After slowing to 5.1 percent in 2017, real GDP growth is expected to pick up in 2018-19, 
averaging 5.9 percent, and inflation has increased above the National Bank of Rwanda’s (BNR) target 
ceiling of 5 percent.1 BNR has raised interest rates to prevent capital outflow and this will likely force a 
tightening of monetary policy in 2017 – 18. BNR has reduced the repo rate by 50 basis points to 5.5 percent 
to encourage commercial banks to lower lending rates to drive growth in private-sector credit and 
stimulate economic growth.2 Rwanda’s large current account deficit (16 percent of GDP in 2016) has been 
exerting downward pressure on the Rwandan franc (FRw). Higher oil and commodity prices (as well as 
large purchases including new planes for the national carrier) have seen the import bill increase although 
this is expected to be mitigated by recovering commodity prices in tea, coffee and minerals – Rwanda’s 
three main exports. On the fiscal side, the fiscal deficit is expected to narrow from an estimated 4.7 
percent of GDP in 2016/17 to 4.4 percent of GDP in 2018/19, financed by external project-based debt and 
some budgetary loans from development partners and multilateral institutions.3 Notwithstanding these 
emerging domestic and international trends, the overall policy stance of the Government of Rwanda (GoR) 
is likely to remain in line with the existing Economic Development and Poverty Reduction Strategy (EDPRS) 
(approved in 2013) and its successor to be finalized and approved in 2018. 

 

3. Rwanda’s Vision 2050 sets an ambitious agenda for further improvements in the standard of 
living, targeting middle-income country (MIC) status by 2020. Parallel targets to reduce food insecurity 
and malnutrition and to further reduce poverty from 45 percent today (according to the national poverty 
line; the headcount rate is 63 percent according to the US$1.25 per day measure) are evidence of a deep 
political commitment to the twin goals of poverty reduction and shared prosperity. Except for a period 
between 2000/01 and 2005/06 when the Gini coefficient rose slightly, rapid growth has not been 
associated with an increase in equality. At the same time, the country has embarked on several flagship 
projects to promote a highly skilled service economy, notably around conferences and hospitality and 
information and communication technology (ICT). 

 

4. However, Government spending programs are currently under pressure. The increase in total 
public spending in 2013-2015 has been exclusively for capital expenditures and net lending as recurrent 
expenditures have held steady. The adjustment program of recent years to address growing external 
imbalances restrained the overall fiscal envelope. Health expenditures, for example, have declined both 

 
1 EUI Country Report, January 2018. 
2 ibid 
3 EUI Country Report, November 2017 



as a percent of GDP and in terms of their share in the budget in recent years. Going forward, resource 
availability will be further constrained because of a continuing decline in external grant financing. 
Although the headline fiscal deficit will be more expansionary in FY18/19, the decline in grant financing 
will continue to depress the overall fiscal envelope. Going forward, Rwanda’s fiscal spending will remain 
constrained due to the elevated debt and subdued tax revenues.  

 

5. The Government is also concerned by the emerging demographic trends and the rapidly 
expanding ambitions and expectations of new entrants to the labor market. Demographic projections 
suggest that by 2032 rural areas will be home to an additional 2.5 – 3.5 million Rwandans; land is already 
so scarce (50 percent of rural farm households farm less than 0.35ha) that few can be meaningfully 
accommodated in farming. With a working age population projected to increase from 5.2 million (in 2014) 
to 6.6 million – of which 4 million will be youth (14 – 35 years old), realizing labor productivity potential 
and meeting individual aspirations will require off-farm employment opportunities. This need not imply 
urban-based employment. Agriculture and the food system broadly (i.e. non-agriculture sector jobs 
nevertheless part of the food system such as retail, agro-processing, food logistics etc.) can provide 
substantial rural-based non-farm employment (RNFE). Current economic modeling indicates around two-
fifths of the 200,000 new labor market entrants annually could be gainfully employed in this sector.  
 

6. Continued urbanization will present many challenges as well as opportunities including for the 
agricultural sector. By 2050 Rwanda’s population is projected to reach 22 million of which 70 percent 
would reside in urban areas. Assuming similar patterns are observed elsewhere in the region, food 
preferences will change with increasing incomes, with increasing demand for more standardized and 
packaged or processed food and food safety will become increasingly important. This will threaten existing 
supply chains from domestic producers, with likely upward pressure on the food import bill and foreign 
currency reserves. At the same time, tapping into this emerging market can be an important opportunity 
for expanding domestic value chains, diversifying out of food staples and further value addition across the 
agriculture and food system. Meeting these challenges for the domestic market can also serve as a 
launching pad for successfully penetrating regional and international markets. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 

7. Notwithstanding, Rwanda’s impressive progress and likely future growth, the country remains 
largely agrarian with agriculture the mainstay of jobs, income and livelihoods for much of the 
population. The sector continues to account for around one-third of GDP. Because of its forward and 
backward linkages, it remains a key driver of overall economic performance and poverty reduction 
(accounting directly for over one-third of the overall reduction in poverty from 59 percent in 2001 to 45 
percent in 2011). 
 

8. Historically, aggregate agricultural performance has been driven by productivity improvements 
and land expansion. Aggregate production of key food staples such as maize, beans, Irish potato, sweet 
potato etc. has increased steadily since the end of the Genocide. According to recent analysis by the 
International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI), agriculture’s aggregate growth rate of 5 percent p.a. 
in recent years has been made up of land expansion (2 percentage points) and productivity growth (1.7 
percentage points) with the remainder from increased labor productivity. Rwanda is already among the 
most densely populated countries in SSA and land expansion has been achieved through developing inland 
swamps and valleys with rapidly declining potential for further gains.  



 

The World Bank  
Transformation of Agriculture Sector Program 4 PforR (P161876) 

 

9. Despite productivity gains, yields remain below their potential. Crop yields have greatly 
increased since 2000 but yield growth started to plateau as of 2011. (For instance, cereal and cassava 
yields have trebled, sweet potato yields have doubled yet they have made marginal progress in the last 
five years and remain at around 40 – 50 percent of their potential.) Similarly, livestock productivity has 
remained consistently low over time due to lack of good quality animal feed and poor husbandry 
management practices. Diversification into higher value crops has been limited to date, partly because of 
limited farmer knowledge and traditional risk aversion, and also because the public-sector support 
services has been excessively focused on a narrow range of food staples under the Government’s flagship 
Crop Intensification Program (CIP).  

 

10. Farm size is a major challenge.  The average is only 0.6 ha, with perhaps 0.12 ha per worker.  
Production on numerous small plots of land can impose technical inefficiencies related to water control 
and distribution, crop choice and interactions, and planting materials used, while limiting the potential 
for mechanized plowing. The government has made significant progress on land consolidation.  Land 
under consolidated use rose from 28,788 ha in 2007 to 502,916 ha in 2012, primarily through 
consolidation of production rather than of ownership (World Bank, 2014).  The consolidation process has 
not involved mandatory consolidation of ownership, and planting, cultivation and harvesting are still 
carried out by the individual land owners, albeit on a communal schedule (Pritchard, 2013).  

 

11. The agriculture value chains face key constraints at every stage. Research and extension is 
dominated by public institutions which are understaffed. There are insufficient extension services to 
support both quantity and quality, and there are weak linkages between research and extension. Input 
supply systems are driven by the public sector, there is low awareness of the advantages of quality inputs, 
domestic seed production is low and there is limited access to finance. Production potential is restricted 
by land size, subsistence and rain-fed farming, mono-cropping, limited access to irrigation and 
mechanization. Post production is impacted by poor storage techniques and insufficient storage and 
drying infrastructure and safety and quality of produce affected by poor storage and drying. Processing is 
characterized by low capacity utilization. - Less than 10 percent of total production is processed. The 
supply of raw material is irregular and limited. The agricultural workforce has a low level of technical skills. 
Finally, markets are informal and unorganized, Rwanda country branding is weak, and the price-sensitive 
domestic market poses a challenge for start ups to enter the market. 
 

12. The government has focused on extending the rural roads network with a main objective of 
connecting to regional markets and opportunities exists for scaling up regional connectivity. A 
significant proportion of Rwanda’s rural population, whose livelihoods depend on agriculture, lacks access 
to rural transport facilities, including feeder roads. In 2015, only 13,350 km of roads were in good or 
passable condition, but Rwanda targets to have 30,000 km of passable roads by 2028. Poor connectivity 
hampers agricultural development and prevents farmers from increasing access to markets, enhancing 
their competitiveness and improving their incomes and livelihoods. A national feeder roads strategy has 
been developed which establishes the Feeder Roads implementation framework with clear-cutting 
institutional responsibilities for different stakeholders in the Feeder roads sub-sector, promoting labour-
based technology in feeder roads development and outlining mechanisms for funding feeder roads 
development and maintenance. 

 

 

13.  Rwanda’s proximity to many of the continent’s key food markets and increased global/regional 
consumption for key export crops including bio-fortified staples, presents significant opportunities 
(especially through EAC and COMESA) for enlarged export markets, transport corridors and cross-border 
trade cooperation. Global and regional markets for higher-value agricultural items are also becoming 
more demanding in terms of quality, food safety, and branding, but also more remunerative. Rwanda is 
well-placed to benefit from expanding regional food markets, providing the facilitating investments in 
infrastructure and institutions are in place and the private sector responds. 

 

14. Moreover, existing farming practices are ill-suited to the challenges of climate change, with the 
agriculture sector accounting for 45.6 percent of national greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and poorly 
equipped to adapt to changing weather patterns. Climate change projections are highly uncertain, and 
so precise changes to agro-climatic conditions in what is an agro-ecologically diverse country are hard to 
predict. What is certain, however, is that the system is not yet equipped to model, forecast and adapt as 
changes occur and greater evidence becomes available to hone down climate change forecasts. According 
to a recent assessment by the International Center for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT), few climate smart 
agricultural practices are currently deployed. Current on-farm practices are leading to rapid declines in 
soil fertility and land degradation. 
 

15. In addition, Rwanda remains challenged by malnutrition especially among rural households 
with extremely small land holdings, and pervasive food insecurity. The national rate of stunting remains 
high at 38 percent while the latest Comprehensive Food Security and Nutrition Survey (2016) reports that 
around one-fifth of households remain food insecure. The pattern of stunting and food insecurity is 
complex and not only related to food availability – food insecurity is greatest in the western and northern 
areas and stunting is observed even in relatively non-poor areas due to inadequate child care and poor 
sanitation practices, in particular. A narrow focus on a few traditional food staples under the CIP resulted 
in limited dietary diversity, yet there are emerging opportunities with bio-fortification. The Government’s 
existing kitchen garden program is reportedly contributing to broader nutritional intake, although further 
improvements are required. 

 

16. In Rwanda the labor force is growing at a rapid pace annually with census projections showing 
that the working-age population will grow by about 240,000 per year between 2016 and 2025. This 
growth is substantially larger than the increase in jobs during the last 15 years. Acknowledging the 
demographic trends, the ongoing Second Five-Year Economic Development and Poverty Reduction 
Strategy (EDPRS-2) of the Government of Rwanda (GoR) has an ambitious target of creating 200,000 off-
farm jobs annually. For off-farm jobs, both the formal and informal sector will be important. The 
informal non-farm sector absorbed 70 percent of the new workers between 2006 and 2011 and will 
continue to absorb workers who seek a better living outside agriculture. Employment in the formal 
sector, while growing quickly, will remain low for the foreseeable future given it is starting from a low 
base. Even so, the sector remains important since most of the perceived ‘good’ jobs are created by the 
formal private sector. Increases in agriculture productivity and job creation in industries related to 
agriculture (agro-processing, agribusiness) will also support employment outcomes for the most 
vulnerable, unskilled workers. 

 

17. Women perform the bulk of the labor in the agriculture sector, putting in approximately 51 hours 
per week on farm and domestic duties compared to men who work 40 hours. Most women farmers lack 


the means to purchase high-quality seeds and proper storage facilities to protect their crops. Many also 
never received education on effective farming methods to increase yields and to ensure that the soil on 
their land remains healthy. This creates a cycle of subsistence farming leaving very little or no profit from 
outputs for farmers to use as a source of income or capital.  

 

18. Despite the observed growth, the non-farm enterprise sector maintains a limited presence. 
Rwanda’s non-farm enterprise sector has been growing from a small base. The number of business 
establishments has increased to 149,404 in 2014 – an increase of 18 percent since 2011 – providing 
employment to 361,901 workers in 2014. However, employment in business establishments represents 
only a small portion of overall employment in Rwanda, with agriculture still being the dominant activity. 
The enterprise sector provided employment to 6.2 percent of working-age Rwandans in 2014 (361,901 
jobs of a labor force of 5,785,000). In addition, there is a limited presence of medium- and large-sized 
private firms and vibrancy in the sector has yet to fully emerge.   

 

19. Considering these trends and projections, Rwanda is committed to identifying and addressing 
the policies, regulations, and investment areas that will stimulate inclusive productivity growth for 
broadening nutritious food production and increasing private sector investment. Furthermore, there is 
commitment across the GoR to pursue new opportunities for farm income diversification to secure further 
reductions in rural poverty, strengthen resilience against the impacts of climate change and to transform 
the dominant subsistence farming sector into a competitive and market-led agriculture sector. Their 
objectives for the food and agriculture system mirror the scale of their broader national goals in terms of 
ambition and conviction to achieve them. 

 

20. To codify these ambitions and articulate a road map to achieve them, the Ministry of Agriculture 
and Animal Resources (MINAGRI) revised and updated their National Agricultural Policy (NAP) in 2017. 
The National Agricultural Policy 2017-2030 responds to the changes facing agriculture and the food system 
nationally, regionally and globally. Under this policy, the role of government in agriculture is envisaged to 
fundamentally shift from making direct interventions in the sector – especially with a focus on production 
only – to a market enabler, thereby promoting enhanced farmer cooperation and private-sector-led 
development of the agri-food economy. The policy seeks to build upon Rwanda’s growing reputation as 
supplier of high-quality, sustainably produced agri-food products, especially for the increasingly 
demanding consumers in Africa’s growing urban centers. It places added emphasis on principles of 
resilience to changes in climate and markets and seeks to seize opportunities offered by advances in 
digitalization and information and communication technology (ICT), and to leverage these also for 
vocational-skill development and for more effective sector administration. The policy also aims to 
promote inclusion through mainstreaming preferential treatment for better participation of women and 
youth in agriculture programs and development. 
 

21. MINAGRI has prepared its fourth Strategic Plan for Agriculture Transformation (PSTA 4) which 
is an articulation of how the Government proposes to implement the updated NAP. PSTA 4 is 
structured around four Priority Areas which are well aligned to the NAP. Priority Area 1: Innovation and 
Extension focuses on improving agronomic knowledge and technology in terms of basic research and 
innovation, development of efficient proximity extension services, as well as promoting knowledge and 
skills of value chain actors; Priority Area 2: Productivity and Resilience focuses on promoting sustainable 
and resilient production systems for crops and animal resources; Priority Area 3: Inclusive markets and 



value addition seeks to improve markets and linkages between production and processing; and Priority 
Area 4: Enabling Environment and Responsive Institutions that provides the regulatory framework and 
defines and coordinates public sector involvement. In addition, although women and youth are 
mainstreamed across all priority areas, Priority Area 4 features specific measures and incentives to 
increase gender equity and to introduce skilled youth to commercial farming and jobs along the 
agricultural value chains. PSTA 4 builds on the experience of implementing the previous strategic plan 
(PSTA 3) and provides a basis for ‘future-proofing agriculture to prepare for risks such as those inherent 
in climate change, considering the constraints and opportunities of Rwanda’s demographic, 
geographical and strategic conditions. 
 

22. In addition to MINAGRI, key actors in the sector include the National Agricultural Export 
Development Board (NAEB) and the Rwanda Agriculture Board (RAB). NAEB is responsible for the 
implementation of policies and strategies for promoting and developing agricultural and livestock 
products for export. RAB is an autonomous body largely responsible for research and extension, 
strengthening the linkage with policy, and establish efficiency in service delivery through institutional 
integration in the agricultural sector.  

 

23. PSTA 4 will also be aligned to National Policies and Strategies including Vision 2050, the Third 
Economic Development and Poverty Reduction Strategy (EDPRS III), and relevant sub-sector strategies. 
The EDPRS III was designed to address the Rwanda’s commitment to the SDGs, Intended Nationally 
Determined Contributions (INDC’s) on agriculture, and the Paris Climate Agreement.  The African Union 
has confirmed that PSTA 4 is aligned with goals of Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development 
Program (CAADP) and key regional programs. 

 

24. The proposed Program for Results (PforR) operation will be nested within PSTA 4. PSTA 4 is in 
the final stages of approval – led by a core team within MINAGRI and benefiting from a broad group of 
development partners, including the World Bank and CAADP institutions. PSTA 4 has been endorsed by 
the GoR and will be formally approved at the CAADP Business Meeting on May 15, 2018. Reflecting 
emerging best-practice with PforR operations, the specifics of the PforR Program are drawn from the 
broader PSTA 4 and nested within the Government’s strategy. 

 
PforR Program Scope 

 

25. The responsibility of agriculture public sector institutions, and of MINAGRI in particular, to lead 
the national transformation process outlined in PSTA 4 is clear. The achievement of this transformative 
agenda will require intense policy work with a particular focus on how to promote and support 
agribusiness at all stages of key value chains while balancing commercialization with the consideration of 
poverty reduction and environmental sustainability in a complex, dynamic and risk prone national and 
regional context. The nature of this leadership will be less through the direct delivery of service but will 
be through “thought leadership”, problem solving, policy definition, capacity building, joint enterprise or 
strategic partnership, resource mobilization, regulation, coordination, information management and 
communication. 

 

26. There have been several organizational reviews of agriculture sector institutions as well as review 
and reform exercises intended to inform the transformation of the public sector as a whole.  In addition, 
 

various reports and evaluations, including the 2016 Agriculture Public Expenditure Review and the 2017 
Mid Term Review of the PSTA 3 Strategy have raised significant issues of an institutional nature.  
Furthermore, recent sub sectoral reports or strategies including the Agriculture Finance Diagnostic and 
the National Agribusiness Investment Promotion Strategy (NAIPS) make clear the need for institutional 
reform.  

 

27. The PforR Program has incorporated the recommendations from these reviews and studies into 
its design.  In addition, the design draws on the lessons learned from previous attempts to build capacity 
within MINAGRI, including the first PforR Program. Specifically, the attempts to undertake reforms 
without significant attention to a well design reform process, sustainably addressing Human Resource 
constraints, ensuring communication/coordination are prioritized and ensuring new ways of working are 
well designed and appropriately incentivized.  As a result, the PforR Program makes a sequenced, focused 
and results based approach to the institutional change process central to its design.  

 

28. The scale and complexity of PSTA 4’s institutional reform agenda is significant. However, it will 
take time for MINAGRI to fully establish and strategically apply its “thought leadership” capacity.  Many 
of the expected outcomes will only be fully delivered, at the required scale, during the latter years of PSTA 
4 implementation. In that context, the PforR Program, which supports the first three years of PSTA 4, is 
focused on a series of mutually reinforcing interventions -  some of which are activities, that will deliver 
intermediate outcomes but, more importantly, incentivize organizational reform, create new policy 
instruments, build increased capacity, and establish new systems that will build a sound institutional 
platform to enable MINAGRI to deliver PSTA 4. 
 

29. The proposed PforR operation will support the first three years (2018 – 2021) of the six-year 
strategy of the PSTA 4 (2018-2024). This period of PSTA 4 is focused on establishing a platform for change 
and new ways of working, including the way MINAGRI is structured and reflecting the way it is more 
private sector facing.  

 

30. There is a possibility of supporting the final three years through additional financing, subject and 
without prejudice to normal Bank approval procedures. The activities to be supported under the PforR 
Program correspond to the MINAGRI PSTA 4 agenda. In this context, the focus of the proposed PforR 
operation will be on strengthening the capacity of MINAGRI to increase private sector investment and to 
enable the commercialization of key agriculture value chains in Rwanda’s agriculture sector. Based on 
value chain diagnostics (further elaborated in the technical assessment ANNEX 4) and taking into 
consideration the Bank’s comparative advantage regarding the PSTA 4 Priority areas, the PforR Program 
is constructed around an organizing framework of the following four results areas: 
 

31. Results Area 1: Policy and Organizational Reform – aligned with PSTA 4 Priority Area 4: The PforR 
Program will seek to improve the structure and capability of MINAGRI in order to strengthen sector 
analysis, associated policy reforms and design/introduce relevant financing mechanisms/business models 
for attracting private sector investment. MINAGRI will demonstrate this new capacity by producing a 
Private Sector Leveraging Strategy to guide processes that will leverage private sector financing, while 
ensuring environmental and social standards are maintained. In addition, the foundations for digital data 
systems will be launched to improve management information and enable greater innovation. 
Furthermore, a new mechanism will be established to enable greater interagency coordination (including 

 

key stakeholders such as Ministry of Trade, Financial sector actors, etc.) and communication.   
 

32. Results Area 2: Enabling Agric Commercialization - aligned with PSTA 4 Priority Area 4:  The 
second PforR Results Area focuses on specific interventions to improve the quality of public investments 
in essential value chain services to leverage commercial agriculture. This includes key areas such as 
infrastructure and research, by introducing new business models that will link public investments to 
commercial markets and leverage increased levels private sector investments. PSTA 4 advocates for 
maximizing the effectiveness and efficiency of public investment by leveraging increased private sector 
investment in service provision and delivery/management of agricultural infrastructure. 
 

33. Results Area 3: Delivery of Improved Agric Value Chain Services - aligned with PSTA 4 Priority 
Areas 3 & 4.  The PforR Program will support fostering competitive agricultural value chains, which 
requires the public sector to provide critical services to support production, processing, logistics, 
marketing and the like. This approach is consistent with MFD principles.  The public function supported 
by the PforR Program is to introduce and accelerate the expansion of services that de-risk agricultural 
investments by improving dialogue between private and public actions, increasing the use of private 
sector service delivery (e.g. out-grower schemes and productive partnerships), and expanding access to 
information and financial services. These measures will help achieve a key anticipated outcome from PSTA 
4 and will improve productivity and inclusiveness of agricultural market systems and increase value 
addition and competitiveness of diversified agricultural commodities, for domestic, regional, and 
international markets. 

 

34. Results Area 4: Efficiency in Public Expenditures - aligned with PSTA 4 Priority Area 4. The PforR 
Program seeks to incentivize the dual approach of supporting: (i) a very specific action that demonstrates 
improved efficiency in public expenditure of the core delivery agency RAB; and (ii) a more general effort 
to improve the overall expenditure among the three main agencies that account for the largest share of 
sector expenditure. Since RAB is the agency responsible for key services, improvements in the budget 
execution system will be undertaken with the goal of improving their delivery function. Standards for 
budget execution help to maximize the impact of government spending and the ability to meet such 
standards signals weaknesses that undermines value for money. It also undermines the argument for 
additional public resources since there are associated concerns over malfeasance in execution that render 
MINECOFIN reluctant to allocate additional resources. Previous audits of RAB have not been approved 
because of non-compliance in several important areas. Prior qualified audits have highlighted in detail 
where weaknesses lie and both agencies are aware of where improvements are needed. 

 

35. The implementation of the program will be sequenced.  Specifically, under Result Area 1 MINAGRI 
will develop and seek approval for a Private Sector Leveraging Strategy (with sections on selection criteria 
for private investments, contract governance, and environmental/social management).   Approval of the 
Private Sector Leveraging Strategy will enable MINAGRI to focus on the delivery of Result Areas 2 and 3.  
 

36. The Boundaries of the PforR Program are summarized below in Table 2 
 



Table 1: Government program and PforR Program Boundary Comparison 

Item Government program PforR Program 

Title PSTA 4 PforR Program 

Objective Transformation of Rwandan 
agriculture from a subsistence sector 
to a knowledge-based value creating 
sector, that contributes to the national 
economy and ensures food and 
nutrition security in a sustainable and 
resilient manner 

To improve the capacity of selected national 
public agricultural institutions, to increase the 
enabling of commercialization of agriculture 
value chains in Rwanda 

Timeframe 2018-2024 2018-2021 

Program 
Cost 

US$ 1.5 billion US$ 292.2 million 

Activities Priority Area 1: Innovation and 
Extension 

• Research and innovation 

• Improved soil health and 
fertility  

• Conservation of biodiversity 

• Extension and advisory 
services 

• Skills Development  
 
Priority Area 2: Productivity and 
Resilience 

• Land husbandry and crop 
production diversification  

• Irrigation 

• Animal resources and 
production systems 

• Nutrition sensitive agriculture 

• Mechanisms for resilience  
 
Priority Area 3: Inclusive markets and 
value addition 

• Market linkages 

• Market risk and financial 
services 

• Quality assurance and 
regulations 

 
Priority Area 4: Enabling Environment 
& Responsive Institutions 

• Agriculture institutional 

 
PforR Program Results Area 3 

• Innovation (partnership agreements 
with universities and private sector) 

 
PforR Program Result Area 2 

• Private sector extension and advisory 
services 

 
 

PforR Program Results Area 2 

• Land husbandry (focused on links to 
commercialization) 

• Irrigation (focused on links to 
commercialization) 

 
 
 
 
 

 
PforR Program Result Area 2 

• Market Links (infrastructure for value 
chain development storage, cold 
trucks, etc.) 
 

 
 
PforR Program Result Area 4 
 

• Agriculture Institutional Development  

development 

• Evidence policy and 
development and regulatory 
framework 

• Commercialization of value 
chains 

• Planning, coordination and 
budgeting 

• Knowledge management  

• Evidence policy development   

• Commercialization of value chains 

• Planning, coordination and budgeting 
 

Geographic 
Scope 

National National 

 

37. The Program boundary for PforR financing provides a clear strategic focus to the PforR Program.  
There are areas of PSTA 4 that will not be covered by the PforR Program.  These areas include the 
following: 
 

a. improved soil health and fertility  
b. conservation of biodiversity  
c. skills development 
d. animal resources and production systems  
e. nutrition sensitive agriculture 
f. mechanisms for resilience 
g. quality assurance  
h. knowledge management 

 

38. The rationale for not incorporating these areas in the PforR Program includes the following:  a) 
MINAGRI is in the process of securing both public and external resources for these areas (including 
regional IPF and GASFP), b) these areas are unlikely to provide an equivalent transformation impact and 
c) a number of these areas (e.g. mechanisms for resilience and quality assurance) could not be effectively 
supported by a PforR Program.  

 

39. The PforR Program and its sub-components aim to tackle identified climate risks and 
vulnerabilities as follows: 

• Policy and Organizational Reform. Currently MINAGRI has limited capacity to fulfil its mandate 
in policy development, inter-sector and intra- sector coordination, resource mobilization and 
M&E. The PforR Program will support improving the capability of MINAGRI to properly 
address policy challenges and direct public investments across all GoR. This new capacity will 
result in strengthen regulatory institutions and policies (including rules and regulations) which 
reduce the emissions of GHGs in the agriculture, fishing, livestock, and/or forestry sectors (a 
PAP action), improvements in data management of weather monitoring systems. 

 

• Improved coordination with relevant agencies and actors. The primary focus for the PforR 
Program is to support MINAGRI in becoming a stronger market enabler.  Improving 
interagency working and coordination is a requirement in this process. This improved capacity 
for sectoral collaboration will also be applied toward tackling climate risks and vulnerabilities. 

• Commercialization of the delivery of key public goods and services. Most agriculture in 
Rwanda is practiced on steep slopes prone to erosion during the rainy season. While 
considerable progress has been made in constructing robust “bench” (wide) terraces, much 
more needs to be done to secure the land asset.  The PforR Program will support, via the 
efficient use of public funds and leveraged private investments, the restoration and 
conservation of productive landscapes. 

 
Table 2: Disbursement Linked Indicators and Climate Change Intent 

Disbursement-

Linked 

Indicator 

Definition Climate Change intent 

DLI 1: 

Organizational 

Development 

Roadmap 

successfully 

prepared and 

implementation on 

track 

• Organizational review, including capacity 
needs assessment of MINAGRI completed and 
new functional structures in place (year 1) 

• OD Plan for MINAGRI prepared and approved 
(year 2) 

• Upgrade of HR management function 
completed (year 3) 

The process of organizational 

change will enable MINAGRI to 

build increased capacity 

tointroduce institutional reforms 

and strengthening to include 

climate aspects in policies and 

regulations in flexible manner 

 

DLI 2: Improved 

analytical and 

policy reform 

competencies 

demonstrated 

• Strategy for leveraging Private Investment 
with Implementation Plan published (year 1) 

• Annual Report by MINAGRI on Public-Private 
Investment in Agriculture published (year 2) 

• Agricultural input subsidy schemes reviewed, 
alternative models for increasing efficiency 
assessed, reforms agreed and implemented 
(year 3) 
 

 

The development of new policies 

and strategies will demonstrate 

MINAGRI capacity to respond to 

new/emerging challenges 

including the identification of 

sites at greatest risk and 

enhancement of resilience of 

those sites and/or services 

DLI 3: Digital 

information 

platforms designed 

and operational 

• A common data warehouse platform is 

designed and ready for use, whereby existing 

data in Weather, MIS and ALIS I will be fully 

interfaced (at least down to the level of all 

districts) – (year 1) 

• The Farmer registration application and ALIS II 

will be fully interfaced with MIS and ALIS I in 

the common data warehouse platform. Both, 

Improved local climate 

information services and 

medium/short-term forecasting 

to support adaptation planning 

and strengthening ability to cope 

with climate change and climate 

variability impacts 

 
Farmer registration and ALIS II, will hold data 

covering all districts - (year 2) 

• (i) The Livestock registration application 
(holding cow data with national coverage) will 
be interfaced with MIS, ALIS I and II, Farmer 
registration application in the common data 
warehouse platform; (ii) Sector Performance 
Dash Board is in place and publicly accessible 
online, whereby it provides reports on 
national agricultural macro indicators, 
national Indicator of Food Security and PSTA 4 
results indicators  
(year 3) 

Improvements to the collection 

and management of data related 

to land use and livestock will 

improve MINAGRI’s capacity for 

monitoring and early response to 

potential impacts of climate-

related risks and hazards such as 

crop and livestock pests and 

diseases  

 

DLI 4: Mechanism 

to strengthen 

public private 

dialogue (PPD) and 

specific commodity 

value chain 

platforms designed 

and implemented 

• Two mechanisms designed and budgeted: (1) 
National Public-Private Dialogues (PPD) on 
themes with strategic relevance (2) 
Commodity value chain platforms (year 1) 

• Two national PPDs held and at least 3 VC 
platforms established with operating plans 
(year 2) 

• Additional 2 PPDs held (year 3) 

• VC platforms are fully functional and yielded 
evidence of satisfactory results (as per M&E of 
operating plan) (year 3) 
 

A stronger dialogue between the 

Public and Private Sector 

(including farmer associations 

and other stakeholders) will 

allow for knowledge exchange 

and greater awareness of climate 

risks, and will encourage greater 

consensus and innovation on 

how (exposure to) risks and 

shocks can be reduced and 

managed.  

DLI 5: New 

irrigation and 

terracing area 

identified, 

developed and/or 

managed where 

commercial 

viability has been a 

determining 

appraisal criterion   

Area (Ha) identified, developed and put under 

recognized PPP (target 23,296 Ha)- disaggregated 

by 

• Irrigation area (target 1260) 

• Area using radical/progressive terraces 

(target 745) (year 2) 

Area (Ha) identified, developed and put under 

recognized PPP (target 31,504 Ha) - disaggregated 

by 

• Irrigation area (target 1680) 

•  Area using radical/progressive terraces 

(target 2310) (year 3) 

 

Most agriculture in Rwanda is 

practiced on steep slopes prone 

to erosion during the rainy 

season. This intervention will, 

with support from private sector, 

promote innovative management 

practices to restore or increase 

resilience of degraded areas for 

crop production. 

 

Promote sustainable water 

management practices that 

promote water use efficiency 


DLI 6: Volume of 

private sector 

investment (in US$) 

matching public 

financing in PPP 

infrastructure 

projects  

The DLI will help to promote new financing 

mechanisms.  Only investments fully committed 

are included in the measure. 

• 4,000,0000 US$ or more (year 2) 

• 7,150,000 US$ or more (year 3) 

Investments will be targeted 

towards infrastructure (e.g. 

greenhouses, drying areas, etc.) 

that is designed to reduced the 

vulnerability of crop storage 

facilities to climate change and 

climate variability. 

 

This investment will also support 

the creation of infrastructure 

that will support improved 

business continuity during and 

after extreme weather events. 

DLI 7: Private 

sector service 

models designed, 

launched and 

achieving positive 

response    

• 6,000 farm households reached by private 
advisory services (non-outgrower scheme) 
(year 2) 

• 8,0000 additional farm households reached by 
private advisory services (non-outgrower-
schemes (year 3) 

• 10,0000 new farm household participating in 
outgrower schemes (Year 3)  

Reduction in the reliance on 

public sector as the key service 

provide will enable MINAGRI to 

refocus resources towards 

supporting farmers who have 

fewer resources to manage 

climate-related risks 

DLI 8: Reform of 

RAB 

• Implementation Plan for RAB Restructuring 

Order prepared and approved by its Board 

(year 1) 

• Deviation between budget and outturn 

expenditure 2018/19  

(year 2) 

• Unqualified audit of RAB (year 3)  

Enables the mainstreaming of 

climate change and relevant 

adaptation and mitigation 

measures across agriculture-

related stakeholders 

 

40. Role of the Development Partners.  MINECOFIN and MINAGRI will be mobilizing resources to 
finance PSTA 4.  There are indications that DFID, EU, IFAD, and USAID will be providing finance via project 
based financing or programmatic financing. 
 
41. DFID is considering providing support for the PforR Program. Once this is confirmed, the most 
appropriate mechanism for their co-financing will be established (i.e., parallel financing, co-financing, 
establishment of a multi-donor trust fund, etc.). To the extent that other development partners (DPs) 
participate in co-financing the PforR Program, it is understood that their funding would need to fit in the 
overall program envelope under PforR financing and would be allocated to the same DLIs, according to a 
similar pattern of distribution (in agreement with the Common Framework of Engagement (CFE)) of the 


MDTF, following all existing procedures of the PforR instrument (i.e., DLIs, verification protocols, PAP, 
Program Implementation). 
 
42. DFID, EU, IFAD, USAID, FAO and the Netherlands will continue to provide Technical Assistance 
(TA) to address the recognized capacity gaps within MINAGRI. These DPs are planning to continue TA 
support over the implementation of PSTA 4.  These same DPs are also part of the Agriculture Sector 
Working Group (ASWG), which provides an important forum to coordinate the complementarity of TA 
interventions, also as part of the annual planning and budgetary processes. Discussions are underway to 
explore the most appropriate modalities to be followed by these DPs, including co-financing the PforR 
operation. Having multiple DPs finance the PforR operation would streamline and reduce transaction 
costs for the Ministry by having one mechanism with agreed upon results and a common set of DLIs. It 
would also simplify the financing to support strategic results, whether policies, impacts, outcomes, and/or 
outputs. DPs who wish to provide co-financing under the proposed PforR operation will follow the same 
procedures as the PforR Program. 

 

C. Proposed Program Development Objective(s)  
 

Program Development Objective(s) 
  
To improve the capacity of selected public agricultural institutions and to enable an increase in commercialization of 
agriculture value chains in Rwanda  
 
 
D. Environmental and Social Effects 

 
43. The physical activities planned under this PforR Program follow the scope and nature of 
activities implemented under the previous PforR operation, and moderate adverse environmental and 
social impacts are anticipated to be site-specific and reversible. Identified impacts can be effectively 
mitigated, based on existing environmental and social systems and the solid recent track record of the 
implementing agencies compliance with both national legislation and World Bank safeguards. No 
anticipated Program activities are judged likely to have significant adverse impacts on the environment 
and/ or affected people that are sensitive, diverse, or unprecedented. However, it is recognized that the 
key sector intuitions, such as, MINAGRI and RAB will require significant capacity building to enhance E&S 
systems and staffing to ensure effective implementation and monitoring of not only public sector, but 
also PPP initiatives.  The capacity enhancement efforts for MINAGRI are included in the PforR operation, 
supported by other Donors. Based on the introduction of the new instruments and new types of 
collaboration with the private sector, the overall environmental and social risks of the PforR Program are 
proposed to be rated as Substantial. 
 

44. The previous PforR operation had several notable achievements, such as the development of a 
consolidated Environmental and Social Implementation Manual based on existing government 
guidelines; and national and district level capacity building on the application of the Manual and the 
establishment of a grievance redress call center. 
 

45. The update of the ESSA is still ongoing to incorporate a sample of the private sector entities and 



assess the environmental and social systems as they are applied for potential PPP projects, especially 
focusing on Results Area 2: Enabling Agricultural Commercialization and Results Area 3: Delivery of 
Improved Agric Value Chain Services. 
 

46. Environmental Effects. The PforR Program may include small scale irrigation schemes, similar in 
scale to sub-projects under the IDA-financed Rural Sector Support Project (RSSP; phases 1 – 3), located 
in existing sites of agricultural land use, do not involve large-scale resettlement, and consist of land 
husbandry works (e.g., terracing); drainage canals and/ or dams that are not higher than 10m; post-
harvest infrastructure, markets, and community storage facilities. Based on the experience with 
implementation of support to PSTA III, the potential environmental impacts of Program activities are 
generally well known and understood by implementing authorities at the national and local levels. 
Under the previous PforR operation, MINAGRI has adopted an Environmental and Social Management 
System based on the internationally accepted best practices and more specifically, based on 
implementation of other donor-funded projects, including Bank-financed RSSP and the Land Husbandry, 
Water Harvesting and Hillside Irrigation (LWH) project. This system includes national small dam safety 
guidelines, integrated pest management plans, environmental assessments and grievance redress 
mechanisms database. It is expected that the identified environmental impacts can be: (i) avoided 
through a careful site selection process, which entails conducting feasibility studies, an environmental 
impact assessment (EIA), and social screening; and (ii) reduced with diligent monitoring of 
implementation of known and demonstrated mitigation measures. At the same time, the Program will 
have a number of environmental benefits, including (i) a soil conservation and land husbandry program 
that will contribute to more sustainable land and water management and decreased erosion; and (ii) soil 
fertility management, and advance research and seed production, which will improve agricultural 
practices and increase food security in the country. 
 

47. Social Effects. No significant changes in land use or large-scale land acquisition are expected 
from the proposed PforR. The Program continues to pay specific attention to its potential social impacts, 
based on the practices established under previous PforR operation. These include: a chance of moderate 
physical resettlement and/ or land acquisition related to Program interventions and temporary 
displacement due to land husbandry works; challenges of identifying relocation sites due to the limited 
land availability; loss of income from land due to demarcation of buffer zones; potential for limitations 
on access to natural resource use in or around protected areas; consolidation of land use; acquisition of 
land for agro-processing and off-farm activities; benefit sharing of commercial farming if land is rented; 
male capture of community institutions; obstacles for women and youth participation; difficulty of 
purchasing agriculture inputs for the very poor due to their limited access to micro finance; conflict over 
land ownership and use; and weak participatory decision making and lack of transparency. The Program 
is also expected to have significant social benefits for the rural communities in the target areas, such as 
increased productivity and commercialization of agriculture and improved quality and accessibility of 
agricultural services, thus improving citizens’ incomes and overall welfare and quality of life, especially 
for the rural poor and vulnerable. Based on the approach established during implementation of other 
Bank-supported operations, the Program targets farmer groups with specific attention to gender issues, 
including in group and cooperative leadership, inclusion of vulnerable groups, and training in conflict 
resolution and family welfare.  
 

48. Sustainability. Ensuring environmental and social sustainability of Program investments requires 




mainstreaming sustainability planning at all levels of the government, including the continuous 
participation of target communities. Currently, the challenge for the sector institutions under the 
Program is to ensure that decentralized decision making, transparency, and accountability are 
institutionalized to enhance sustainability of investments. This need has been recognized by MINAGRI, 
RAB and participating private sector entities and will receive support from the DPs.  
 

49. Capacity. Institutional arrangements for environmental management, including ESIAs, are 
mandated and established at all levels of government. The legal/regulatory procedures and policies for 
expropriation of land in the country adequately respond to the relocation and compensation for loss of 
assets, services, homes, and land. However, a common challenge is the ineffective implementation of 
these requirements and responsibilities due to lack of institutional capacity and financial resources at 
the local level. The assessment of specific capacity of the private sector is ongoing, however, more 
coordination efforts will need to be made by MINAGRI to ensure effective compliance monitoring of the 
PPP interventions. The capacity-building program will continue from the previous phase and focus on 
improving the environmental and social management practices among the government agencies and 
private sector organizations, including in the areas of: (i) implementation and oversight of the 
environmental and social assessment system within the Program; (ii) sustainability aspects of site 
selection and technical designs of the land husbandry and irrigation activities; (iii) documentation of 
involuntary resettlement and project-affected people and vulnerability assessments, including, where 
necessary, preparation of resettlement action plans (RAPs); (iv) screening of potential environmental 
and social impacts and public consultation; (v) enhancing gender-sensitive capacity building of local and 
national staff and service providers and gender responsiveness in agricultural service delivery; and (vi) 
good monitoring practices, including proactive use of grievance redress mechanisms; sampling of soil 
and water quality, and others.  
 

50. OP 7.50 on International Waterways is triggered as the Program activities will involve water 
extraction for irrigation activities from the streams flowing into international basins of the Nile and Lake 
Tanganyika. Following the practice of the RSSP (phases 1-3), the Bank has notified riparian states as part 
of Program preparation. The Bank has assessed, however, that the proposed activities under the 
Program will not result in any adverse impacts to the riparian countries. Irrigation development and land 
husbandry are not expected to have adverse impacts on water quality levels. Even though agricultural 
intensification and increased use of agricultural inputs are objectives of the Program, pre-Program input 
use levels are very low, and modest increases and sustainability measures built into the Program design 
are not expected to have an adverse impact on water quality. In addition, environmental and pest 
management plans are routinely implemented in the Program to mitigate such impacts to minimal 
levels. The PforR Program will not have any adverse effects on the quantity or quality of water flows to 
any other riparian states. 
 

51. Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected as a result of a Bank 
supported PforR operation, as defined by the applicable policy and procedures, may submit complaints 
to the existing program grievance redress mechanism or the WB’s Grievance Redress Service (GRS). The 
GRS ensures that complaints received are promptly reviewed in order to address pertinent concerns. 
Affected communities and individuals may submit their complaint to the WB’s independent Inspection 
Panel which determines whether harm occurred, or could occur, as a result of WB non-compliance with 
its policies and procedures. Complaints may be submitted at any time after concerns have been brought 




directly to the World Bank's attention, and Bank Management has been given an opportunity to 
respond.  For information on how to submit complaints to the World Bank’s corporate Grievance 
Redress Service (GRS), please visit http://www.worldbank.org/GRS. For information on how to submit 
complaints to the World Bank Inspection Panel, please visit www.inspectionpanel.org 

 
 
E. Financing 

Program Financing (Template) 
 

Sources Amount 
(USD Million) 

% of Total 

  Counterpart Funding 189.92 65.50 

       Borrower      192.20      65.7850 

  International Development Association (IDA) 100.00 34.50 

       IDA Credit      100.00      34.22 

Total Program Financing 282.92  

 

 
 .   

























































World Bank Document

PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
APPRAISAL STAGE

Report No.:  PIDA15898

Project Name Agricultural Development Support Project (P147629)
Region EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC
Country Myanmar
Sector(s) Irrigation and drainage (40%), Agricultural extension and research 

(30%), Crops (30%)
Theme(s) Rural services and infrastructure (60%), Other rural development 

(20%), Climate change (20%)
Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P147629
Borrower(s) Republic of the Union of Myanmar
Implementing Agency Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation
Environmental Category B-Partial Assessment
Date PID Prepared/Updated 22-Feb-2015
Date PID Approved/Disclosed 23-Feb-2015
Estimated Date of Appraisal 
Completion

24-Feb-2015

Estimated Date of Board 
Approval

23-Apr-2015

Decision

I. Project Context
Country Context
Myanmar is the largest country in mainland Southeast Asia with a land area of about 654,000 
square km. It is located between Bangladesh, China, India, Lao PDR, and Thailand, with more than 
2,800 miles of coastline. It is also one of the poorest countries in East Asia, with an estimated 
poverty headcount between 26 and 37 percent, depending on the methodology used, among its 
population of around 52 million. The new government which took in office in March 2011 has 
introduced sweeping political and economic reforms. Myanmar is now embarking on a triple 
transition: from an authoritarian military system to democratic governance; from a centrally 
directed economy to a market-based economy; and from 60 years of conflict to peace in the border 
areas. From a strategic point of view, agriculture is of central importance for achieving the twin 
goals of ending extreme poverty and promoting shared prosperity in Myanmar. The sector accounts 
for about 36 percent of the GDP, which is largest share of GDP among ASEAN members. Rice 
production constitutes about 30 percent of agricultural GDP and covers 70 percent of cultivated 
land. The sector generates about 53 percent of total employment and is source of livelihoods for 
about 70 percent of population who live in rural areas. The poverty headcount, which ranges from 
26 to 37 percent depending on methodologies, is highest in upland areas, but in absolute terms most 

rural poor live in the Dry Zone (34 percent), followed by the Delta region (25 percent), according to 
the Systematic Country Diagnostic carried out by the World Bank Group in 2014. In the lowland 
areas of the Delta and the Dry Zones where population densities are highest, poverty is associated 
with landlessness or limited farmland holdings. The rural poor in these areas depend primarily on 
farm income generation and on-farm seasonal and other informal labor opportunities. Among the 
rural households who own land persistent poverty stems from a combination of low productivity of 
farming systems and high vulnerability of these systems to adverse weather events, especially 
drought in areas featuring limited or unreliable access to irrigation services. The government places 
high priority on the development of the agriculture sector and sees it as the basis for food security, 
poverty reduction, job creation, and export promotion.

  

Sectoral and institutional Context
Myanmar has a favorable agricultural potential. It has abundant water resources -- 20,870 m3 per 
person compared to the Asia-wide average of 3,948 m3 per person -- and relatively abundant 
agricultural land, which translates into the highest agricultural land per worker in the East Asia and 
Pacific (EAP) region of about 1.1 ha/worker, compared to 0.8 ha/worker in Thailand and Cambodia 
and less than half of Myanmar figure in Vietnam and Indonesia). According to the Myanmar 
Census of Agriculture (2010), the average farm area is 2.6 hectares, which is the second largest in 
EAP after Thailand (3.1 ha) (and about five times of that prevailing in Vietnam’s Mekong Delta 
region). Finally, it has diverse agro-ecological conditions which would allow it to produce a wide 
range of temperate, sub-tropical and tropical crops. The current agricultural productivity is 
constrained by under-supply of public services (extension, basic education), low levels of 
technology adaption and farm mechanization, insecure irrigation water supply, limited access to 
affordable credit suitable for agricultural production cycles, and rising labor costs that have trapped 
farmers in poverty even within double cropping systems in irrigated areas. There is a lack of an 
overarching and clear agricultural sector strategy in Myanmar to guide public sector and donor 
spending programs. The effectiveness of current public spending programs is also affected by the 
nature of agricultural services provided to smallholders. Too often, public goods and services 
provided to farmers, such as irrigation and extension, are supply driven with little consideration of 
farmer interests.  For example, farmers’ crop choices could be sometimes restricted by local 
authorities at regional and district level who make decisions on water allocations. The limited 
extension services are often focused on the promotion a single crop rather than helping farmers to 
overcome problems they are facing in their farming systems, such as soil infertility and fertilizer 
use, pest management, increasing labor cost, etc. At the same time, farmers’ incentives to invest in 
better water, soil and crop management technologies may be constrained by their lack of security on 
water and land use rights, as well as issues related to the underdeveloped marketing systems and 
high volatility of agricultural prices. Many irrigation schemes function below their potential 
because of inappropriate operation of reservoirs and a lack of responsive irrigation system 
management.  For example, while about 2 million hectares are equipped with irrigation and 
drainage infrastructure, a second crop is being grown on only about 28 percent of this area 
(2011/12). This may reflect both technical deficiencies as well as uncertainties farmers are facing in 
marketing their crops. While primary irrigation structures (dams, canals) seem in general in good 
shape there are problems in getting water to farmer fields. With improved management and a 
change in cropping patterns, including to non-rice crops, it is possible to expand the cropping areas 
and cropping intensity. This may necessitate minor structural alterations to the irrigation schemes to 
improve drainage and, for some fields, to which improves in-field drainage through land leveling. 
However, improving irrigation management is not sufficient to increase farm incomes. This is 

because farmers often do not possess the necessary agronomic technologies and skills to take 
advantage of an improved access to irrigation. The current public extension system is under-
resourced and extension personnel rarely visit farmers to provide advice on the correct fertilizers 
rates to use improved technologies such as improved seeds. There is also some reluctance by 
farmers to change from growing rice to more water efficient crops, such as legumes and sesame. 
This may be partly caused by the rigidity of irrigation systems which does not offer enough 
flexibility in on-field water delivery and thus result in a lack of control over water levels on 
individual farm plots. The general under-capitalization of smallholder farming systems in Myanmar 
caused by decades of public under-investment and policy inefficiency fuels the risk of a vicious 
cycle of declining terms of trade. The development of smallholder agriculture in Myanmar thus 
requires significant public investments in institutional development, technology generation and 
dissemination, rural infrastructure, and human capital for years to come.  The Ministry of 
Agriculture and Irrigation (MOAI) has made significant investments in irrigation infrastructure bet 
ween the 1980s and 2000s which can serve as platform for development of smallholder farming 
systems. Many of these schemes host large numbers of smallholders who have the potential to 
respond to public investments under a supportive environment. These schemes would offer good 
opportunities for landscape-based rural development approaches that address agricultural, natural 
resource management, and social development goals.

II. Proposed Development Objectives
The Project Development Objective is to increase crop yields and cropping intensity in the selected 
existing irrigation sites in Bago East, Nay Pyi Taw, Mandalay, and Sagaing regions.

III. Project Description
Component Name
1. Irrigation and Drainage Management
Comments (optional)
The component seeks to enhance more responsive and reliable provision of irrigation and drainage 
services in the project areas to enable an increase in irrigation area coverage, a resulting better farm 
productivity and better distribution of benefits between upstream and downstream users. It will 
initiate institutional change required for the provision of farmer-responsive irrigation services and 
finance the improvement and rehabilitation of irrigation and drainage infrastructure covering about 
35,000 ha within up to 8 selected schemes in the project regions and will pilot 2-3 small land 
improvement sites in these schemes. The component would support also inclusive land 
administration activities in the selected project irrigation sites.

Component Name
2. Farm Advisory and Technical Services
Comments (optional)
The component seeks to enhance MOAI technology development and farm advisory services at 
target townships which host selected irrigation schemes to improve farmer crop choices and increase 
farm productivity. It will support quality seed production, soil nutrition management, integrated pest 
management, agricultural extension services, and farm mechanization.

Component Name
3. Project Coordination and Management
Comments (optional)


This component seeks to support the project coordination, technical support, communication 
activities, monitoring, and evaluation.

Component Name
4. Contingent Emergency Response
Comments (optional)
This component allows a rapid reallocation of credit proceeds from other components to provide 
emergency recovery and reconstruction support following an eligible crisis or emergency.

IV. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 100.00 Total Bank Financing: 100.00
Financing Gap: 0.00
For Loans/Credits/Others Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT 0.00
International Development Association (IDA) 100.00
Total 100.00

V. Implementation
The MOAI will be the implementing agency of the project. The Project will be governed at the 
Union level by the National Project Steering Committee (NPSC) and at the township level by the 
Township Agricultural Coordination Committees (ACC). The project will be managed by the 
Project Management Unit (PMU) which will be integrated within the existing structures of 
Department of Irrigation (ID). The PMU will be located in Nay Pyi Taw in MOAI headquarters. 
PMU would be responsible for day-to-day management and coordination of the project. It will be 
responsible for the project financial management and procurement functions.  It will ensure that 
annual work plans are prepared, budgeted and implemented in a timely manner, and that 
management of project funds is in line with the provisions of the project’s eligibility guidelines. The 
PMU will be responsible for management of the Designated Accounts; disbursement of project 
funds and replenishment of the project bank accounts and preparing and submitting withdrawal 
applications; and consolidation of annual work plans, budget planning, arrange for project annual 
audit, project reporting and M&E.  
 
Implementation of the project activities will be carried out by five technical departments 
(Department of Irrigation/ID, Department of Agriculture/DOA, Department of Agricultural 
Research/DAR, Agricultural Mechanization Department/AMD, and Settlements and Land Records 
Department/SLRD) through their central, regional, district and township level structures. ID will be 
the lead agency for the implementation of the Component 1, with technical inputs from SLRD and 
AMD, and DOA would be the lead agency for Component 2, with technical inputs from DAR and 
AMD. The implementation of filed activities will be done by respective township level staff with the 
supervision and technical backstopping from the team of central/regional/district level Subject 
Matter Specialists (SMS). The implementing departments are responsible for the initiation of the 
procurement activities as per work plan, provision of technical specifications and TORs to PMU and 
serve as members of the evaluation committee; accounting for funds on their respective Operating 
Accounts and at district level accounts and provision of financial information to PMU for the 
compilation of the financial documents; and preparation of the annual work plans of their respective 
sub-components and activities, and provision of information and indicators for the PMU for the 


consolidated project reporting. The ACCs are township level structural coordination bodies, which 
are responsible for the coordination of crop planning and extension activities, and makes irrigation 
water allocation and distribution decisions. The main function of the ACC under the project would 
be to provide a platform for joint (MOAI-farmer) planning and monitoring of project activities in 
targeted irrigation schemes. Implementation of the project activities at the township level will be 
done by the Project Implementation Committees, which is a sub-committee under ACC, and it 
includes township level staff of the implementing MOAI departments.

VI. Safeguard Policies (including public consultation)
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖

Comments (optional)

VII. Contact point
World Bank
Contact: Paavo Eliste
Title: Lead Rural Development Special
Tel: 5788+7681 /
Email: peliste@worldbank.org

Borrower/Client/Recipient
Name: Republic of the Union of Myanmar
Contact: U Maung Maung Win
Title: DG, Budget Department, Ministry of Finance
Tel: 9567410450
Email: maungmaungwin58@gmail.com

Implementing Agencies
Name: Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation
Contact: U Khin Zaw
Title: Deputy Minister
Tel: 9567413778
Email: deputyminister.irrigation@gmail.com




























































World Bank Document


Page 1 of 6

PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
ADDITIONAL FINANCING

Report No.:  PIDA14019

Project Name NMPRP-2 Additional Financing (P148733)
Parent Project Name Second Northern Mountains Poverty Reduction Project (P113493)
Region EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC
Country Vietnam
Sector(s) Agricultural extension and research (80%), Animal production 

(20%)
Theme(s) Rural services and infrastructure (80%), Rural markets (20%)
Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P148733
Parent Project ID P113493
Borrower(s) Government of Vietnam
Implementing Agency Ministry of Planning and Investment
Environmental Category B-Partial Assessment
Date PID Prepared/Updated 19-Nov-2014
Date PID Approved/Disclosed 26-Nov-2014
Estimated Date of Appraisal 
Completion

26-Nov-2014

Estimated Date of Board 
Approval

14-Jan-2015

Decision

I. Project Context
Country Context
In spite of Vietnam’s impressive achievements in poverty reduction – poverty declined from 58 
percent in 1993 to 14 percent in 2010 according to official statistics, and to 20 percent according to 
GSO-WB – poverty remains high at 60 percent in the West Northern Mountains Region and at 38 
percent in the East Northern Mountains Region (GSO-WB methodology). Limited access to basic 
services, markets, and financial, land, and information resources are the most important constraints 
for the poor in the Northern Mountains. Addressing these constraints is hampered by weaknesses in 
institutional capacity and public sector management: Vietnam has moved from a highly centralized, 
hierarchical, central planning system, to one where many decisions are decentralized. However, 
capacity building at the local level has not kept pace with decentralization. A five-year (national) 
Socio-Economic Development Plan (SEDP 2011-2015) which responds directly to these 
development challenges was approved by the National Assembly in November, 2011.

  

Sectoral and institutional Context


Poverty is increasingly concentrated among Vietnam’s ethnic minority populations. While ethnic 
minorities account for only 15 percent of the country’s population, they make up for half of the 
poor in Vietnam and have experienced a much slower pace of poverty reduction compared to the 
majority of Vietnam’s population. Poverty among ethnic minorities remains at 66 percent.   Most of 
these ethnic minority groups live in highland or upland areas, in particular in the North-West and 
North-East as well as in the Central Highland regions. The Northern Mountains region has the 
highest rate of poverty and is home to almost one-third of Vietnam’s poor. 
 
Improvements in both the delivery and accessibility of basic public services in the Northern 
Mountains region are especially needed to reach the twin goals of eliminating poverty and fostering 
shared prosperity in Vietnam. Over the last fifteen years, the GoV has launched a number of 
programs through the Ministry of Labor, Invalids, and Social Affairs (MoLISA), the MPI, the 
Committee for Ethnic Minority Affairs (CEMA), the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural 
Development (MARD) and other line Ministries to address this poverty challenge. Among others, 
these include: (a) the Program for Socio-Economic Development in Communes Facing Extreme 
Hardship in Ethnic Minority and Mountainous Areas (referred to as P135) to finance the commune 
and inter-commune level infrastructures and strengthen planning and implementation capacity; (b) a 
follow-up program (P135-2) designed to reduce poverty among disadvantaged groups; and (c) 
Program 30-A (Support for Fast and Sustainable Poverty Reduction in Poor Districts)  financing the 
development plans for the 62 poorest districts in the country. More recently, the GoV decided to (a) 
continue the series of poverty programs with the newly launched P135-3 under the CEMA; and (b) 
launch a New Rural Area Program (NRAP) under the MARD. In total, Vietnam currently has 16 
different NTPs implemented through various ministries. The consequence of this evolution is a 
degree of institutional fragmentation (and resulting contestation) across major Government 
agencies. 
 
The World Bank has supported Vietnam’s poverty alleviation efforts through two community-
driven development (CDD) operations – the Community Based Rural Infrastructure Project 
(CBRIP) and the Northern Mountains Poverty Reduction Project (NMPRP-1) – which introduced 
participatory approaches and promoted decision making at the commune level; three Development 
Policy Credits (DPCs); and the ongoing CDD operation (NMPRP-2) which focused on 
infrastructure support, livelihood activities, market linkages and further devolution of investment 
ownership to communities. There is evidence that the positive lessons from the Bank’s support are 
being mainstreamed leading to a wider menu of community projects, a stronger focus on 
participatory planning, transparency, devolution of decision making, and institutional capacity 
building at the local level.  
 
In spite of the positive results of various poverty programs, both the GoV and donor agencies are 
concerned about the inefficiencies, administrative requirements and associated costs resulting from 
the high level of fragmentation in Vietnam’s poverty alleviation efforts. Although a clear consensus 
on the consolidation of poverty programs has not yet emerged, various GoV stakeholders at the 
national and provincial levels, as well as donor agencies are taking initiatives to address this 
situation. These efforts focus on (a) the consolidation of existing poverty programs and NTPs in 
possibly two overarching national poverty programs;  and (b) the integration of the planning efforts 
at the local level in one common SEDP.       
 
Alignment with Government Strategy. The NMPRP-2 supports the Government’s Resolution 80/



Page 3 of 6

NQ-CP on Direction of Sustainable Poverty Reduction which aims at accelerating poverty 
reduction in the poorest districts, communes and villages of the country, by setting poverty 
reduction targets of 4 percent per annum over the 2011 – 2020 period (compared to a national target 
of 2 percent) and by prioritizing the mobilization of resources and support to these areas.  
 
The GoV is moving towards medium term planning (3 years planning cycle with a multi-year 
budget allocation rather than annual budgeting as is currently the case). Fully implemented, this will 
give more predictability, flexibility, and discretion to the commune level to plan their investment 
priorities in a more integrated manner. The GoV is also moving towards greater consolidation of its 
various poverty alleviation efforts. The SEDP approach developed under the NMPRP-2 fits very 
well both in this medium-term planning context and in the efforts to integrate various NTPs.

II. Proposed Development Objectives
A. Current Project Development Objectives – Parent
The development objective for the proposed project is to Enhance the living standards of the project 
beneficiaries by improving: (i) their access to productive infrastructures; (ii) the productive and 
institutional capacity of local governments and communities; and (iii) market linkages and business 
innovations. The key outcome indicators to assess achievement of the PDO are as follows:  
 # At least 60% of the project beneficiaries report satisfaction on the selection, design, and 
implementation of project activities.  
 # The project beneficiaries report an improvement in on- and off- farm income of at least 10% over 
the life of the project.

B. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)
The AF focuses on institutionalizing and mainstreaming the socio-economic development planning 
approach in the broader planning and budget allocation processes in the project area. The PDO will, 
therefore, be revised to capture this important element of the AF.  
 
Project Development Objective for the AF is revised to read: The Project Development Objective 
(PDO) is to enhance the living standards of the Project Beneficiaries by improving: (i) their access 
to productive infrastructure; (ii) the productive and institutional capacity of local governments and 
communities; (iii) commune integrated investment planning and (iv) market linkages and business 
innovations.

III. Project Description
Component Name
Component 1: District Economic Development
Comments (optional)
(about 30% of total allocated provincial project funds, equivalent to US$28.8 million). The objective 
of this component is to provide investment support to the District Socio-Economic Development 
Plans, focusing on productive and economic infrastructure for increased agriculture productivity, 
direct local employment and income generation, and facilitation of business innovation. This 
component supports specific efforts to link the supply side, namely the market and business 
institutions, with the poor.

Component Name
Component 2: Commune Development Budget
Comments (optional)



Page 4 of 6

(about 58% of total allocated provincial project budget, equivalent to US$55.68 million). This 
component will provide block grants to communes to finance small-scale sub-projects at the village 
level for productive infrastructure and livelihood improvement activities that are identified through 
participatory planning processes. Livelihood support will assist the poor with strengthening the 
operations of Common Interest Groups (CIGs), develop necessary skills and the further 
development of market linkages and ensure that women participate in and benefit from the project 
through targeted support to village level women’s groups.

Component Name
Component 3: Capacity Building and Communication
Comments (optional)
(about 6% of the total project provincial allocation budget and CPO’s component, equivalent to US
$6.76million). Under the AF, this component will mostly focus on the farmers and other 
beneficiaries to help sustain their capacity for implementing project activities during the AF period 
and beyond. This component will continue to help improve the capacity of project implementation 
agencies at all levels, especially of the local governments and the communities to plan, manage, 
implement, supervise, and maintain productive infrastructure and livelihood improvement programs, 
communication and information sharing and learning. This component will also support the scaling 
up and institutionalization of the participatory local development planning through the Socio-
Economic Development Plan (SEDP)

Component Name
Component 4: Project Management
Comments (optional)
(about 6% of total allocated provincial project budget and CPO’s component, equivalent to US$8.76 
million). This component is to ensure effective and efficient project management through 
facilitation of various implementation, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), reporting, coordination, 
and quality enhancement efforts.

IV. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 110.00 Total Bank Financing: 100.00
Financing Gap: 0.00
For Loans/Credits/Others Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT 10.00
International Development Association (IDA) 100.00
Total 110.00

V. Implementation
MPI will take charge of overall project coordination at the central level, while provinces will be 
responsible for project implementation. At the central level, Central Project Coordination Office 
(CPO) will be established at the Department of Agricultural Economics in the MPI, and facilitate 
overall coordination with provinces, as well as serve as the focal point vis-a-vis the World Bank and 
relevant central government agencies. At each project province, a Provincial Project Management 
Unit (PPMU) will be established at Department of Planning and Investment (DPI). At the district 
level, District Project Management Unit (DPMU) will be created. Community Facilitators (CFs) 
who will provide vital support to the communes in particular in the process of CDBC planning and 



Page 5 of 6

implementation will be competitively selected, and hired under the project as members of DPMU. 
At the commune level, a Commune Development Board (CDB) will be established under Commune 
People’s Committee (CPC) to oversee the implementation of Component 2. Each unit will be staffed 
with appropriate experts as required (see Annex 6 for proposed staffing and key responsibilities).

VI. Safeguard Policies (including public consultation)
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖


























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Ethiopia Resilient Landscapes and Livelihoods Project (P163383) 

 
 

  
May 10, 2017 Page 1 of 16  

     

 

 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 20-Mar-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSC22113 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Ethiopia P163383  Ethiopia Resilient 
Landscapes and 
Livelihoods Project 
(P163383) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA Jun 15, 2018 Aug 02, 2018 Environment & Natural 
Resources 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Finance and 
Economic Cooperation 

Ministry of Agriculture and 
Natural Resources 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
To improve livelihoods, climate resilience, carbon storage, and land productivity in vulnerable rural major watersheds. 

 

 Financing (in USD Million)      

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B-Partial Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

Finance OLD 

Financing Source Amount  

International Development Association (IDA)  100.00  

Total Project Cost  100.00  

    
 
 

 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

 

The intersection of land management, rights, and use forms the key development issue for millions of rural 

Ethiopians facing water insecurity, food insecurity, land tenure insecurity, and livelihood insecurity – all 

amplified by climate variability and change. Climate impacts in Ethiopia are felt primarily through water stress, 

which is affected by land use and degradation that undermines watershed function. In Ethiopia, the estimated 

cost of land degradation is 2-3% of GDP, before accounting for downstream affects, such as increased flood risk.  

The proven remedy centers on delivering a combination of better natural resource management and resource 

rights, jobs and livelihood enhancements, and gender outreach throughout targeted major watersheds. 

Restoration effects include a range of resilience-related results, including increased soil moisture and soil fertility 

important for higher and less variable crop yields, improved water availability, and increased carbon 

sequestration – all of which are high priorities for the government.   

 

Much progress has been made by the government and thousands of local communities to address these challenges 

through proven investment packages financed by the World Bank. However, this work requires more innovation, 

more financing, more coordination, and much greater scale if the country is to meet its resilience and low carbon 

objectives while achieving middle income status in less than 10 years as planned. 
 

 
 

Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 

The World Bank has been financing Ethiopia’s Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources (MOANR) 

in six regional states to transform the way landscapes are managed by convening sectors, resources and partners 

(IDA, Norway, Canada, Germany, GEF, LDCF) to invest in a holistic and coordinated fashion. With financing 

from IDA through the Second Sustainable Land Management Project (SLMP-2), natural and economic wealth is 

being built on over 1.3 million hectares of degraded communal and smallholder lands through an integrated 

package of activities throughout targeted watersheds that include (i) management of natural resources (soil and 

water conservation structures, agroforestry, participatory forest management, enclosures to reduce free grazing 

and allow assisted natural regeneration, small irrigation, water point development, climate-smart technologies on 

household farmland, and land use planning approaches), (ii) improved land rights through issuance of legal 

landholding certificates to one million people, including landless youth, and (iii) livelihoods support including 

for improved cookstove adoption that reduces women’s labor,  respiratory illnesses, and fuelwood demand.  

 

Results from SLMP-2 financing are well documented in 135 major watersheds in 135 woredas (districts) in the 

six highland regional states during a major drought. Water and food security are boosted. Approximately 9 million 

tons of additional CO2e will have been accumulated in restored productive lands – a proxy for system function 

as well as a contribution to climate change mitigation over 4-5 years. Degraded lands are brought back into 

production for local farmers. Dry season base flow of streams and depth to water table are improving. And, 

protective vegetation cover was either maintained or expanded, as verified by remote sensing. A short video of 

the SLMP-2 approach and achievements is available here: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nak-

UUZnvPI&t=1s.  Smallholder farmers regularly express how their identity and sense of place has also been 

restored through landscape restoration and improved legal resource rights. Many community members who were 



ready to migrate remained in their birthplace. Afterwards, they could send their children to school. They could 

increase nutrition by combining forage and livestock management, produce vegetables and fruits using small-

scale irrigation, and diversify with poultry, apiculture, and woodlot production. Moreover, local people 

established community watershed teams to discuss natural resource problems and opportunities, plan and 

implement interventions on the ground in an empowered, participatory manner.  

 

This transformative approach contributes to key national strategies, including the Growth and Transformation 

Plan-2 (GTP-2), the Climate Resilient Green Economy (CRGE) Strategy, and accompanying 2015 Climate 

Resilience Strategy for Agriculture and Forest, Ethiopia’s Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC), 

the Ethiopia SLM Investment Framework, the emerging National Forest Sector Strategy and National REDD+ 

Strategy, as well as sector strategies for energy, water, and agriculture.  

 

With support from the Pilot Program for Climate Resilience and the BioCarbon Fund, the Bank is further 

supporting the government’s CRGE Facility and four line ministries led by the finance ministry to develop a 

Multi-Sector Investment Plan (MSIP) for climate resilient production landscapes, while taking into account 

relevant activities on water resources, irrigation, and energy. 
 

 
 

Relationship to CPF 
 

The operation features in the Bank’s CPF for FY 17-21 as a government flagship addressing the CPF’s 

resilience pillar, with a funding commitment from IDA-18 for US$100 million. It would leverage and scale up 

support to the MOANR’s proven Sustainable Land Management Program while also contributing to the climate, 

forest, water, energy, and land tenure targets in the client’s GTP-2 and CRGE Strategy as well as the 

forthcoming GTP-3.   
 
 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 

 
 

To improve livelihoods, climate resilience, carbon storage, and land productivity in vulnerable rural major 

watersheds. 

 

Key Results (From PCN) 
 
10 million hectares restored, supporting at least 20 million people facing increasing food, land tenure and water 

insecurity, and accumulating at least 20 million tons of CO2e per year after restoration.  

 

PDO level indicators: 

 
     

1. Land area with sustainable landscape management practices (Ha)  

1a. Communal land area treated for degradation (degraded hillsides, gullies, PFM, pastures) (ha)  

1b. Individual farmland area treated for productivity improvements (Ha)  

2. Total land area restored or reforested/afforested on both individual and communal land (Ha)  

3. Incremental carbon dioxide equivalent accumulated in the project area (metric tons)  

3a. Biomass in the intervention areas (Tons/Ha)  

4. Land area of the targeted micro watersheds with vegetation increase of at least 4% compared to baseline (Ha) 

 

Bottom 40: Ethiopia’s poorest citizens will benefit from the operation since they are the ones who are dependent on land 

resources for their livelihoods, and are highly vulnerable to climate shocks that good natural resource management and 

improved tenure security can mitigate – as proven in SLMP-2 interventions. 

 

A note on scale: These results imply that 300-1000 major watersheds are targeted, expanding from the current 135 major 

watersheds targeted in the Bank-financed SLMP-2 and just over 100 major watersheds targeted by parallel external 

financing. Interventions in 1000 major watersheds in turn implies an expansion of financing from the current 

approximately $250m for the current SLM Program (Bank and parallel financing together) to approximately $883m in 

total financing, or approximately $800,000 per major watershed depending on the package of interventions selected and 

the amount of blended and parallel financial and technical support provided by partner projects. Bilateral and multi-

lateral co-financiers are interested in significantly leveraging IDA. 

 
 
D. Concept Description 

 
A critical mass of watershed restoration is within reach, but more must be done. MOFEC and MOANR aim to scale up and 

enhance the success of its proven flagship, the Sustainable Land Management Program, for which the Bank has been the 

largest and leading financier. The government has also requested the World Bank to be a GCF delivery partner for large-

scale impact, building on our mutual track record of delivery on the ground, and to convene financing from a variety of 

sources to be truly transformative at very large scale.  

 

The $100m of IDA would be blended with bilateral financing, Green Climate Fund (GCF), Global Environment Facility 

(GEF), plus additional sources of financing currently under discussion, would provide a large and strategic financing 

package to support Ethiopia, through its existing proven Sustainable Land Management Program (SLMP), to reach a 

critical mass of 10 million restored hectares of climate-vulnerable degraded watersheds upon which an estimated 20 

million people directly depend, and which could store an estimated 20 million tons of CO2e per year after restoration.  

An indirect spill over effect of replication would also occur in neighbouring watersheds, as is happening already. Reaching 

this critical mass would be a true transformative achievement, one that has started and built momentum over the years 

but requires institutions, investments, and financing models with a track record of getting to scale -- and with the right 

combination of integrated, well-monitored interventions.  

 

But it is not only about scale. Specific enhancements to the package of interventions are needed to reduce climate risks 

and sustain impact. For example:  



 

• Improved technologies are critical to reduce variability of crop productivity in the face of more extreme and 

frequent droughts, floods, and storms. As part of SLMP’s innovative landscape approach to achieve climate 

resilient productivity, a proven technique in the field ready for scaling is based on use of seeds from Ethiopian 

indigenous land races instead of imported improved varieties. Ethiopian wheat and barley varieties have seen 

approximately 60% yield improvements in the face of drought in actual farmers’ fields. This proven approach of 

deploying Ethiopia’s own genetic crop diversity for drought risk management needs to be brought to more farmers 

in the context of successful models of watershed re-vegetation and restoration and the government’s seed and 

extension system. 

• Information modernization and dissemination: improved meteorological, hydrological, and early warning systems 

are being developed, but the “last mile” of connecting improved weather information with farmers via the 

extension system and mobile phones needs to be strengthened for more timely planning and planting. 

• Small scale irrigation infrastructure is being put in place in restored watersheds and can be enhanced with PV and 

wind water pumps that displace diesel options. Resilient rural roads that also serve as water harvesting structures 

can expand from small pilots to national reach. 

• Innovative measures that integrate land management with land rights can reduce climate risks especially water 

stress. The Bank has financed a proven scheme to provide landholding certificates, inputs, and extension to 

landless youth in exchange for restoring degraded communal land, such as through terracing plus fruit tree or 

plantation outgrower schemes. 15,000 youths have been reached and this could grow to 100,000 in a new 

operation – alleviating urban migration driven partially by risks from land degradation and climate variability. 

• Innovative financing models such as the Bank’s “Performance for Results (P4R)” are proven in Ethiopia’s urban 

space and the selective use of Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs) in this IPF could, for example, help incentivize 

rapid, transformative expansion of the issuance of landholding certificates that are important for farmer 

reinvestment in land resource and adaptation. 

• Smart targeting of watershed restoration can expand the lifetime and resilience of key infrastructure including 

reservoirs for hydropower and irrigation. 

• Focusing on generating income streams from value and supply chain development from restored watersheds. An 

example is a large-scale commercial brewery made economically viable because a major restored watershed now 

provides cleaner and more consistently available water in a semi-arid highland setting. Another example is 

cookstoves, which according to a rigorous impact evaluation by the World Bank’s DEC and the Ethiopia 

Development Research Institute, significantly reduces fuelwood demand and deforestation. It also was shown by 

the SLMP-2 community reinvestment clubs to reduce women’s and girls’ fuelwood collection time from 3.5 hours 

to half an hour per day while reducing indoor air pollution, and saving up to 3h of cooking time per session and 

decreased fuel collection time by 1/3. Women also started to produce injera (bread) and sell it to the community. 

• More than 33,000 fuel saving stoves has been distributed or sold to households.  This figure could reach into the 

hundreds of thousands -- and solar lighting could also be included which has very high demand -- if a focused 


effort were made to bridge the last mile of distribution via women-managed local enterprise development. A shift 

to ethanol stoves could be prioritized. 

 

In line with the above and underpinned by extensive World Bank analytical work and investment experience on forest, 

climate-smart agriculture, household energy, land tenure, watershed management and landscape restoration, the new 

Resilient Landscapes project financed by IDA, GCF and others would provide large-scale coordinated financial support to 

the Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources (MoANR) and its acclaimed Sustainable Land Management Program to 

make a lasting impact at very large scale.  

 

The Project would be implemented by the government based on sound, proven principles centred on: 

 

• Crowding in activities spatially to comprehensively investment in each targeted major watershed 

• Knowledge disseminated across communities by leveraging a large-scale program, 

• Improving agro-ecological, hydrological and climate information services and extension, 

• Empowered participatory approaches to community watershed management and livelihoods activities,  

• Better land use planning and policy combining bottom-up and top-down approaches informed by a stronger 

evidence base,  

• Mechanisms for deciding on more optimal trade-offs of sector objectives in the landscape,  

• Household energy solutions that impact land use, climate, jobs, women, health and education, 

• Legal land tenure security, and  

• Strengthened government and community institutions to coordinate and deploy investment, information, 

incentives, and income-generating opportunities. 

 

Strategic options for scaling up:  

 

1. Continue toward “full treatment” of existing 135 major watersheds in SLMP-2 and 18 major watersheds 

supported by Canada; 

2. Expand treatments to neighboring major watersheds in existing SLMP woredas, based on degradation/climate 

hotspots; 

3. Expand to neighboring major watersheds in new neighboring woredas, based on degradation/climate hotspots; 

4. Expand to Afar and Somali regional states -- perhaps a handful of western border woredas to pilot, if the 

additional GCF resources or other significant financial resources materialize;  

5. Combination of the above. 

 

Project Components 

 
Component 1. Investment in Green Infrastructure for Resilient Watersheds ($70 million IDA, others TBD).  

This component would scale-up proven sustainable land and water management practices by rural smallholders and 

communities in large watersheds (average 10,000 ha each) vulnerable to climate variability and change, recurrent drought 

and floods, and land degradation. Investment would support communal and individual lands as well as supporting 

infrastructure such as rural roads and small bridges.  Proven climate-smart practices include: soil and water conservation 

infrastructure such as terraces, small irrigation, and water harvesting trenches, check dams, small reservoirs, and other 

civil works; soil fertility and moisture management; assisted natural regeneration, enclosures plus livestock land use 

rationalization, intercropping, low tillage, gully reclamation, establishing grazing corridors, watering points and wells, 

sylvo-pastoral strategies, etc. Government Development Agents in the Bureaus of Agriculture would mobilize and support 

communities and receive continuous training to ensure quality extension. It is also important to enhance the 

interconnectivity of natural resources, which would be supported through land use planning in targeted watersheds where 

green corridors would be established to link fragmented forests, water bodies, key habitats, and rehabilitated micro 

watersheds (km). 

There would be three sub-components: 

Sub-component 1.1. Land restoration and watershed management ($40 million IDA, others TBD).  Described above. 

Sub-component 1.2. Climate-smart agriculture ($20 million IDA, others TBD). Described above. 

Sub-component 1.3. Income Opportunities and Resilient Livelihoods ($10 million IDA, others TBD). This sub-

component would finance advisory services and investment to improve access to and implementation of income 

generating activities.  These activities will help address the issue of landless/jobless youth/women and the 

resulting increased stress on the natural resource base and its potential to reduce climate risks.  Interventions 

could potentially include: 

• Ethanol and improved cookstove and solar home lighting promotion via women-managed local enterprise 

development, to close the last mile in distributing low carbon household technologies that also reduce 

land and water degradation; 

• Support to self-help groups, cooperatives and community unions such as vocational training for jobs, 

identification of business opportunities and preparation of related business plans for natural resource 

based community enterprises or others; 

• Organization of related consultation workshops, private sector forums, exhibitions/fairs;  

• Preparation of marketing strategies and sales promotions, manuals/guidelines;  

• Facilitation of access for technology, market information, credit, standard certification services; 

• Facilitate access to markets and fair trade opportunities; 

• Facilitate opportunities for international foundations and private sector engagement; and 

• Construction of warehouses, stores, product processing and workshops.   

Component 2. Strengthening Institutions and Information: and information modernization (US$ 10 million IDA, others 

TBD). This component would enhance production and management of -- and access to -- relevant environmental, climate, 

hydrological, crop, livestock, forest, geospatial, and weather information for land use decision making and disaster risk 

reduction at the levels of major watersheds, community watersheds, and farms. Land use planning (supported under 

Component 3) would be informed by vulnerability mapping and climate profiling, which would in turn be used to develop 

or update watershed plans and farm planning (under Component 1) by incorporating climate smart agricultural techniques 

financed under Component 1.  Component 2 would also support rigorous independent impact evaluations through a 

partnership arrangement between the MOANR, the Ethiopia Development Research Institute’s Environment and Climate 

Research Center, the World Bank’s Development Research Group, and the Africa Gender Lab for Impact Evaluation. 

Component 3. Land administration and use (US$ 10 million IDA, others TBD). In the same targeted watersheds in 

component 1, this component would (i) improve the legal land tenure security of rural households and groups through 

land certification and administration, and (ii) expand and enhance local level land use planning and innovations in 

landscape certification models. For the former, approximately 100,000 landless youth would receive legal communal land 

certificates, inputs, and extension in exchange for land restoration. And 2,000,000 households would receive legal 

individual landholding certificates. Half of the communal and individual/HH certificates would include a woman.  For the 

latter, the component would introduce the certification of locally managed forest plantations or natural forest, so that 

forest maturity is reached. This approach to forest management provides job opportunities for establishment and 

management including harvesting, processing and transport of forest products while helping green the supply chain for 

wood products. 

Component 4. Project Management and Monitoring ($10 million IDA, others TBD). The component would finance the 

operational costs of Project Implementation Units (PIUs) in MoANR and Regional State Bureaus of Agriculture. These PIUs 

will carry out all fiduciary aspects of project implementation including financial management, procurement, 

environmental and social safeguards, M&E, sector coordination of investment targeting and policy harmonization, and 

donor coordination structures. 

 
 

 
 
    

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
The operation would be implemented in existing 135 major watersheds in the Sustainable Land Management Project II 

(SLMP-2, P133133) and possibly in 18 partially treated major watersheds recently supported by Canada whose funding 
has been exhausted. Additional major watersheds to be targeted will be determined during preparation, and based on 
the scale of financing made available beyond the $100m IDA. Potential new major watersheds could be selected by the 
government based on the following options: (ii) expand treatments to neighbouring major watersheds in existing SLMP 
woredas, based on degradation/climate hotspots; (iii) expand to neighbouring major watersheds in new neighbouring 
woredas, based on degradation/climate hotspots; (iv) expand to Afar and Somali regional states, perhaps a handful of 
western border Woredas to pilot, if significant financial resources materialize beyond ID financing.  
 
SLMP-2 safeguard instruments will be updated taking the above considerations into account as the project concept 

becomes more concrete during preparation, and pending formal site selection by the government and subsequent 
mapping of the specific project intervention area with provision of shape files for each major watershed and community 
watershed targeted for project intervention.  

B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
SLMP-2 safeguards implementation was consistently rated moderately satisfactory and to date has not encountered any 

serious problems. RLLP would build upon this implementation structure and the built capacity. RLLP implementation 
would be centered in the MOANR who would be responsible for project implementation down though all levels of the 
government’s existing implementation structure for its Sustainable Land Management Program: Federal, Regional State, 
Zone, Woreda (District), and Kebele (Sub-district). These entities and their staff are generally capacitated and ready to 
implement in the existing 135 SLMP-2 woredas in Oromia, Amhara, SNNP, Tigray, Benishangul Gumuz and Gambella 
regional states. If the proposed new regional states of Afar and Somali and any Woredas additional to SLMP-2 materialize, 
these will require a start-up period of capacity building and mobilization of communities in institutional capacity to 
implement safeguards.  
For RLLP, MoANR will need to update the SLMP-2 Social Assessment through enhanced consultation in existing and 

proposed new areas to integrate the experiences from SLMP-2 implementation and address any new challenges 
identified. This work would then be used to integrate the views, concerns and recommendations into the design of RLLP 
components. If the proposed inclusion of the 18 major watersheds supported earlier by Canada occurs, the MoANR will 
need to conduct Environmental and Social due diligence to identify any gaps and integrate actions in the RLLP design for 
implementation.  
 

 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 
Chukwudi H. Okafor, Social Safeguards Specialist 
Dereje Agonafir Habtewold, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 
Yacob Wondimkun Endaylalu, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 

 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

Generally, the RLLP is proposed as a Category B 
project, and would provide positive environmental 
and social benefits by scaling up proven sustainable 
land and water management practices on communal 
and individual lands, coupled with land holding and 
use rights. The EA policy is triggered, given that the 
project would finance supporting infrastructure such 
as rural roads and small bridges, soil and water 
conservation structures such as terraces, small 
irrigation, and water harvesting trenches, check dams, 
small reservoirs, and other civil works; soil fertility and 
moisture management; assisted natural regeneration, 
enclosures plus backyard livestock land use 
rationalization, intercropping, low tillage, gully 
reclamation, watering points ,wells, and also land use 
planning , reforestation and afforestation, etc. The 



RLLP project may have range of activities such as 
construction of small scale irrigation schemes, 
community access road construction, water harvesting 
structures, small or micro-dams, degraded forest 
rehabilitation and reforestation, gully rehabilitation, 
land administration, certification and local land use 
planning. These activities may cause some unforeseen 
environmental and social impacts. These impacts may 
include biodiversity loss, natural habitat and cultural 
resources destruction, soil erosion and sedimentation, 
restriction of access to resources, flooding, involuntary 
loss of land and displacement of people, pollution and 
diseases 
Since the location, scope and nature of the major 
watersheds, micro watersheds, and specific activities 
within these sites are not known at the time of 
preparation, the instrument proposed for analyzing 
potential environmental and social risks is an ESMF. 
Thus, the SLMP-2 ESMF will be updated to capture the 
essence of implementation challenges, concerns and 
views regarding environmental and social risk 
management in the proposed RLLP. Regarding the 
possible inclusion of the 18 major watersheds 
supported earlier by Canada (not involving the Bank), 
an Environmental and Social due diligence will be 
conducted to document environmental and social 
compliance issues and identify recommended actions 
to be integrated in the RLLP design.   

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

Project intervention areas are likely to encompass 
some natural habitats which are protected by law. 
Hence, it is necessary to reflect this OP/BP in the ESMF 
and to ensure that sub-projects are screened against 
this OP/BP and that appropriate preventive or 
mitigation measures are formulated and executed. 
The policy will be triggered because activities in the 
Project may have some impacts on wetlands, 
protected areas, conservation sites, and critical 
ecosystems. Activities involving significant conversion 
of natural habitats or if an environmental assessment 
indicates that a proposed activity would significantly 
convert or degrade natural habitats, the proposed 
activity will not be eligible for financing under RLLP. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes 

This policy is triggered as the Project areas are likely to 
encompass some forests which may be for production 
or protection. Under RLLP, the forest related activities 
will have positive impacts because of reforestation, 



rehabilitation of degraded forests land and communal 
lands. Community infrastructure such as access roads 
and irrigation schemes may pose some negative 
impacts if forests are found in those sites. 
Management plans with mitigation measures will be 
prepared to avoid or reduce such impacts. If there are 
projects likely to cause significant conversions of 
forests, they will not be financed under RLLP. The 
project ESMF will ensure that subprojects are 
screened against this OP/BP and that appropriate 
preventive or mitigation measures are formulated and 
executed. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The triggering of this OP is predicated on the 
assumption that the Project intends to support the 
introduction of high value crops, new and high yielding 
crop varieties and animal breeds which may lead to 
increased application of agrochemicals (insecticides, 
herbicides, fertilizers, etc.). The ESMF includes a 
description of Integrated Pest Management (IPM) 
approaches that would elaborate on what actions 
need to be undertaken to minimize environmental, 
health and safety impacts. Experience from SLMP-2 
implementation indicates that activities, particularly 
those in agriculture and irrigation (introduction of high 
value crops and use of pesticides, introduction of new 
varieties of crops, new fruit tree species and varieties, 
high yielding varieties) may increase the use of 
agrochemicals (insecticides, herbicides, fertilizers, 
etc...). 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 

This policy is triggered given the possibility that there 
may be cultural assets and/or sites in the project area 
and on the assumption that there could be “chance 
finds.”  
The policy is triggered by the Project because the small 
scale infrastructure activities involve access road 
construction, small scale dam construction, and other 
similar infrastructure, which may potentially affect 
physical and cultural resources. The necessary steps of 
public consultations, engagement of cultural or 
religious leaders, local authorities need to be 
conducted before decision on project is made.  

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 Yes 

As a follow-on operation to SLMP-2, the RLLP is not 
expected to introduce new social risks related with the 
underserved and historically disadvantaged peoples. 
SLMP-2 had conducted an enhanced consultation 
process with project beneficiaries and project affected 



peoples and prepared a Social Assessment in regions 
having the characteristics associated with the 
populations defined under OP4.10 criteria, to seek 
broad support for the project from these groups. The 
findings of the Social Assessment (the identified social 
risks and risk mitigation measures), as well as the 
process used to foster free, prior, and informed 
consultations and achieve broad community support 
have been documented and publicly disclosed.  
The RLLP, as a follow-on operation to SLMP-2, will 
update the Social Assessment and Social Development 
Plan to document experiences and mitigate the 
challenges identified in SLMP-2 implementation and 
ensure the views, concerns and recommendations of 
people in Afar and Somali regional states, if included. 
Regarding the possible inclusion of the 18 major 
watersheds supported earlier by Canada, an 
Environmental and Social due diligence will be 
conducted to document any environmental and social 
compliance issues and identify recommended actions 
to be integrated in to the RLLP design against SLMP-2 
safeguard instruments. The Social Assessment and 
Social Development Plan update will also screen the 
presence of underserved and historically 
disadvantaged peoples in 18 major watersheds 
previously supported by Canada and new areas to be 
covered by RLLP but not previously covered by SLMP 
II.  
The gender and youth dimensions of the SLMP-2 
implementation will be captured in the updated Social 
Assessment and the SDP with a dedicated section to 
ensure provision of adequate implementation and 
monitoring support while addressing the practical and 
strategic needs of the youth and gender aspects of the 
RLLP design.   

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

This OP/BP is triggered based on the assumption that 
the implementation of RLLP interventions may 
potentially involve acquisition of land and/or 
restriction of access to communal natural resources. 
The ESMF, Social Assessment, and the Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF) prepared for SLMP-2 will be 
updated based on an enhanced community 
consultation to capture views, concerns and 
recommendations based on experience in 
implementation of the SLMP-2 RPF. Experience from 
SLMP-2 implementation indicates that the scope of 


land take has been small and the nature of land take is 
voluntary. The restriction of access to degraded lands 
follow a due process using the participatory watershed 
management guideline. However, to ensure adequate 
assessment satisfactory to the Bank, the RPF update 
will include a participatory process, steps on 
community decision making process including 
identification of appropriate measures to mitigate any 
adverse impacts, if any, on the vulnerable members of 
the community. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 Yes 

The project triggered OP 4.37 (safety of dams). No 
new construction and/or rehabilitation of large dams 
is anticipated to be financed under the proposed RLLP 
but there will possibly be construction of small dams 
particularly for irrigation of small-farm holdings, these 
may not be large (more than 4.5 meters high) and may 
not require special procedures to follow. In cases of 
small dam construction (less than 4.5 meters), 
implementers can use the FAO ‘Manual on Small Earth 
Dams, a guide to siting, design and construction’. In 
addition, the guideline for small dam construction 
prepared by the MOANR will be used to ensure safety 
of small dams. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

Yes 

RLLP woredas are located in international water basins 
such as Abay, Tekeze, Baro or their tributaries. Most of 
the project activities are aimed at better watershed 
and pasture land management, afforestation and 
reforestation, biodiversity conservation as well as 
climate smart agriculture. These activities will 
contribute to reducing soil erosion and rejuvenate 
degraded landscapes hence lesser siltation of rivers 
and streams in the targeted watersheds. None of the 
project activities will therefore adversely change the 
quality or quantity of water flows to the other riparian 
countries. The physical interventions the RLLP project 
is expected to undertake include shallow groundwater 
recharge and micro-scale community-level irrigation. 
While the impact of individual sub-projects would be 
negligible and the cumulative abstractions minor, 
riparian countries will be notified in accordance with 
the policy. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No  

 

E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Feb 13, 2018 
 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
ESMF, SA, and RPF prepared for SLMP-2 will be updated. This activity will be launched on January 1, 2018 and updating 

of each document will take 45 days. 
 
 
























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Kenya Marine Fisheries and Socio-Economic Development Project (MAFIDEV) (P163980) 

 
 

  
Jun 06, 2017 Page 1 of 13  

     

 

 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 13-Sep-2017 | Report No: PIDISDSC22230 


BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Kenya P163980  Kenya Marine Fisheries 
and Socio-Economic 
Development Project 
(MAFIDEV) (P163980) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA Jul 16, 2018 Nov 20, 2018 Environment & Natural 
Resources 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing The Republic of Kenya Ministry of Agriculture, 
Livestock and Fisheries 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The Project Development Objective is to improve management and increase value-addition of priority fisheries and 
aquaculture, and to strengthen access to livelihoods for coastal communities in Kenya. 

 

 Financing (in USD Million)      

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B-Partial Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

Finance OLD 

Financing Source Amount  

International Development Association (IDA)  100.00  

Total Project Cost  100.00  

    
 
 

 
 
Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
 


B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
 

1. Kenya’s economic growth has been robust over the past years. For the third consecutive year, economic activity has 
increased, reaching an estimated 5-year high of 5.9 percent in 2016, and once again placing Kenya among the fastest 
growing economies in Sub-Saharan Africa.

1
 Projections indicate continued growth with a rate of around 6 percent in 

2018 and 2019. Kenya’s population is estimated to grow equally fast, with an annual increase of 1 million.
2
 In 2015, the 

country’s population stood at around 46 million.
3
 Natural resources are the basis for livelihood and economic 

development. Agriculture, including forestry and fishery,
4
 represents a major economic driver and a dominant source of 

employment, having accounted for more than 30 percent of GDP in 2015.
5
  

2. The effects of sustained macroeconomic growth are translating into improved quality of life and poverty reduction, 
but inequality remains high. Between 2006 and 2016, poverty measured against the official national poverty line is 
projected to have dropped from 46 percent to 36 percent.

6
 Inequality, however, remains high. Kenya’s Gini coefficient 

stood at 48.5 in 2005.
7 

In remote and sparsely populated areas such as the north-eastern parts or the coastal areas, 
poverty rates can be as high as 80 and 60 percent, respectively. There is a growing rural-urban split, and the richest 10 
percent of the population receive 40 percent of the nation’s income.

 
 

3. In 2008, the Government prepared a long-term development strategy, Vision 2030, which aims to transform Kenya 
into a globally competitive middle-income country by 2030.

8
 The strategy has three pillars: an economic pillar that 

aims to achieve GDP growth of 10 percent per annum; a social and environmental pillar that aims to build a just society 
enjoying equitable social development in a clean and secure environment; and a political pillar that aims to build a 
people-centered, results-oriented, accountable democratic political system. Promoting equal opportunities across the 
entire Kenyan territory is key to realizing this vision.  

4. In an effort to narrow long-term, deeply entrenched regional disparities and to increase the responsiveness of the 
government, Kenya adopted a new Constitution in 2010. County governments now play the primary on-the-ground 
role in delivering services (in the agriculture, water, environment, urban, and health sectors), while the national 
government retains a policy-making, regulatory, and research role.  

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 

5. While the fisheries sector contributes less than one percent to GDP, it plays a significant role in employment 
generation, food security, and rural development. Fish production from inland fisheries, marine artisanal fisheries, and 
aquaculture, increased from 150,000 metric tons in 2010, to about 190,000 in 2014, with a market value of more than 

                                            
1
 World Bank (2017). Kenya Economic Update – Housing Unavailable and Unaffordable. April 2017, Edition No. 15 

2
 Ibid 

3
 World Bank (2017). World Development Indicators Database 

4
 Agriculture includes forestry, hunting, and fishing, as well as cultivation of crops and livestock production. 

5
 World Bank (2017). World Development Indicators Database 

6
 An updated national poverty line and measures will be published in 2017 based on the second Kenya Integrated Household Budget Survey 

completed in September 2016. Poverty incidence measured using the international extreme poverty line of US$1.90 per day (2011 PPP terms) was 
33 percent in 2006 and is projected to have dropped to 24 percent in 2016. 
7
 World Bank (2017). World Development Indicators Database 

8
 Government of the Republic of Kenya (2007). Kenya Vision 2030.  

US$250 million.
9
 Fish production from marine resources only, amounts to around 9,000 metric tons of catch annually.

10 

Imports and exports of fish products have also been increasing. Fish products were being imported and exported in the 
amount of US$15.5 million and US$39 respectively in 2013, compared to US$4.6 million and US$38.9 million, 
respectively, in 2010.

11
 The sector employs more than 2 million people directly and indirectly, working as fishers, 

traders, processors, suppliers, and merchants of fishing accessories, and thus serves the development and stabilization 
of Kenya’s rural communities, both coastal and riparian.

12
  

6. The artisanal marine fishery is recognized as one of the most important contributors to the food security of coastal 
villages, however, weak governance, particularly an unregulated fishing regime, has led to overexploitation and 
degradation. Fishing effort in Kenya’s marine waters is primarily directed inside territorial waters (i.e., 12 nautical 
miles), is largely artisanal and characterized by small crafts propelled by wind and paddles, and thus almost entirely 
restricted to the fringing reef and near-shore areas. The coastal region is among the least developed in the country, 
with more than 60 percent of the population living below the poverty line, and most relying on coastal and marine 
ecosystems for employment, livelihood and nutrition. On the other hand, Kenya’s Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ), which 
broadly extends 200 nautical miles from the coastline and covers a total area of 142,400 km

2
, is exploited mostly by 

distant-water fishing fleets, comprised mainly of purse-seiners and long-liners.
13 

Unrestricted access to fisheries in near-
shore waters, increased fishing effort driven by a growing population, and destructive fishing gear are destroying 
critical marine habitats and seriously affecting the state of fish stocks. Most nearshore fish stocks are considered fully 
exploited, and in many instances at levels that exceed Maximum Sustainable Yield (MSY), thereby contributing to 
economic overfishing. The World Bank and the Global Environment Facility (GEF)-financed Kenya Coastal Development 
Project (KCDP) has been supporting the development of Fishery Management Plans (FMPs) as well as stock 
assessments to improve the management of these inshore fisheries. However, the management plans are yet to be 
implemented and used by decision makers and other key stakeholders.  

7. Poor market access and lack of basic infrastructure are causing post-harvest losses, thereby reducing economic 
returns. Lack of appropriate post-harvest fish handling and preservation facilities increase transport time and thus the 
risk of spoilage, ultimately leading to low fish prices or wastage. In 2014, post-harvest losses were estimated at 2,700 
metric tons, representing about 30 percent of total landings for marine fisheries.  

8. The impacts of climate change further compound the challenges coastal communities are facing not only due to 
shoreline erosion, floods, and extreme weather events, but also because of their limited ability to adapt as a result of 
insufficient income and lack of basic infrastructure. In Kenya, 2.8 million people are estimated to live within 25 km of 
the coast, and this number is expected to increase to nearly 4 million by 2030. While the impacts of climate change on 
Kenya’s coast are not yet fully measured, or analyzed, marine and coastal ecosystems are expected to be affected as a 
result of rising ocean temperature, irregular rainfall, sea level rise, ocean acidification, changes in ocean current 
patterns, and more frequent and severe extreme weather events. 

9. With improved management and control, Kenya aims to increase the contribution from offshore fisheries to its 
economic development. Kenya is increasingly engaged in regional initiatives aimed at controlling Illegal, Unreported, 
and Unregulated (IUU) fishing, and in managing regional fishing efforts through its involvement in the IOTC, the 
Southwest Indian Ocean Fisheries Commission (SWIOFC), the African Union-Interafrican Bureau for Animal Resources 

                                            
9
 Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (2016). Fishery and Aquaculture Country Profiles: The Republic of Kenya 

10
 Ibid 

11
 Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (2016). Fishery and Aquaculture Country Profiles: The Republic of Kenya 

12
 Republic of Kenya (2014). Fisheries Annual Statistical Bulletin 2014. Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, and Fisheries – State Department of 

Fisheries 2014.  
13

 Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (2016). Fishery and Aquaculture Country Profiles: The Republic of Kenya 


(AU-Ibar), and FISH-I Africa.
14 

 With support from the KCDP, Kenya has recently established an advanced Vessel 
Monitoring System (VMS) in Mombasa, which will become fully operational once licensed vessels deploy the required 
on-board beacons to link with the base station at the State Department of Fisheries and Blue Economy (SDF-BE).  

10. More broadly, and driven by a growing population and the need for sustainable growth in ocean-related economic 
activities, the Government of Kenya (GoK) has made a strong commitment towards improving the management of its 
marine fisheries by embarking on a new approach – the Blue Economy. The blue economy approach aims to increase 
the number of livelihoods and level of income linked to the oceans, while concurrently conserving its resources and 
ecological integrity to ensure sustainability of the coastal/marine fisheries sub-sector.

15
 Sustainable management of 

fisheries stock, enhancing economic returns including through development of local semi-industrial fisheries, and 
improving coastal livelihoods are key focus areas of the GoK. Several State Departments were established through 
Executive Order No.1/2016, with the SDF-BE being tasked with coordinating economic ocean activity, which includes a 
comprehensive mandate to protect marine ecosystems. In addition, a new Fisheries Management and Development 
Act is currently under implementation, and a new national fisheries agency to bolster management of the fisheries 
sector, the Kenya Fisheries Service (KeFS), was established in September 2016. KeFS is in the early stages of becoming 
operational.  

11. The proposed project would support the GoK in implementing its blue economy agenda. MAFIDEV would scale up 
some of the successes of the KCDP. Furthermore, MAFIDEV would support the GoK in the operationalizing the KeFS, 
and help strengthening the marine fisheries and aquaculture-based livelihoods in coastal communities, by building on 
the benefits derived from the Hazina Ya  Maendeleo ya  Pwani (HMP), a coastal development fund providing grant 
support to demand driven community sub-projects which was established under KCDP. 

 
Relationship to CPF 
 

12. The proposed project is aligned with the Kenya Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) FY2014-2018
16

 as updated during 
the Performance and Learning Review in 2017, whose overarching goal is sustainable reduction in poverty and 
increased shared prosperity. Aligned both with Kenya’s Vision 2030 and its Medium-Term Plan, the CPS highlights three 
priority areas of engagement: (i) competitiveness and sustainability – growth to eradicate poverty; (ii) protection and 
potential – human resource development for shared prosperity; and (iii) building consistency and equity – delivering a 
devolution dividend. The project would directly contribute to the competitiveness and sustainability pillar of the CPS 
through development of a robust marine and coastal fishery economy, thereby addressing the government’s growth 
and poverty reduction strategies. By focusing on the coastal region, the project is expected to contribute to economic 
prosperity, employment, and livelihood of the coastal communities, where deep-rooted poverty and inequality are still 
a major concern for the government. 

 
 

                                            
14

 FISH-I is a regional Task Force to stop illegal fishing in the western Indian Ocean region 
15

 World Bank and United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs (2017). The Potential of the Blue Economy: Increasing Long-term 
Benefits of the Sustainable Use of Marine Resources for Small Island Developing States and Coastal Least Developed Countries. World Bank, 
Washington DC 
16

 World Bank. 2014. Country Partnership Strategy for the Republic of Kenya, FY2014–2018 (Report No. 87024-KE).  




C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 

 
 
The Project Development Objective is to improve management and increase value-addition of priority fisheries and 
aquaculture, and to strengthen access to livelihoods for coastal communities in Kenya. 

 
Key Results (From PCN) 

 
13. The key project outcomes are: 

 Index of captured indicator species (size, volume and fishing effort) (tbd) 

 Number of fishing vessels in Exclusive Economic Zone with valid licenses (#)  

 Total production of aquaculture in coastal areas (disaggregated by type of aquaculture) (metric tons) 

 Coastal communities with access to livelihood activities (number) 

 Increase value addition of catch of indicator species (tbd)  

 Share of targeted beneficiaries with rating ‘Satisfied’ or above on project interventions (disaggregated by 
gender)  

 
 
D. Concept Description 

 
14. The project objective will be achieved through targeted interventions grouped under the following proposed 

components. 

1) Component 1 – Governance and Management of Marine Fisheries and Aquatic Resources: Strengthening of 

marine fisheries and aquaculture governance is a critical element to increasing economic benefits from marine 

fisheries. This includes regulating fishing effort to enhance stock productivity and ensuring availability of reliable 

fisheries information for management decision-making. The proposed component would: (i) strengthen marine 

fisheries and coastal aquaculture governance; and (ii) minimize overfishing and destructive fishing practices, 

maintain or improve stock productivity, and enhance the integrity of associated ecosystems. The expected 
outcomes are: (i) improved institutional capacity of KeFS; (ii) improved FIS that supports management decision-

making; (iii) fisheries management measures implemented for four priority nearshore fisheries; (iv) functional (at 

least seven) joint Co-Management Areas (CMAs); (v) effective surveillance of Kenya’s EEZ; (vi) improved 

understanding of the status of stocks and fishing effort in priority fisheries; and (vii) regulatory framework for 

coastal aquaculture in place.  

2) Component 2 – Promote Investment in Marine Fisheries and Coastal Aquaculture: Most of Kenya's marine 

fisheries resources are close to, and in some cases beyond, maximum sustainable harvesting levels. Thus, in the 

context of enhancing overall economic benefits, there are limited options to increasing production sustainably. 

However, there is a greater scope to improve value addition of existing production, in particular through 

improved post-harvest handling, product development and better access to markets, as well as through 

aquaculture development. This potentially creates a space for private sector investment, which in turn will 

generate opportunities for community-level income generation. The objective of this proposed component is to 

Note to Task Teams: The PDO has been pre-populated from the datasheet for the first time for your convenience. 
Please keep it up to date whenever it is changed in the datasheet. 

 


promote efficient utilization and value-addition of the resources by increasing investment in the marine fisheries 

and aquaculture sector. The component objective will be achieved through facilitating sectoral value chain 

analysis and identifying opportunities for investment in upgrading and/or new processing facilities and marketing 

initiatives, targeting the full range of nearshore resources, industrial offshore tuna fisheries and aquaculture. Such 

facilitation of private sector investment may include enhancing the business-operating environment, potentially 

including relevant infrastructure improvements. The expected outcomes are: (i) improved fisheries-related 

infrastructure; (ii) stable growth in the total economic value generated by sustainable use of the fishery and 

aquaculture resources; and (iii) improved business environment for investments in the fishery and aquaculture 

sector.  

3) Component 3 – Strengthening Marine Fisheries and Aquaculture-based Livelihoods in Coastal Communities: 

Outside Mombasa and tourism centers such as Malindi-Watamu, Diani and Lamu Island, rural coastal 

communities in Kenya remain relatively poor, and would thus be a main target beneficiary group under the 

proposed project. Even the coastal tourism economy is highly vulnerable to fluctuating global economics and 

security challenges in East Africa; therefore, fisheries resources remain the critical livelihood resource for rural 

coastal households in Kenya. Since nearshore capture fisheries resources are already at, or in some cases beyond, 

maximum sustainable harvesting levels, as with private sector development under Component 2, opportunities to 

strengthen coastal households lie more in fisheries value addition, aquaculture production and other enterprise 

development, than in increasing effort on capture fisheries. Accessing these opportunities requires information 

and knowledge sharing, skills development and better access to credit. Strengthening coastal livelihoods is an end 

in itself. However, it also supports a positive feedback loop in terms of strengthening nearshore fisheries 

management. Fishers with more secure livelihoods are better able to engage in fisheries co-management 

initiatives, which, although in the short-term might involve reducing fishing effort and catches, in the medium to 

longer-term allow stock recovery, improved fisheries productivity and further improvements to coastal 

livelihoods. This proposed component would enhance the social and economic benefits that coastal communities 

derive from sustainable use of living marine resources. Expected outcomes are: (i) increased income of coastal 

households from project-supported enterprise development and value-addition initiatives; (ii) increased access to 

and repayment of credit among coastal communities; and (iii) project beneficiaries are distributed by gender and 

age in accordance with stated targets.  

4) Component 4 – Project Management: This proposed component would ensure efficient and effective 

implementation of project activities and fiduciary management. Project management including monitoring and 

evaluation, and safeguards management activities are supported under this component.  

 
 

 
 
    

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
The Project investments will be located in the coastal counties of Kenya, including Mombasa, Kwale, Kilifi, Taita Taveta, 

Lamu and Tana River. While the exact location of project interventions is not known at this stage, it is known that Kwale, 

Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal. 
 

     

Kilifi, Taita Taveta, Lamu and Tana River counties are home to Vulnerable and Marginalized Groups (VMGs) who meet the 
OP 4.10 criteria in terms of their language, culture, attachment to given lands and being subordinate to the more 
dominant communities among whom they live. The livelihood strategies of the VMGs within these counties range from 
nearshore fishing – the closer a community is located to the sea – to subsistence farming, livestock keeping and small 
scale businesses, the farther a community is from the sea. 
 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
The overall project implementation would be carried out by a Project Coordination Unit (PCU) in the State Department of 

Fisheries and Blue Economy (SDF-BE), Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, and Fisheries. The SDF-BE has been newly 
established, however, previously it existed as State Department of Fisheries and represented one of the implementing 
agencies of the KCDP. The PCU would hire environmental and social safeguards staff to be responsible for overseeing the 
implementation of safeguards instruments. The initial assessment finds the safeguards capacity of the future PCU to be 
rather limited, therefore a technical assistance, capacity building and monitoring environmental and social risks and their 
mitigation will be included as part of Component 4 design. 
 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 
Svetlana Khvostova, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 
Lilian Wambui Kahindo, Social Safeguards Specialist 
Ben Okindo Ayako Miranga, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 
 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The initial screening revealed that the project is likely 
to have negative environmental and social impacts, 
taking into account that the project activities include 
small and rehabilitation of large infrastructure, such as 
reconstruction of fishing port facilities in Mombasa, 
improvement of landing sites infrastructure, upgrading 
fish markets, small scale fish-handling and processing; 
and product development and packaging facilities. It is 
proposed that the project is assigned EA Category B. 
Given that the nature of the proposed project 
activities, including their design and location are not 
known at this point in time, the project would follow a 
framework approach to managing safeguards. An 
Environmental and Social Management Framework 
would be prepared and publicly disclosed before 
project appraisal. During project preparation, the 
team will identify initial investments ready for 
financing, for which subproject specific ESIAs (and if 
necessary RAPs) will be developed and also disclosed 
prior to project appraisal. Throughout the project 
implementation, each subproject will be screened for 




environmental risk and ESIA/ESMP will be prepared by 
the PCU. The preparation of the ESMF and ESIAs will 
be accompanied by a set of public consultations with 
the project stakeholders, which will be documented in 
the assessments. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

Most of the marine coastal area is classified with some 
form of protection, including several national parks. 
Some of the marine protected areas are under 
effective management as they were supported under 
Kenya Coastal Development Project (KCDP).  However, 
others are at various stage of degradation and in need 
for targeted activities to enhance management 
effectiveness including an active monitoring system. 
The project will design its investments to avoid 
negative impacts on environmentally sensitive areas 
and will work with relevant stakeholders, such as 
Kenya Wildlife Service, to enhance the management 
effectiveness of protected areas including the 
establishment of buffer zones and providing capacity 
building to the communities. The ESMF will include 
identification of risks and description of mitigation 
measures specific to avoidance and minimization of 
impacts on natural habitats. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes 

The Project may include some investments in some 
areas with potential negative impacts on mangroves 
while in other areas may benefits from restoration of 
mangroves. The ESMF will include specific provisions, 
including a TOR for a mangroves management plan, 
for cases where such impact is unavoidable. Project 
preparation will determine the potential impacts on 
mangroves, however the large scale impact is not 
anticipated. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 TBD 
 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 TBD 

It is unlikely that cultural resources will be impacted, 
however, the presence of objects of cultural heritage 
will be identified during screening as part of project 
preparation. The ESMF will include a sample chance 
find procedure to be adopted by the contractors. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 Yes 

Five of the six coastal counties targeted under the 
proposed MAFIDEV (i.e., Tana River, Lamu, Kilifi, Kwale 
and Taita Taveta) are home to Vulnerable and 
Marginalized Groups (VMGs) who meet the OP 4.10 
criteria in terms of language, culture, attachment to 
given lands and being subordinate to the more 
dominant communities among whom they live, as well 
as other Vulnerable Groups. Under the Kenya Coastal 



 
The World Bank  
Kenya Marine Fisheries and Socio-Economic Development Project (MAFIDEV) (P163980) 

 
 

  
Jun 06, 2017 Page 10 of 13  

     

Development Project (KCDP), a VMG Framework was 
prepared followed by a comprehensive Social 
Assessment (SA), which found that the livelihood 
strategies of the VMGs within these counties ranged 
from nearshore fishing, the closer a community is to 
the sea – to subsistence farming, livestock keeping and 
small scale trades, the farther a community is from the 
sea. The findings of the SA resulted in the 
development of a VMG Plan (VMGP) to mitigate risks, 
which was disclosed in December 2015.  
Activities under Component 1 of the proposed 
MAFIDEV will include regulating fishing effort to 
enhance stock productivity and ensure availability of 
reliable fisheries information for management 
decision-making. While this may result in medium- to 
long-term benefits, in the short term, it might 
negatively affect the livelihood strategies of the fishing 
VMG communities. Since the exact location of project 
interventions is unknown at this point in time and in 
order to continue addressing the livelihood needs, 
strategies and aspirations of the VMGs, the project will 
prepare a VMG Framework. The VMG Framework will 
build on the VMG Framework and SA developed under 
KCDP, accommodate lessons learnt, and be publicly 
disclosed in Kenya and in the World Bank Info Shop. 
Furthermore, the proposed MAFIDEV will build on the 
KCDP best practices and engage the VMGs at all stages 
of the project including at the project design stage.    
 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

Large scale involuntary resettlement and land 
acquisition are not expected to be required for the 
proposed types of investments, as the project expects 
to include rehabilitation of existing infrastructure or 
expansion of existing facilities. While resettlement of 
households can be avoided, in most cases, some 
economic displacement and restriction of access to 
resources is expected to be an impact for the project. 
Since the exact locations of project interventions are 
unknown at this stage, a framework approach would 
be adopted through which the project will develop a 
Resettlement Policy Framework to outline the types of 
compensation required for the project activities and 
guide preparation of the Resettlement Action Plans 
during project implementation. The project will also 
develop a Process Framework (PF) to establish the 
mechanism for compensation, participation, and 



implementation of improved management of 
nearshore and offshore fisheries. During project 
preparation, the PCU will identify initial investments 
ready for financing, for which subproject specific RAPs 
will be developed (if necessary) and disclosed prior to 
project appraisal. Throughout the project 
implementation, each subproject will be screened for 
resettlement risks and a RAP prepared by the PCU as 
necessary. The preparation of the RPF, PF and RAPs 
will be accompanied by a set of public consultations 
with the project stakeholders, which will be 
documented in these documents. Particular attention 
will be paid to the identification of vulnerable groups 
among the Project Affected Persons (PAPs), who may 
require special resettlement assistance during project 
implementation. Such PAPs and the nature of their 
vulnerabilities as well as the necessary support to 
them will be clearly documented in the RAP. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 
 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

TBD 
The policy may need to be triggered, which will be 
determined during project preparation. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 TBD 
The policy may need to be triggered due to Kenya’s 
maritime dispute with Somalia. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
May 31, 2018 
 

Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
The safeguards related studies are expected to be carried out from October 2017 through January 2018.  More details 

will be available after the first preparation mission which is likely carried out in Oct 2017. 
 
 

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Yemen Food Security Response and Resilience Project (P176129) 

 
 

  
Mar 10, 2021 Page 1 of 22  

     

 
 
 
      

 

Project Information Document (PID) 
 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 31-Mar-2021 | Report No: PIDA31193 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Yemen, Republic of P176129 Yemen Food Security 
Response and Resilience 
Project 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH 
AFRICA 

18-Mar-2021 27-Apr-2021 Agriculture and Food 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing United Nations 
Development Programme, 
World Food Programma, 
Food and Agriculture 
Organization 

World Food Programme, 
Food and Agriculture 
Organization, United 
Nations Development 
Programme 

 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
The Project Development Objective is to improve the availability of and access to food and nutritious diets, both in the 
short and medium term, for targeted households in the Project Area, and to enhance Yemen's capacity to respond to 
food insecurity. 

 
Components 

Improving household incomes through CFW for agricultural production infrastructure and building climate resilience 
Increasing Production and Sale of Nutritious Crop, Livestock and Fish Products 
Improving the Nutritional Status of Vulnerable Rural Households 
Capacity building for food security management and climate resilience 
Project Management and Knowledge Management 

 
OPS_TABLE_FCC The processing of this project is applying the policy requirements exceptions for situations of urgent need of 
assistance or capacity constraints that are outlined in OP 10.00, paragraph 12.     
Yes 

 

PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
   

SUMMARY-NewFin1  
 

Total Project Cost 127.00 

Total Financing 127.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 100.00 



 

Financing Gap 0.00 

 
   
DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 100.00 

          IDA Grant 100.00 

Non-World Bank Group Financing 

     Trust Funds 27.00 

          Global Agriculture and Food Security Program 27.00 

    

Environmental and Social Risk Classification 

Substantial 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate     
 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
B. Introduction and Context 

 
Country Context 

 
1. Violent conflict, now in its seventh year, has crippled Yemen’s economy and created an 
unprecedented humanitarian crisis. Oil exports, the main source of government revenue and foreign 
exchange, came to a virtual halt in 2015 due to repeated sabotage of vital infrastructure and increased 
insecurity. The resulting wide-scale suspension of basic public services and civil service salary payments, 
rapid currency depreciation, and shortages of imported goods weakened the non-hydrocarbon sector and 
left many Yemenis without a regular income. More than 50 percent of Yemenis between the ages of 18 
and 24 were unemployed in 2017 (United Nations Development Program 2017). A liquidity crisis hit the 
country in mid- to late-2018 with the local currency depreciating significantly and food prices rising, 
making food virtually unaffordable to many households. External assistance financed imports of food and 
other necessities and helped stabilize the economy in 2019 but was largely depleted by early 2020 and 
foreign reserves were not replenished. Some respite was provided through IMF financing in late spring 
and summer of 2020.  
 
2. The macroeconomic policy environment differs spatially due to the bifurcation of 
administration between areas of control. In the areas controlled by the internationally recognized 



 

The World Bank  
Yemen Food Security Response and Resilience Project (P176129) 

 

 

  
Mar 10, 2021 Page 4 of 22  

 

government (IRG), significant revenue underperformance and continued monetization of the fiscal deficit 
have undermined macroeconomic stability. Oil prices remain low, eroding the government’s hydrocarbon 
revenue. Non-oil economic activity has suffered significantly from COVID-19 related trade slowdown, 
desert locust outbreaks and exceptionally heavy rainfalls, which have caused intense flooding, 
infrastructure damage and human casualties in 2020. The severe revenue shortfall has led to expenditure 
compression. Since early 2020, salary payments to public sector workers have seen frequent delays. 
Payables to suppliers (mostly to energy suppliers) have continued building up, disrupting fuel imports and 
electricity supply. The complete ban on using new banknotes since December 2019[1] has resulted in two 
exchange rates, complicating trade and financial flows across Yemen. The DFA’s fiscal policy operates 
under a cash-constrained budget. The collection of corporate profit and sales taxes and customs revenue, 
the three largest revenue sources, was affected negatively by COVID-19 related trade slowdown and 
movement restrictions, and administrative disruption caused by flooding. In 2020, the DFA disbursed half-
month salaries to public sector workers under its controlled areas every other month 1. 
 
3. Over 24 million people (or 83 percent of the total estimated population) are food insecure2, 
including a staggering 16.2 million people in IPC Phase 3+ requiring urgent emergency assistance. Food 
insecurity in Yemen is driven by constrained food production, supply and distribution and households’ 
diminishing purchasing power. An estimated 4.3 million people have fled their homes since the start of 
the conflict, and 3.3 million remain internally displaced. Hunger, food insecurity and malnutrition are 
among the most pressing and overwhelming challenges Yemen now faces, at a scale that is not being fully 
met by national authorities and the international development and humanitarian communities. Low food 
access has resulted from a combination a high household dependence on food imports, high food prices 
and significantly reduced household income. It is estimated that Yemen imported 8 percent less wheat 
per month between January and May 2020 than during the same period in 2019 due to limited funds, 
which is an insufficient imported amount of wheat to meet the 2020 consumption requirement.  
 
4. Socio-economic conditions deteriorated further in 2020, significantly worsening poverty. 
Distortions created by the fragmented institutional capacity and the divergent policy decisions between 
the areas of control have compounded the economic and humanitarian crisis. This dramatic deterioration 
of conditions in Yemen means that an estimated 80 percent of the population (around 24 million) were 
living below the poverty line even before COVID-19 pandemic crisis (World Bank 2019). The likely result 
based on anecdotal evidence is a contraction of the economy from an already low base in 2020. In addition 
to monetary poverty, it is estimated that up to 80 percent of households experience overlapping monetary 
and non-monetary deprivations (World Food Program 2020). 
 
5. Multiple indices point towards a significant gender gap, with Yemeni women having a lower 
standard of living than men, and less access to education, health, productive employment and food 
security than men (World Bank 2014). The Gender Inequality Index (GII) measures Yemen’s GII value as 
0.8343 vs. the world’s average at 0.439.  Yemen ranks 153 out of 153 countries, meaning Yemen has the 
most massive gender gap in the world, in the 2020 Global Gender Gap Report4 by the World Economic 

 
[1] Notes printed after September 2016 when the Central Bank of Yemen (CBY) headquarters was moved to Aden. 
1 The Yemen Macro-Poverty Outlook, the 2020 Annual Meetings Edition. 
2 IPC Phase 2 and above.  
3 The Borgen Project, 2018. 
4  The Global Gender Gap considers the economic participation, education, health and political empowerment of all genders. 

 

Forum. International Labor Organization (ILO)- modeled estimates5 suggest that 46 percent of women 
work in agriculture (versus only 27 percent of men). Yet far fewer women participate in the labor market 
and in productive employment, with only 6 percent of women participating in the labor force compared 
to 72 percent of men. One out of four women in the labor market are unemployed (24 percent) compared 
to 12 percent of men. Vulnerable employment is high for all but especially for women; 68 percent of 
women fall in this category compared to 44 percent of men. Income inequality is stark: for every dollar a 
man makes in Yemen, a woman is estimated to make only thirty cents6. In 2011, the adult literacy rate 
was 80 percent for men and 45 percent for women, but among youth aged 15-24, these rates were 96 
and 72, respectively7 8. Finally, while men face a higher direct burden of war through fighting and battle 
deaths, women are disproportionately affected by the indirect and often lasting effects of conflict (World 
Development Report 2011, Buvinic et al. 2012, Justino 2018) that exacerbate existing gender-based 
deprivations and development shortfalls. 
 
6. Economic and social prospects for 2021 and beyond are highly uncertain. With the ongoing 
difficult political and security situation, socio-economic conditions will remain difficult. Urgent progress 
to address the current restrictions of access to supplies and fuel imports would improve public service 
provision and the operational environment for humanitarian operations. Ceasing hostilities and eventual 
political reconciliation, including the return of unitary macroeconomic policy implementation, are 
prerequisites for reconstructing the economy and rebuilding social fabric. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 

 
7. Yemen’s agriculture supplies around 15 – 20 percent of its food needs due to limited agricultural 
land and water resources and poor agricultural practices. However, agriculture—including fisheries and 
livestock—is the backbone of Yemeni livelihoods and the most important non-oil sector of the economy, 
even as its contribution to gross domestic product (GDP) has decreased during this period of severe 
economic disruption. Agriculture’s share of GDP contracted from 10.3 percent in 2010 to 4.03 percent in 
20189. Agricultural land is less than three percent (3 percent) of Yemen’s land area (FAOSTAT) and supplies 
around 15 - 20 percent of its needs for food. The principal agricultural systems are in the rainfed highlands 
characterized by terraced agriculture for coffee, fruits, grains and qat10 and extensive livestock (meat) 
production. Horticulture and field crops predominate in the plains, using groundwater for irrigation. 
Groundwater resources are very limited, fossil and non-renewable, and agriculture accounts for up to 90 
percent of groundwater use. The current annual renewable freshwater resources in Yemen are estimated 
at 80 m3 per capita versus an 8,900 m3 per capita global average. Yemen therefore falls well below the 
absolute scarcity threshold of 500 m3 per capita11. Up to 85 percent of food consumed is imported, mostly 
staples, such as wheat, rice, oil, sugar and milk. Yemen has self-sufficiency in some cereals (sorghum, 
millet, and barley), while 90 percent of wheat is imported. The agricultural sector accounts for a large 
portion of non-oil domestic exports and supports livelihoods through agricultural and livestock 
production. Over three thirds of Yemenis depend on agriculture for their livelihoods.  

 
5 World Bank Data.  
6 The Borgen Project. 
7 World Bank: data.worldbank.org/country/yemen-republic. 
8Description of Yemen’s education system is summarized in Annex 2.  
9 https://www.theglobaleconomy.com/Yemen/share_of_agriculture/ 
10 Qat is a mild stimulant leaf chewed for recreation, and for which up to 40 percent of total water resource use is dedicated 
11 Dire Straits: The Crisis Surrounding Poverty, Conflict, and Water in the Republic of Yemen, World Bank, 2017.

 
8. Agriculture is very important for job creation and food security, especially for women, yet 
women have less access to agricultural assets and higher food insecurity. Women have a major role in 
agricultural production; up to 87 percent of rural women are involved in agriculture sector activities (FAO), 
yet women rarely have land ownership rights and they commonly relinquish inherited land rights to male 
family members. It is estimated that only 13 percent of women are agricultural landholders (UNDP). 
Women working in agriculture face many constraints, such as limited access to land ownership, finance, 
markets, livelihood activities, and information, aside from legal and cultural restrictions on economic 
independence. It is estimated that only 2 percent of women have access to a formal bank account or 
mobile financial provider compared to 11 percent of men (which is also low). According to UNOCHA, 
female-headed households are more at risk of food insecurity due to scarce work opportunities for them. 
Women are generally excluded from economic transactions in the local markets. When food is scarce, 
women are the first family members to eat less as a coping mechanism, even though they continue to do 
hard work, including in the fields. Lack of official papers are an obstacle for women, boys and girls when 
registering for humanitarian assistance distribution. Restrictions in mobility (for security and cultural 
reasons) are often an obstacle for women and girls to go to humanitarian distribution points. Given the 
agriculture sector’s importance in producing food for consumption and commercialization, and 
generating incomes, it will continue playing an important role in households’ coping strategies and is 
expected to play a leading role in post-conflict recovery and reconstruction12. 
 
9. Vulnerability to climate change and pest outbreaks are exacerbating Yemen’s dire food 
insecurity, creating a crisis within a crisis. Yemen is highly vulnerable to climate change, further 
threatening food security and intensifying the development of locust swarms. By 2060, mean annual 
temperature is expected to increase by 1.2oC to 3.3oC, and the rate of warming is projected to be more 
rapid in interior regions than in coastal areas. Sea level rise will result in increased coastal flooding and 
possible damages to infrastructure and ecosystems, leading to sea-water intrusion affecting the country’s 
already fragile freshwater balance. Climate change has already triggered the strongest alterations in water 
temperature in the Indian Ocean in 60 years. Warmer seas also create more extreme rainfall as well as 
stronger and more frequent cyclones, providing ideal conditions for desert locusts to hatch, breed, and 
disperse widely. Fall Armyworm breeding areas are also increasing in Yemen as a result of ecologically 
favorable conditions, including extensive rains, with several governorates affected. 
 
10. Despite the agricultural sector’s importance, agricultural productivity remains low and the 
conflict has severely disrupted access to markets, transportation and distribution. Yemeni farmers 
operate around 1.18 million farms, with an average land holding of 1.36 ha (FAO). About 75 percent of 
agricultural production comes from the highlands, home to 60 percent of the population. While 
productivity has always been low, conflict has worsened production conditions, resulting in a shortage of 
inputs such as seeds, fertilizer and fuel, damage to agricultural machinery, irrigation systems and storage 
facilities along with a deterioration of water, sanitation and electricity services, and a breakdown of 
logistical chains. These disruptions, coupled with the relatively small and fragmented land holdings, have 
been preventing the sector from making a larger contribution to rural incomes and addressing food trade 
imbalances. The insufficient availability of inputs and post-harvest losses have been exacerbated by 

 

inadequate marketing systems, low human resource capacity, and lack of infrastructure and access to 
markets. 
 
11. Acute malnutrition is among the world’s highest, and both underlying acute and chronic 
malnutrition will adversely impact the country’s human capital outcomes in the long term. Prior to the 
2015 escalation of conflict, Yemen already had one of the world’s highest malnutrition levels. In 2021, 
over 2.25 million children under the age of five in Yemen are threatened with acute malnutrition. Of those 
children, 395,000 are expected to suffer from severe acute malnutrition and could die if without 
treatment. The projected figures in the IPC nutrition analysis13 mark a 16 percent increase in acute 
malnutrition and a 22 percent increase in severe acute malnutrition among children under five compared 
to last year’s estimate. This is the highest number on record in Yemen. An additional concern are the more 
than one million pregnant and lactating women who are projected to suffer from acute malnutrition 
during 2021 in Yemen. Acute severe malnutrition14 has immediate effects, including greater susceptibility 
to diseases like cholera, wasting and a whole range of other poor physical and mental health outcomes. 
Malnutrition impacts on children is particularly severe, as it results in long term declines in cognitive 
development, along with poorer health outcomes in both short and longer terms. This looms as a longer-
term societal issue. According to UNICEF, a shocking 46 percent of all children in Yemen are stunted. At 
this rate, malnutrition will create a lost generation. Undernutrition is particularly prevalent in rural areas, 
related to lean seasons or food security crises, and in areas remote from food aid. This suggests that 
enhanced, rural household-focused nutritional awareness, combined with improved local production can 
improve nutritional outcomes. 
 
12. Several aggravating factors that emerged in the spring and summer 2020 have been driving a 
worsening of the food security situation. Those factors include:  
 

(a) Widespread floods. In most of the governorates, the 2020 agriculture season started in March with 
strong rains, which lasted into August and led to heavy floods across the country. The floods resulted 
in substantial damage to cultivated lands and infrastructure and affected agricultural activities such 
as horticulture and livestock. Floods coincided both with harvesting and planting, resulting in damages 
to the standing crops and delayed planting activities. Destruction of water infrastructure alone (not 
including impacts on crops and livestock) is estimated at US$50 million (FAO). The estimated recovery 
and reconstruction needs for the short- and medium-term are between US$763 million and US$932 
million15. 
 

(b) Desert locust invasion. Yemen is one of the main breeding grounds of desert locust swarms, with 
swarms developing across the entire year and in multiple locations. The rains created favorable 
conditions for desert locusts to reproduce, resulting in extensive damage to cultivated crops. 
Residents and farmers in selected governorates reported a huge number of locusts invading farms, 
cities and villages, devouring important seasonal crops such as dates and causing heavy losses. The 
World Bank’s estimates put the damages and losses for the 2020 agricultural season at US$ 222 
million.  

 
13 Yemen: High levels of food insecurity persist | IPC Global Platform (ipcinfo.org)  
14 Severe acute malnutrition is defined by a very low weight for height (below -3z scores of the median WHO growth standards), 
by visible severe wasting, or by the presence of nutritional oedema (WHO). 
15 Yemen Dynamic Needs Assessment (DNA): Updated 2020 (World Bank). 

 

(c) Livestock disease incidences and prevalence in 2020. The above normal and intense rains created 
conducive environments for disease vectors to multiply and easier disease transmission of livestock 
diseases, resulting in increased outbreaks. In livestock, suspected outbreaks of Foot and Mouth 
Disease (FMD), Peste des petits ruminants (PPR), sheep and goat pox (SGP) in areas of low/absence of 
vaccination coverage, Lumpy Skin Disease (LSD) and other disease conditions have devastated 
livestock population, increasing vulnerability of livestock dependent population to food security 
shocks. 
 

(d) Well below-average cereal harvest in 2020. The total cereal production in 2020 was estimated at 
365,000 tons, almost 25 percent below the five-year average. Rural food crop production is expected 
to continue declining unless action is taken. With reduced food imports, higher food prices and for 
most households significantly reduced income earnings, the result will be lower food access. 
 

(e) The COVID-19 pandemic continues its spread across Yemen, negatively impacting food supply chains 
and food trade and contributing to sharp food price increases. By early March 2021, Yemen had 
reported 2,436 COVID-19 cases with 660 deaths, although it is likely COVID-19 cases are significantly 
under-reported. Market functionality and logistics in many areas have been hampered due to curfews 
and other COVID-19 pandemic prevention measures, greatly affecting farmers’ access to markets. 
Although farmgate prices did not change, poor market access has resulted in high post-harvest losses 
of horticulture products with only a few farmers finding alternate marketing channels to sell their 
produce, resulting in lower incomes. Movement restrictions and high input costs could further affect 
the next planting season. Negative coping strategies observed amongst pastoralists, such as selling 
herds, could continue without assistance to secure the upcoming planting season and to preserve 
productive assets in rural areas. In the coming months, localized and temporary increases in COVID-
19 control measures are expected in areas where higher numbers of cases are suspected, with further 
disruptions to trade and access to food and income. 
 

(f) Food price increases have continued through a combination of rapid currency deterioration, COVID-19 
pandemic impacts on the agri-food sector and lower food imports. Food represents a large share of 
poor households’ consumption expenditures, estimated between 60 to 70 percent. The disruptions 
to supply chains of locally produced foods are resulting in postharvest losses, and informal food flows 
across land borders are expected to continue at reduced levels relative to the pre-conflict period. 
Trade across land borders will likely remain difficult as continuing insecurity is now compounded by 
border closures due to COVID-19. As a result, the cost of the minimum food basket (MFB) increased 
by more than 20 percent during February 2020 – January 202116. For instance, wheat flour price 
gradually increased throughout 2020 and in November 2020 was 27 percent higher than at the same 
time previous year17. At the same time, incomes in the informal sector have dropped dramatically, 
remittances are also down sharply, and from December 2019 to June 2020, the local currency (Yemeni 
riyal) lost an average of 19 percent of its value against the US dollar18.  

13. The ability of Yemen’s physical food markets  to operate varies across the country. Yemen’s food 
market landscape is  fragmented and market ability to operate depends on the security situation.  In many 
areas, markets are operating reasonably well and are reasonably well stocked, however, in many food 
insecure areas poorly operating markets and dis-functional logistics are among the reasons contributing 
to the food insecurity.  The Yemen Joint Market Monitoring Initiative19 regularly monitors market 
operations in 56 districts in 16 governorates. They report that price inflation is the most commonly 
reported constraint faced by the assessed vendors when obtaining fuel, Water, Sanitation and Hygiene 
(WASH) items, food items, and water trucking services. Among the vendors interviewed, results showed 
86.2 percent saw price increases as the key constraint. Other constraints listed by respondents were 
insecurity (17.7 percent), demand shortages due to the population’s low purchasing power (14.9 percent), 
transportation difficulties (12.8 percent), with supply shortages only mentioned by 2.4 percent of 
respondents. Yet farmers report worsening access to markets due to the COVID-19 restrictions. 
Horticulture farmers, mainly women, are selling a highly perishable commodity and rely on this income to 
sustain their families. Poor market access has both, kept the farmgate prices steady, but also resulted in 
high post-harvest losses of horticulture products with only a few farmers finding alternate marketing 
channels to sell their produce, resulting in lower incomes. Another significant factor that negatively 
impacts overall private sector operations is fuel scarcity and its trading in the black market at double the 
price, which have disrupted the production process, service delivery, decreased working hours, and 
increased costs of production, transportation, storage and marketing20. 
 
14. Climate change is already worsening the existing challenges and negatively impacting all four 
dimensions of food security: availability, access, stability, and utilization of food. Food availability is 
compromised by projected yield declines due to temperature and precipitation patterns change. Climate 
change also compromises food access by affecting consumers' purchasing power through price increases 
as a result of climate change. Climate change affects food utilization primarily by reducing food safety 
through a higher incidence of food-borne diseases and the spread of novel pests and diseases. Regarding 
food stability, the risks to food and nutrition security are exacerbated by the expected increase in the 
frequency and intensity of climate-related events. Furthermore, according to the World Bank's 
Groundswell report21, climate change will scale up internal climate migration. The poorest people in rural 
areas will be forced to move due to slow-onset climate change impacts, including decreasing crop 
productivity, shortage and deterioration of water’s quantity and quality, and rising sea levels. Therefore, 
actions geared towards building improved and climate-smart agri-food systems will contribute to 
increased food security, climate change adaptation and mitigation. 
 
15. Food security situation forecasts for the first half of 2021 predict that food insecurity across the 
country will intensify due to the continued, combined effects of the aggravating factors described in 
paragraph 12 above, a warning uniformly sounded across the UN agencies working in Yemen, including 
the FAO, UNICEF and the World Food Programme (WFP)22. This includes large areas of the country 
previously in IPC Phase 2 (Stressed) moving to IPC Phase 3 (Crisis), with the share of the population in IPC 
Phases 3 and 4 significantly increasing by June 2021. The number of people likely to experience high levels 
of acute food insecurity (IPC Phase 3 or above) is estimated to be nearly 16.2 million (54 percent of the 


total population). Food insecurity is more severe both in areas with active fighting and bordering areas 
with limited access. It is particularly affecting Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs) and marginalized groups 
such as the landless laborers and the Mohamasheen23. Food insecurity is also severe in areas where 
people survive on low and irregular sources of income and low access to public services. The population 
in Catastrophe (IPC Phase 5) are found in five districts of Al Jawf, Hajjah and Amran. The governorates 
with the highest proportion of IPC Phase 4 districts (>75%) are located in Al Dhale’e, Al Jawf, Hajjah, Marib 
and Rayma Governorates. Each of the governorates of Al Hudaydah, Dhamar, Hajjah, Ibb, Sana’a City and 
Taizz have more than one million people in IPC Phase 3 (Crisis) or above. The upcoming “lean” season, 
between March and June 2021 is expected to aggravate this situation. 
 

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 

Development Objective(s) (From PAD)  
 
16. The Project Development Objective is to improve availability and access to food and nutritious 
diets, both in the short and medium term, for targeted households in the Project Area, and to enhance 
Yemen’s capacity to respond to food insecurity. 
 

Key Results 
 

17. Progress toward the achievement of the PDO will be measured by the following outcome 
indicators:  
 

Outcome 1: Short-term access and availability of food and nutritious diets at household level 

improved  

• Percentage of households (HH) with improved Food Insecurity Experience Scale (FIES), of which 
female-headed households;  

• Percentage of women in beneficiary households with minimum dietary diversity; 

• Percentage of children (6-23 months) consuming minimum acceptable diet.  
 

Outcome 2: Medium-term access and availability of food and nutritious diets at household level 

improved 

• Increase in the volume of food/agricultural products commercialized/sold by beneficiaries, of which 
by female beneficiaries.  
 

Outcome 3: Country capacity to respond to food insecurity strengthened 

• Food security preparedness improved, through the adoption of the food security preparedness plan 
and the use of the EO monitoring tool.  

 
 

 

D. Project Description  
 

 
18. Component 1: Improving household incomes through CFW for agricultural production 
infrastructure (US$20.0 million, including US$5.0 million from GAFSP and US$15.0 million from IDA). 
UNDP will implement this component through the Social Fund for Development (SFD) and the Public 
Works Project (PWP). The  SFD will  take the lead in implementing the CFW program, which will provide 
employment opportunities directly to beneficiary laborers from the communities in the project area. The 
PWP will implement small-scale infrastructure-related works through selected locally sourced contractors 
which are also expected to create employment opportunities for the communities. Both organizations 
have extensive experience implementing their respective responsibilities under a number of other 
interventions, including under several Bank-financed projects.  It is expected that 85 percent of the 
component financing will be allocated for CFW activities, which the remaining 15 percent would be 
channeled through the PWP. Component 1 activities will be implemented in close collaboration with the 
FAO to ensure that they are closely coordinated with the productive investments made under Component 
2. Component 1 would ensure immediate access to food for an estimated 26,500 food-insecure 
households by creating temporary employment opportunities through a Cash-for-Work (CFW) program, 
focusing on restoring damaged public and collective productive assets, including those affected by the 
recent floods. The project would target youth (18 – 32 years of age) through the community outreach 
programs and encourage them to participate in the CFW program. The Component will also seek to 
support employment generation activities targeting women. 
 

19.  Component 1 activities would directly contribute to climate change adaptation and mitigate 
greenhouse gas emissions. Implementing climate-resilient irrigation and water conservation and 
management practices will restore degraded lands (including terracing) and affected water infrastructure 
for subsequent productive, climate-smart technology use in agricultural production and allow 
beneficiaries to earn much needed income from their repair and maintenance through cash-for-work. An 
estimated 15,700 farmers will have improved access to water infrastructure, irrigation networks and 
rehabilitated lands. These actions also contribute to climate change mitigation and adaptation by 
increasing carbon sequestration and improving water management. The Component will finance 
beneficiary compensation, estimated as US$660 per household per six month period, and the operating 
costs of SFD and PWP. The detailed criteria for beneficiary selection will be included in the Project 
Operations Manual (POM), and care will be taken to ensure that the beneficiaries of this Component are 
not engaged in parallel Bank-financed projects24. 
 

20. Component 2: Increasing production and sale of nutritious crop, livestock and fish products 
(US$33.0 million, including US$10.0 million from GAFSP and US$23.0 million from IDA). This Component 
will be implemented by FAO. The Component would allocate resources to provide key support for 
smallholder farmers and producers to invest in productive assets and help improve their capacity to better 
commercialize their products and enter new markets. The Component would support: (1) restoring 
climate-smart local food production to increase household access to food and food availability in local 
markets, and (2) improving farmer’s access to markets for staple and high value cash crops (such as 
horticultural crops and coffee), by strengthening value chains’ vertical and horizontal linkages, to increase 
incomes for beneficiary households. Component 2 would collaborate with IFC in developing selected high 

value agricultural value chains, building value chains between the project-supported farmers/agricultural 
producers and IFC’s advisory services and investment clients25. This component is therefore expected to 
restore climate-smart agricultural production while also stimulating the local economy and promoting the 
production of nutrient-dense foods (e.g., horticulture, pulses, meat (chicken and livestock), dairy and fish). 
This component would finance two types of support packages. Detailed criteria for beneficiary selection 
and implementation arrangements will be included in the POM. 
 

21. Sub-component 2.1: Restoring climate-smart agricultural production (US$15.0 million, including 
US$ 5.0 million from GAFSP and US$10.0 million from IDA). The Input Package for agricultural producers 
will promote climate-smart agricultural production focusing on smallholder’s re-engagement in 
horticulture, crop and livestock farming, bee-keeping and fish production. Producers would receive 
support to restart or expand production, including input starter packages for crops, animal feed, improved 
forage seeds, equipment and inputs to start fish farming, bee-keeping kits, farm equipment such as fodder 
choppers and small dairy equipment, energy efficient post-harvest handling and storage facilities. The 
Input Packages will be supported by complementary climate-smart practices supporting diversified 
production and climate resilience—for instance, by introducing improved varieties and plantings and ways 
to preserve and manage grasslands. The Sub-component will also provide extension support to producers, 
including training and advisory services through Farmer Field Schools (FFS) on good agricultural practices, 
enhanced animal husbandry and feeding practices  and climate-smart technologies. SFD, which has 
extensive prior experience in implementing the types of activities supported under this Component, will 
work alongside FAO to restoring and enhancing access to  some agriculture inputs. It would also 
strengthen access to supporting services to ensure maximum benefits from those assets, including 
extension services to be supported under Component 4, veterinary services (including vaccinations for 
animals) thought Community Animal Health Workers (CAHWS) and General Directorate for Animal Health 
and Quarantine (GDAHWQ), and mechanical services support.  
 

22. Sub-component 2.2: Promoting value addition and sale of nutritious food products (US$20.0 
million, including US$5.0 million from GAFSP and US$15.0 million from IDA). The second package of 
interventions (Value Addition Package) will provide in-kind grants to support enterprising producers, 
processors and traders to scale up, add value to their products, improve product quality and aggregation, 
consolidate production, and access local and regional markets with their products. The sub-component 
will work with the value chain participants to structure the value chain, providing both training and 
advisory support in technical aspects (aggregation, development of linkages with farmers, product quality 
and others), business skill capacity building, and provide beneficiaries with key assets (equipment, 
machinery and working capital), enabling them to increase the quality and commercialization of food 
products. In areas with high caseloads of Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs), the project will build 
capacities of farmers with agriculture techniques, value chain development and maintenance of local 
infrastructure, to improve mutual trust, understanding and collaboration between displaced and host 
populations. SFD, which has extensive prior experience in implementing the types of activities supported 
under this Sub-component, will work alongside FAO to increase the farm-gate value and nutritional 
content of some agricultural products through provision of improved technologies and practices for key 
horticulture crops. The equipment and machinery provided under the sub-component will be climate-
smart and more environmentally friendly than conventional technologies. Most of the equipment and 
machinery is expected to be procured, imported and distributed to the value chain/value addition 

 
25 One such opportunity for a black sesame value chain has already been identified. 




beneficiaries by FAO. Some of the value chain activities may also cover the beneficiaries who received 
support under the SAPREP and ECRP.  
 

23. Sub-component 2.2 will support key value chains mostly focused on the local market, including 
beans and cereals, vegetables, dairy, livestock and fish value chains. To increase production, improve 
product quality, extend shelf-life, reduce food loss, and improve energy efficiency, the component will 
complement the Input Packages by providing in-kind grants for value chain development, post-harvest 
enhancement and value addition activities. The size of in-kind grants will depend on the type of 
beneficiary financed – a group or individual, as well as on the nature of the activity. Larger-scale 
investments, such as seedling centers, post-harvest centers, hydroponics, dairy processing facilities, etc., 
will be implemented though groups of beneficiaries. For group beneficiaries, the upper value of the in-
kind grants should not exceed a maximum of US$70,000 per group. The only exception to this maximum 
size limit may be groups engaged in milk collection and dairy processing where construction of 
infrastructure is necessary. Given the high start-up costs, the maximum value of such in-kind grants should 
not exceed a maximum of US$120,000 per group. Individual beneficiaries who will receive support for 
activities such as beekeeping, poultry production, horticulture production and processing, food 
preservation, agro-logistics services and other income-generating value-addition activities, the grant shall 
not exceed US$2,000 per individual beneficiary. All in-kind grant financed by the project should be 
supported by a business idea description, description of the market, value chain arrangements and 
financial viability. The length of the business idea description should be commensurate with the size of 
the in-kind grant. Detailed description of the in-kind grants is in Annex 3. 
 

24. The component will also support investments and technical assistance in selected high-value, 
high-growth value chains (such as coffee, fruits and nuts, and poultry and eggs26), some of them in 
collaboration with IFC and aiming to generate IFC and/or private sector investments. This should generate 
higher employment and household incomes, improve access to food, and allow for higher diversification 
of household diets. To ensure that the products are delivered to the market, and to create additional jobs, 
selected small-scale agro-logistics service providers may also be supported. The component will prioritize 
the adoption of climate-smart crop and livestock practices to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and 
enhance resilience to climate change. SMEPS will be working alongside FAO and IFC to ensure knowledge 
transfer on value chain development and support to build SMEPS’s capacity to engage in similar activities 
in the future. To further review and strengthen opportunities for development of value chains, the Sub-
component will also finance studies in two areas: (1) A fisheries and coastal 
aquaculture needs assessment and a fisheries and coastal aquaculture stock assessment; and (2) agro-
logistics constraints and solutions for selected value chains. The sub-component will also support limited 
small-scale laboratory equipment for selected Universities to support the value chain development 
activities. 
 
25. Component 3: Improving the nutritional status of vulnerable rural households (US$49.3 million, 
all IDA). Sub-component 3.1 will be implemented by FAO and Sub-component 3.2 and 3.3 will be 
implemented by WFP. This component would aims at improving the nutritional security of very vulnerable 
(Sub-components 3.1 and 3.3) and moderately vulnerable (Sub-component 3.2) households through a 
variety of instruments, including: (1) targeted nutrition-sensitive agriculture activities and facilitating 

 
26 Based on the results of application of the Agricultural Investment for Development Analyzer (AIDA) model by the 
International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI).  

Uptake by poor households of appropriate dietary and nutrition practices, in particular improving nutrient 
intakes of pregnant mothers and children under two, (2) promoting women’s entrepreneurship activities 
and improving the diets of the female-led households, and (3) improving nutrition in vulnerable 
households with malnourished women and children. Component 3 beneficiaries may also include the 
Cash-for-Nutrition beneficiaries under the ECRP, to ensure that they receive support allowing them to 
start their own production of food or improve nutritious diets on a more sustainable basis.  
 
26. Sub-component 3.1: Promoting kitchen gardens and backyard production for improved diets 
(US$10.0 million, all IDA). FAO will implement this Sub-component which will target beneficiary 
households that have received malnutrition treatment and prevention services referred to under Sub-
component 3.3, former beneficiaries of the Cash-for-Nutrition programs under the ECRP, households with 
pregnant mothers and children under two, and other eligible households with a similar vulnerability level. 
The Sub-component will provide inputs (vegetable seeds, chicken, etc.) for households to establish kitchen 
gardens and backyard production of nutritious food items (vegetables, eggs, and meat). It is estimated 
that the sub-component will reach 20,000 beneficiary households. Beneficiaries would also receive two 
types of training. For improving backyard production, they will receive training on best and climate-smart 
agricultural production practices. The Sub-component will prioritize the adoption of climate-smart crop 
and livestock practices to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and enhance resilience to climate change. To 
maximize the nutritional value of available food, training sessions will be offered to beneficiaries of this 
sub-component on how to maximize the nutritional value of foods when preparing family meals. Also, the 
project will use different communication channels to spread nutrition messages to trigger behavioral 
change in target populations. Since women are the main family caretakers, mostly women beneficiaries 
are expected to partake in these activities, however, the training will be open to both women and men. 
 
27. Sub-component 3.2: Promoting women’s rural entrepreneurship for improved nutrition and 
food security (US$14.3 million, all IDA). The Sub-component will be implemented by WFP and will focus 
on promoting women’s entrepreneurship to generate higher income and improve nutritious diets and 
food security at the household level. WFP’s resilience and livelihoods interventions will mainly target 
moderately food-insecure people to prevent them from slipping into further food insecurity. WFP will 
work with national NGO partners and provide Food for Training to food-insecure women, especially 
targeting those who are heading their households in rural communities. The training will develop their 
skills, aimed at restoring or establishing their livelihoods, and starting their own businesses. The support 
in most cases will range from six to nine months (at the monthly payment of US$105), giving participants 
access to various trainings, such as skill development, business development and management, digital skills, 
entrepreneurship, improved nutrition and life-skills (e.g. health practices) while they are supported by a 
monthly allowance. Once trainings are completed and a business plan submitted, the women would 
receive a start-up grant to start diversified income generating activities (both agricultural and non-
agricultural). The grant amount per individual will not exceed US$800. Increasing the productive capacity 
and livelihoods potential of rural women, especially in agriculture and food production, will help sustain 
their food and nutritional security when the assistance period ends. Similar to 3.1, for agricultural 
activities, the Sub-component will prioritize the adoption of climate-smart crop and livestock practices to 
reduce greenhouse gas emissions and enhance resilience to climate change. WFP’s comprehensive 
approach also includes training and support related to gender-based violence, awareness on preventing 
infectious disease spread, and child-care, nutrition and health practices. Participants will be encouraged 
to work together in joint business ventures with an estimated 3 participants per business, although the 
number may vary based on participant preferences and conditions for joint ventures in the targeted areas. 



It is expected that around 7,910 women will participate in the training, establishing an estimated 2,637 
businesses.  
 
28. Sub-component 3.3: Providing nutrition assistance to treat and prevent malnutrition (US$25.0 
million, all IDA) for pregnant and lactating women and girls (PLWG) and children under 5 years old. This 
Sub-component will be implemented by WFP and constitutes an integrated malnutrition prevention and 
treatment response. WFP will provide blanket supplementary feeding with specialized nutrition products 
to children aged 6–23 months and PLWG to prevent acute and chronic malnutrition in the project area 
districts prioritized for integrated famine response. Elsewhere, WFP will provide targeted supplementary 
feeding to malnourished children aged 6–59 months and PLWG girls to treat moderate and acute 
malnutrition across the country. Beneficiaries of targeted supplementary feeding will be screened in local 
health centers, through community health volunteers and screening campaigns organized by the Ministry 
of Public Health and Population (MOPHP), using mid-upper arm circumference (MUAC) and weight-for-
height measurements. This is accompanied by social behavior change communication (SBCC), designed to 
reduce barriers to adequate infant and young children feeding practices and healthy eating and hygiene 
habits. The SBCC campaign will target PLWG, health workers and caregivers, and also other decision 
makers and influencers within the community such as parents-in-law, husbands and local leaders. 
Messaging will focus on ensuring that responsibility for the care of children is shared within the household 
and not only limited to women. During the project period, around 195,000 beneficiaries are expected to 
be reached through the  Treatment Program, including 150,000 acutely malnourished children under the 
age of five and 45,000 acutely malnourished pregnant and lactating women and girls, as well as around 
277,000 beneficiaries through the Prevention Program, including 150,000 children under the age of two 
and 127,000 pregnant and lactating women and girls. 
 
29. Component 4: Capacity building for food security management (US$6.0 million, all IDA). FAO 
will lead implementation of this component in cooperation with other partner organizations as described 
below. This component includes a set of activities that are expected to significantly strengthen the 
capacity of both the private (households) and public sectors for food security crisis planning and response: 

 

(a) Developing an evidence-based Food Security Preparedness Plan (FSPP). The FSPP development 
will be co-led by the World Bank (financed under a separate budget) and the FAO, and will be 
carried out in a highly participatory manner, consulting with the main line ministries and 
Institutions involved in the agricultural sector, multilateral and bilateral organizations, the private 
sector; and civil society including international and local NGOs. This FSPP will be prepared within 
six months of project effectiveness and it will be reviewed by the World Bank’s Technical Expert 
Group on Food Security. The FSPP implementation will be monitored on a regular basis 
throughout the project period.  
 

(b) Establishing a satellite-based Earth Observation (EO) crop and pasture monitoring and early 
warning system for detecting climate-induced hazards. This tool would support monitoring 
agricultural production, providing information to the GOY for decision-making regarding food 
imports planning. The data generated by the EO Tool will also feed into the FSPP implementation. 
The EO tool will initially be housed by FAO and arrangements to transfer to the appropriate agency 
will be identified during the project Mid-Term Review (MTR). The project will be designed in a 
manner to ensure its use for the intended (civilian) purpose only.  



(c) Strengthening agriculture extension services by financing capacity building of the existing 
extension services, including current extension services staff, Community Animal Health Workers 
(CAHWs) and other extension service agents working in the communities. A significant number of 
women, enrolled on the basis of selection criteria which will be reflected in the POM, will be 
trained as extension workers, agricultural technicians, and CAHWs under this activity and 
recruited to be part of FFS.  
 

(d) Piloting alternative agricultural production technologies will introduce alternative, climate smart 
land- and water-efficient agricultural production technologies for producing nutritious crops (soil-
less technologies, such as hydroponics and aquaponics) by financing technology pilots and 
demonstrations in areas where previously, production would not have been possible, due to 
limited land resources. 

 
30. Component 5: Project Management and Knowledge Management (US$16.7 million, including 
US$3.2 million from GAFSP and US$13.5 million from IDA). This component would cover the costs 
associated with project management for all three Implementing Agencies (FAO, UNDP and WFP), 
recognizing the particularly challenging operating conditions in Yemen. Covered implementation costs 
include financial management, procurement, monitoring the project’s environmental and social 
safeguards, communication and stakeholder engagement, and overall monitoring and evaluation (M&E). 
Additionally, M&E is expected to be strengthened by using the Geo-Enabling initiative for Monitoring and 
Supervision (GEMS) and by carrying out an additional impact assessment (in collaboration with IFPRI), to 
assess the suitability and impact of project interventions. This component would also finance a third-party 
monitoring (TPM) mechanism and establishing and maintaining a grievance redress mechanism (GRM). 
 
31. For real-time data collection and analysis, the project will implement the Geo-Enabling method 
for Monitoring and Supervision (GEMS). The GEMS method enables project teams to use open-source 
tools for in-field collection of structured digital data that automatically feeds into a centralized M&E 
system and Management Information System (MIS). The integrated data can include any kind of 
indicators, based on tailor-made forms; photos, audio, videos; time and date stamps; and GPS coordinates 
that allow for automated geo-mapping of the information. Using these tools systematically allows the 
project to enhance the transparency and accuracy of project planning as well as M&E and third-party 
monitoring throughout the project cycle. Moreover, GEMS allows for establishing a digital platform for 
remote supervision, real-time safeguards monitoring, and portfolio mapping for coordination across 
project components as well as with other operations in the region.  
 
32. Integration of COVID-19 response. The project will use its resources (such as field consultants) to 
integrate COVID-19 awareness and preventive measures in the training events and awareness campaigns 
planned for beneficiaries. Awareness raising and training events will follow precautionary measures 
described in workshop/training protocols, as well as enforce and maintain adequate distancing during 
control, distribution, training, payment, and other project activities. These will also be held in locations 
and during times that are convenient for women. The project will work with local communities, female 
and male consultants, and beneficiaries to reach households with awareness and hygiene materials (such 
as masks, hand sanitizers and other relevant consumables) that will be developed to resonate with women 
and men’s different roles and behaviors at home and in society. The decision on which hygiene materials 

to procure will be made in coordination with the Bank-financed COVID-19 health emergency project in 
Yemen.  .

.  
Legal Operational Policies 

            Triggered? 

Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50             No  

Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60             No  

 

Summary of Assessment of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts 
. 

 
Environmental Risk Rating 
 

33. The environmental risk is considered Substantial given that the project will support several 
interventions that might be associated with environmental risks and impacts and the implementation 
agencies' ESF capacity remains limited. Environmental risks and impacts are expected to be site-specific, 
reversible, and generally of low magnitude that can be mitigated following appropriate measures; 
nonetheless, based on the implementation experience of ongoing projects, particularly those involving 
labor-intensive interventions, and the identification of significant Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) 
gaps, there is a significant risk for fatal incidents or serious injuries to occur under the project, particularly 
under the interventions of component 1 (Alleviating immediate food security needs by improving 
household incomes) since the activities under this component will provide temporary work opportunities 
to a large number of local community members, with little or no knowledge or experience in applying OHS 
measures. 
 
34. Furthermore, there is a risk of COVID-19 transmission among community workers if worksites are 
not managed appropriately and injuries due to the potential explosion of a remnant of war (ERW). 
Component 1 will also support the rehabilitation of small-scale rural land and water infrastructure and 
access roads to isolated villages/communities, therefore improper management of materials that will be 
used for the rehabilitation activities might lead to the generation of waste and open dumping in the 
environment. In addition, the project might support some interventions such as rehabilitation of terraces 
and construction of hydroponics which might increase the use of pesticides (the project will not finance 
procurement of pesticides) and fertilizers which should be applied and disposed of adequately and in a 
controlled manner.  

 

35. It is mentionable that the project will have several positive impacts including through supporting 
the hydroponics and aquaponics which will enhance the economically - environmentally friendly and 
sustainable development solution for the beneficiaries and will pilot interventions which are of high 
productivity and save land and water consumption for irrigation. This may encourage other farmers to 
replicate this intervention at a larger scale and spreading scientific knowledge to other farmers 
countrywide. 
 

Social Risk Rating 
 

36. The proposed project is expected to bring significant social benefits to the targeted communities. 
It will contribute to the alleviation of food security and improvement of household income through the 
Cash for Work program, support restoration of local food production and increase the sales of crops and 
livestock and promote diversified nutrient crops.  Particular attention and efforts would be given to the 
promotion of youth and women participation and maximizing their benefits through dedicated 
subcomponents under the project.   
 
37. The project could face possible adverse social impacts and risks. The proposed interventions in 
farmland and irrigation works are of rehabilitation and maintenance nature.  They are planned to take 
place within their existing footprints and are expected to be quite small in scale. Therefore, land 
acquisition or resettlement needs are not anticipated under the project.  A negative exclusion list will be 
developed for the project. However, these activities could have potentials for labor-related impacts and 
risks, such as possible child labor, forced labor, discriminatory practices in recruitment, occupational 
health and safety issues, and GBV/SEA risks, and even possible conflicts within potential beneficiary 
communities.  The project faces a potential risk of elites or better-connected individuals or groups 
capturing project benefits, affecting poor and vulnerable groups receiving their due share of project 
benefits.  These could include the elderly, poor farmers, women, and individuals displaced by the ongoing 
conflict. The overall country security situation poses another challenge for the project and is a key risk for 
the project implementation. In addition to the general conflict and security situation the country faces, 
the project may face possible conflicts among local communities, interested groups, and factions over 
project benefits distribution. Given the above, the project's social risks are considered Substantial. 

 
E. Implementation 

 
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 

 
38. The project would be implemented by three UN Agencies, FAO, UNDP and WFP, ensuring project 
activities reach throughout both the South and the North of Yemen. Each Agency will implement part of 
the project based on their mandate and relevant experience: 
 

(i) FAO is the specialized UN agency responsible for and well positioned to respond to 
emergencies in agriculture and food security, including crop and food supply monitoring and 
needs assessments, evaluations of agricultural relief requirements, and mobilizing assistance 
and resources to restore agricultural activity. The FAO has prior experience in supporting the 
implementation of Bank-financed projects on the ground in Yemen (since 2017 it has led the 
implementation of SAPREP toward satisfactory achievement of results and more recently it 
became the Implementing Agency for the Desert Locust Response Project; P174170). SAPREP, 
implemented in collaboration with SFD,  supported a set of similar activities, including the 
CFW instrument implementation, support to agricultural production by providing input kits 
and ensuring access to associated services (such as animal health services). The project’s 
implementation performance rating is Satisfactory. Given their prior experience in 
implementing SAPREP, FAO is fully aware of the Bank’s fiduciary and safeguards 
requirements. FAO has put in place enhanced M&E mechanisms to supervise local 
implementation partners and has also been using TPM. 


(ii) UNDP is the UN’s development agency and it is committed to supporting the peacebuilding 
initiative in Yemen, political stability and enhanced local governance. UNDP has built a 
successful partnership with the World Bank in implementing the CFW activities of the ECRP. 
The project works in 317 districts out of 330 districts of Yemen. UNDP is partnering with the 
SFD and PWP and their community networks to deliver services. Given their prior experience 
in implementing the ECRP, the UNDP is fully aware of the Bank’s fiduciary and safeguards 
requirements. UNDP established an M&E system to ensure proper project management, 
assuring stakeholders and providing accountability and is also using a TPM mechanism to 
monitor project implementation. UNDP communicates with the World Bank team monthly on 
project implementation and to address  emerging challenges. UNDP had a good collaboration 
with FAO on water resource management, aimed at enhancing access to water in agriculture 
and improving the effective use and management of scarce water resources in Yemen.  

(iii) WFP is the food-assistance branch of the United Nations and is the world's largest 
humanitarian organization, the largest one focused on hunger and food security, and the 
largest provider of school meals. In Yemen, in addition to food and nutrition interventions, 
such as school feeding programs, WFP is also engaged in livelihoods development activities 
through a range of instruments, including Food-for-Assets and Food-for-Training in close 
cooperation with FAO. WFP’s vulnerability, mapping and assessment (VAM) expertise 
conducts joint nation-wide food security and livelihood assessments which inform the 
Integrated Food Security Phase Classification (IPC) for Yemen, as well as regular food security 
and price monitoring and analysis. WFP is an existing Implementing Agency under the World 
Bank-financed Restoring Education and Learning Project (P175036), engaged in school 
feeding activities, and it has therefore some exposure to the Bank’s fiduciary and safeguards 
requirements.  
 

39. The Country Representation Offices of the three UN Agencies will be responsible for the overall 
implementation of their respective activities and coordinating all relevant activities at the sub-national 
level, supported by the regional office staff who will monitor the activities in different governorates. 
The FAO will be the lead agency for the implementation of the project and will be a recipient of both IDA 
and GAFSP financing. Both UNDP and WFP will receive IDA financing. Each UN Agency will be responsible 
for the technical implementation of the relevant components and sub-components (as indicated in the 
PAD), as well as all fiduciary, environmental, and social aspects, monitoring and reporting. The UN 
Agencies will help ensure financial and technical accountability of the implementing partner organizations 
(such as SFD, SMEPS and PWP) and ensure appropriate training and capacity building of the staff of the 
implementing partner organizations. The FAO would have a Project Coordination Unit (PCU) based in 
Sana’a, and technical staff deployed in its Aden sub-office and other decentralized hubs to ensure day-to-
day project management, including all fiduciary, environmental, and social aspects, and monitoring and 
reporting. UNDP and WFP will assign dedicated staff to support project implementation and ensure timely 
and relevant contributions to the PCU work. This proposed structure would build on the experience with 
previous grants implemented by FAO in the country. Moreover, the FAO team in Sana’a is backstopped 
by a dedicated team of technical experts at Regional (Cairo) and Headquarters (Rome) level in line with 
the Level 3 fast-track procedures established due to the emergency situation in Yemen. 
 
40. Coordination. The three selected organizations are currently working in Yemen and exchanging 
information as part of their participation in partner meetings. The three UN Agencies will set up a formal 
project Coordination Committee for increased efficiency and efficacy, including to coordinate activities 


with and among the Implementing Partners. This committee will hold meetings on a regular basis 
(suggested monthly) to best coordinate their activities, evaluate progress, address bottlenecks and 
consolidate annual work plans. Frequency of meetings, attendance, communication tools, etc. will be 
developed in the POM. Collecting and reporting on indicators (including methodology, tools, devices, etc.) 
to inform the results framework and progress on implementation will be discussed and agreed among 
implementing partners with the support of the Bank. A mechanism will also be established to brief the 
authorities at various levels on regular basis on the project results and challenges of implementation.  
 
41. Local partners with prior extensive experience in implementing similar projects will have key 
implementation roles. The PWP and SFD would play a key role as the local implementing partners for 
Component 1, SFD and SMEPS would support implementation of small-scale value chain activities, 
provision of technologies and practices for some horticulture crops and restoration of agriculture inputs 
under Component 2, alongside FAO. The SFD and PWP are the key local partners in implementing the 
ongoing ECRP, SAPREP and DLRP, and they would lead the implementation of Component 1. SMEPS would 
contribute to the value chain development under Component 2. Selecting national institutions for these 
roles would contribute to building national capacity for community-based interventions. For activities that 
would be implemented by SFD, SMEPS and PWP, UNDP and FAO would provide technical guidance and 
backstopping as required. Under the CFW program of Component 1, SFD will be in charge of working with 
beneficiaries on the CFW program, while the PWP will implement the activities related to restoration of 
small-scale agricultural infrastructure in the cases it requires involvement of professional contractors, to 
ensure communities have access to good quality assets. SMEPS will ensure technical assistance to the 
value chain development activities. Additional personnel will be recruited to cover any skills or human 
capacity gaps as assessed during the project preparation. All staff are required to have satisfactory 
expertise, experience, and qualifications. All three national institutions have capacity and experience 
spanning over 20 years in undertaking participatory and community-based development activities 
involving women and men from local communities. 
 
42. Project Operational Manual (POM). A detailed POM and a separate CfW Transfer Manual will be 
prepared for all project components by effectiveness. The POM and the CfW Transfer Manual will be 
subject to the World Bank’s no objection.  
 
43. Financial Management and Procurement arrangements. The project’s financial management 
(FM) arrangements will be governed by the Financial Management Framework Agreement (FMFA) 
between the World Bank and the UN Agencies, which provides for the use of the UN’s Financial 
Regulations. For procurement, FAO will follow its own procurement procedures as Alternative 
Procurement Arrangements, as provided under the World Bank New Procurement Framework Policy 
Section III. F. This implementation arrangement is sound, since the procurement procedures of FAO were 
assessed and found acceptable to the World Bank under agreements with UN agencies. 
 
44. Implementing partners will prepare budgeted Annual Work Plans of implementation and a 
detailed procurement plan (in agreement with the World Bank). This budgeted Annual Work Plan will be 
prepared no later than four months after project effectiveness. It will highlight the activities to be 
implemented for the subsequent 12 months by component and sub-component with intended results, 
timeline, budgets and planned procurement activities. It will also identify issues / implementation 
bottlenecks and relevant remedial actions and outline key responsibilities. In the context of COVID-19 and 
virtual missions (video/audio), the budgeted Annual Work Plan will be the common communication 

interface between implementing partners and the World Bank to regularly monitor activities of each 
component, evaluate progress and discuss corrective actions or changes as needed. 
 

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Ghana Productive Safety Net Project 2 (P175588) 

 
 

  
Nov 25, 2020 Page 1 of 12  

     

 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document (PID) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 25-Nov-2020 | Report No: PIDC30653 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Ghana P175588  Ghana Productive 
Safety Net Project 2 
(P175588) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA WEST Jan 25, 2021 Mar 30, 2021 Social Protection & 
Jobs 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Republic of Ghana Ministry of Gender Children 
and Social Protection, 
Ministry of Local 
Government and Rural 
Development (MLGRD) 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
To support the Government to expand and enhance social safety nets that improve the incomes and productivity of the 
poor 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-NewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 100.00 

Total Financing 100.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 100.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 100.00 

          IDA Credit 100.00 

   
Environmental and Social Risk Classification Concept Review Decision 

Moderate  Track I-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

 
1. The Republic of Ghana, with a population of about 30.4 million, is classified as lower-middle-income with a per 

capita income of US$5,413 (in 2017 PPP dollars) in 2019. Ghana achieved its current income status through strong, 

sustained economic growth. The country’s per capita income grew by an average of 1.5 percent per year between 1990 

and 1999, by 2.8 percent per year between 2000 and 2009, and by 4.3 percent between 2010 and 2019 (peaking at 11.3 

percent in 2011). Ghana’s economic growth performance during the 2000s is mainly attributed to the sharp increase in 

prices for its main commodity exports, cocoa and gold, and the start of commercial oil and gas production in 2011. 

 
2. The country’s favorable economic growth performance has been accompanied by a substantial reduction in the 

prevalence of poverty. Based on the national food poverty line, the extreme poverty rate fell from 36 percent in 1991/92 

to 16.5 percent in 2005/06 to 8.4 percent in 2012/13, allowing Ghana to meet the United Nations Millennium 

Development Goal of halving poverty by 2015.  

 
3. In 2016/17, measured using the international poverty line of $1.90 per day per person in 2011 PPP dollars, Ghana’s 

poverty rate was 13.6 percent. This level of poverty is substantially lower than the average level for Sub-Saharan Africa. It 

is also lower than the average for lower-middle income countries.1 Measured using the country’s official poverty lines, 

Ghana’s overall poverty rate in 2016/17 was 23.4 percent, whereas its extreme poverty rate was 8.2 percent.   

 
4. Poverty levels appear to differ markedly across areas within Ghana. Poverty levels are substantially higher in rural 

areas than in urban areas. In 2016/17, the overall poverty rate in rural areas was 39.5 percent, five times higher than the 

corresponding rate in urban areas, at 7.8 percent. The extreme poverty was 15.6 percent in rural areas, while it was just 

1 percent in urban areas. Overall and extreme poverty rates in 2016/17 are also markedly higher in the administrative 

regions of Volta, Upper East, Northern, and Upper West than in other parts of the country. These high-poverty regions are 

situated in the northern and eastern parts of Ghana.  

 
5. Spatial patterns in where infrastructure, services, and markets are lacking show strong overlap with the spatial 

pattern in where poverty levels are high, suggesting that these factors may be constraining households from achieving 


sufficiently high incomes to escape poverty.2 High-poverty regions also face adverse ecological conditions, which are 

considered to play an important role in constraining growth, development, and poverty reduction.3     

 
6. In recent years, the pace of poverty reduction has slowed, and the association between economic growth and 

poverty reduction has weakened. The COVID-19 pandemic and accompanying global economic crisis also serve as a major 

setback to Ghana’s prospects for further reductions in poverty.  

 
7. In October 2020, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) projected that Ghana’s real GDP for 2020 will grow by 

0.9 percent.4 In contrast, in October 2019 (before the pandemic), the IMF had forecast real GDP growth of 5.6 percent for 

Ghana in 2020.5 Micro-simulations suggest the pandemic and the Government of Ghana’s measures to control the spread 

of infection (mainly the partial lockdown of Ghana’s largest cities of Accra and Kumasi in April 2020) have contributed to 

large increases in poverty.6 They show that Accra, Kumasi, and other urban areas were hardest hit. They also show losses 

across the population, with larger losses (in percentage terms) for richer than poorer households, and the accrual of large 

losses by farm and nonfarm households in areas that were not locked down, due to interlinkages among markets. 

 
8. A telephone-based national survey of sample households conducted in June 2020 confirms that Ghanaians have 

suffered widespread and acute economic distress amid the pandemic.7 A majority of respondents said they had 

experienced a loss in income since mid-March 2020 when the Government began to introduce restrictions to control the 

local spread of infection. Those who received self-employment income were more likely to report a loss in income than 

those who received wage earnings. Those who received remittance income or other private transfers were more likely to 

report a loss in income than those who received cash or in-kind assistance from the government or nongovernmental 

organizations.  

 
9. In terms of how households were affected by the pandemic, 75–77 percent reported that they were severely 

affected by the suspension of schooling or by an increase in food prices, while 37–44 percent said they were severely 

affected by an increase in the price of nonfood goods and services or by a fall in the price of outputs. In addition, 23–25 

percent reported that they were severely affected by business failure or loss of employment.8,9 Only 1–5 percent of 

households had received any formal assistance, such as from government, NGOs, employers, or insurance.  

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 

 
10. Over the 2000s, the Government of Ghana, with development partner assistance, has progressively introduced, 

expanded, and strengthened social protection programs targeted at the poor and vulnerable. Ghana’s main social 

protection programs as defined by the National Social Protection Policy (2015) comprise (i) the Livelihood Empowerment 


Against Poverty (LEAP) cash transfer program, (ii) the Labor-Intensive Public Works (LIPW) program, (iii) the Ghana School 

Feeding Program (GSFP), (iv) the National Health Insurance Scheme (NHIS), and (v) the Education Capitation Grant.  

 
11. The Government has progressively invested in strengthening the design and delivery of its flagship safety net 

programs. Specifically, the LEAP Cash Transfer program was initiated in 2008 to provide unconditional cash transfers to 

needy households in impoverished areas of the country. The program originally used geographic and categorical targeting 

to identify needy beneficiary households. In recent years, these forms of targeting have been supplemented by proxy 

means test (PMT)-based targeting, applied after categorical targeting. Benefits are distributed every two months, through 

payment points in or near LEAP communities; benefits can also be collected from local branches of partnering financial 

institutions or through ATMs. The program currently reaches 332,000 needy households across the country. The estimated 

program coverage rate ranges from 1.5 to 5 percent of the population based on alternative sources of data (national 

household survey data, government administrative information). The program is highly pro-poor: 74 percent of 

beneficiaries are either extreme or moderate poor. Benefits are currently a function of eligible members in the household. 

Although the Government of Ghana (GoG) has revised the benefits up two times since program inception, benefits remain 

unindexed to price inflation. As such, the average benefit level as a proportion of total consumption of beneficiary 

households was 12.8 percent in 2016/17, lower than the proportions typically observed in cash transfer programs in other 

countries that have been documented to have had sizeable positive impacts on welfare.10 

 
12. In addition, the Labor Intensive Public Works program was initiated in 2011 and offers temporary labor earnings 

opportunities during the agricultural off-season to needy households. In so doing, it also supports the creation, 

rehabilitation, and maintenance of public or community infrastructure. Typical public works activities relate to rural feeder 

and access roads, basic water infrastructure (small earth dams and dugouts), and environmental degradation and climate 

change mitigation activities (reforestation and afforestation, catchment and watershed protection, and biodiversity 

conservation), collectively determined by local officials and communities and consistent with their medium-term 

development plans. Overall responsibility for administering LIPW lies with MLGRD. LIPW is currently targeted at districts 

and communities with the highest poverty levels. Within selected communities, individuals (one per household) self-select 

into the program. At least 60 percent of participants are expected to be women, achieved through community 

sensitization, outreach, conductive work activities, working conditions and hours, and amenities. Participants can work a 

maximum 90 days per year during the agriculture off-season, for up to two consecutive seasons. LIPW wages are pegged 

at the national daily minimum wage, which is adjusted yearly. Private contractors are contracted to manage the works. In 

the current fiscal year, the program has supported 32,300 households in 80 districts, mainly in northern Ghana. Ninety 

percent of LIPW works sites have been in rural communities. 

 
13. More recently, the GoG also piloted a Productive Inclusion (PI) program to enhance the income-generating 

potential of the poor and vulnerable in northern Ghana. It provided training in life, general business management, and 

specific enterprise/livelihood development skills. It also provided business capital grants amounting to the cedi equivalent 

of US$200 (provided in tranches after beneficiaries completed the full set of training). The pilot PI program reached 7,200 

beneficiaries, compared to an original target of 3,150 beneficiaries; 80 percent of beneficiaries were women, compared 

to an original target of 50 percent. Important lessons learned from the pilot included the need for a well-designed and -

implemented digital program MIS, greater information and facilitation for beneficiaries to access productive inputs and 


output markets, and further capacity building of actors at the district and community levels engaged in implementation. 

A tracer study of PI program beneficiaries under GSOP is currently underway.   

 
14. The GoG’s commitment to Social Protection is further evidenced in the establishment of the Ministry of Gender, 

Children, and Social Protection (MoGCSP) in 2013, with the mandate to coordinate social protection programming. In 

2015, a National Social Protection Policy was approved by the Government, which sets the vision and guides efforts in the 

sector, including increased financing and harmonization of programs and increased coordination across key ministries 

involved in the social protection sector, namely MOGCSP, the Ministry of Local Government and Rural Development 

(MLGRD), Ministry of Education, and the National Health Insurance Authority (NHIA) and across different government 

administrative levels (national, regional, and district). 

 

15. The Government has also introduced several system-level reforms and innovations to strengthen program 

delivery performance. Central among them is the continued rollout of the Ghana National Household Registry (GNHR), a 

national social registry; use of digital benefit payment systems; the use of digital program management information 

systems (MIS’s) covering the full program delivery chain; and the rollout of an integrated unified citizen engagement and 

grievance redress system, called the Single Window Citizen Engagement Service (SWCES). These reforms and innovations 

have improved program implementation performance, including transparency and integrity.  

 
16. These program and system-level improvements have been supported by various World Bank projects. Specifically, 

the $139 million Ghana Social Opportunities Project or GSOP (P115247), which was implemented between 2010–18, 

supported the Government in administering and strengthening LEAP, LIPW, and the pilot Productive Inclusion program. 

GSOP was rated by the Independent Evaluation Group (IEG) as either satisfactory or substantial across all dimensions 

examined.11 The Ghana Productive Safety Net Project (GPSNP - P164603), which is currently under implementation by the 

Government, is a $60 million IPF operation that builds on GSOP. GPSNP became effective in July 2019 and supports the 

Government to strengthen its social safety net system toward improving the welfare and productivity of the poor. GPSNP 

is also supported by the United Kingdom Foreign, Commonwealth, and Development Office (UK FCDO) through a 

Recipient- and Bank-Executed Trust Fund of £21 million.12 The project’s support has been coordinated with that of other 

development partners, including the European Union (EU), the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), and the United 

States Agency for International Development (USAID). The project comprises of five main components: (i) Productive 

Inclusion, (ii) LEAP Cash Transfers, (iii) LIPW program, (iv) SP Systems Strengthening, and (v) Project Management.  

 
17. These IDA-financed projects have contributed to strengthening the design and implementation of the LEAP 

program and its underlying system, including the capacity of the MoGCSP, the MLGRD, and other government and private 

actors involved in implementation. Recent such initiatives have included the development and implementation of a digital 

LEAP MIS, PMT formula and PMT-based targeting, and digital payments.13 Under LIPW, improvements have included a 

digital program MIS; digital wage payments; capacity development of district officials, private contractors, and community 

facilitators; and information, communication, and engagement (ICE) activities, including grievance redressal. The projects 

have covered the full program costs of works contracts and beneficiary wages.  

 


18. In addition, the PI program is currently being scaled up in northern Ghana under the GPSNP, incorporating 

measures to improve program implementation based on lessons learned from GSOP. The program targets some of the 

poorest districts and rural communities. Within these communities, LEAP and LIPW households receive preferential 

treatment for PI participation. Under GPSNP, the PI program aims to reach a total of 18,000 beneficiaries; at present, 

8,000 beneficiaries are receiving training and are expected to receive the first tranches of their capital grants shortly. As 

under the pilot, most beneficiaries are women, driven by a combination of endogenous household decision-making 

regarding which members work where and conducive program rules and procedures.  The PI program supports both farm 

and nonfarm income-generating activities; the former is supported through links to the World Bank’s Ghana Commercial 

Agriculture Project (P162525). Behavioral interventions to support improved financial decision-making of PI beneficiaries 

and their households are also being tested with the assistance of ideas42, an international nonprofit consulting firm 

focused on behavioral program design. The welfare effects of the PI intervention are being evaluated by the World Bank 

based on a randomized phase-in design.  

 

19. Systems Strengthening was also supported through these projects. Specifically, the GNHR was established to 

improve targeting for social protection programs and other poverty alleviation initiatives in Ghana. Launched in 2015 

under GSOP, GNHR completed data collection for two out of the three targeted regions. Under GSOP, GNHR completed 

data collection for the Upper East and Upper West Regions, the poorest regions in Ghana. Subsequently, through GPSNP, 

GNHR completed data collection for 400,000 households in October 2020 in three Northern Regions,14 and currently 

preparing to begin data collection in two additional regions – Volta and Central. GSOP and GPSNP were both instrumental 

in developing a fully functional management information system to track enumeration activities, including the use of 

geographical information systems. The GNHR system was also used to collect emergency data during the COVID-19 

pandemic when data was required to identify poor and vulnerable people within the lockdown areas who needed support. 

 
20. The Government initiated the SWCES in 2017 to streamline grievance redress mechanisms for social protection 

beneficiaries, but also to address other vulnerabilities handled by the MoGCSP. The SWCES includes (i) a toll-free hotline 

which receives calls from across the country, with agents responding between 8am and 5pm on weekdays, and a voice 

mail system after hours and on weekends; and (ii) a digitized referral directory, which is continuously updated. During the 

COVID-19 pandemic in Ghana, the call center was instrumental in receiving grievances from vulnerable individuals who 

required food aid during the lock down period.  A total of 1,315 out of 1,978 cases were from individuals who required 

aid. 

 
21. GPSNP has also supported the Government in developing and implementing an information, communication, and 

engagement strategy in relation to the pandemic for social safety net beneficiaries and communities and implementing 

health protective measures in the program delivery chain to protect personnel, beneficiaries, and communities from 

COVID-19 infection, including measures to comply with infection mitigation directives by the Government. 

 
22. GPSNP was restructured in August 2020 to intensify the Government’s social safety net response to the pandemic. 

Specifically, funds have been reallocated within the project to allow for previous and planned emergency cash transfers 

to existing LEAP program beneficiaries and to new beneficiary groups. The reallocation also allowed for, among other 

things, accelerated, intensive efforts under GNHR and SWCES. To date, the project has disbursed $40 million, and expects 

to exhaust its financing by March 2022.  

 
14 Ghana’s administrative system had 10 regions during GSOP implementation but expanded to 16 at the onset of GPSNP. As such GNHR will have 

to reach all 16 regions of Ghana, instead of the previous 10. 


23. The Government has requested GPSNP 2 toward the following ends: 

 

• Scale up PI, LIPW, and LEAP to cover more households that are poor, vulnerable, or hard-hit by the COVID-induced 
economic crisis in both rural and urban areas; 

• Strengthen the social protection program delivery infrastructure, including the completion of GNHR; 

• Continue the further integration of ICT solutions into the program delivery chain, including monitoring; and 

• Integrate structures and processes that improve the shock-resilience and -responsiveness of the social protection 
system. 

24. These directions consistent with the priorities and directions of the Government’s overall COVID response. They 

are also consistent with the aims and directions in the World Bank’s Board documents WBG COVID-19 Crisis Response 

Approach Paper – Saving Lives, Scaling-up Impact and Getting Back on Track and Protecting the Poor and Vulnerable: 

Social Response Framework for COVID19.  

 
Relationship to CPF 

 
25. The World Bank’s Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) for Ghana, published in 2018, identifies four pathways 

toward the achievement of the World Bank’s twin goals of eliminating extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity in 

Ghana. These pathways comprise (i) addressing inequality and vulnerability, (ii) improving macroeconomic management 

and economic diversification, (iii) increasing better-quality jobs and opportunities, and (iv) strengthening governance and 

government effectiveness.15 Consistent with this SCD, the World Bank’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Ghana, 

currently under preparation, identifies three focus areas: (i) improving equitable access to services for improved human 

capital development, (ii) enhancing conditions for diversified growth and job creation, and (iii) promoting resilient 

development. Under these focus areas, specific objectives have been formulated.  

 
26. The proposed efforts under GPSNP 2 to strengthen and expand cash transfers, productive inclusion (cash grants; 

business and life skill training; savings support; access to inputs, services, and markets), labor-intensive public works 

(involving rehabilitation of water resources infrastructure, forestation, and conservation), and health insurance to needy 

households are consistent with the objectives of all three CPF focus areas. Specifically, the project’s proposed efforts are 

in accordance with the following CPF objectives: (i) improved utilization of health services for the poor and vulnerable 

(objective 1.2), (ii) improved connectivity for access to markets and productive opportunities (objective 2.1), (iii) increased 

financial inclusion and access to financial services (objective 2.3), (iv) enhanced market relevant skills and income 

opportunities (objective 2.4), (v) improved adoption of sustainable natural resource management (objective 3.2), and (vi) 

improved household preparedness for shocks (objective 3.3).  

 
 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
To support the Government to expand and enhance social safety nets that improve the incomes and productivity of 
the poor 

 

 

Key Results (From PCN) 
 

1. Number of households that receive the full set of support through the Productive Inclusion (PI) program and start 
a new, or enhance an existing, income-generating activity  

2. Number of households that participate in the Labor-Intensive Public Works (LIPW) program 
3. Number of households that receive cash benefits from the Livelihood Empowerment Against Poverty (LEAP) 

program 
4. Number of social protection programs that use data from the Ghana National Household Registry (GNHR) to 

target benefits and services to intended beneficiaries 
 
 
D. Concept Description 

 
27. The proposed GPSNP 2 will be an IPF of $100 million, spanning four years. It is composed of six components (with 

tentative allocations) as follows:  

• Component 1: Productive Inclusion program (US$15 million) 

• Component 2: Labor-Intensive Public Works program (US$25 million) 

• Component 3: Livelihood Empowerment Against Poverty program (US$25 million) 

• Component 4: Social Protection System Strengthening (US$28 million) 

• Component 5: Project Management, Coordination, and Capacity Building (US$7 million) 

• Component 6: Contingency Emergency Response (US$0 million) 

 
28. Components 1-3 represent the main interventions supported by GPSNP 2. Components 4 and 5 underpin the main 

interventions by supporting social protection system functioning and improvement. Important initiatives such as GNHR, 

SEWES, and the extension of health insurance coverage are reflected under the system-related components, as are, more 

generally, monitoring and evaluation; information, communication, engagement, and grievance redressal; capacity 

development across implementing ministries and administrative levels (national, region, district, and community); and 

reforms to the system to enhance shock resilience and responsiveness. Component 6 offers built-in flexibility to the project 

to rapidly reallocate financing to support needed relief and recovery initiatives for the poor and vulnerable in the event 

of a future disaster or crisis that affects the country.         

Project Beneficiaries 
29. The interventions under GPSNP 2 aim to protect and raise the welfare of poor and vulnerable households across 

Ghana. Reaching the poor and vulnerable will follow, in part, from targeting interventions to the poorest communities, in 

both rural and urban areas. Direct beneficiaries of some of the programs (for example, LIPW and PI) will be at the individual 

level. The digital MIS’s for the various programs, GNHR, and sample-based field surveys by contracted third parties will 

provide beneficiary information at both the household and individual levels, allowing for breakdowns of beneficiary 

numbers by different socioeconomic and demographic characteristics (for example, location, gender, age, disability status, 

welfare status).  

 
30. Over the project implementation period, GPSNP 2 will support the Government to reach the following cumulative 

beneficiary numbers: (i) 45,000 households under PI, (ii) 45,000 households under LIPW, and (iii) 400,000 households 

under LEAP. GPSNP 2 will also support the extension of NHIS coverage and facilitation services to access and use health 

services to PI, LIPW, and LEAP beneficiary populations.        

 
Legal Operational Policies                                  Triggered? 

Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50 No 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60 No 

 
Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts 
.  

 
The Environmental Risk Rating is moderate. The environmental risks and impacts expected from the LIPW subprojects, such 
as rehabilitation and maintenance of small earth dams, dugouts, and rural feeder and access roads; cultivation of fruit trees 
and tree crops as part of the climatic change initiatives and provision of water, household toilets and community solid waste 
collection services will present low to moderate environment risks. The potential risks and impacts are, however, specific 
and may include erosion, siltation, flooding, dust generation, road safety hazards, waterborne diseases, generation and 
disposal of spoils and waste, and health and safety issues. Cultivation of fruit trees and crops may require the use agro-
chemicals. These expected risks and impacts are envisaged to be low to medium in magnitude, temporary, site-specific and 
largely reversible.  
 
The Social Risk Rating is moderate. This classification is based on the potential social risks and impacts and the capacity of 
the implementing agencies to manage the risks and impacts. The project builds on experiences and lessons from the 
ongoing GPSNP (P164603) and successor project GSOP (P115247) and seeks to improve productivity, social inclusion, 
expanding income earning opportunities to poor households, and providing relief to extremely poor households due to the 
COVID-19 pandemic.  
 
While the project activities are expected to have positive impacts, some social risks and impacts are envisaged. The 
proposed project activities are small-scale; however, the activities that may generate social risks include the proposed 
rehabilitation and maintenance of rural feeder and access roads and small earth dams and dugouts; construction of of 
WASH facilities and provision of cash grants and cash transfers to extremely poor households. Other social risks and impacts 
envisaged include project ability to manage local labour issues and localized economic displacement arising from land use; 
addressing community health and safety issues, ensuring social inclusion and preventing elite capture of project 
interventions; and putting in place robust framework for Stakeholder engagement and addressing grievances and SEA/SH 
prevention. 
 

 
  

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
NIGER - AGRICULTURAL AND LIVESTOCK TRANSFORMATION PROJECT (P164509) 

 
 

  
Mar 04, 2018 Page 1 of 18  

     

 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 06-Mar-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSC23726 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Niger P164509  NIGER - AGRICULTURAL 
AND LIVESTOCK 
TRANSFORMATION 
PROJECT (P164509) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA Aug 13, 2018 Nov 15, 2018 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Plan Ministry of Agriculture and 
Livestock 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The Development Objective (PDO) is “to increase productivity and commercialization for selected agriculture and 
livestock value chains and strengthen the country’s capacity to respond to eligible crisis or emergency”. 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 100.00 

Total Financing 100.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 100.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 100.00 

          IDA Credit 100.00 

   
 

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 



B - Partial Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 
 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
 

1. Niger is a large, landlocked country in the arid and semi-arid Sahel region. The country’s 
population is estimated at over 22 million, half of it less than 15 years old and growing rapidly at about 
3.9 percent per year.. Two-thirds of the country is inhospitable desert, and more than 84 percent of the 
population is concentrated in the areas along the Niger River in the southwestern part of the country 
and along its long southern border with Nigeria. The climate is mostly arid; annual rainfall in 85 percent 
of the country’s area is less than 350 mm.  However, some areas in the south and along the Niger river 
get some 600 mm of rain, making rainfed agriculture with dryland crops possible. 
  
2. Niger’s political institutions have been strengthened since the restoration of constitutional 
order in 2011. The Government of Niger (GoN) is pursuing important measures to combat organized 
crime and terrorism and to promote the safety and property rights of its citizens. Military and law 
enforcement agencies have created new crisis response units, and border security has been 
strengthened in close collaboration with regional and international partners. As a result, both unrest in 
various zones of Niger and insecurity in the border zone with Mali have diminished. Nevertheless, the 
country continues to face significant risks related to domestic and regional instability, as well as 
organized crime and transnational terrorism. The rise of Boko Haram in Nigeria and the recent expansion 
of its operations to neighboring countries, including Niger, is cause for concern.  Further, there are now 
over 100,000 refugees from Nigeria in the Diffa region.   

 
3. Niger is a founding member of the Sahel Alliance, an organization that committed its members 
and development partners to combine their efforts and better coordinate their actions to create the 
conditions for sustainable growth and lasting peace.  It aims to achieve more effective aid coordination 
and enhance the support from development partners to the region, in order to more generally 
contribute to stabilizing the security situation and eradicating poverty, by developing solutions for rural 
areas, creating employment for young people, improving energy infrastructure and the fight against 
climate change, and strengthening governance. 

 
4. Since 2000 Niger has had a good track record for macroeconomic stability. It has embarked with 
some success on reforms to foster private sector-led economic growth, reduce its debt, and improve 
social indicators. Niger has significant mineral wealth, including uranium and gold, and has started 
exporting refined oil products. These three commodities account for approximately 70 percent of the 


country’s exports. However, despite improvements, Niger continues to face persistent, long-term 
development challenges linked to its large geographical size, home to a largely rural population often 
beyond the reaches of public services, where the bulk of the poor reside. 

 
5. Although poverty incidence is declining, Niger remains among the poorest countries in Africa, 
with an estimated average per capita gross domestic product (GDP) in current prices of US$420 in 2014, 
well below the average GDP of US$1,600 for Sub-Saharan Africa (IMF, 2017).  In the 2016 Human 
Development Index, Niger was ranked second to last out of 188 countries.  Despite a decline in overall 
poverty incidence, the rural poor became poorer relative to their urban counterparts during the 2005-
14 period. Their per capita consumption relative to that of the urban poor declined from 60 percent to 
43 percent. Lack of economic diversification, volatile agricultural growth, low access to physical and 
institutional infrastructure, and weak human capital base limits economic opportunities, especially in 
rural area. 

 
6. Food insecurity and malnutrition remain a challenge. Overall, growth of major food production 
was slightly less than the population growth over the period 1980-2011, with the increase in the food 
deficit being filled by imports. Malnutrition is a big challenge with. An estimated 2.5 million people in 
Niger are chronically food-insecure and unable to meet their basic food requirements even during years 
of average agricultural production. During periods of constrained access to food, millions more can 
quickly fall into acute transitory food insecurity. Over the past years, Niger made some progress on 
nutrition indicators, but the country still lags substantially behind other low-income countries and Sub-
Saharan African counterparts. Malnutrition accounts for more than one-third of child mortality in the 
country and 43 percent of children under five years old suffers from stunting and wasting. Malnutrition 
remains high due to a host of health, sanitation, and behavioral factors, worsened by recurrent food 
shortages.    

 
7. Niger is vulnerable to climate shocks, with drought being the most important risk in terms of 
frequency and impacts. A strong correlation exists between changes in gross domestic product (GDP) 
and the meteorological conditions, demonstrating the fragility of the economy to weather-related 
events, particularly in the agriculture sector.1 The food crisis resulting from the 2011 drought affected 
almost half of the country’s population. While uncertainty remains regarding longer-term climate change 
projections (2050-2100), short- and medium-term rainfall deficits will most likely continue to plague 
Niger’s agriculture sector, and the frequency and severity of droughts may remain the same or increase. 
The agriculture, forestry, and other land uses (AFOLU) sector accounts for 89 percent of total greenhouse 
gas (GHG) emissions, while the energy sector accounts for 9 percent. The national priority for the AFOLU 
sector in Niger’s Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC) relates to improving the resilience 
of the agriculture, animal husbandry, and forestry subsectors. For Niger, the adaptation options 
considered as top priority are those that will permit higher co-benefits with respect to climate change 
mitigation, particularly those good adaptation practices and techniques that will permit carbon 
sequestration and reduction of GHG emissions while improving productivity. Niger’s climate change 
strategy is based on the vision of climate-smart agriculture (CSA) and access to modern energy services 
for everyone in 2030.    

 

                                            
1 The 2013 World Bank agriculture sector risk assessment report indicated that Niger’s GDP growth rate dipped into 
negative territory eight times between 1984 and 2010, and drought was largely responsible. 


8. Women and young people are marginalized. The main factors that significantly impede the 
economic empowerment of rural women in the agricultural sector include: difficulties in accessing 
natural and productive resources, the overwork of rural women as they are in charge of both productive 
and reproductive/ household tasks, lack of women's leadership and decision-making, and limited access 
to information and education/ training.  Similarly, rural youth are mostly un-educated and lack 
professional qualifications. Their low social status and the difficulties they encounter to access economic 
opportunities limit their participation in decision-making at community and family level. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 

9. Agriculture (crops, livestock, and fisheries) is very important for the economy and employment. 
It represents more than 40 percent of the national GDP and occupies nearly 90 percent of the active 
population. The performance of the sector is unstable from one year to another because of its high 
exposure to agronomic, climatic, health, and more recently security risks.  The shocks that follow 
agricultural and livestock crises have a strong impact on household incomes,  the general budget  of the 
State and the growth rate at the overall Nigerien economy.  
 

10. Crop subsector.  Crop production is only possible in the relatively humid areas in the south-west 
of the country (an area of some 12 million hectares; about 10 percent of the national territory). 
Additionally, there are some 19 million hectares mainly pasture lands. Most crops are produced under 
rainfed conditions with low yields, including millet, sorghum, and other cereals (including coarse/feed 
grains), as well as legumes (cowpeas, groundnuts) in more modest amounts. The remainder of crop 
production grown by irrigated conditions, including rice and vegetables.  The yields of irrigated crops, 
however, are still below potential. The average size of a family farm unit is about 5 hectares, producing 
mostly for household consumption and little marketable surplus.  The production of food/feed grains, of 
which by-products are used for animal feeding (e.g. shredded millet/corn stalks) as extensive livestock 
production, is common to each farm and remains the customary production model. Agricultural 
productivity remains low largely because of a highly variable agro-climate from year to year with a 
constrained access to inputs such as certified seeds and fertilizers.  More entrepreneurial farmers are 
facing a weak financial market, limiting access to credit, and suffering from poor access to quality 
phytosanitary products, limited familiarity with modern production practices, and the difficulty of 
accessing urban markets due to lack of aggregation, and a lack of adequate transport infrastructure and 
transport means.  
 

11. Livestock subsector. It is a key sector of the Nigerien economy that contributes 13 percent to the 
national GDP and provides 7 percent of the country's export earnings. The national herd is estimated at 
more than 10 million cattle, 24 million small ruminants, and a little over a million and a half camels.2 
Three main types of livestock farming co-exist in Niger: (i) the "pastoral systems" characterized by animal 
mobility (extensive breeding systems for camels, small ruminants, and cattle), (ii) the traditional livestock 
farming systems practiced by villagers throughout the country, for ruminants and poultry, and (iii) 

                                            
2 Despite the mortality associated with successive pastoral crises, livestock numbers have been steadily increasing 
over the past ten years, rising from 11.5 TLUs in 2005 to 14.5 TLUs in 2012. [Tropical Livestock Units/Unités de bétail 
tropical (TLUs/UBT); a TLU implies a live weight of 250 kg]. The most significant increase involved cattle (+ 38 
percent) and goats (+ 22 percent). Equines and camels had the lowest rates of increase (4 and 7 percent, 
respectively). While the increase represents a larger potential food reserve, these animals also need to be fed in 
what is often a fodder-constrained environment. 



"improved livestock systems" (mainly semi-intensive and intensive peri-urban poultry and ruminant 
fattening). Other types of farming (quite marginal, but diversified) include beekeeping, rabbit breeding, 
etc. 
 

12. Fisheries subsector. National consumption of fish is only in the order of about 2 kg per inhabitant 
per year, implying a total demand of about 44,000 tons per year.  Production between 2012 and 2017 
fluctuated within a range of 27,000 to 47,000 tons.  Most of the catches from Lake Chad are exported to 
Nigeria (in smoked form).  Some fish are imported fresh or frozen from Mali, Nigeria, Senegal, Benin, and 
Côte d'Ivoire.  Potential for import substitution exists. There are currently about 70,000 people employed 
in this subsector, involving fishermen, processors, and traders, and the estimated contribution to GDP is 
about 0.7 percent. Previous projects financed by other donors have demonstrated that there can be 
relatively high fish productivity in ponds (more than 200 kg/ha/year in many ponds particularly for 
catfish, Carp, and Lake Chad perch).  Also, there exist some successful local initiatives for community 
management of fisheries. Fish output could be increased, including particularly with an expansion of 
aquaculture, while conserving fishery resources and the natural resources on which these are based.  Key 
actions would include investments in water management, particularly of excess water during the rainy 
season (continuing investments or similar to some of those under PRODEX) along with improved 
extension and transfer of technology.  
 
13. Extension and advisory services, support to processing and marketing, and availability of 
financing are weak. These constrain agriculture development.  Some of the factors explaining the weak 
status of extension are: weak human resources, limited research along with limited research and 
extension linkages, unclear extension messages, limited specialized services to support crop quality, 
animal health, and food safety; limited transport resources and operational budgets to visit farmers and 
their fields/livestock, and low use of information and communication technology (ICT). The above factors 
combine to limit effective coverage of crop and livestock extension to support production.  Similarly, 
bottlenecks in the various value chains limit support to value addition on production, such as with 
processing or packaging units of products of animal and vegetable origin, and the weakness of the inter-
professions.  However, opportunities exist as proven by private or professional initiatives regarding milk, 
dried meat, hides and skins, cowpeas, onions, sesame, nut-grass, etc. Finally, financing for the sector is 
lacking. Banks are reluctant to take risks to finance the agriculture and livestock operations, and micro-
finance institutions are weak. 
 

14. Significant water resources exist but are insufficiently used. The limited use of water is a major 
constraint for crop production.  It is estimated that only 1 percent of surface runoff and 15 percent of 
renewable groundwater are currently used, and that less than 30 percent of potentially irrigable land is 
currently irrigated.  Water resources consist of large surface water networks as well as large renewable 
groundwater reserves of around 2.5 billion m3, and 2,000 billion m3 of non-renewable water reserves. 
This water potential is underutilized. Only the Niger River flows permanently throughout the year, while 
five other large rivers feeding the Niger river flow only part of the year. There are also about a thousand 
ponds, including 175 permanent ones that are mostly used by livestock herders for watering their cattle.  

 
15. Other constraints for agriculture development include: (i) institutional, legislative and regulatory 
deficiencies (means and capacity of intervention of the State services, including some of its laboratories 
for analysis and diagnosis, unsuitable texts and/or not-applied data and unused monitoring/evaluation 
systems); (ii) low level of organization of sector actors (POs, unstructured IPs and other cooperatives 

without economic organization capacity); (iii) lack of technical and economic benchmarks on the 
intensification of farming and livestock systems; (iv) difficult access to advisory support (low coverage 
and weak messages of the extension network and local veterinary services) and quality production inputs 
(low access to improved seeds, livestock/poultry feed capacity limited and uncontrolled); (v) low genetic 
potential of the most common plant varieties and animal breeds or under-valued potential; (vi) 
inadequate investment and support for the sector (lack of industrial-scale infrastructure and outdated 
equipment for production, processing, storage, transport and marketing, low value of by-products); (vii) 
overexploitation and non-sustainable use of land resources; (viii) limited decentralization and land 
insecurity; and (ix) national system for preventing and managing crises (of climatic, sanitary, and 
commercial origin) that is not well adapted or developed.  

 
16. Main assets of the agriculture sector. These include: (i) a substantial potential for irrigated 
farming, (ii) the presence of a numerically large and diversified herd with untapped potential for 
increased productivity through animal health, feed, genetic improvements, and better husbandry 
practices; (iii) the presence of plant varieties and animal breeds recognized for their adaptive and 
productive potential in their agro-climatic environment; (iv) traditional know-how and good experience 
of producers in certain areas (flood recession cultivation, livestock fattening, artisanal milk production, 
poultry); (v) competitiveness of certain export sectors (onions, cattle/meat); and (vi) important sectoral 
contribution to the fight against poverty (the main source of household income), and to food and 
nutrition security. 

 
 

Relationship to CPF 
 

17. The proposed project is fully aligned with the Niger Country Partnership Framework (CPF) and 
the Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD). The proposed project is aligned with the CPF and SCD as it 
would contribute to poverty alleviation and improved food security through increased farm productivity 
and value addition in selected agricultural value chains, thus improving rural livelihoods. It would 
generate employment in general and in particular for women and young people in the targeted areas. 
The SCD underlines that “improving the productivity in agriculture remains a first priority for poverty 
reduction.”  The CPF has an overarching goal of empowering women, while engaging with men as allies, 
to bring down the unsustainable population growth rate in Niger and to enable development policies to 
succeed. In the medium term, reduced demographic pressures are expected to free up scarce public 
resources to fund services, such as health and education and enable further empowerment of women 
and girls in a self-sustaining virtuous circle. Within this overarching logic, the FY18-21 CPF, approved by 
the Board on April 10th, 2018, focuses on the importance of boosting agricultural productivity, 
diversifying exports, and raising incomes in the rural sector where 80 percent of the population live. 
Investments in the agricultural sector, including livestock and fisheries, are therefore essential, such as 
through the proposed project. Specifically, yields can and should be increased, including, for example, 
via use of more productive varieties, small-scale irrigation, agroforestry and intercropping, which the 
project would emphasize, while increasing the involvement of youth and women.  
 
18. The proposed project is also aligned with the Government’s sector strategy in support of 
agriculture and livestock.  The strategy is described in the Plan for Economic and Social Development II 
(PDES II), focused on "food security and sustainable agricultural development," implemented in 
particular through the 3N (“Nigeriens feed Nigeriens") Initiative. The Initiative aims to contribute to the 

overall overarching goal of eradicating hunger, while helping to improve the productivity and income of 
farming households, especially the most vulnerable. The approach is also intended to operationalize the 
Rural Transformation Program of the Sustainable Development and Inclusive Growth Strategy (SDDIC). 
It contributes to the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) adopted in 2015 by the 
United Nations World Assembly, including SDGs 2 and 1. The general orientation of the proposed project 
is also in line with the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Plan (CAADP), the ECOWAS 
Common Agricultural Policy (ECOWAP), and the Agricultural Policy of Africa (PAU; UEMOA). 

 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 

19. The Development Objective (PDO) is “to increase productivity and commercialization for selected 
agriculture and livestock value chains and strengthen the country’s capacity to respond to eligible crisis 
or emergency”. This objective is fully aligned with the Government's vision for agricultural and livestock 
development. 

 
Key Results (From PCN) 

 
20. Key performance indicators include: (i) increased productivity of project-targeted agriculture and 
livestock systems: this would be measured based on area irrigated and increased yields (kg per hectare 
or per head), including the reduction of losses due to the most prevalent animal diseases; (ii) incremental 
sales in targeted value chains, including for dairy/milk, cattle/meat, fish, poultry, onions, and niébé 
(aggregated over all the targeted value chains); and (iii) reduction in the Government’s response time to 
agriculture and livestock sector-related emergencies including sanitary crises. In addition, the following 
two core indicators regarding direct beneficiaries would be measured: (i) number of small-scale 
agriculture producers and sedentary livestock rearing and fish farming households benefiting from 
project interventions in the project-targeted production basins, particularly the vulnerable groups (e.g., 
women and youths); and (ii) beneficiary satisfaction rate with the quality of project-supported services, 
as a partial measure of citizens’ engagement in the Project. The detailed results framework would be 
developed during the course of preparation. Adequate provision would be made in terms of human and 
financial resources for the design of thorough M&E activities as part of project preparation. A baseline 
survey would be conducted to inform indicators regarding the reference situation at project inception. 
 

D. Concept Description 
 

21. The World Bank's Agriculture and Livestock Portfolio in Niger currently includes the following 
projects: (i) Export Promotion Project (PRODEX) which ended in October 2017 and for which an 
Implementation Completion Report is currently being  prepared; (ii) Additional Financing for the West 
Africa Agricultural Productivity Project, approved in 2017; (iii) Regional Support Project to the Sahel 
Irrigation Initiative/Project d’Appui Regional à l’Initiative pour l’irrigation au Sahel (SIIP/PARIIS) approved 
in December 2017; (iv) Climate-Smart Agriculture Project/Projet d’Appui à l’Agriculture Sensible aux 
risques Climatiques (CSA/PASEC) approved in 2016; (v) Sahel Regional Pastoral Support Project (PRAPS-
Niger) in operation since fiscal year 2016 to support pastoral livestock production; (vi) Phase 3 of the 
Community Action Program/Programme d’Actions Communautaires (CAP3/PAC3), with its recently 
approved additional funding in 2017 and scheduled to close  in December 2019; (vii) the Regional Disease 
Surveillance Systems Enhancement Project (REDISSE) is strengthening the national cross-sectoral 
capacity for disease surveillance and epidemic preparedness,;  (viii) a rural development policy operation 

being disbursed over 2017-2018 under IDA 18. This project will provide financial support for the 
implementation of the PDES II whose  objectives include “increasing rural productivity growth” and 
“supporting growth enabling sectors.” It has numerous actions planned, including in energy, mineral 
exploitation, financial sector, etc.; it also seeks to provide input subsidies and improve agricultural 
extension in pilot communes; and (ix) The Competitive and Growth Support Project, which is closing on 
March 31, 2019 and  includes the rehabilitation and upgrading of slaughterhouses and their respective 
environments for developing meat production. In spite of the above projects/investments, there still 
remains a significant gap in terms of the overall performance of the agriculture and livestock sectors.  
 
22. Scope of intervention and complementarity with other projects. The PIMELAN would capitalize 
on the lessons learnt and best practices by past and on-going Bank projects. The targeted production 
systems and activities would be complementary to those supported by other Bank-financed projects. On 
the crop production side, the project would focus on increasing irrigated production with a focus on 
onions, and horticulture production (tomatoes in particular); it would also focus on fodder production as 
a link to the livestock production. It would capitalize on the results of the Small Irrigation Project (SMP; 
closed in FY 2009) and PRODEX (closed in October 2017, which already built on SMP) as well as PASEC 
that focuses on climate-smart agriculture (CSA) and PARIIS that focuses on irrigation. Regarding livestock, 
the project would focus on sedentary livestock systems to enhance cattle and small ruminant production 
and meat processing, the milk and poultry value chains (meat and eggs), and fish farming and processing; 
it would complement PRAPS-Niger which focuses on pastoral systems. The PIMELAN would deal with 
value chains in an integrated manner; it would focus on processing and marketing activities downstream 
of production. It would also address as a major thrust the financing constraints of the sector through TA 
support to partner financial institutions (PFIs) and funding for matching grants to producers and other 
V/C participants, following mechanisms already used by other projects. It would also coordinate with IFC 
and complement on-going or planned IFC work on agri-business development. 

 
23. The proposed Project would be structured as an Investment Project Financing (IPF), funded by 
an IDA credit in the amount of US$100 million over a six-year period. The Project would have three 
interrelated components: (i) improving the quality of public and private services in support of agriculture 
and livestock; (ii) support to public and private investments for improved production, processing, and 
market access for selected agriculture and livestock value chains; and (iii) crisis prevention & 
management, and project coordination. The project would be complementary to the ongoing agriculture 
and livestock projects. 
 

24. Integrated value chain approach. The rationale for the proposed project is to boost productivity 
in the selected agriculture and livestock value chains (V/Cs). The selected V/Cs would be: (i) Crop 
production: irrigated onions and vegetables; and (ii) Animal production: cattle and small ruminant meat, 
cows, poultry, goat and camel milk, hides and skins, as well as fish farming. This project would adopt an 
integrated value chain approach for the selected V/Cs from production to marketing on the domestic 
and regional markets or export to international markets. It would support financing through small credits 
or grants for services and activities of entrepreneurs who are ready to engage in intensification of their 
production, development of value-added activities to primary production through diversification of 
processing activities, and the logistics between agricultural production and the market (including 
processing, storage, and transport). This would require the close involvement of Partner financial 
institutions. 

25. The project would address cross-cutting priorities.  The main cross-cutting priorities proposed to 
be addressed under the project are: (i) capacity-building of extension and advisory support for crop and 
animal production; of input supply services (including seeds, feed supplements, and genetics); and of 
veterinary services; (ii) land restoration and sustainable land management; (iii) empowerment of women 
and youth; (iv) climate change mitigation and adaptation; (v) public health and nutrition; and (vi) 
environmental and social safeguards. 
 
26. Preparatory activities. Before making a final choice of actions to be selected, preparation work 
would identify the difficulties and constraints to be considered to guarantee the success of the project 
through a detailed mapping of the sectors and locations already covered by other IDA projects and those 
of other partners. The authorities would determine whether the priority actions should relate to sectors 
and/or locations not supported so far, or the promotion and scaling up of sectors already supported and 
promising in terms of supply of the domestic and export market. Due to the diversity of beneficiaries, 
and therefore the needs that would ultimately be identified (in terms of production sectors but also of 
typology of actors), a selective approach would be preferred, with a preferential focus on women and 
young people (see below). 

 
27. There have been recent developments in the Agriculture Sector in Niger, such as the reform of 
agriculture extension services and facilitation of the policy environment for investing in the sector.  On 
August 2, 2017, three important decrees were issued. These created: (a) the National System of 
Agricultural Extension/Système National de Conseil Agricole (NSAE/SNCA); (b) the Promotion Agency for 
Agricultural Extension/l’Agence de Promotion du Conseil Agricole (PAAC/APCA); and (c) the Investment 
Fund for Food Security and Nutrition/Fonds d’Investissement pour la Sécurité Alimentaire et 
Nutritionnelle (IFFSN/FISAN). A Committee has been set up to help with the operationalization of these 
bodies and to develop a roadmap, including the preparation of procedural manuals, the recruitment of 
the DGs and the technical directorates, etc.  PIMELAN would provide support to make them fully 
operational and effective. 

 
28. The preliminary project description is presented below.  
 

Component 1: Improving the quality of services in support of agriculture and livestock--US$ 25 million  
 

29. The objective of this Component would be to increase the productivity of agriculture and 
sedentary livestock farming systems for selected crops and non-pastoral value chains (milk, meat, fish, 
poultry, onions, and niébé) through the strengthening of the capacity and efficiency of services which 
would provide more and effective support and advice to producers. In doing so, it would build sustainable 
human, institutional, and policy capacity for key public and private actors in the agriculture and livestock 
(including aquaculture) sectors, in order to improve crop and animal husbandry practices (and therefore 
output), including climate-smart agriculture (CSA) practices, as well as improved access and delivery of 
quality extension services (crop production, animal health, feed, and breeding), which would also help 
farmers to strengthen their resilience and adaptive capacity to climate-related hazards.  Activities would 
include:  
 

(a) Support to crop and livestock extension and advisory services in order to increase 
producers' knowledge and capacities to facilitate increased productivity. Knowledge 
developed under the West Africa Agricultural Productivity Programme (WAAP) would 


be disseminated to help reduce crop and livestock losses and contribute to improved 
public health; and involvement of extension services would help in finding synergies 
and complementarities with PRAPS-Niger, PASEC, and the SIIP. Support would include 
knowledge development for the selected crop and livestock value chains through 
increased transfer of Good Agriculture Practices (GAPs) by rolling out innovative 
extension models, such as livestock Farmer Field Schools (FFSs) and e-extension, 
diffusion of innovative technologies (including CSA, such as climate-resilient feed 
production and mitigation options), developing technical references, and providing the 
related training; provision of improved access to quality agricultural and zootechnical 
inputs (fertilizers, seeds, phytosanitary and sanitary products, food, genetics). 
Improved extension services are expected to increase producers’ awareness about 
climate change and improve their capacity to mainstream climate action; 

 
(b) Productivity and food safety enhancement via provision of specialized services to 

support crop quality, animal health, and food safety. The aim would be to increase the 
availability of and access to high-quality services and inputs for crop and livestock 
producers (including aquaculture). It would include crop and animal disease 
surveillance in order to improve the quality and hygiene of food of plant and animal 
origins, strengthening programs of animal prophylaxis (animal health/vaccinations) 
and fight against major pests and diseases, including prevention and management, 
weather monitoring, veterinary services enhancements and vaccination campaigns, 
quality control of crop and animal products, and seed and input certification.3 It would 
seek synergies and complementarities with PRAPS and REDISSE. Pest and animal 
health surveillance, together with weather monitoring, is expected to improve herd 
and crop resilience to climate-induced risks; and 

 
(c) Strengthening the policy planning and regulatory framework. This activity would aim 

at strengthening MoA&L’s efficiency and effectiveness by supporting policy 
formulation and developing the attendant legislation/regulations for improving the 
agriculture, livestock, and fisheries regulatory environment, and reducing distortions.  
This would include supporting the preparation of sector master plans, public 
investment plans, public expenditure reviews, support the establishment of 
agricultural and livestock infrastructures (establishment of service platforms at the 
level of the eight regions, according to approaches adapted to the target sectors, 
which would also include CSA options), and definition of food standards (quality and 
safety).  In order to support women’s empowerment and enhance agricultural 
productivity, the project would support policy development to expand women’s land 
rights and formally document their land claims to improve land access and tenure 
security for women.4 

                                            
3 This could involve the development of registers for plant and livestock varieties to help standardize food 
production and processing methods.  A livestock identification and registration system would help with disease 
mitigation and management from getting a handle on animal movements within the country.  It might be useful also 
to develop a phyto register to catalogue locally-developed seeds but also help with controls of invasive species (bugs 
and weeds). 
4  These proposed actions are fully in line with World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No.7199 by Prospere 
Backiny-Yetna and Kevin McGee, entitled: “Gender Differentials and Agricultural Productivity in Niger.” The paper
     

 
Component 2: Support to public and private investments for improved production, processing, and 
market access for selected agriculture and livestock value chains—US$ 60 million  

 
30. The Component would promote public and private investment at all levels of the selected value 
chains of milk, red meat, fish, poultry, onions, and niébé (production, processing, storage, transport, and 
marketing) for the development of production, market access, and competitiveness. The objective would 
be to increase productivity (while adapting to climate change and allowing for reduction in GHG 
emissions) and to strengthen the competitiveness of the targeted sectors (including through processed 
product diversification) and facilitate market access for producers and breeders, and agro-industry. 
These activities would be aimed at supporting the intensification and modernization of cropping and 
sedentary livestock systems, as well as processing units in the selected value chains, with a view to 
reaching operators' critical sizes to increase profitability and generate jobs.  

31. The intervention principles would be the following: (i) supporting the enhancement of capacities 
of farmer, cooperative, and inter-professional organizations in the targeted sectors in order to allow the 
emergence of an improved, more competitive economic fabric; (ii) identifying pre-investment activities 
(commercial viability studies, capacity building of service providers) to prepare viable business plans for 
economic operators and improve access for project promoters to financing by partner financial 
institutions (PFI); (iii) improving market access by removing distortions and supporting aggregation and 
packaging/processing points for agricultural and livestock products; and (iv) financing public and private 
investments in all segments of the sectors targeted by the project (production, processing, upstream, 
and downstream) within the framework of Productive Partnerships, i.e. economic partnerships between 
producers and other operators of the value chains. 

 
32. Activities envisaged to strengthen value chains (VCs) could be as follows: strengthen the 
economic organization of operators (support for professional structures); facilitate the linking of supply 
and demand (structuring of supply, identification of markets, linking, and contracting prospects); conduct 
pre-investment and training activities for economic operators and private service providers, in order to 
identify viable business plans, and improve operators' access to PFI financing (development of financial 
products for livestock farming, training of PFIs in the agriculture and livestock sector, negotiation of 
agreements with PFIs to partially finance project promoters); and finance investment subprojects within 
the framework of Productive Partnerships in all segments of the targeted sectors (upstream, production, 
downstream) in the form of cost-shared grants that could finance inputs, services, training, equipment, 
and infrastructure. 

 
33. Possible windows for investment funding. Funding and co-financing of investments in the 
targeted VCs would likely be conducted through separate windows, such as: (i) Productive Partnership 
(PP) window: for larger investment sub-projects, requiring individual contributions in cash and PFI 
funding; these sub-projects could involve, inter alia, scaling up of small-scale irrigation with the use of 
solar energy instead of diesel pumps; (ii) medium-scale microproject (MP) window: for medium 
investments with combination of cash, PFI funding, and in-kind contributions; and (iii) small-scale 
microproject (MP) window: for small investments with in-kind contributions and no external funding 

                                            
explicitly recommended enhancing women’s tenure rights in order to improve agricultural productivity. It further 
recommended facilitating women’s access to and use of hired farm labor and facilitating its supervision, incl. by 
facilitating community-based child care. 

requirements. Under these three windows, women and youth would receive preferential treatment.  The 
most appropriate financing modalities, including lower and upper thresholds for different windows, 
would be determined during project preparation. 

 
34. Women and Youth. Possible types of investments, favoring women and youth where feasible, 
may include: (i) promotion of small-scale irrigation facilities and equipment in order to properly manage 
water for agriculture purposes. This would be done according to the National Small-Scale Irrigation 
Strategy developed (SPIN) in Niger. The activities to be carried may also include structures to 
manage/store excess water during rainy season; (ii) land tenure rights recognition/documentation in 
order to preserve existing assets and use rights and to avoid conflicts; (iii) land reclamation, upgrading of 
soil fertility and improving existing carbon pools (such as through rangeland management, agro-forestry, 
reduced tillage techniques, etc.); (iv) development of storage facilities (including cold chain and adapted 
to climate risks); and (v) marketing structures. 

 
Component 3: Crisis prevention & management, and project coordination--US$ 15 million  

 
35. The objective of this component is to develop mechanisms for preventing and responding to 
severe crises and emergencies in the agriculture and livestock sectors, including future extreme weather 
events and other climate risks, as well as to strengthen project coordination capacities within MoA&L. 
Accordingly, its proposed activities relate to: (i) crisis prevention and management, and (ii) institutional 
support and project management: 

(a) Crisis prevention and management: (i) support MoA&L’s capacity to deal with crises by 
providing equipment (computer hardware and software, office furniture, vehicles, etc.), 
training and resources for specialized studies and communication campaigns, and vaccines; 
(ii) develop and operationalize crisis prevention and management tools, including the 
organization of forums for crisis management at local and national levels (as well as 
participation in international crisis management forums in West Africa and the Sahel); and 
(iii) funding of an Contingency Emergency Response Component (CERC). In doing so, the 
project would help establish a Crisis Management Unit at MoA&L with the capacity to 
intervene quickly when needed through the provision of emergency funds for severe crises 
and institutional support.  
 

(b) Project coordination. This activity would support all PCU activities required to manage IDA 
funds, procure IDA-funded goods and services, conduct project M&E including Iterative 
Beneficiary Monitoring (IBM),5 and comply with safeguard mitigation measures.  It would 
provide training and equipment to modernize MoA&L operations (computer hardware and 
software, office furniture, vehicles, and so on) at the central level and in the field as needed 
for project activities. It would also support general awareness and sensitization campaigns 
about project activities.  

    

                                            
5 This activity would monitor beneficiaries of the project starting at the beginning of the implementation with the 
objective to improve project efficiency and increase beneficiary satisfaction and beneficiary engagement. IBM collects 
information on project implementation, even in insecure settings. It is light, low-cost, and rapidly complements 
project supervision. The approach is problem-oriented and provides feedback to project teams through different 
iterations with the aim of catalyzing improvements in project implementation. IBM collects data directly from 
beneficiaries but keeps data collection efforts to a minimum by relying on few research questions and small samples. 


  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
The Project will be nationwide. However, during preparation it will be determined whether the focus will be on selected 

Communes in the eight regions, depending on the selection of value chains and the complementarity with other ongoing 
projects. 
 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
The Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock (Recipient) has considerable experience in implementing IDA-funded 

Agricultural sector development projects. This collaboration with the Bank has obviously provided the Ministry with some 
technical capacity with regards to the application of World Bank environmental and social safeguards policies; the 
development of appropriate safeguards mitigation instruments and their implementation and monitoring.  Staff of the 
Ministry have shown a great deal of understanding and implementing social and environmental safeguards measures on 
the ground. More recently, the Recipient successfully carried out the CAP3 microprojects in accordance with the WB 
environmental and social safeguard policies and the national environmental and social compliance requirements. This 
good standing trend will be continued and further mainstreamed as the Recipient will continue to receive guidance from 
the Bank’s Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists in the project team through supervision missions and virtual 
support to the Social and Environmental Focal Point. 
 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 
Cheikh A. T. Sagna, Social Safeguards Specialist 
Bougadare Kone, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 

 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The proposed project is categorized as B under this OP 
policy because its potential social and environmental 
risks are expected to be moderate and mostly site-
specific, with no significant or long-term negative risks 
and impacts. The potential environmental and social 
risks and impacts are mostly related to the use of 
fertilizers, pesticides and the increased GHG emissions 
due to the land-use change during agriculture cycles.   
Since the project physical footprint is presently 
unknown prior to appraisal, and in compliance with 
OP/BP 4.01 core requirements, the Borrower will 
prepare an Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF), consult upon and disclose it prior 
to appraisal.  The ESMF will be mostly building upon 
the existing PAC3 ESMF to guide the way that 
potential negative environmental and social risks and 



impacts of future sub-projects (following the positive 
list) will be identified and mitigated during project 
implementation. The ESMF will include social and 
environmental clauses to be observed by the farmers 
and herders, especially during project implementation, 
by which time most project activities footprints will be 
known.  If, during project preparation, any specific site 
is known before appraisal, Environmental and Social 
Impact Assessments (ESIA)/Environmental and Social 
Management Plans (ESMP) will be also be prepared 
and publicly disclosed, both in-country and at the WB 
prior to appraisal. 

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No  

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 No 
The policy is not triggered as the project will not 
support activities in areas where critical habitats may 
be threatened. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No 

The policy is not triggered because the project will not 
support activities related to forest exploitation or 
management or that might have potential adverse 
impacts on forested areas. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The project is not expected to finance acquisition, 
transport, distribution, disposal, storage or use of 
pesticides or similar chemicals that could threaten 
environmental and human health.  Nevertheless, OP 
4.09 is triggered because of the following related to 
the project: (i) livestock productivity enhancement via 
animal health, animal disease surveillance, animal 
health/vaccinations, and fight against pests, 
prevention and management; and (ii) farmers, for the 
agricultural productivity purpose, may use fertilizers 
and pesticides.  An Integrated Pest Management Plan 
(IPMP) will be prepared, consulted upon and publicly 
disclosed prior to appraisal. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 

This policy is triggered because of the nature of 
possible civil works to be financed under component B 
which might lead to the unearthing of such PCR.  
Nevertheless, it is highly unlikely that any physical 
cultural resources will be impacted; nonetheless, the 
existing “Chance finds procedures” will be embedded 
in the ESMF to ensure that these aspects will be taken 
into account during project preparation and 
implementation. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 
The policy is not triggered as there are no Indigenous 
Peoples in the project areas. 


Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

The Policy is triggered as the proposed project 
activities will require acquisition of land that could 
lead to some losses of assets, losses or restriction of 
access to some sources of livelihoods, resulting in 
either a temporary or permanent involuntary 
resettlement of project affected persons (PAP). 
However, since the physical footprint of project 
activities areas are mostly unknown at this juncture 
and will very likely be unknown prior to appraisal, the 
Borrower will prepare, consult upon, and publicly 
disclose prior to appraisal a Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF). During project implementation, the 
screening process will further determine whether land 
will be acquired and whether a subproject-specific 
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will be required. If so, 
such a RAP would be duly consulted upon and publicly 
disclosed both in-country and on the World Bank 
website at the InfoShop prior to the physical start of 
project civil works. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 TBD 

The project may finance some water retention 
structures for excess water during the rainy season. 
This matter will be reviewed during the project 
preparation stage and pre-appraisal to assess whether 
or not OP/BP 4.37 should be triggered. The Policy of 
for now is to TBD until then. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
The project will not finance activities that will interfere 
with international watercourses; either in terms of 
water withdrawal or discharge of pollutants. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No The project intervention areas are not under dispute. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
May 31, 2018 
 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
The safeguard-related studies will be launched in early March 2018 and will be completed by May 14, 2018. 
 

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Transforming landscapes for resilience and development in Zambia (P164764) 

 
 

  
July 12, 2018 Page 1 of 16  

     

 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 09-Aug-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSC23065 

     

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Zambia P164764  Transforming 
landscapes for 
resilience and 
development in Zambia 
(P164764) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA Oct 08, 2018 Mar 18, 2019 Environment & Natural 
Resources 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of National 
Devleopment Planning 

Luapula Provincial 
Administrative office 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
To improve natural resource management in the northern region of Zambia to support sustainable livelihoods, and in 
the event of an eligible crisis or emergency, to provide immediate and effective response to the eligible crisis or 
emergency. 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 75.00 

Total Financing 75.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 75.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 75.00 

          IDA Credit 75.00 

   
Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B - Partial Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
1. Zambia is a landlocked country in Southern Africa, surrounded by Malawi, Tanzania, Democratic Republic of Congo, 

Namibia, Angola, Botswana, Zimbabwe and Mozambique. It has a surface area of 752,614 km2 and population 

estimated at 17.6 million people that is growing at an annual rate of 3.2%. The country is endowed with rich natural 

resources including minerals, freshwater, forests, wildlife and fertile land. Nearly 56% or 42 million hectares of the 

total land area is arable. The country is also home to globally significant ecosystems and biodiversity. About 40% of 

freshwater resources in the southern African region are found in Zambia alone. Zambia is characterized as a service-

oriented economy with the tertiary sector at 53.7%; Mining (principally copper, emeralds, zinc, lead and cobalt) at 

12.9%; Agriculture; Forestry and Fisheries at 9.9%; and Manufacturing at 7.9%. The 2017 World Bank Zambia 

Economic Brief indicates that Zambia’s national economy experienced domestic pressures in 2015. Economic growth 

fell to 2.9 percent in 2015 and contributed to increased poverty in rural communities. Among the main factors are 

the reduction in the price of copper, El Nino induced lower seasonal harvest, political uncertainty and the power 

crisis which impacted local business operations of all sectors. Economic growth increased to 3.8 percent in 2016 and 

to 3.5 percent in 2017. Economic growth is expected to continue rising with a projected GDP growth of 4.1 percent 

in 2018 and 4.7 percent in 2019. 

 

2. Zambia's economy is heavily dependent on natural resources, particularly mining and increasingly forestry 

resources. Agriculture is largely rain-fed. Rural economies and livelihoods depend almost entirely on renewable 

natural resources i.e. biodiversity, forests, wetlands, fisheries, water, etc. The productive capacity of landscapes 

nation-wide is compromised by various drivers across agriculture, infrastructure development, unsustainable use of 

forest resources, land use, energy and mining activities. These drivers solely or in combination reduce productive 

capacity and resilience of landscapes and undermine ecosystem services, particularly due to the impacts of climate 

variability and climate change.  

 

3. Zambia is endowed with vast forests. These productive landscapes support rural livelihoods and investment 

opportunities that hold potential for national socio-economic development. About 65% of land is covered by 

forests, of which 40% constitutes miombo woodland. The country has an array of protected areas that include 20 

National Parks; 39 Game Management Areas; 432 Forest Reserve; 59 Botanical Reserves; 42 Important Bird Areas; 

and 2 Bird Sanctuaries. The forest lands, therefore, represent the life-line of rural economies and daily subsistence. 

For example, the forest sector currently contributes about 5.2% to the nation’s GDP, and provides formal and 

informal employment to about 1.1 million people in the country. The forest sector is also the greatest contributor to 

carbon emissions (61% of total emissions in 2011). It is a sector, therefore, that holds opportunity to contribute to 

national reductions in greenhouse gas emissions and for equitable sharing of both carbon and non-carbon benefits 

among stakeholders. However, the forest sector is under increasing pressure. From 2001 to 2017, Zambia lost 2.5 

million hectares or about 6% of total tree cover. This led to the release of 252Mt of carbon into the atmosphere1. 

According to FAO, current annual deforestation in Zambia is 160 000 hectares, which is approximately twice the size 

of New York City. Zambia is among the top ten deforested country’s in the world.  

 

Sectoral and Institutional Context 

4. Zambia has been implementing the World Bank led Pilot Program for Climate Resilience (PPCR) aimed at 

strengthening Zambia 's institutional framework for climate resilience (while) improving the adaptive capacity of 

vulnerable communities in selected sub-basins. Investments supported by the Zambia PPCR on the ground include 

participatory adaptation, climate-resilient infrastructure and strategic program support in agriculture, water, 

livestock, fisheries and natural resources and climate information services. Adaptation to climate change is one of 

the nation’s development priorities because the Zambian economy, particularly the rural economy, is highly 

vulnerable to the impacts and effects of climate change. This has become very important because the country has 

already been experiencing frequent droughts, extreme temperatures and dry spells in some parts, and seasonal and 

flash floods in others. Floods and droughts have increased in frequency over the past three decades, costing the 

nation an estimated 0.4% in annual economic growth. These trends are expected to intensify in the future. Based on 

records from 1960 to 2003, the mean annual temperature has increased by 1.3oC. This gives an average of 0.3oC per 

decade. Within the same period, mean rainfall has decreased by an average of 1.9mm/month (2.3%) per decade 

since 1960.  

 

5. Through different land and forest-related policies, the Government seeks to manage productive landscapes to 

enhance forest products and services for improved income generation, poverty reduction, job creation and 

protection and maintenance of biodiversity, and contribute to mitigation of climate change. In the Forest Act 2015, 

the Government has given direction on the new configurations of forests to increase people’s participation in the 

management of forests and forest resources and in their ownership of forest benefits at micro-level. This therefore, 

forms basis for a firm socio-economic and legal engagement in the collective management, including the private 

sector to transform landscapes for resilience and development in Zambia.  

 

6. Zambia is a Party to a number of global Multilateral Environmental Agreements. It is a Party to the three Rio 

Conventions: the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change; the UN Convention on Biological Diversity (UNCBD); 

and the UN Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD). In 2015, Zambia joined the Paris Agreement and 

submitted its Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC). As a Party, Zambia is mandated to respond to the 

policy directions and obligations of these Conventions. In this regard, the Government continues to pursue 

development goals that complement efforts from other development partners for socio-economic and 

environmental benefits. To realize the international as well as national development priorities, the Government has 

continued to pursue efforts to establish conducive policy and legislative instruments as well as strategic plans to 

address climate change and other sectoral development challenges. Among the pieces of legislation, the following 


constitute a set of important policies that can anchor the development objective of TRALARD to increase the 

ecosystem resilience and productivity within vulnerable landscapes and enhance the disaster related preparedness 

of Zambia: Vision 2030; Seventh National Development Plan (7NDP, 2017); Second National Biodiversity Strategy and 

Action Plan (NBSAP2, 2015); National Policy on Environment (NPE, 2007); National Policy on Climate Change (NPCC, 

2017); National Climate Change Response Strategy (NCCRS, 2012); Zambia National Forest Policy (ZNFP, 2014) and 

Forest Act (2015); National Agriculture Policy (NAP, 2016); Environmental Management Act (EMA, 2011); and the 

National Energy Policy (NEP, 2008) 

 

Relationship to CPF 

 

7. The proposed TRALARD project is aligned with the draft Zambia Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for the period 

FY18-FY21 which puts forward an integrated World Bank, IFC, and MIGA strategy to support Zambia’s development 

through the Seventh National Development Plan (7NDP). The project contributes to the CPF Objective Two on 

Increased resilience to hydrological, climate and environmental shocks and to associated outcomes: a) Local level 

community infrastructure and natural resources management practices reduce impact of hydrological shocks 

(droughts, floods) on livelihoods; b) Climate adaptation support to communities harmonized, institutionalized and 

decentralized; and c) Institutions for environmental governance strengthened. 

 

8. The Government has embraced an integrated approach to development investments at landscape level. This project 

builds on this vision, the CPF and Bank’s experience on climate resilience, particularly through the implementation 

of projects on resilience and adaptation priorities, including i) Zambia Strengthening Climate Resilience (PPCR Phase 

II); ii) Livestock Development Animal and Health Project (LDAHP); iii) Zambia Water Resources Development Project; 

iv) Irrigation Sector Development Project (ISDP); and v) Zambia Integrated Forest Landscape Project (ZIFLP). 

 

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 

9. To improve natural resource management in the northern region of Zambia to support sustainable livelihoods, and 
in the event of an eligible crisis or emergency, to provide immediate and effective response to the eligible crisis or 
emergency. 

 
10. The PDO will be achieved through activities under the following components: (a) Institutional Development and 

Capacity Building for Landscape Restoration and Resilience, (b) Sustainable Landscape Management Practices, (c) 

Infrastructure for Resilience and Market Access, and (d) Project Management, Coordination, and Monitoring. 

Through these components, TRALARD will offer a selection of interrelated activities that can be tailored to the needs 

of participating areas. The project also includes standard Contingency Emergency Response component. 

 
Project beneficiaries and expected outcomes 

 

11. Project beneficiaries include communities increasingly reliant on the exploitation of natural resources due to the 

absence of alternative sources of livelihoods and energy, partially resulting from the lack of sound management and 

planning. Rural communities, including women and children, will have an opportunity to take advantage of diversified 
     

selection of livelihood options based on prudent, environmentally sound natural resource management. Local 

authorities will gain from strengthened institutions and policies and capacity to manage, plan, operate, and enforce 

regulations to achieve both environmental improvement and poverty reduction. Rural and urban communities will 

benefit from reliable and environmentally sound infrastructure that will improve market access and in a broader 

context will promote the creation of new economic opportunities for the region. 

 

Key Results (From PCN) 

 

12. Project activities will be designed to advance and develop three dimensions of the resilience capacity of the 

vulnerable communities: absorptive capacity, adaptive capacity, and transformative capacity. This approach will 

facilitate measuring resilience at project level with Results Framework (RF) indicators being connected to these three 

capacities. In addition, RF will include Predictive Proxy Indicators (PPI) to evaluate the effectiveness of forest related 

interventions, as suggested in the Forest Action Plan2.  

 
13. Key outcome indicators 

 

1. Land area under sustainable landscape management practices (CRI) (ha) 

2. Forest area brought under management plans (CRI) (ha) (intermediate) 

3. Fisheries management plans implemented (CRI) (count of water bodies and/or area) 

4. Diversified livelihoods activities adopted by households (count), of which households headed by women (percent) 

5. Number of households using resilience infrastructure supported by the project (count) 

6. Small scale farmers/producers with improved market access (count), of which households headed by women 

(percent) 

7. Protected Areas approved management plans (count) (intermediate) 

 

Project level and intermediate indicators will be defined in the Project Appraisal Document. 

 

D. Concept Description 

 

14. In the 7th National Development Plan of Zambia for 2017-2021, the Government of Zambia recognizes the need to 

implement measures to reduce poverty through harnessing the potential of Luapula, Muchinga and Northern 

Province in agriculture, forestry, and tourism among other areas, and addressing the challenge of poor infrastructure. 

 

15. Given the complexity of socio-economic, environmental and climate change induced challenges facing the NRZ, 

TRALARD is proposed to bring the northern region to a new level of sustainable management of natural resources 

with expanded options for non natural resource based livelihoods and improved market access. The implementation 

of the program aims to trasform the region into a vibrant ecological and socio-economic system preserving the 

environment, resilient to climate change consequences, and offering communities broader development 

opportunities. 

       

16. TRALARD is focused on addressing the main drivers of environmental degradation, natural resource exploitation and 

persistent poverty. The project aims to contribute to improving the sustainability of poor rural community livelihoods 

in an environment already stressed by climate change impacts and rapid population growth. TRALARD will build on 

the lessons learnt from the successful PPCR currently under implementation in Zambia. For example, PPCR has 

worked with local structures and implementation partners to improve and mainstream climate risk into livelihood 

option decisions, local development planning, and implementation capacity and has gained experience in conducting 

microprojects in the intervention area. This experience informs the design of TRALARD.  

 

17. The examination of economic realities during the fact-finding mission to the NRZ reveals closely interconnected and 

mutually determined processes of natural resources degradation and deepening poverty. For example, declining fish 

stock in Lake Tanganyika and other water bodies forced some fisherman to switch to charcoal burning as an 

alternative source of income. While fish stock still continues to decline due to climate change impacts and increasing 

consumption by the growing population, forests are under increased pressure from the population whose economic 

options are severely limited and alternative sources of energy are absent. Unchecked access to natural resources and 

the lack of enforcement to protect them by authorities invite their unsustainable expolitation. As a result, the poverty 

level in the region is increasing while the natural resource base that those communities rely on is being destroyed.  

 

18. Funding and implementation capacity constraints mean that not all 26 districts will participate in TRALARD in the first 

phase. The selection criteria for districts that will be included in the first phase will include: (i) most vulnerable 

districts based on assessment of poverty and vulnerability maps; (ii) proximity to protected areas; (iii) districts 

bordering Lake Tanganyika; (iv) preparedness and commitment of districts and capacity of implementing 

stakeholders. The number of districts will be determined during preparation.  

 

19. TRALARD aims to improve value chains through greater community and private sector engagement, better market 

information and priority infrastructure. Sustainable resource management requires that environmental benefits are 

strongly linked to improved livelihoods and poverty reduction. The project design promotes greater community and 

private sector participation in sustainable natural resources management as the most direct path to fostering this 

linkage.  

 

20. Contributing to the sustainability aspect of the project, TRALARD intends to facilitate establishing robust mechanisms 

to monitor key environmental, climate and weather parameters, model longer-term challenges, including climate 

change and population growth, and develop measures to address issues in a long-term perspective. 

 

21. The project places emphasis on the adoption of advanced technologies in the natural resource management practices 

and in the measurement, monitoring, and reporting of project impacts. The application of innovative and disruptive 

technologies such as remote sensing, drones, mobile phone and online apps, biotech, water and energy saving 

technologies, will be examined during the preparation stage.  

 
22. The following areas of activities have been determined at the initial preparation stage of the project. These 

components are defined with a view of (a), (b) tackling immediate tasks of reversing degradation through adaptation 

and alternative livelihoods measures, and (c) improving infrastructure for resilience and facilitating creation of new 

opportunities through more developed market access. 

 

23. Component 1. Institutional Development and Capacity Building for Landscape Restoration and Resilience 

(indicative amount US$8 million) 

The aim of this component is to strengthen government institutions at the national, local and community level to 

develop and implement new approaches for sustainable natural resource management This will be achieved by 

reviewing and updating certain policies, providing better information, and improving the development planning and 

budget process by mainstreaming climate risk and environmental considerations into development plans. This 

component will finance policy and regulatory reviews, province, district and ward level development planning, 

technical assistance (TA), workshops, and trainings.  

 

1.1. Policy and Institutional strengthening and capacity building: This component will support the review of key 

natural resource policies and regulations relating to the forestry and fisheries sector. It will support the 

government to implement the Statutory Instrument NO 11 of 2018 which allows for community management 

for forests. In addition, this component will support policy analysis on the options and alternatives for charcoal 

production, enforcement, and government regulation to license charcoal production. The activities will also 

help development and disseminate a manual on community participatory co-management; as well as the 

establishment of effective interdepartmental structures to organize collaboration at the ecosystem level to 

enhance integrated approaches to natural resource management and coordinated land use planning and 

management. The outputs will focus on: integrated approaches for community mobilization, partnerships for 

sustainable forest landscape restoration (FLR), and targeted studies, for example, on models, resource 

mobilization for sustainable PA management. This will enhance the ability of the government to determine 

sectors that hold greater promise to transform landscapes for resilience and development and scale up 

interventions. 

 

1.2.  Advance the beneficial use of hydro-meteorological information: The project will finance the improvement of 

early warning systems and related institutional systems to improve the resilience of communities to climate 

change impacts. This will include technical assistance to develop a long term strategic plan to strengthen the 

institutions i.e. Zambia Meteorology Department (ZMD), Disaster Management and Mitigation unit(DMMU), 

Water Resources Management Authority (WARMA) etc. responsible for delivering meteorological and 

hydrological information, data management and forecasting systems. This sub-component will introduce the 

concept of using hydro-met information for better decision making and delivery that information to local 

governments and primary producers: (for water resources, landscape management, disaster management, 

agriculture, environment, hydropower utilities, PAs.); (c) priority infrastructure rehabilitation identified in the 

Hydromet Master Plan developed under the World Bank Water Resource project (including hydromet 

infrastructure and related office refurbishment and equipment); and (d) community training, awareness 

campaigns, knowledge on improved climate information use and disseminationto end-users nationaly, with 

specific focus in the Chambeshi-Luapula catchment area. 

24. Component 2. Sustainable Landscape Management Practices (indicative amount US$32.5 million) 

The component aims to improve the livelihoods and resilience of rural communities by improving the management 

of the rich natural resources base that rural communities are dependent upon through: (a) ecosystem based 

integrated natural resource management planning; (b) improved management of protected areas and protection of 

environmental services; and (c) diversification and increased sustainability of rural livelihoods.  

 

2.1. Invesment in ecosystem based Integrated Natural Resource Management Planning (INRMP): This activity will 

support the preparation and implementation of INRMP plans in the project targeted area. These plans will be 

based on the assessment of the available natural resources and their conditions, as well as the sustainable 

levels of production. The plans will be done in year one. They will be developed and implemented with the 

involvement of relevant stakeholders, including communities, cooperatives, and local government, and will 

be based on physical, ecological, and socio-economic baseline data. 

 

2.2. Improved Management of Protected Areas (PA) and Reserves: This activity will support the effective and 

sustainable development of the three PA systems in the northern region of Zambia – Lavushi Manda National 

Park, Lusenga Plain National Park and Nsumbu National Park – to preserve the biodiversity and ecosystem 

services for the well-being of people with focus on forest dependent communities and potenital to develop 

tourism opportunities. This support will include: (1) preparation of protected areas management plans; (2) 

capacity assessment of the staff and analysis of the financial resources required to fully protect the protected 

areas; (3) priority park infrastructure such as staff offices and housing nearer to the park; (4) equipment 

including vehicles, GPS, computers; disruptive technology for monitoring animal populations, poaching 

activities; (5) training.  

 

2.3 Strengthen opportunities for primary producers to transform their livelihoods into market based enterprises: 

The main aim of the activity is to identify key challenges, risks and opportunities for transforming livelihoods 

of producers into market based enterprises. The project will provide resources to conduct value chain studies 

(including secondary sources of information) to identify key challenges to market entry and design 

interventions to incentivize smallholder producers to initiate viable enterprises for increasing productivity, 

incomes and resilience to climate change. This component will draw from the lessons learnt during the pilot 

to support primary producers and small business operaters under the Zambia PPCR private sector approcah. 

 
2.4. Sustainable livelihoods: Rural populations in the north are dependent on subsistence agriculture and fishing, 

both of which have seen severe declines in productivity and have increased risk due to climate variablility. 

This activity aims to: increase smallholder production and productivity of diversified value chains; reduce 

farmers risk through insurance and prudent and informed risk taking strategies; improving access to markets; 

and diversifying into alternative livelihoods that are non resource based enterprises. This will be done through 

a program of support which encourages farmers to adopt conservation agriculture practices, promotes 

savings, provides technologies to reduce post harvest loss, establishes rural aggregation centers and linkages 

to buyers and advanced purchase contracts, and persue alternative livelihoods that are non natural resource 

based businesses. The alternative livelihood activities will target women and youths to lifting up the socio-

economic situation particularly of women who use natural resources with inferior financial value compared 


to men. The roster of alternative livelihoods will include increased rearing of livestock, agroforestry, 

agroprocessing, aqua culture, fingerlings production, fish processing, feed making for fisheries, bee keeping, 

caterpillars and mushrooms production, and other service industries such as tailoring, hair dressing etc.  

 

25. Component 3: Infrastructure for Resilience and Market Access (indicative amount US$27 million IDA) 

Activities under this component aim at supporting and improving NRZ infrastructure in vulnerable areas that suffers 

from the lack of investments and is additionally adversely impacted by climatic changes. Such impacts include drastic 

changes in rain patterns resulting in floods and droughts, shortages in water, changes in wind patterns, lack of 

passable roads and damaged bridges leaving entire communities cut off from the basic services and goods during 

floods where durations are becoming extended. This increases the likelihood of lack of water and nutrition, diseases, 

livestock loss etc. In addition, this component will help identify ways to improve market access for primary producers 

who often lack opportunities and/or knowledge on the ways to make their produce accessible to the market. 

 

3.1.  Investments in resilience strengthening infrastructure: identify in concert with stakeholders the most sensitive 

pieces of small-scale infrastructure in the most vulnerable areas that require prompt investments. 

Infrastructure is the backbone of well-being and safety of people and its reliability and even presence in such 

poorly serviced regions is central to communities’ resilience. Potentially, they include (a) feeder roads, 

bridges, culverts, (b) water harvesting structures (check and sand dams, earthen bunds, solar-powered 

irrigation), and (c) traditional and alternative energy sources.  

 

3.2. Examining opportunities for restoration of traditional canals: conduct feasibility study on possible restoration 

of traditional canals in the North. Traditional canals in Zambia play multiple roles: transportation, water body, 

fish harvesting, and traditional ceremonies. The canals in the North are in a state of disrepair after decades of 

no investment or maintenance, yet their potential for transportation and commerce remains high. This sub-

component will draw from the experience acquired from similar successful operations under the PPCR in the 

Barotse sub-region.  

 
3.3. Facilitated access to markets: determine ways and forms to support producers in establishing access to 

markets. Jointly with stakeholders, including producers, authorities, private companies and consumers, the 

project will examine constraints and bottlenecks in establishing connection between products and markets 

and suggest measures to address them. It is not an uncommon situation when farmers’ produce – mangos, 

oranges – goes to waste because farmers have no ability to deliver their products to potential consumers. This 

inability undermines income and negatively affects resilience of producers.  

 

26. Component 4: Contingency Emergency Response Component (CERC) (Standardized)  

This contingency component can be triggered by a joint Government and World Bank agreement in case of an 

emergency. This component had been embedded in the project to finance early recovery and/or specific emergency 

works, goods, and services, in case of eligible emergencies/crises/disaster caused by natural or man-made hazard 

including public health crisis. The mechanism is designed to support enhancement of preparedness, early recovery 

activities, and provision of rapid response to disaster that can be implemented in a relatively short period. This 

component was considered necessary because of the inherent in Zambia’s current socioeconomic and climate related 
hazards (unexpected flooding or drought, an aggravation of the state of fragility, as a result of influx of large groups 

of displaced people ( cross boarder and internal displacements) could potentially shift priorities. Reallocation of funds 

to CERC can only be done when there is a serious disruption of the functioning of a community or society causing 

widespread human, economic, or environmental losses that exceed the ability of the affected community or society 

to cope using its own resources. Following such a disaster event where both the region and national resources cannot 

sufficiently and adequately address the situation, the Government of the Republic of Zambia (GRZ) may trigger 

activation of CERC according to national law and subject to the World Bank’s activation policy.  

 

27. Component 5: Project Management, Coordination, and Monitoring (US$7.5 million IDA) 

This component will finance TA, works, goods, workshops, and operational costs to support the project’s day-to-day 

implementation and management, including procurement, FM, environmental and social safeguards, and 

preparation of annual work plans and organization of audit reports. The component also includes the design and 

implementation of a communication strategy to report on the project results and to raise awareness about land 

degradation, restoration and climate change impacts, vulnerability, and adaptation. It also supports the M&E system 

to report on the expected project’s results (disaggregating by gender, where appropriate) and systematizes the 

project’s lessons learned. The component also finances impact evaluation to assess project’s impacts on specific 

elements such as adopted livelihoods.  

  

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
The project covers the Northern region of Zambia (NRZ), which includes Luapula, Northern, and Muchinga provinces. This 

area has vast coverage of pristine Miombo forest, four national parks, four lakes, water falls and many rivers. They lie in 
the third agro ecological zone with the annual rainfall of about 1200 mm. NRZ encompasses over 35% of managed lands 
which contribute to protecting and maintaining large intact natural landscapes. The region is endowed with natural 
resources that include rich biodiversity and half of the wetlands of international importance listed under the Ramsar 
Convention. These wetlands contain habitats for several important fauna and flora species, are a natural flood controller 
and important for groundwater recharge. The natural resources in the area also represent a life-line for rural economies 
and daily subsistence.  
 
The provinces are home to over 3.5 million people with record high levels of poverty 81% (Luapula), 79% (Northern) and 

69% (Muchinga). The main economic stay for the people of this area is agriculture due to the availability of arable land, 
abundant water bodies and good annual rainfall. The area has experienced vulnerabilities due to climate variability and 
human related activities posing a challenge to conserving natural resources. Factors contributing to vulnerabilities include 
forest lands under threat from human encroachment for settlement and growing food insecurities due to population 
growth. Increased mining activities result in growing demand for energy met through heightened production of charcoal 
and logging. An estimated 16,000,000 hectares out of 21,423,600 hectares total land (75%) is under threat of degradation 
from these activities.. 
 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
The PPCR PIU under Ministry of National Planning and Development has implemented and monitored safeguard 
compliance in accordance with Bank policies. The project performance has been rated satisfactory, while the risk has 
been moderate. The PIU has a dedicated Safeguard Specialist who is supported by Community Adaptation Specialists in 
each district. The PIU has gained substantial experience with Bank funded projects through their active participation in 
the design and preparation of the Forest Investment Project, Displaced Person's and Border Communities, and the 
Zambia Integrated Forest Landscape Project (ZIFLP). The PIU played a pivotal role in setting up the ZIFLP PIU which is now 
operational. 
  
Given the PIU's involvement in design, preparation and implementation of climate resilient projects, the PIU is being 

transformed into a national coordinating unit that will assume a supervisory role in monitoring implementation of the 
TRALARD project at the national level.To fulfill  this new role, more experts (including Environmental and Social) will be 
recruited to strengthen their capacity to manage environmental and social risks.  
 
For the implementation of the TRALARD project, three PIUs will be established at provincial level (i.e. one for each target 

province). The staffing structure will include Environmental and Social experts as key personnel. These will collaborate 
with District officials that will be assigned to the project. Working through existing district structures will enhance project 
ownership and contribute to sustaining project investment. However, this being the initial engagement with Provincial 
and District counterparts in the 3 provinces, a capacity assessment will be undertaken as part of project preparation. 
Results on the assessment will feed into the a capacity building plan that will be developed for the project. 
 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 
Tito Joel Kodiaga, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 
Njavwa Namposya Chilufya, Social Safeguards Specialist 

 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The  policy on environmental assessment has been 
triggered as the proposed  TRALARD project will 
involve infrastructural works. The  infrastructural 
works are envisaged to be undertaken under 
component  2 and 3 of the project. Component 2: of 
the project will involve the promotion of sustainable 
landscape management practices and this will 
incorporate the improved management of protected 
areas  and reserves. Lavushi Manda , Lusenga Plain 
and Nsumbu National Parks and their buffer Game 
Management Areas (GMA's) have been identified as 
potential beneficiary parks. The project will support 
the construction and rehabilitation of  infrastructure 
such as, park structures, staff offices and their housing 
in the vicinity  of the parks. Component 3: of the 
project will involve the investment in infrastructure for 
resilience and market access. Investments will focus 
on the  sensitive pieces of small-scale infrastructure in 
the most vulnerable areas that require urgent 


attention. These will include  the periodic 
maintenance of  feeder roads (existing dirt or gravel 
roads) and support structures such as small access 
bridges and placement of culvert,  water harvesting 
structures (check and sand dams, earthen bunds, 
solar-powered irrigation), and the restoration of 
existing traditional canals.  
 
Since the project is at concept stage,  the scope and 
beneficiary areas have not yet been fully defined, an 
ESMF and  associated RPF is currently under 
preparation to assess potential safeguards 
risks/impacts associated with project activities and 
subprojects.In addition, line with the Bank's guidance 
on Contingent Emergency Response 
Components(CERC); Component 4 (CERC): This 
Component requires that the ESMF includes specific 
section (or a CERC-specific ESMF) describing the 
potential emergencies and the types of activities likely 
to be financed, and provide a preliminary evaluation 
of potential risks and mitigation measures associated 
with them. The ESMF will ensure to include a section 
addressing the CERC guideline. Once finalized, ESMF 
will be formally cleared by the Bank and disclosed at 
national level and on the Bank’s website.   
 
 
Furthermore, a Strategic Environmental and Social 
Assessment (SESA) covering 4 out of 10 provinces was 
conducted under a similar project,  PPCR in 2013. 
Since the  proposed TRALARD beneficiary areas were 
excluded in the initial assessment. The SESA will be 
updated to include Northern, Luapula and Muchinga 
provinces. For the benefit of future project, expanding 
the scope to cover the entire country will be 
considered. It is anticipated that TRALARD project will 
benefit from the findings of the SESA which will be 
incorporated in the development of INRM Plans and 
PA Management Plan.  
 
 

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No  

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 
The policy on natural habitat has been triggered as the 
project will be implemented in ecologically sensitive 

areas and  habitats such as wetlands and national 
parks. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes 

The Bank policy on forest has been triggered as the 
TRALARD will involve afforestation activities to 
improve forest health.  The project will provide 
incentives to communities in beneficiary areas to 
protect vegetation cover in  the existing  forests and  
regenerate deforested areas 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The policy on pest management has been triggered as 
the project will involve livelihood activities that may 
directly or indirectly support the use of pesticides. A 
Pest Management Plan (PMP) will be included in the 
ESMF. 
 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 

The policy on physical culture resources has been 
precautionary triggered as the project will be 
implemented across three provinces and the works 
may unearth artefacts of cultural and heritage value. A 
chance find procedure will be included in the ESMF to 
guide, should a chance find occur. It will further layout 
the process for notifying the National Heritage 
Conservation Commission (NHCC) in case of an 
occurrence.  
 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 

The policy on Indigenous Peoples has not been 
triggered as the project will be implemented in 
Luapula, Northern and Muchinga Provinces where 
there is no presence of Indigenous Peoples as defined 
by Bank Policy. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

Policy on Involuntary Resettlement has been 
triggered. This will apply to selected project activities 
which may result in land acquisition for the 
establishment of priority infrastructure to support 
local tourist operators. A RPF will be prepared in 
consultation with key stakeholders. The RPF will guide 
preparation of the RAP to address physical and 
economic impacts that may arise from project 
implementation. 
Luapula, Muchinga and Northern provinces are 
endowed with forests and national parks where 
communities derive natural resources for livelihood 
activities. Possible restrictions to natural resources 
arising from project implementation will be managed 
through preparation of a Process Framework. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 Yes 
The policy on dam safety has been triggered as the 
project will  support the construction of small water 


harvesting structures such as check and sand dams 
and earthen bunds. These will be small dams as 
defined by Bank policy and a generic safety guidelines 
for small dams will be incorporated in the ESMF.  
 
In compliance with the requirements of the policy, 
generic dam safety measures designed by qualified 
engineers will be included in the design and 
implementation/rehabilitation of small dams; with 
respective requirements outlined in the ESMF.”. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

Yes 

The policy has been triggered as it will be 
implemented in a catchment area that feeds into the 
Luapula River which falls within an international 
waterway. This will require the notification of riparian 
states in which the waterways falls. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
The policy has not been triggered as it will not be 
implemented in any disputed area as defined  by Bank 
policy. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Oct 01, 2018 
 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Studies launched September 30, 2017. Draft ESMF is currently being finalized. An RPF and PF are under preparation as 

part of the safeguards requirement. 
 
 

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Productive Alliances Project (P168153) 

 
 

  
Oct 29, 2018 Page 1 of 12  

     

 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document (PID) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 12-Nov-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSC25297 

P
BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Paraguay P168153  Productive Alliances 
Project (P168153) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

LATIN AMERICA AND 
CARIBBEAN 

Jun 03, 2019 Oct 08, 2019 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Republic of Paraguay Ministry of Agriculture and 
Livestock Production 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
To enhance access to markets and adoption of climate risk management approaches by project beneficiaries in a 
sustainable manner. 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 120.00 

Total Financing 120.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 100.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) 100.00 

Non-World Bank Group Financing 

     Counterpart Funding 20.00 

          Municipalities of Borrowing Country 1.00 

          Local Farmer Organizations 19.00 

   


Environmental and Social Risk Classification Concept Review Decision 

Substantial  Track I-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
 

1. Over the past decade, the expansion of export-oriented agriculture production has significantly contributed to 
GDP growth and poverty alleviation. During the period 2004 and 2016, Paraguay’s average growth was 4.7 percent per 
year, with high volatility. Key drivers of growth were the agriculture and hydroelectric power sectors. Crops alone 
contributed to one-quarter of total growth, with expanded agriculture (comprising backward and forward linkages) 
contributing a higher share to overall GDP growth. Agricultural products constitute the bulk of Paraguay’s exports. There 
is a strong duality in the sector with a significant share comprised of a lagging subsistence farming component, but in 
parallel there is a vibrant and substantial commercially-oriented agricultural industry segment (individuals, cooperatives 
and corporations), which engage in value chains such as soybean and meat. Capitalized agriculture uses about 70 
percent of the country’s productive area. Since 2003, the boom in export-oriented production has contributed to a 
significant fall of national poverty rates: 45 to 20 percent in urban areas, and 58 to 36 percent in rural areas. These 
prosperous years have also resulted in an increase in income for the bottom 40 percent and in the expansion of the 
middle class, which currently comprises 38 percent of Paraguay’s population.    
 
2. However, a large rural population accompanied by extensive rural poverty are among the salient features of 
Paraguay. In 2017 Paraguay’s population was estimated at 7 million inhabitants, with 40 percent of the population –
roughly 2.8 million-- living in rural areas. This represents the highest percentage of rural population of any country in 
South America, and among the highest in all of Latin America. About 97 percent of Paraguay’s population live in the 
Eastern Region, roughly 40 percent of the total territory, whereas only 3 percent of the population reside in the Western 
Region (Chaco). Most of the total poor live in rural areas, with a fair share engaging in agriculture-related activities, with 
informality as the hallmark.   
 
3. To build on the gains during the past decade in terms of growth and poverty alleviation, Paraguay must focus 
on creating sustainable economic opportunities for the poor and vulnerable population. Approximately 60 percent of 
Paraguay’s population are considered either poor or vulnerable, that is, they are at risk of falling back into poverty. 
Indigenous peoples, slightly under 116,000 inhabitants –a 2 percent of the total Paraguayan population, are one of the 
most vulnerable population groups. Indigenous peoples are essentially rural and have very limited access to basic 
infrastructure and services. For instance, not more than 6 percent of indigenous households are connected to a supply 
system of potable water. Among indigenous groups, monolingual Guaraní speakers are particularly disadvantaged. 
Another important vulnerable group is made up of subsistence producers and small or medium-sized producers in 
transition to commercial schemes. This group forms the end of a spectrum of farmers, which as noted above, at the 
other end, includes the highly capitalized farmers and corporations. This group of producers who are primarily poor and 
vulnerable, comprise at least 200,000 households; they are particularly affected by the lack of access to markets, 
finance, technology, land, human capital, and connectivity, and are harshly impacted by extreme weather events and 
the risks posed by climate change. They have not succeeded in keeping up with the pace of modernization of Paraguay’s 
agriculture, led by the large farmers and corporations. A third group that is considered vulnerable is the youth. Half of 
the young people that neither study nor work reside in rural areas, with many of them performing unpaid family labor in 
agriculture-based activities gender. Despite the progress made in Paraguay in recent years, creating economic 
opportunities for these groups is an unfinished agenda. Efforts must focus on improving incomes and reducing 
vulnerability through creating conditions to enable opportunities for self-employment and access to jobs, which are 
indispensable for reducing poverty in Paraguay.    
 
4. Paraguay enjoys many innate advantages which provide it with a great potential for driving pro-poor growth 
through the development of a resilient and responsible agro-industrial sector.  To do so however, it must overcome 
the inter-linked challenges of creating economic opportunities while conserving its natural endowments and 
improving resilience to climate change. Recent growth in Paraguay has taken a toll on its natural resource base. For 
example, logging and clearing land for crops, cattle ranching, and charcoal/biomass have resulted in extensive forest 
degradation and deforestation.  Combined with lack of planning around soil and water resources management, this is 
contributing to increasing the vulnerability to extreme weather events. It is critical that the expansion of agro-industrial 
productive activities and the creation of jobs go hand in hand with sound management of Paraguay’s rich natural capital 
comprising, fertile soils, abundant water, and pastures and forest resources; in addition, the enhancement of its capacity 
to develop and implement a strategy for integrated management of climate change risks are all keys to securing the 
basis of long term growth and development for the generations to come.      
 
 

Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 

5. The bulk of the rural poor and vulnerable population, a good part of which are indigenous peoples, rely on 
agriculture to make a living. In 2017, 76 percent of households in rural areas were engaged in family farming or small, 
informal agri-based activities, individually or in an organized way. If looking only at indigenous peoples, 71 percent of 
households rely on agriculture along with forestry, hunting and freshwater fishing. The impressive growth of capitalized 
agriculture has not translated into significant benefits for smallholders, who are left far behind in terms of per capita 
income and other socio-economic indicators, even when compared to rural households that do not rely on agriculture.  
Such subsistence and transition producers tend to combine agriculture with multiple sources of income such as off-farm 
labor, migration and remittances as a coping mechanism; but, on-farm production and associate income constitutes a 
key source of income which is critical for overall sustenance of these households. In addition, their capacity to mitigate 
against and adapt to climate risks is extremely limited. In 2011 agricultural households in rural areas were found to be 
more than twice as likely to report a negative shock than non-agricultural households. Exposure to climate or other 
shocks can push vulnerable households back to or further into poverty since the economic gains in years with good sales 
can be drawn down with just one season of severe drought .   
 
6. Global experience demonstrates that building resilience against natural disasters and climate change, 
integrating value addition opportunities and removal of barriers to accessing markets for agriculture creates 
economic opportunities for the rural poor and vulnerable population. Recent evidence in Paraguay confirms that 
vulnerable rural inhabitants can lift themselves out of poverty and begin to prosper when they receive assistance in 
accessing markets and technology. It is the case of about 25,000 households who have benefited from the Sustainable 
Rural Development Project (PRODERS, P088799 ). By selling their surpluses in open-air markets or through farm-gate 


intermediaries, subsistence and transition producers have significantly enhanced their agricultural earnings and half of 
them were able to rise above the poverty threshold, according to the measurement of June 2018 in relation to the 
baseline.   
 
7. There is untapped potential to enhance outcomes through linkages with formal supply chains, to enable 
transition of subsistence and transition producers toward greater value addition. Paraguay’s food system has formal 
supply chains with larger potential, such as organic yerba mate for export, horticulture for supermarket, and nutrition-
rich grains and beans as inputs for processed foods. Empirical experience in Paraguay indicates, however, that multiple 
barriers prevent rural producers from becoming providers in more modern chains, especially due to the lack of critical 
assets, infrastructure, knowhow and/or organization. In this regard, women find it particularly difficult to access 
financial services and technology. Only 30 percent of the credits issued by the Enabling Agricultural Credit Office (in 
Spanish “Crédito Agrícola de Habilitación”) and 5 percent in the case of the Livestock Fund (in Spanish “Fondo 
Ganadero”) are assigned to women . It is almost universally challenging for smallholders to meet demand requirements, 
including supplying consistent quantities of quality goods that comply with sanitary and phytosanitary standards and are 
delivered on time.     
 
8. Fostering sustainable and inclusive value chain integration has become a priority for the current 
administration. The National Development Plan of Paraguay (2014-2030) seeks to shift the overarching orientation of 
the national economy towards a knowledge-based approach, with diversified and competitive sectors, and increased 
technology adoption. Creating opportunities for the most vulnerable population groups and reducing inequalities are 
essential elements of the Plan. Building on the same in 2016, Paraguay submitted its Intended Nationally Determined 
Contribution (INDC) to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. Paraguay’s INDC identifies 
agriculture, forestry, land use and land use change as strategic sectors for adaptation and mitigation actions. More 
recently, the administration of President Abdo, who took office in August 2018, has committed to take family farming to 
the next level. To do so, the Government is promoting technology adoption and long-lasting linkages with competitive 
markets, so that producers improve their income in the short and medium-term and acquire economic and climate 
resilience in the long term.   
 
9. The sectoral agenda is led by the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock Production in partnerships with its 
decentralized institutions. The Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock Production (MAL) focuses on producers, for whom 
agriculture represents a critical source of income (see beneficiaries for a more specific classification). It is responsible for 
the sectorial policy and is at the helm of a set of decentralized sectoral institutions such as the Paraguayan Institute for 
Agricultural Technology (IPTA,: in Spanish “Instituto Paraguayo de Tecnología Agraria”), the National Service for Quality 
and Safety in Vegetables and Seeds (SENAVE: in Spanish “Servicio Nacional de Calidad y Sanidad Vegetal y de Semillas”), 
and  National Service for Animal Quality and Health (SENACSA, for “Servicio Nacional de Calidad y Salud Animal”), and 
the aforementioned Enabling Agricultural Credit Office. To fulfill its mandate, the MAL not only formulates the national 
policy, but also carries out projects at the grassroot level with finance of the International Fund for Agriculture and the 
Interamerican Bank for Development.   
 
 

Relationship to CPF 
 
 
10. The Concept Note has been drafted at the time of preparation of the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for 
the period FY19-23. By appraisal of the project, the CPF will have been approved by the World Bank Board of Directors. 
 
11. The Strategic Country Diagnostic (SCD) completed in June 2018 flagged the following three structural challenges 
for Paraguay: (i) concentration of inputs, production, exports, income and political influence; (ii) informality of 
production, labor, land and trade; and (iii) inefficient provision of public services. To address them in the CPF, the SCD 
proposed four policy priority areas: (i) accountable institutions, the rule of law, and business environment; (ii) quality of 
public services; (iii) natural wealth management; and (iv) human capital. The proposed project is mainly aligned with 
policy areas (i) and (ii). 
 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
To enhance access to markets and adoption of climate risk management approaches by project beneficiaries in a 
sustainable manner. 

 
Key Results (From PCN) 
 

Increase in the volume of sales of project beneficiaries, disaggregated by gender, youth, and Indigenous (“access to 
market indicator”); 
 
Percentage of project beneficiaries (producers, cooperatives and agro-enterprises) in operation 1 year after the 
completion of the investment subproject (“sustainable access to market indicator”);  
 
Number of beneficiaries adopting climate smart practices promoted by the project, disaggregated by, among others, 
gender, youth, and ethnicity (“access to climate risk management approaches indicator”). 
 
 
 
D. Concept Description 

 
12. The project will contribute to creating long-term economic opportunities for the rural poor and vulnerable 
population by applying a two-fold approach: i) intervene at the grass-roots level via capacity building and subprojects 
(components 1a and 2a/b) focused on improving access to markets and resilience to extreme weather events and 
climate change; and ii) improve critical institutions, systems, and infrastructure (component 1b and 2c). In the short and 
medium term, the project will put into operation an inclusive agribusiness model: productive alliances. Producers will 
enhance their income-generating capacity by becoming more engaged in business activities, while incorporating more 
climate resilient technologies and approaches. In the long term the project will spark the creation of both on-farm and 
off-farms jobs and strengthen resilience.    
 
13. The project will have national coverage. Because Paraguay is a diverse country, activities will be tailored to fit 
the diverse ecological and productive contexts. Prioritization criteria for specific activities will be determined.  
 
14. Project beneficiaries will include the following categories:  
- rural indigenous communities; afro-descendants. Participation by women and youth will also be prioritized 
- organized rural smallholder producers from any of the following categories used for family farming policies in 
Paraguay: subsistence, transitional or capitalized producers, 
- producer cooperatives, small- and medium-sized agro-entrepreneurs, and other partner institutions; 
- and selected public institutions.  
Based on the experience of comparable interventions in Paraguay and other countries and counting a household as a 


single beneficiary once it receives any type of support, the project will benefit over 30,000 poor and vulnerable rural 
households, with the target figures for both women-headed households and young producers to be determined later. 
Beneficiaries of investment support will be selected on a competitive basis (see component 2) and using screening 
mechanisms that ensure that the benefits reach the poor and vulnerable groups. This operation will adopt a customized 
approach to targeting indigenous peoples and afro-descendants, drawing upon the experience of PRODERS. 
Beneficiaries of PRODERS will be eligible for this project, provided they meet the specific criteria for each type of 
support.  
 
15. Four critical changes will distinguish this project from PRODERS: (i) promoting activities that ultimately help the 
beneficiaries profit from business opportunities –this project will take up where PRODERS left off in terms of promoting 
market access ; (ii) including calls for proposals and co-financing schemes (with counterpart contributions mainly in cash) 
for subproject investments to strengthen ‘buy in’ and sustainability of investments; (iii) capitalizing on the capacity and 
engagement of a larger spectrum of partners (alliances at various levels); and (iv) integrating a risk management 
approach across the board in order to minimize the shocks of extreme climate events, while investing in resilience 
against climate change and enhance the sustainability of project outcomes.  
 
16. The project will address the gender gaps that are critical to attaining the PDO, namely (i) increasing women’s 
access to resources and technology; (ii) strengthening the earning-generating capacity of women; and (iii) fostering the 
participation of women in critical institutions.   
 
17. The project will mobilize private capital in multiple ways in line with the Maximizing-Finance-for-
Development Agenda. Besides the inclusion of counterpart co-financing in all types of subprojects, the project will 
promote access to credit for smallholder producers by providing technical assistance to beneficiaries and financial 
institutions. Credit to small agricultural businesses is often considered risky and poorly profitable for financial 
institutions. By linking productive alliances that have been successfully implemented to commercial banks that can 
continue financing their business plans, the project will contribute to reducing the risk exposure of private financial 
institutions. With this experience, conditions can be put in place to removing barriers to crowding in private sector 
finance for small rural entrepreneurs. 
 
Component 1: Capacity building (approximately US$ 20 million IBRD loan) 
 
18. This component will address the need to build both human capital of targeted communities and producer 
organizations (1a), and to improve critical factors (1b), in order to facilitate access to markets and integration with 
formal and lucrative value chains. It will fund workshops, courses, field days, study trips, and public events. In addition, 
the subcomponent will finance the provision of expert assistance, as needed, such as lawyers and the preparation and 
dissemination of printed and audiovisual education material. 
 
1a Strengthening human capital of targeted communities and strengthening producer organizations  
19. This subcomponent will help remove barriers that prevent potential beneficiaries, in particular indigenous 
peoples and Afro-descendants, from taking advantage of investment opportunities. Furthermore, it will strengthen 
organizations that have already made investments, so that they are more sustainable. 
 
20. Assistance will cover areas such as legal issues during the formalization of land titles in indigenous communities 
or pending formal registration of the organization, technical and operational know how around select value chains, as 
well as management capabilities such as financial literacy, with an emphasis on understanding barriers to credit access 
notably for women and women’s organizations; creating and administering revolving funds; and monitoring and 


assessing results of investments.   
 
21. Moreover, under this subcomponent, the project will disseminate calls for proposals among potential 
beneficiaries and provide technical assistance to the organizations for preparing the detailed proposals for investments, 
as described in component 2.    
 
1b Strengthening critical institutions and systems  
 
22. This subcomponent will focus on strengthening the institutions and systems that are pivotal to promoting access 
to markets, including a risk management and sustainability perspective as well as a gender angle. By doing so, the 
project will contribute to creating a conducive environment for improved partnerships between organized producers 
and firms. 
 
23. Attention will be paid to improving the capabilities of the MAL to provide the sector with updated risk-related 
information and services that mitigate and/or transfer risk. This includes existing climate information services, forecast 
models, and weather insurance, which will cover both indemnity-based and parametric/index-based insurance. The 
ministerial Risk Management Unit will lead these activities.   
 
24. Furthermore, the MAL and its dependent institutions will improve their ability to support productive integration 
in strategic value chains; for instance, studies and technical assistance will be undertaken to identify key constraints as 
well as policy and systems reforms and financing requirements to enhance Paraguay’s capabilities in terms of 
strengthened traceability systems and food quality governance for select (prioritized) value chains will be undertaken.  
Actionable roadmaps for implementing the salient recommendations would be developed under the project.   
 
25. In addition, the component will strengthen the existing ministerial centers that serve to collect, store, and sell 
products for associated farmers (CECOPROA: its name in Spanish “Centros de Comercialización para Productores 
Asociados”), and replicate the model in at least two additional locations. In this regard, alternatives for crowding-in 
private financing for building and managing the centers will be analyzed. 
 
26. Finally, the subcomponent will provide support to private firms, with a focus on small- and medium-sized 
enterprises, to put Supplier Development Programs into operation. These efforts will be complemented by advisory 
services provided by the International Finance Corporation to its client firms in selected value chains. The project will 
also examine the possibility to work with select private commercial banks in understanding and where feasible, helping 
address barriers to formal financing by producers (especially, women, subsistence, small or even medium-sized entities).   
 
Component 2: Investments to foster market access (approximately US$ 70 million IBRD loan, US$ 20 million 
counterpart funding from communities, organizations, and municipalities) 
 
27. Component 2 will provide matching grants to beneficiaries (organizations and institutions) to carry out 
investment subprojects (productive partnerships, 2a)) complemented by two sets of investments in innovation 
subprojects and small infrastructure works, 2b and 2c.  
 
28. Investment support under component 2 will be mainly granted on a competitive basis following calls for 
proposals. Special focus will be paid to promoting access to matching grants for afro-descendants, women farmers and 
young people. Clear beneficiary profiles and categories, as well as the criteria and process for selection will be 
elaborated during preparation.  A key consideration will be households and individuals that benefit under component 1 


in terms of capacity building and technical assistance will be able to apply for investments under component 2.  
Different levels of counterpart contribution will be established based on categories of beneficiaries. The experience in 
multiple alliance projects in the region shows that providing counterpart co-financing in cash can help generate buy-in 
and ownership and contribute to more sustainable outcomes.  This finding will be applied appropriately during project 
design.  
29. The project will stimulate the access to financial services that can provide funds for subproject implementation 
and/or continue supporting the alliances once the project ends. To narrow the gender gap regarding access to credit for 
women, the project will include tailored training for women and provide additional support for women-led businesses.  
Similar attention will also be paid to participating afro-descendants and youth.    
 
2a Productive partnerships 
 
30. Indigenous and afro-descendent communities and producer organizations will be supported in establishing 
partnerships with purchasers and preparing business plans that aim to meet the purchasers’ requirements in terms of 
product type, quantity, and quality. These business plans will determine the investments needed either on-farm or off-
farm as collective assets, as well as the technical or administrative assistance.  
 
31. Since the project aims for all subprojects to incorporate climate-smart features to enhance their resilience to 
natural disasters and climate change, beneficiaries will be encouraged to incorporate climate risk management 
practices, such as small-scale water harvesting and irrigation schemes, soil management or other improved on- and off-
farm practices into their business plans, and adopt technologies that, besides boosting yields, are climate-smart and 
environmentally sound.  
 
32. Purchasers will include the following domestic public and private and potentially international actors: public 
institutions, such as schools, the military and hospitals, and businesses, such as supermarkets or agri-processors, with a 
focus on formal supply chains in dynamic markets. 
 
33. The scheme will finance subprojects with agricultural and livestock products, forestry products, such as yerba 
mate, aquaculture, and rural and ecosystem-based services, including agritourism. It will also support partnerships for 
both primary and processed products. The subcomponent will promote the participation of women in the organizations 
and provide customized assistance to women-led alliances. Attention will also be paid to Afro-descendants and youth.  
 
2b Complementary innovation subprojects 
 
34. Indigenous communities and producer organizations will partner with public or private institutions to carry out 
investment subprojects that aim to pilot, disseminate and adopt innovative technologies, and also to move downstream 
along value chains by piloting new processing techniques, products/product development and agro-industry based 
services. These investments seek to stimulate the sector to go beyond traditional agricultural schemes and introduce 
new products, concepts and activities that can translate into better access to lucrative markets and higher economic 
benefits in the medium term. Groups of alliances supported under subcomponent 2a will be eligible to this type of 
support to expand the adoption of technologies such as improved genetic plant varieties at a more regional level.  
 
35. Technologies and practices refer, for instance, to innovative integrated landscape approaches for agricultural 
products, drought-tolerant and disease-resistant plant varieties, integrated agro-forestry or pastoral-forestry systems, 
information and communication technologies, and new (green) business models, all of them with either promising or 
demonstrated benefits. Incentives will be provided for subprojects led by women, afro-descendants and young 
producers.  
 
2c Complementary small infrastructure subprojects 
 
36. Municipalities will partner with the MAL to carry out small infrastructure works that are critical to facilitating 
agro-logistics and access to markets for communities and organizations, such as basic market/fair structures and spaces 
and storage facilities. The project will support analytical work to examine the opportunity to establish more 
sophisticated public-private investments in needed infrastructure such as wholesale markets, cold chains and processing 
plants.  
 
Component 3: Project Coordination, Monitoring and Evaluation (approximately US$ 10 million IBRD loan) 
 
37. This component will provide support to the MAL for project coordination and management; monitoring, results 
evaluation, and assessment of project activities; project fiduciary administration, internal controls, and audits; project 
environmental and social risk management following the new Environment and Social Framework; a citizen engagement 
mechanism and a grievance redress mechanism; and project-related studies. In addition, this component will finance the 
strengthening of cross-cutting areas in the MAL, such as financial management and results-based monitoring. It will fund 
consultants, goods and services need to perform the activities. 
 
    
 
Legal Operational Policies                                  Triggered? 

Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50 No 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60 No 

 
Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts 

A baseline environmental and social risks and impacts assessment (ESA) will be conducted under ESS1 at a 
framework level to verify the necessary scope of addressing ESS2-8. ESS2-4 and 6 will require close attention, 
given several related and critical challenges that include e.g. securing sound labor conditions and considering 
potential use of child labor, efficient use of living natural resources and all materials, consideration adaptation 
to increased climate variability and change and minimizing GHG emissions, sustained provision of ecosystem 
services, prevention of further expansion of the agricultural frontier, contamination and/or overexploitation 
of water resources, and promotion of biodiversity-friendly productive systems. ESS7 will require careful 
consideration during project preparation and implementation since the prevalence of indigenous and afro-
descendant communities will be a substantial criterion for the selection of subprojects. Based on the lessons 
learned in PRODERS, the project will adopt a customized approach to targeting Indigenous Peoples (IP, see 
ESS7 for more details) and the approach will be broadened to afro-descendant communities. ESS9 is the only 
ESS that is not expected to have relevance for the project, yet the institutional arrangements for matching 
grants/revolving funds remain to be determined. Due implementation of ESS10 will be critical to promote 
broad and transparent participation of project-affected and other interested parties and to prevent elite 
capture. 

 
























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Chad Second Programmatic Economic Recovery and Resilience Grant (P168606) 

 
 

  
 Page 1 of 6  

     

 
      
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Program Information Document 
(PID)  

 
Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated:  06-Dec-2018| Report No: PIDC26196 


BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Chad P168606 Chad Second Programmatic 
Economic Recovery and 
Resilience Grant (P168606) 

P163424 

Region Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) Financing Instrument 

AFRICA Jul 31, 2019 Macroeconomics, Trade 
and Investment 

Development Policy 
Financing 

Borrower(s) Implementing Agency 

Ministry of Economy and 
Development Planning 

Ministry of Finance and Budget 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The Program Development Objectives and pillars of the proposed series are to (1) enhance fiscal risk management; 
(2) improve oil revenue transparency and management; (3) promote resilience and economic diversification in key 
real sectors; and (4) increase social protection for the poor and vulnerable. 

 
 Financing (in US$, Millions) 

FIN_SUMM_PUB_TBL 
SUMMARY 
 

Total Financing 40.00 
    
DETAILS-NewFin3 

Total World Bank Group Financing 40.00 

     World Bank Lending 40.00 
   

  
Decision 
The review did authorize the preparation to continue 

    
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
 

1. The collapse of global oil prices caused a fiscal and economic crisis in 2016 and 2017. Low oil prices left Chad’s 
external debt unsustainable and threw the economy into deep recession. Falling revenues, together with the obligation 

to service an oil collateralized commercial loan, rendered the government illiquid. In fact, more than 80 percent of oil 
revenues were used to directly service debt owed to Glencore, with only about 15 percent entering treasury accounts in 


cash terms. Real GDP contracted by 6.3 percent in 2016 and 3 percent in 2017, opening a large negative output gap. This 
was reflected in a sharp drop in CPI inflation from 3.7 percent in 2015 to -1.1. percent in 2016, and 0.2 percent in 2017.  

2. In response to the oil price shock, the government had to pursue severe fiscal consolidation. In early 2016, the 
authorities introduced cash-based budgeting and adopted an Emergency Fiscal Plan aimed at mitigating the short-term 
impact of the crisis. Significant expenditure cuts led to a fall in the non-oil primary deficit from 9.7 percent of non-oil GDP 
at end-2015 to 3.8 percent at end-2017, while the overall fiscal deficit (cash basis) was contained at 2.5 percent of non-oil 
GDP in 2017. In 2018, the overall fiscal balance is estimated to be at -0.6 percent of non-oil GDP. Domestically financed 
public investment took a major hit and dropped from 9.8 percent of non-oil GDP in 2014 to 0.7 percent in 2017, while 
recurrent spending dropped from 16.6 percent to 13.7 percent and arrears accumulated. 

3. To return to fiscal and debt sustainability, commercial debt restructuring as well as strong external budget support 
were necessary. An important challenge has been to close an original financing gap of US$1.222 billion in 2017 and 2018. 
Following almost a year of negotiation, Chad and Glencore signed a final debt restructuring agreement in June 2018, notably 
linking debt service to oil revenues through a dynamic cash sweep mechanism. This arrangement reduces the debt service 
to revenue ratio, mitigates the fiscal risk of oil price volatility, reduces the financing gap and returns Chad to a sustainable 
debt path. Furthermore, authorities have financed part of the deficit by issuing bonds in the regional market, however, banks 
have approached their regulatory limits on Chadian Government securities. Ultimately, Chad’s development partners have 
provided budget support requiring the Government to adhere to the rules and mechanisms as agreed for the restructuring 
of its commercial debt while further rationalizing public financial management (PFM) and tightening expenditure controls. 

4. Despite fiscal stabilization translating into gradual recovery, years of recession and austerity have constrained 
social welfare and poverty-reduction.1   Real GDP expected to grow at an estimated 2.6 percent in 2018, largely supported 
by increases in oil prices and oil production. In the non-oil economy, favorable weather conditions and the privatization 
of the cotton public enterprise are expected to improve the agriculture sector’s contribution to (non-oil) GDP growth. 
However, in the absence of a well-targeted and effective social safety net (SSN), the poor and vulnerable have been deeply 
affected by the crisis. During the oil boom, poverty rates declined (from 55 percent in 2003 to 47 percent in 2011), 
however, the absolute number of poor increased from 4.9 million to 5.6 million due to population growth. Progress on 
non-monetary poverty also presents a mixed picture. Since 2014 and up until 2018, dwindling fiscal resources and poor 
social spending execution have disrupted vital public services despite efforts to protect priority social and productive 
spending 

Relationship to CPF 
 

5. The Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY16-FY202 is based on three engagement themes: (i) 
strengthening management of public resources; (ii) improving returns to agriculture and building value chains; and (iii) 
building human capital and reducing vulnerability. The program supported by the proposed second Development Policy 
Grant is closely aligned with the three pillars of the CPF and designed to leverage World Bank investment lending projects 
and Technical Assistance activities across the four pillars, notably in the areas of domestic resource mobilization, tax policy 
and administration, SOE management, oil sector capacity building, agriculture value chain support and productivity 
enhancement, and social safety nets development. 

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The Program Development Objectives and pillars of the proposed operation are to (1) enhance fiscal risk management; 
(2) improve oil revenue transparency and management; (3) promote resilience and economic diversification in key real 
sectors; and (4) increase social protection for the poor and vulnerable. 
 
Key Results  
 

6. This second programmatic Economic Recovery and Resilience (ERR) DPO will support Chad in building resilience 
and consolidating transition to a sustainable, structural growth path. Building on the First Economic Recovery and 
Resilience DPO (P163424), this second grant in a series of two solidifies the shift of World Bank support towards a 
structural resilience and growth agenda. The authorities aim at sustaining recovery, fostering economic diversification, 
and developing coping mechanisms for the poor and vulnerable. Four intertwined pillars combine structural measures to 
enhance fiscal risk management with boosting economic diversification and social resilience. Improved debt, Public 
Financial and oil revenue management are complemented by increased productivity in agriculture and competitive, open 
access information and communication technologies (ICT). Finally, putting in place a well-targeted and fully operational 
social protection system adds an explicit micro layer of resilience. 

 

D. Concept Description 
 

7. The proposed operation supports structural policy reform to improve debt and oil revenue management, 
increase productivity in agriculture and ICT telecom sectors and build a well targeted social safety net.  The operation 
is programmed under IDA18 with a total amount of US$40 million. It follows the First Programmatic Economic Recovery 
and Resilience DPO that passed Board in September 2018, as well as a 2017 standalone Emergency Fiscal Stabilization 
Operation that was conceived as a first stage supporting Chad in its stabilization effort while preparing the ground for the 
second stage, i.e. structural measures to build resilience and start sustainable recovery in the context of this programmatic 
DPO series. 

8. The main policy pillars are to (1) enhance fiscal risk management; (2) improve oil revenue transparency and 
management; (3) promote resilience and economic diversification in key real sectors; and (4) increase social protection 
for the poor and vulnerable. First, this programmatic series aims at enhancing fiscal risk management through (a) 
improved debt management; (b) rationalization of tax expenditures; (c) streamlining the payroll for enhanced fiscal space; 
and (d) improved oversight and transparency in the management of SOEs. Second, to improve the contribution of the oil 
sector to fiscal sustainability and economic resilience it promotes (i) a functional oil revenue management mechanism; (ii) 
transparency in the financial performance of the SHT; and (iii) improved control over oil production costs. Third, to 
increase diversification and resilience of Chad’s population in face of economic and climatic shocks, the operation (a) 
contributes to greater agricultural productivity for more sustainable and inclusive growth; and (b) strengthens the 
contribution of the ICT sector to inclusive growth through enhanced affordability and coverage of services, as well as 
improved transparency for public and private service delivery. Fourth, it increases social protection for the poor and most 
vulnerable groups including refugees, by developing an effective and well-targeted SSN system, and implementing cash 
transfers.  

9. The operation is well aligned with the strategic objectives of the 2017-2021 National Development Plan (NDP). 
It focuses on three of the four strategic Pillars of the government’s program, including Pillar 2, strengthening good 
governance and the rule of law, Pillar 3, development of a robust and competitive economy, and Pillar 4, improving the 
quality of life of the Chadian population.  

10. This second programmatic DPO will also help catalyze private investment through improving the investment 
climate and creating opportunities in key sectors of the economy. Maximizing the impact of development financing is a 
central medium-term objective. The importance of concessional finance in supporting inclusive economic growth should 
be gradually reduced and compensated by private sector activity and investment: 1) Improved debt management and SOE 
oversight will reduce fiscal risk and create fiscal space for effective public investment able to crowd in private investment; 
2) at the same time, enabling competitive input markets in agriculture (here through effective agricultural extension 
services and high-quality seeds) and telecommunication (here through a competitive, open access fiber optics 
infrastructure) will not only break power of inefficient SOEs, but also lower entry and business costs across the economy. 
In the medium-term, it creates permanent opportunity for competition and innovation as well as significant consumer 
welfare gains. 

 

E. Poverty and Social Impacts and Environmental Aspects 
 
Poverty and Social Impacts 
 
11. The proposed programmatic Development Policy Grant is expected to have a positive impact on poverty 
reduction in the medium- and long- term. Actions supported by this operation are expected to help decrease poverty in 
the medium- and long-term through the promotion of inclusive growth in agriculture, and the development of more 
affordable ICT services and broader coverage in underserved areas. In addition, a properly targeted expansion of the 
Social Safety Net system has the potential to have a significant impact on allowing households to move out of poverty 
and strengthen household resilience to shocks.  
 
Environmental Impacts 
 

12. The reforms and policy actions supported by the proposed operation are not likely to have significant negative 
effects on the country’s environment, forests and other natural resources. All the actions are policy-oriented; they do 
not support direct investment in environmentally impactful projects or involve policy actions with significant 
environmental consequences. The assessment of potential impacts related to actions supported by the DPO will rely on 
the existing national legal and regulatory framework and will be monitored and addressed through the national 
procedures in place in Chad. Environmental Assessment (EA) is a legal requirement in Chad and is widely applied to all 
developmental projects. The EA process is based on Presidential Decree No. 630/PR/PM/MEERH/2010 on EA regulations 
and the ministerial decision No. 039/PR/PM/MERH/SG/DGE/DEELCPN/2012 with respect to the general guidelines and 
procedures for EA. The department of EA and pollution control in the Ministry of Environment and Fisheries is 
institutionally charged with reviewing and clearing environmental impact assessment (EIA) documents. 
 

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Eastern Ukraine: Reconnect, Recover, Revitalize (3R Project) (P172348) 

 
 

  
Apr 01, 2020 Page 1 of 11  

     

 
     

 

Project Information Document (PID) 
 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 21-Apr-2020 | Report No: PIDA28762 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Ukraine P172348 Eastern Ukraine: 
Reconnect, Recover, 
Revitalize (3R Project) 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA 10-Apr-2020 30-Jul-2020 Social 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Finance Ukravtodor, Ministry for 
Reintegration of 
Temporarily Occupied 
Territories 

 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
To strengthen transport connectivity, support agricultural sector recovery, and engage conflict-affected communities 
in the design and monitoring of investments in project areas. 

 
Components 

RECONNECT: Roads Investments to Link Rural Communities to Processing, Markets, Services 
RECOVER: Agricultural Investments to Support Sector Recovery and Modernization 
REVITALIZE: Implementation Support Platform 
CERC: Contingent Emergency Response Component 

 
 

PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
   

SUMMARY-NewFin1  
 

Total Project Cost 100.00 

Total Financing 100.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 100.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 

 
   
DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 



     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) 100.00 

    

Environmental and Social Risk Classification 

Substantial 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate     
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
B. Introduction and Context 

 
Country Context  

1. Ukraine’s economic growth has been uneven since the country’s independence in 1991 and has been 
impacted by both external factors, such as the global financial crisis of 2008, and the internal conflict that 
began in 2014.  During the 2000-2007 period, Ukraine sustained high annual growth rates of 7 percent on 
average. Capital inflows surged, and credit growth boomed, fueled by the external borrowing of commercial 
banks. This enabled an expansionary fiscal policy that resulted in the accumulation of a structural deficit. Growth 
was almost entirely driven by favorable external conditions, but was not supported by structural reforms. With 
the onset of the global financial crisis, the Ukrainian economy contracted rapidly. During 2008‐2013, growth 
was negative and averaged ‐0.7 percent annually. The Maidan Revolution of 2013/2014, the events in Crimea 
in March 2014, and the armed conflict in the east of the country since 2014 resulted in a continued severe 
recession, and the economy contracted by 16 percent during 2014-2015. The Government of Ukraine (GoU) 
subsequently undertook a series of fiscal and business environment-related reforms that helped stabilize the 
economy. Economic growth has resumed, albeit at a modest rate: gross domestic product (GDP) grew by 2.3 
percent in 2016, 2.5 percent in 2017, 3.3 percent in 2018, and 3.5 percent in the first half of 2019.1 

 
2. Poverty rates vary across the country as fiscal and conflict-related pressures amplify traditional factors 
of vulnerability. Ukraine is characterized by significant regional disparities, and the benefits of past economic 
growth have not been shared evenly. Poverty remains higher in rural areas (8.5 versus 5.1 percent), where local 
communities face challenges such as poor living conditions, outdated infrastructure, and limited public services 
provision. Inflows of internally displaced persons (IDPs) due to the conflict have put an additional strain on local 
resources and services in host communities. Reversing the trend of increasing poverty rates and promoting 
shared prosperity remain significant development challenges that require Ukraine to capitalize on the drivers of 
growth through structural, policy, and investment reforms and the development of human capital. 

 
3. The conflict in Eastern Ukraine has impacted the lives and livelihoods of over five million Ukrainians 
through damage to infrastructure, interruption of markets and services, restrictions of movement, loss of 
employment, and psychosocial impacts. To date, over 13,000 people have been killed and 2.7 million persons 
displaced, including over 1.3 million internally displaced. Despite the extension of the ceasefire agreement in 
February 2015 (Minsk II), the security situation remains volatile, with daily hostilities occurring along the contact 


line separating Government-Controlled Areas (GCAs) and Non-Governmental Controlled areas (NGCAs) in 
Eastern Ukraine. 

  
4. The conflict has severely impacted socioeconomic activity in Ukraine’s eastern industrial heartland of 
Donetsk and Luhansk Oblasts. Prior to the conflict, these areas (referred to as “the Donbas”) accounted for 12.5 
percent of Ukraine’s population and generated 15.7 percent of the country’s total GDP and a quarter of its 
exports. Because of the conflict, an estimated 70 percent of enterprises in the Donbas have reported decreased 
investment and revenues, disrupted trade relationships, lack of demand for products, and shrinking 
workforces.2 A World Bank survey of the socioeconomic impacts of the conflict in 2017 highlighted the welfare 
and socioeconomic challenges facing IDPs, veterans, and host communities.3  

 
5. Since taking office in May 2019, Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy has made outreach and 
development support to Eastern Ukraine a key policy priority, emphasizing socioeconomic integration of the 
region. This policy shift represents a window of opportunity for the World Bank to support the GoU in promoting 
the recovery and development of conflict-affected areas. Luhansk Oblast GCAs are proposed as the geographic 
focus for initial World Bank investment because of their acute lack of connectivity and economic opportunity 
compared to other areas of Eastern Ukraine, to complement and leverage other international partner funding 
more heavily concentrated in Donetsk Oblast, and to promote economic recovery of the region through a focus 
on agricultural development in line with the Bank’s broader support for Ukraine’s land and agricultural sector 
reform agenda as a future engine of economic growth.4  

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 

 
6. Economic impacts of the conflict have been among the most acute in Luhansk Oblast. With the division 
into GCAs and NGCAs, the oblast’s rural and agricultural north was severed from its industrialized and more 
urbanized south. Out of a pre-conflict population of 1.5 million people, Luhansk GCAs now have an estimated 
population of 692,000 people. Twenty-two of the region’s 34 cities, including Luhansk City as the oblast regional 
center, are now located in the NGCAs. An estimated 84 percent of the industrial capacity and 81 percent of all 
jobs in Luhansk Oblast have been left outside of the GCAs. Unemployment in the GCAs reached 17.5 percent 
among working age individuals in 2018, the highest of any oblast5 and the region has experienced the sharpest 
decline of any oblast in GDP between 2010-2017. While outmigration from Luhansk Oblast averaged 4,000 to 
6,000 individuals per year during the 2008-2013 pre-conflict period, it has since increased to more than 13,000 
people per year.6   
 
7. Luhansk GCAs also face severe connectivity challenges and lack a quality transport system to serve as 
a backbone of the regional economy. Before 2017, the financial and institutional arrangements in Ukraine’s 
road sector created a large backlog of periodic maintenance and rehabilitation. The shortage of funding, 
combined with a large share of overweight trucks, has resulted in premature deterioration of the network. From 
2011 to 2016, the share of national roads in poor condition (with an International Roughness Index (IRI) > 6) 

increased from 5 to 17 percent. Ukraine is also currently ranked 66th of a total of 160 countries in the World 
Bank’s 2018 Logistics Performance Index 7 and lags behind the best performers in the region and all European 
Union (EU) member states. For Luhansk Oblast, connectivity and logistical challenges are particularly acute. In a 
national comparison, Luhansk Oblast GCAs ranked as having the lowest connectivity level, based on its low 
proportion of roads per square kilometer and the limited access of its cities to major national markets. Major 
upgrading of the regional road network has not been undertaken since the 1980s. Luhansk’s transport system 
has also been severely impacted by the interruption of rail lines and road networks due to the conflict, resulting 
in an increase in overweight trucks transporting products over long distances. The average IRI on the network 
in Luhansk Oblast in 2017 was approximately 6.54, well below the national average.  
 
8. The long-term industrial decline and the recent conflict have increased the prominence of the 
agricultural sector in the Luhansk GCA economy and its importance to rural livelihoods. Before the conflict, 
the share of agriculture in the regional economy was about 10 percent and about 10 percent of the labor force 
was employed in the sector. Today, about 76 percent (or 1.5 million hectares) of the total agricultural land of 
the Donbas is located in the GCAs of Luhansk Oblast, with a growing percentage of workers employed in the 
agricultural sector.8 In the majority of Luhansk GCA districts, agriculture is the leading economic activity and 
sector of employment. In 2018, 23 percent of new jobs created were in agriculture, more than any other sector.9 
As of 2018, a total of 964 agro-industrial enterprises and more than 45,200 private family farms were involved 
in agricultural production.10 These family farms provide significant numbers of informal employment and 
support to rural livelihoods in the region. The sector remains critical because of its role as an employer of last 
resort and its importance for livelihoods for rural populations in the region. Luhansk’s regional development 
strategy highlights agricultural development as a key objective, including increasing productivity and efficiency 
and facilitating processing and access to markets. The project’s focus on agricultural development in Eastern 
Ukraine also aligns with the Bank’s broader support for Ukraine’s land and agricultural reform agenda as a future 
engine of Ukraine’s economic growth and development. Finally, interventions in the agricultural sector, such as 
the introduction of new technologies and the development of value chains, are likely to be more efficient and 
cost effective for recovery than focusing on the restructuring or reconstruction of the former and now 
uncompetitive industrial sector. 
 
9. However, the conflict has resulted in significant negative impacts on agricultural supply and value 
chains in the region. Cereal and oil seed production has remained by far the most important agricultural activity, 
with 57 percent of arable land cultivated with cereals and sunflowers. Prior to the conflict, Luhansk Oblast relied 
on the Luhansk-Valuyki railway and road connections for the transportation of agricultural goods. Commodity 
flows have now been reoriented westward towards the Kharkiv region via longer, poorer quality road 
connections that have increased the required road haulage distance by an average of 65 kilometers. In 2018, 
transport costs for commodities increased by UAH 140-190 per ton of cargo, which impacted profitability and 
income.11 The resulting increased truck traffic has hastened the deterioration of the oblast’s primary and 
secondary road network. In addition, many of the large-scale grain and oil storage, processing, and logistical 

 
7 https://lpi.worldbank.org/international/global.  
8 United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization. 2018. The Agriculture Sector in Eastern Ukraine: Analysis and Recommendations. 
Rome. 
9 United Nations Peacebuilding and Reconstruction Program. 2018. Comprehensive Analysis of the Regional Labor Market and the State 

Employment Service and Their Impact on the Vocational Education System in Luhansk Region. 
10 Luhansk Region Civil-Military Administration. 2016. Regional Development Strategy for the Period Until 2020. Severedonetsk. 

facilities, and most of the food processing industry and modern laboratory testing facilities are now located in 
the NGCAs and are therefore inaccessible. Production costs have also increased because of higher prices for the 
import and transportation of agricultural inputs, such as fuel and lubricants, seeds, and fertilizers.  
 
10.  Subsistence farming is widespread in Luhansk GCAs and is critical in supporting basic livelihoods in 
rural areas but small and household farmers producing vegetables, fruits, dairy products, and meat have lost 
access to aggregators and to the urban markets of Luhansk NGCAs, which accounted for over half of the 
oblast’s pre-conflict population. These producers now also face challenges because of the lack of access and 
investments in on-farm innovation and technology; limited storage, laboratory services, and processing 
facilities; and poor access to finance that would allow them to transition from subsistence level to more market-
oriented production. These challenges are exacerbated by the general uncertainty about the prospects of a 
political settlement and reintegration of NGCA urban markets and trade.  

 
11. Youth, IDPs, and veterans in Luhansk Oblast face particular development challenges. Among the 
average of 13,000 individuals that migrate from the GCAs each year, 67 percent are under 28 years of age, driven 
by limited opportunities for civic engagement, limited prospects for well-paying employment, and concern over 
poor social infrastructure for young families.12 Luhansk Oblast ranks second to Donetsk Oblast in the number of 
IDPs per oblast, with over 270,000 people officially registered. Tensions with host communities are low, 
however, and IDPs are well represented among employees of public service institutions. Yet IDPs face difficulties 
in accessing land, obtaining satisfactory housing, and joining established agricultural networks within the GCAs 
of Luhansk. Most IDPs have skills in engineering, processing, and other mechanical or technical trades that they 
acquired in their home areas, which are now in NGCAs. Veterans in Luhansk Oblast, as elsewhere, have to 
contend with unemployment and difficult transitions to civilian life, lack of psychosocial and rehabilitation 
support, long absences from farming and assets, and difficulty securing their benefit entitlements.13    
 
12. The conflict has exacerbated gender gaps, particularly for rural women. With men being predominantly 
engaged in military operations, women have taken on greater responsibilities for household affairs, with many 
becoming sole caregivers for their families, the elderly, and the disabled.14 Female pensioners, women IDPs, and 
female-headed households with young children are particularly vulnerable to the conflict-induced social 
disruption prevalent throughout Luhansk Oblast.15 Poor road conditions and the resulting longer commutes via 
personal vehicles as well as limited and neglected public transport systems also disproportionately disadvantage 
rural women’s mobility in the region and their access to employment, healthcare, childcare, and other public 
services. Poor mobility also constrains women’s access to more diverse employment opportunities and more 
lucrative markets.16 Many women in rural Luhansk GCAs are engaged in agricultural production at a small-scale 
or household level. However, the supplementary income and food security gained from farming activities is 
limited by poor access to markets, limited productive inputs (both advisory and technological), and lack of access 
to information and skills development around value chain development and value-added production.17 

 
12 SCORE data (2019) for driver identification. See Ukraine State Statistics Agency for outmigration s, 2018-2019. 
13 World Bank. 2017. Ukraine: Socio-Economic Impacts of Internal Displacement and Veteran Return. 
14  Spear, A., Kokanova, N., Magduyk, L., Dadalauri, N., Buzu., and Engvall, L. 2016. Gender analysis of the EU AA/DCFTAs with Georgia, 

Moldova and Ukraine. Swedish International Development Agency Publication. p. 60. 
15  Focus group discussions as part of a WB Rapid Gender Assessment for Luhansk GCAs during project preparation, February 2020. 
16 National official labor force participation rates reflect these realities. Employment among Ukrainian women (47%) is lower than 

among men (63%). UNDP. 2019. Human Development Report. 
17  United Nations Country Team – Gender Theme Group. 2018. Leaving No One Behind: Rural Women and Girls. 

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
Development Objective(s) (From PAD)  
To strengthen transport connectivity and improve agricultural services with the active engagement of conflict-affected 
communities in project areas in Eastern Ukraine. 
 

Key Results 

• Travel time from agricultural communities to service centers/markets in Luhansk GCAs  

• Increased use of agricultural hub and laboratory services (disaggregated by type of 

producer/institution, small-/medium-/large-sized enterprises, women-headed enterprises)  

• Percentage of target beneficiaries of agricultural clusters reporting improved production 

(disaggregated by gender, youth, veterans, production type) 

• Percentage of target beneficiaries who report that the design/operation of infrastructure investments 

financed by the project reflect their inputs (disaggregated by gender) 

 
D. Project Description  
 

13. The project seeks to reinforce national commitment to recovery and development of Eastern Ukraine 
and highlights the benefits of socio-economic connectivity in support of a future settlement.  The project’s 
multi-sectoral investments aim to promote agricultural sector development in rural areas in Luhansk GCAs that 
could help stimulate future growth and opportunity in the region.  Prioritized investments reflect an intensive 
stakeholder dialogue during project preparation with national, regional and local officials, agri-industry, 
agricultural producers, agricultural communities, women, IDPs, veterans, and youth in project areas. 
Recognizing the socio-economic and administrative characteristics of Luhansk GCAs, the project will include the 
following components:  
 
14. Component 1: RECONNECT - Roads Investments to Link Rural Communities to Processing, Markets, and 
Services.  Component 1 will support the rehabilitation of roads in Luhansk Oblast in support of the agricultural 
sector and connecting rural communities to urban service centers in Luhansk GCAs.  Poor and deteriorating local 
roads have been a key bottleneck to agricultural logistics and supply chains and the broader development of the 
region.  Component 1 prioritizes road investments that link farmers to processors, markets, and service centers 
in Luhansk GCAs.  The target road network will be rehabilitated to a category 2-3 standard which is a two-lane 
road with safety specifications including side crash barriers where required.  The project will finance all 
necessary road infrastructure such as bridges, interchanges, and railway crossing, safety measures, site 
supervision of civil works, and equipment.  Additionally, for protection of the investments, the project will 
include installation of weigh-in-motion stations and speed cameras.  The Component will also include activities 
to engage local administration and communities in project areas on road use, road safety measures, and will 
provide technical assistance to support development of ‘feeder roads’ to the network.  This is expected to 
promote local ownership and sustainability of transport investments.  
 
15. Component 2:  RECOVER - Agriculture Investments to Support Sector Recovery and Modernization.  
Component 2 will complement the connectivity investments of Component 1 through select agricultural sub-
projects that address some of the conflict’s impacts on the agricultural sector in Luhansk GCAs, including loss of 
access to agricultural services, processing facilities, product testing and local urban markets, as well as limited 


technology and value chain to market support for the Oblast’s many small producers.  Component investments 
will include: (a) an Agriculture Logistics and Service Hub in Starobilsk City, including a grain/oil seed elevator; a 
small grain/oil seed quality testing facility; an office building for administration and business development 
support; an innovative online trading platform to link producers and traders; and an agricultural services support 
area; (b) a Regional Agricultural Testing and Food Safety Laboratory to address a critical gap following the loss 
of access to the agricultural product testing and food safety management services due to the conflict; and (c) 
Agricultural Cluster Development for small household-level producers.  Community-based Cluster support will 
facilitate the transition from current subsistence production towards more organized and market-oriented 
production practices, including value-chain to market support to an estimated 5 to 10 clusters of 100 to 150 
small household-level producers.  The component will also finance the associated detailed design studies. 
 
16. Component 3 - REVITALIZE: Implementation Support Platform.  Component 3 will support the 
development of an implementation support platform to address management capacity constraints, deficits in 
state-citizen dialogue, and requirements for national-regional-local cooperation to effectively delivery the 
project activities.  Component 3 will finance Project Management activities for the MRTOT.  Component 3 will 
also include the following activities: Luhansk regional public-private investment forums to gather project 
beneficiaries, international and Ukrainian private sector representatives, international and domestic financial 
institutions, GoU representatives, and development partners to raise awareness and promote investment 
opportunities in the region; user/beneficiary surveys and community forums to provide feedback on project 
design and implementation (project processes, budgets and outcomes) for infrastructure investments under 
Components 1 and 2; and a 3R Project beneficiary feedback mechanism (BFM), including Grievance Redress 
Mechanism (GRM).  To educate communities and stakeholders in project areas on the objectives, procedures, 
purpose, and opportunities associated with the project and to emphasize the project as a national investment 
to support economic recovery in Eastern Ukraine, Component 3 will also finance strategic communications 
activities.  The implementation platform supported by Component 3 will promote sustainability and possible 
future scale-up and expansion of Project investments to additional sectors and geographic areas in Eastern 
Ukraine. .

.  
Legal Operational Policies 

            Triggered? 

Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50             No  

Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60             No  

 

Summary of Assessment of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts 
. 
17. The proposed project is expected to have substantial environmental and social risks. The 
Environmental and Social Risk Classification is based on the potential environmental and social risks associated 
with project activities, as well as project location (proximity to conflict areas) and baseline conditions, overall 
scale of the project, possible cumulative impact and anticipated challenges in environmental and social risk 
management supervision due to limited client capacity. 
 
18. Environmental risks. Although the specific sites where physical works will take place are mostly existing 
roads and urbanized areas, key environmental issues will be related to: (a) waste management of removed road 


surfaces and construction spoils; (b) noise and air pollution with dust; (c) the presence and handling of 
hazardous materials such as bitumen, paint, oil containing materials; (d) the health and safety of the populations 
of the villages and towns along the roads and travelers during road rehabilitation phases, as well as the 
populations living near the agriculture-related investment construction sites; and (e) impacts on water, soil, and 
air quality in case of construction-related spills. These predictable impacts are expected to be temporary, 
reversible, moderate in magnitude, and site-specific. The location of the project near the armed conflict zone 
and in a post-conflict territory raises the risk of unexploded ordnances (UXOs) and some of the locations may 
require demining activities to take place before civil works. Adequate adoption of UXO neutralization 
procedures and occupational health and safety practices for workers during construction and maintenance 
operations will be required. Also, the agricultural logistics and service hub is required to adopt HACCP (Hazard 
Analysis and Critical Control Point) and integrate it into its operational model.  
 
19. Social risks. Social issues and potential risks identified include: one, works to be financed under 
components 1 and 2, and associated ESS5 impacts, particularly under component 1 roads investments; two, 
engagement with local communities and other relevant stakeholders (including with most vulnerable and 
disadvantaged groups) and challenges in ensuring their genuine participation in decision-making processes of 
the project; three, the challenging social environment and baseline conditions in Eastern Ukraine due to conflict; 
and four, limited capacity of Ukravtodor as well as MRTOT in handling ESF requirements.  In addition to these 
risks, the evolving situation around the COVID-19 pandemic may also potentially impact project 
implementation, particularly given public health guidelines on physical distancing and quarantine.  Meaningful 
community engagement will be a challenge in the project areas.  To mitigate this risk, implementing entities 
prepared a draft Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP), which among others, suggests preliminary tools (such as 
virtual consultations, etc) to ensure continuous community engagement. Consultation, communication, and 
feedback mechanisms in the design of the project will help to manage expectations, especially for large 
infrastructure projects, and orient investments in ways that address local priorities and strengthen transparency 
in resource allocation decisions.  
 
20. Environmental and Social Framework instruments. Detailed analysis of the application of the World 
Bank’s Environmental and Social Standards (ESSs) has been provided as part of the Environmental and Social 
Review Summary (ESRS). The project applies ESS 1-6, 8, and 10 as relevant at this stage of development and 
needed environmental and social measures will be implemented through the actions agreed in the respective 
Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) prepared by UAD and MRTOT and submitted to the World 
Bank. The Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) with template ESMP, draft SEP, draft RPF 
and Labor Management Procedure were developed and will be updated during project implementation as 
required. Once the project activities are finalized and environmental and social assessments completed, 
additional measures such as subproject-specific Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs), Traffic 
Management Plans (TMP) and Waste Management Plans (WMPs) are to be prepared. A project-specific 
Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) will be established as outlined in the ESMF. 

 
E. Implementation 

 
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 

 
21. Because the project is a multi-sectoral program of support for socio-economic recovery and growth in 
Luhansk Oblast, it requires the involvement of government agencies responsible for recovery/IDPs/veterans, 
transport, agriculture, local infrastructure, and economic development; as well as regional and local officials in 

Luhansk Oblast project areas.  The implementation arrangements will also encourage opportunities for 
interaction and dialogue between national and local levels of administration on project activities.  The Bank team 
agreed specifically on the following: 

 

• UAD will implement Component 1 through its central Project Implementation Unit (PIU) – SOE 
“Ukrdorinvest” (UDI) – and in coordination with the regional UAD office in Luhansk Oblast.  Ukrdorinvest 
has experienced staff with project management, procurement, FM, and social and environmental 
safeguards experience.  Ukrdorinvest will also coordinate with the regional UAD office in Luhansk Oblast 
to support supervision activities and to liaise with local authorities and communities.   
 

• MRTOT will implement Components 2 and 3, drawing on its mandate for conflict-recovery efforts and 
to support establishment of an implementation support platform for national investment in Eastern 
Ukraine.  MRTOT will implement the project through a central PIU and place select PIU staff in the already 
established Sector Office in Luhansk Oblast to carry out coordination, monitoring, communications and 
oversight functions in close coordination with local authorities.   
 

• A Project Steering Sub-Committee will be established under the current Inter-Governmental Council on 
Recovery of the Eastern Regions chaired by MRTOT, or any relevant successor coordination body on 
conflict-recovery.  The Sub-Committee will include participation of relevant national-level agencies, 
including Ministry of Infrastructure, UAD, MDETA, Ministry of Finance, and the Luhansk Oblast State and 
Civil-Military Administration.  The Sub-Committee will be chaired by MRTOT and provide overall strategic 
guidance and oversight to the 3R Project.   
 


























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Burkina Faso COVID-19 Emergency DPO (P174315) 

 
 

  
 Page 1 of 5  

     

 
     
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Program Information Document 
(PID)  

 
Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated:  17-Jun-2020| Report No: PIDC29848 


BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Burkina Faso P174315 Burkina Faso COVID-19 
Emergency DPO (P174315) 

 

Region Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) Financing Instrument 

AFRICA WEST Nov 24, 2020 Macroeconomics, Trade 
and Investment 

Development Policy 
Financing 

Borrower(s) Implementing Agency 

REPUBLIK OF BURKINA 
FASO 

MINISTERE DE L'ECONOMIE, DES FINANCES ET DU DEVELOPPEMENT 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
This operation aims at mitigating the impact of the COVID-19 shock on lives and livelihoods, and laying foundations 
for a resilient recovery. 

 
 Financing (in US$, Millions) 

FIN_SUMM_PUB_TBL 
SUMMARY 
 

Total Financing 100.00 
    
DETAILS-NewFin3 

Total World Bank Group Financing 100.00 

     World Bank Lending 100.00 
   

  
Decision 
The review did authorize the preparation to continue 

    
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
The proposed Development Policy Operation (DPO) supports the Government’s response to the COVID-19 pandemic 
in the context of a deteriorating security and humanitarian situation. Burkina Faso was among the first countries in 
Sub-Saharan Africa hit by COVID-19 and the Government took early and decisive action to contain and mitigate the 
spread of the virus. Prior to COVID-19, the country has experienced a rapidly deteriorating security situation since 
2018 with persistent armed violence that has severe humanitarian consequences. Against this backdrop, the COVID-
19 pandemic is transmitted through external and internal channels with a substantial economic impact. The COVID-19 
crisis is worsening the poverty and social conditions in the country. The proposed operation will help the Government 
tackle the COVID-19 crisis and address structural issues to reduce poverty and inequality in a sustainable manner to 


improve the social conditions over the long term. The macroeconomic policy framework is adequate for the proposed 
operation with the risk of overall debt distress assessed as moderate.  
 

Relationship to CPF 
The Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY18-FY23, which is embedded in the twin goals of ending extreme 
poverty and promoting shared prosperity in a sustainable manner, provides the overarching framework for this 
operation. Policy reforms supported through this emergency operation are consistent with all three pillars of the CPF 
with other projects complementing the operation to achieve CPF outcomes. First, policy reforms related to public 
investment reprioritization (in combination with the the Emergency Recurrent Cost Financing Project ([P169486]) and 
access to credit (supported by the Financial Inclusion Support Project [P164786]) support the acceleration of 
sustainable private-sector-led growth for job creation (CPF Pillar 1). Further, policy reforms related to health (linked 
to Health Services Reinforcement Project [P164696]) and social protection (complemented by the Social Safety Net 
Project [P160371]) contribute to investing in human capital and social protection systems (CPF Pillar 2). Finally, policy 
reforms related to the digitalization of the public administration (supported by the Burkina Faso eGovernment Project 
[P155645]) and the governance of COVID funds (linked to the Economic Governance and Citizen Engagement Project 
[P155121]) contribute to strengthening governance and supporting citizen engagement (CPF Pillar 3). 
 

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
This operation aims at mitigating the impact of the COVID-19 shock on lives and livelihoods, and laying foundations 
for a resilient recovery. 

 
Key Results  
This operation seeks to achieve results in multiple areas. In the health area, the operation seeks to improve the capacity 
to respond across all phases of the epidemic and to increase health system resilience. The social protection field, it seeks 
to facilitate access to services and strengthen the country’s response to COVID-19 and other crises. Further, this operation 
supports also business continuity of the state and prepares the digital transformation. Moreover, the DPO is expected to 
improve transparency and accountability in the use of COVID-19 funds and accelerate the response to future crisis. In 
addition, it will help improve the efficacy and efficiency of priority spending. Finally, the DPO envisions to improve access 
to credit for individuals, micro, small and medium enterprises and improve debt management and transparency. 
 

D. Concept Description 
 
The proposed operation is based on reforms included in the Government’s COVID-19 Response Plan, enacted in the Head 
of State’s address to the Nation. The plan is the result of recommendations from the National Pandemic Management 
Committee chaired by the Prime Minister and comprising a dozen sectoral ministries, technical and financial partners, 
and the civil society organizations. In addition, in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic, the Bank has intensified the policy 
dialogue in the health, social protection, education and agriculture sectors.  
 
The proposed operation supports the Government’s Government’s Emergency Response Plan through several angles. 
First, the DPO will strengthen the crisis response through the implementation of a national epidemiologic monitoring 
system. Second, the operation will help strengthen the Government’s response strategy through better identification 
and targeting of the most vulnerable, fast, adapted and transparent PFM and procurement procedures, and better, faster 
and if needed, contactless public services. Third, the operation will help strengthen the resilience of MSMEs and the 
informal sector through easier and better access to credit. Fourth, the DPO will help speed up and complete the ongoing 
public spending reprioritization exercise (with a focus on investment projects). Finally, the operation will support Burkina 

Faso’s macroeconomic stability through two channels: a more efficient public spending, and a better management and 
transparency of public debt. 
 

E. Poverty and Social Impacts, and Environmental, Forests, and Other Natural Resource Aspects 
 
Poverty and Social Impacts 
The measures related to the health sector have strongly positive poverty and social impacts. The first sub-action supports 
the development and implementation for the large-scale pilot phase of the development and rollout of a One Health 
system. Improving preparedness, notification, investigation, response, and epidemic management capacity across the 
actors will mitigate against risks that affect both rural (animal husbandry and crops) and urban areas (shutdown effects, 
risk of transmission due to at-risk living conditions). The second sub-action through its information component increases 
targeting and coordination of resources and enables the provision of proper inputs in a timely and cost-effective manner. 
Reducing the duration of the epidemic will reduce the risk to populations, particularly the poor. The third sub-action is 
consistent with the CPF focus to increase service availability to all, but particularly the poor. Increasing prioritization of 
activities and investments and the focus on results will support better health results at lower total cost.  
 
Environmental, Forests, and Other Natural Resource Aspects 
Policy reform in the area of public investment is expected to promote climate-smart infrastructure investments. The 
revised Public Investment Program will include a list of prioritized investment projects resulting from a multi-criteria 
analysis. Impacts on and from climate change are among those criteria. Other criteria are project maturity, economic 
return, and the impact on growth and jobs. For example, in the area of urban roads the following criteria are taken into 
consideration: (i) all-weather pavement resurfacing with material that prevents water damage; (ii) construction of wider 
drains and culverts as well as slope stabilization to accommodate heavy rainfall; and (iii) elevation of bridges, tunnels, 
and roads in flood prone locations to allow for increased amounts of runoff from torrential rainfall to be transported 
away from vulnerable areas. 





















































PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
CONCEPT STAGE

Report No.: PIDC35817

Project Name Regional Disease Surveillance Systems Enhancement (REDISSE) 
(P154807)

Region AFRICA
Country Western Africa
Sector(s) Health (50%), Other social services (35%), Animal production (15%)
Theme(s) Other communicable diseases (40%), Health system performance (40%), 

Rural services and infrastructure (15%), Rural policies and inst itutions 
(5%)

Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P154807
Borrower(s) Ministere de la Sante et de la Prevention
Implementing Agency WAHO
Environmental 
Category

B-Partial Assessment

Date PID Prepared/
Updated

12-Nov-2015

Date PID Approved/
Disclosed

13-Nov-2015

Estimated Date of 
Appraisal Completion

25-Jan-2016

Estimated Date of 
Board Approval

13-May-2016

Concept Review 
Decision

Track II - The review did authorize the preparation to continue

I. Introduction and Context
Country Context
The countries of West Africa belong to the Economic Community of West Africa States 
(ECOWAS), which comprises 15 countries and is home to more than 310 million people. ECOWAS 
is a regional organization that serves to promote economic integration across the West Africa 
region. The region is very heterogeneous in terms of cultural, economic and human development. 
Overall, member states rank low on the United Nations Development Programme’s (UNDP) human 
development index; as of 2014, life expectancy at birth and gross national income per capita of 
countries in the region ranged from 45.6 to 75.1 and 873 to 6,365 respectively.

Sectoral and Institutional Context
Over the last four decades, the world has witnessed one to three newly emerging infectious diseases 



annually. The West Africa region is both a hotspot for emerging infectious diseases and a region 
where the burden of zoonotic diseases is particularly high. In this region, emerging and re-emerging 
diseases at the human-animal-ecosystems interface are occurring with increased frequency. As 
evidenced by the recent Ebola epidemics in Guinea, Sierra Leone, and Liberia, highly contagious 
diseases in this region cross borders easily and have the potential to turn into pandemics. These add 
to the ongoing burden of neglected and endemic human and animal diseases, including zoonosis.  
 
Pandemics and epidemics have potential catastrophic effects on human and animal life, ecosystems, 
and on national economies. From 1997-2009, major outbreaks of fatal infectious diseases such as 
the human pandemic influenza (H1N1), highly pathogenic avian influenza A (H5N1), Creutzfeld-
Jakob disease, Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS), and EVD caused an estimated US$80 
billion in economic losses. Additionally, a recent analysis by the World Bank (WB) shows that a 
severe pandemic such as the 1918 Spanish Flu could cost approximately US$3 trillion globally, an 
estimate comparable to the impact of the 2008 global financial crisis.  
 
The pandemic of H1N1; epidemics of SARS, H5N1 and Middle East Respiratory Syndrome 
Coronavirus (MERS-CoV); and recent outbreaks of EVD are reminders of persistent risk of 
infectious, zoonotic diseases, and the economic losses they cause. Animal losses from zoonotic 
diseases are also high. On average, about half of all annual losses of Livestock Units (LSU) reported 
on average by veterinary services to the OIE-WAHID database from 2006 to 2009 were the result of 
zoonotic diseases. 
 
Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) represents an increasing global health threat as resistant pathogens 
can be transmitted across healthcare facilities, in communities, and across international borders. A 
review of some disease control and prevention measures adopted in the human health sector shows 
that resistance to inexpensive and effective antimicrobial drugs has emerged at an alarming rate, 
increasing the likelihood that many common diseases and pathogens (such as tuberculosis, malaria, 
HIV, gonorrhea, MRSA, CRE and Salmonella Typhi infections) could become difficult and 
expensive to treat. Similarly, challenges with insecticide resistance continues to be on the rise in the 
region and could undermine the significant gains in the control of vector born disease such as 
malaria, dengue, and yellow fever. Detection, monitoring, and responding to AMR relies on having 
strengthened and coordinated laboratory and surveillance capacities in the region. 
 
Control of the accelerating spread of communicable diseases in West Africa is also hampered by the 
limited capacities of individual country health systems for efficient surveillance, early detection and 
rapid response to infectious disease outbreaks that result in significant reversals in human 
development progress in the region including increased cases of morbidity and mortality, threats to 
food security, and substantial economic losses. For many countries in West Africa, years of civil 
conflict and underinvestment have resulted in weak health infrastructure, periodic disruption in 
service delivery, and critical shortages or gaps in the workforce (eg. epidemiologists, laboratorians, 
information technology experts, etc.). Mitigation of the risks posed by diseases with pandemic 
potential, including emerging zoonosis, will have to address these weaknesses in country health 
systems in the region. 
 
The effectiveness of disease surveillance and response systems is currently hampered by:  
lack of appropriate plans and resources to respond to health threats in a timely manner; 
scarcity and non-retention of trained and motivated human and animal health workforce resources, 
at both central and local levels; 


overall weakness of  human and animal disease information systems, including insufficient data 
collection and use of data for informing policy decisions and action, as well as for the prevention 
and mitigation of the cross-border spread of diseases; 
insufficient integration of parallel disease- specific surveillance systems;  
insufficient cross-sectorial coordination and collaboration among Ministries, in particular among 
those in charge of public health, animal health and the environment leading to inadequate 
operationalization of the “One Health” concept; 
inadequate human and animal health laboratory capacity, including inadequate specimen 
transportation networks, and low involvement of laboratories in the surveillance and response 
systems; 
disparity in detection and disease management capabilities among countries and insufficient 
regional cooperation. 
 
In June 2007, the WHO set forth a mandate via the International Health Regulation (IHR 2005) that 
requires country governments to develop, strengthen and maintain the core capacities of national 
public health systems to detect, assess, notify, and respond promptly and effectively to health risks 
and public health emergencies of international concern (PHEICs).  In the WHO Africa Region 
(WHO/AFRO), the Integrated Disease Surveillance and Response (IDSR) strategy serves as a 
framework to fulfill the mandates of IHR (2005). However, till today, IDSR has not been fully 
implemented in most countries in the region, thus contributing to the limited capacity of the 
countries’ health system for systematic collection, analysis, confirmation, and interpretation of 
disease surveillance data, in addition to insufficient capabilities for preparedness and rapid response. 
Thus, the need to reinforce these capacities in this region as a mitigating risk for potential future 
pandemic outbreaks. 
 
Animal Health Sector 
The animal health sector in the ECOWAS region is characterized by a high incidence and 
prevalence of many contagious diseases, both zoonotic and non-zoonotic, impacting productivity, 
public health, rural development and livelihoods. Since December 2014, West Africa has witnessed 
a reemergence of an H5N1 outbreak.  Important weaknesses in veterinary public health systems 
caused long delays in detecting, reporting and putting other necessary mitigation measures in place 
to reduce the risk of spread and to eventually eradicate the virus. Lack of preparedness, insufficient 
human, physical and financial resources, and the lack of cross-sector collaboration were highlighted 
as key factors by the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) and the World Organization for 
Animal Health (OIE) in all affected countries. A recent summary of evaluations of the performance 
of Veterinary Services (PVS) done by the OIE within ECOWAS also highlighted the insufficient 
budgetary resources, and a mismatch between human resources and actual requirements.  In terms 
of strategic actions for animal health, all countries identified the need to improve the surveillance 
cover, in line with the OIE Terrestrial Animal Health code, and to control priority animal diseases 
(including through vaccination). 
 
Collaboration between Veterinary and Human Public Health Systems.  
West African countries do not have yet the requisite systems in place and are generally ill-equipped 
to prevent human infections and to mitigate the losses from exposure to diseases of animal origin. In 
addition to strengthening national veterinary and human public health systems and their regional 
cooperation, there is an urgent need to establish or reinforce and maintain strong collaboration 
between systems at national and regional levels in order to better manage risks that arise at the 
animal-human-ecosystem interface (the so called ‘One Heath’(OH) approach.). For that to happen, 

ar attention will be given to priority core public functions (veterinary public health and 
human public health) that would reduce these risks. Assessing these core functions, bridging divides 
among systems and ministries and reducing capacity gaps would constitute a critical element of the 
program. Country assessment tools now exist for both systems (Performance of Veterinary Services 
pathway; IHR monitoring framework costing tool) as well as well identified bridges for OH 
competencies. Attention to building systems for core functions and policy dialogue, based on 
credible assessments, rigorous analysis and adequate financing, will ensure sustainability and reduce 
disease risks. These efforts would support specific ongoing national and regional disease-control 
initiatives, already part of system-strengthening country program, and demonstrate the performance 
of collaborative systems in disease surveillance, prevention and control.   
 
Regional Disease Surveillance and Response Network 
The recent EVD epidemic in West Africa has been attributed, not only to environmental factors and 
human behavior, but also to weaknesses in the health systems of Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone 
and their inability to detect and respond swiftly to public health threats, and moreover, to the lack of 
a regional surveillance and response network in West Africa. Containment of West Africa’s EVD 
epidemic that initially began in Guinea and spread to neighboring countries was hampered by the 
absence of the systematic collection and reporting and exchange of surveillance and laboratory data 
across country-borders in real time. The EVD epidemic dramatically illustrates the need for a more 
harmonized approach to disease surveillance and response, both within countries and within the 
West Africa region overall. The EVD epidemic highly underscores the importance of regional 
cooperation among West African countries for the prevention and control of potential cross-border 
disease outbreaks, as a key component of the post-Ebola health systems recovery strategy, and 
overall health systems strengthening efforts in the region.

Relationship to CAS
The project is in line with the WB’s mission to end extreme poverty and promote shared prosperity. 
Communicable and non-communicable diseases are a major constraint on the health, education and 
potential earnings of people living in the ECOWAS region and have the greatest impact on the most 
vulnerable population.  Hence, the economic rationale for investing in these interventions is key to 
mitigating the economic burden not only on individuals but also on the country as a whole. The CPS 
for the nine countries targeted by this project emphasize the need to strengthen the capacity of 
health systems of which disease surveillance is a key pillar, in order to improve health outcomes and 
reduce vulnerability (To be updated with CPS for each country). 
 
The project complements both WBG and development partner investments in health systems 
strengthening, disease control and surveillance.  Establishing this complementarity is particularly 
important in the three countries most affected by the EVD epidemic.  For Example, in the context of 
the recent Ebola epidemic, the Government of Sierra Leone is eager to dramatically improve 
national disease surveillance and response capacity. Having experienced first-hand the devastating 
consequences of cross-border spread of Ebola, the government also acknowledges the paramount 
importance of regional disease surveillance and institutions for cross-border and inter-country 
collaboration. On 7-8 September, 2015, the Sierra Leone Ministry of Health and Sanitation (MOHS) 
and multiple partners met in Freetown to discuss the creation of a Sierra Leone's National Public 
Health Institute (NPHI). Core functions of this Institute will include surveillance and response, 
research aimed at answering important questions for policy and program design, and response to 
public health emergencies. The Government of Sierra Leone is acutely aware of its limited financial 
and technical resources and has already begun actively engaging partners to assist in the creation of 


the NPHI. US CDC, China CDC and Public Health England have already demonstrated significant 
interest. The proposed project can play a vital role in providing financial and technical assistance to 
the Government of Sierra Leone to create the NPHI, can convene the multiple partners around a 
harmonized agenda, and can ensure that what is created in Sierra Leone is integrated into regional 
systems.

II. Proposed Development Objective(s)
Proposed Development Objective(s) (From PCN)
The project’s development objective (PDO) is to strengthen cross-sectoral and regional capacity for 
collaborative disease surveillance and response in West Africa.

Key Results (From PCN)
i. Percentage of participating countries that improve compliance with IHR (2005) and OIE 
international standards based on independent external evaluations;  
ii. Percentage of outbreaks for which cross-border investigations are undertaken; 
iii. Percentage of surveillance workforce who have been trained; 
iv. Percentage of satellite laboratories awarded 2-star or more status under the regional 
accreditation program based on WHO/AFRO 5-step accreditation process; 
v. Percentage of reported priority communicable diseases outbreaks with laboratory 
confirmation of etiologic agents as defined by IDSR and OIE/FAO; and 
vi. Number of regional rapid response teams set up and equipped, activated and demonstrate 
competency on a quarterly basis

III. Preliminary Description
Concept Description
The project's development objective (PDO) is to strengthen cross-sectoral and regional capacity for 
collaborative disease surveillance and response in West Africa. 
 
The PDO seeks to address systemic weaknesses within the animal and human health sectors that 
hinder effective disease surveillance and response by: (i) strengthening the capacity of selected 
ECOWAS member countries to fulfill their obligations under the WHO IHR (2005) and the OIE 
Terrestrial Animal Health Code; (ii) reinforcing sustainable and effective regional collaboration and 
collective action to detect and respond promptly to priority infectious diseases threats in West 
Africa including zoonotic diseases; and (iii) establishing an efficient linkage of country health 
systems to regional laboratory, surveillance, and response networks. 
 
Ultimately, the project will contribute towards significantly reducing the burden of diseases 
particularly among the poor and vulnerable populations, mitigating the public health and economic 
risks posed by infectious diseases in humans and animals, and decreasing the threats of future 
disease outbreaks thereby promoting global health security.

IV. Safeguard Policies that might apply
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No TBD
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖


Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖

V. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 310.00 Total Bank Financing: 310.00
Financing Gap: 0.00
Financing Source Amount
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 0.00
 International Development Association (IDA) 310.00
 Total 310.00


























































World Bank Document


PROGRAM INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 

CONCEPT STAGE 

March 13, 2018 

Report No.:  126013 

 

Operation Name 

 

Region AFRICA 

Country Niger 

Sector  

Operation ID P166124 

Lending Instrument Development Policy Lending 

Borrower(s) THE REPUBLIC OF NIGER 

Implementing Agency  

Date PID Prepared March 13, 2018 

Estimated Date of Appraisal  

Estimated Date of Board 

Approval 

October 30, 2018 

Corporate Review Decision Following the corporate review, the decision was taken to 

proceed with the preparation of the operation.  

 

I. Key development issues and rationale for Bank involvement  
 

Niger is predominantly a rural economy. The majority of the population and the poor earn their 

living from agriculture which is the main contributor to GDP. A key objective of the Government 

of Niger is to focus on supporting rural growth with agriculture being the leading sector of the 

rural growth strategy. The government’s priority is to increase agricultural productivity. The sector 

is handicapped by inadequate extension services,1 limited use of equipment and modern inputs, 

limited control of water, a weak organization of producers, and declines in soil fertility. Extremely 

low access to rural finance is identified as one of the key impediments to modern inputs, marketing 

channels and logistics—including inadequate storage facilities and ability to process agricultural 

products which also account for low productivity in agriculture. Strengthening of the links between 

the extractive industry and the local economy is also considered a key factor to rural growth. The 

greatest potential for the extractive industry social and economic contribution is in job creation 

either through local subcontracting and/or through the development of the informal mining sector, 

such as gold panning and small-scale mining. A framework needs to be established to formalize 

the local content in the sector and the artisanal mining sector needs to be formalized and better 

organized. Community development aimed at providing social infrastructure (roads, schools, 

hospitals, and mining cities) also enhances the benefits for the rural population. They provide an 

alternative to rural employment.  

 

                                                 
1 République du Niger, and FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization). 2009. Analyse diagnostique du système 
d’appui conseil. Mise en place d’un dispositif intégré d’appui conseil pour le développement rural au Niger. 

Counterfactual analyses show that significant gains could be made if inefficiencies in 

infrastructure were fixed. Niger could grow by as much as 4.5 percentage points per capita if it 

expands and improves its infrastructure. Power would contribute around 1.51 percentage points to 

per capita growth if generation capacity and national access rates—which as of today are among 

the lowest in the region—were increased. ICT would also make an important contribution to 

economic prospects (1.31 percentage points), provided the mobile phone and Internet markets 

continue expanding.2 Creating a favorable environment for the private sector to invest in these 

sectors, improving access of the rural population to electricity and mobile/internet, and making 

sure that the NIGELEC, the state-owned company in electricity, remains financially viable are the 

main objectives of the Government.    

 

One of the key challenges facing Niger is to increase tax revenue. First, it will help continue 

financing Niger’s development challenges and avoid painful fiscal consolidation through cuts in 

expenditures as has been the case in the past years. Second, the current vicious circle of increasing 

public debt and interest payments represents a risk that would only be mitigated in the medium 

term under the assumption of a tightening fiscal stance. Tax policy to broaden the base, the 

rationalization of tax exemptions and the strengthening of tax and customs administration are 

among the key features of the government’s strategy. Government data show that tax expenditures 

and exemptions from the investment code -only - increased from 0.5 percent to 0.9 percent of GDP 

between 2014 and 2015. A World Bank study showed that for customs revenues only, over the 

five years from 2011 to 2016, exemptions represented 47 percent of customs revenue, on average, 

peaking at 54 percent in 2015.3  

 

Niger’s macroeconomic framework remains adequate for the proposed operation. Niger’s 

macroeconomic framework remains adequate for the proposed operation. Growth is on an upward 

trend and expected to average 5.8 percent during 2018-21. Niger has sustained its fiscal 

consolidation policy since 2016, combining enhanced revenue policy and expenditure control 

which aims to bring Niger in line with the West African Economic and Monetary Union 

(WAEMU) fiscal target by 2021. The risk of debt distress is moderate. The macro policy 

framework is underpinned by the continued implementation of the International Monetary Fund 

(IMF) Extended Credit Facility (ECF) program and the macroeconomic anchor offered by Niger’s 

membership in the WAEMU. Downside risks predominate and are mainly related to the 

vulnerability and exposure of the economy to weather, security and commodity prices. 

 

II. Proposed Objective(s) 
 

The proposed operation is the second of a series of two development policy operations to be 

disbursed over 2017-2018 under IDA 18. The operation will provide financial support to Niger as 

the authorities implement the PDES II.   

 

The proposed series is fully aligned with the government’s development strategy and priorities as 

articulated in the PDES II.  It is designed to advance a number of key PDES II objectives. Pillar 1 

supports the PDES II ’s objective of “  by 

focusing on agricultural productivity 

                                                 
2 Source: Niger SCD – 2017. 

3 Draft: Informal trade and customs revenue losses in Niger, (2017). 



The focus on the extractive industry in Pillar 1 supports the PDES II’s objective of “

the linkages between the extractive industries with the 

rural economy. 

the PDES II’s objective of “ . Pillar 3, supports the PDES 

II’s objective of “Governance, Peace and Security”.    

 

 

III. Preliminary Description 
 

The program development objective (PDO) is to foster rural growth. This will be achieved 

through a series of cross-cutting reform measures grouped in two pillars. The first pillar is 

“Increasing rural productivity growth”. It aims to (i) 

strengthen the linkages between the extractive industries 

and the local economy “Supporting 

growth-enabling sectors”. It aims to (i) develop a framework favorable to ICT investment, mainly 

in rural areas; (ii) improve the financial and the technical performance of NIGELEC4; (iii) broaden 

the tax base by rationalizing tax expenditure and exemption regimes, and (iv) create the conditions 

for sustainable rural road maintenance financing framework.  

 

IV. Poverty and Social Impacts and Environment Aspects 
 

Many of the actions supported by the proposed operation are expected to have positive poverty 

reduction and welfare enhancement impacts. Improvements in the agricultural input supply chain 

(seeds and fertilizers) and on the extension service delivery will contribute to higher agricultural 

yields and therefore to improved food security while reducing economic vulnerability of rural 

households. Artisanal and small-scale mining (ASM) is an important source for jobs for the rural 

population, and a way for many to complement agricultural incomes. In particular, the 

development of community projects financed by the extractive industry will impact positively the 

rural population. In addition, enforcement of existing regulation in the extractive industry will 

allow the development of a strategy to address the social, health and safety issues that are currently 

encountered in the artisanal mining areas: the child labor, the dangerous and unhealthy working 

conditions resulting in frequent accidents (collapsing tunnels and pits), the absence of adequate 

personal protective equipment. Greater access to rural finance will help producers access more 

economic opportunities.  

 

The development of the electricity and ICT sectors will create small business opportunities while 

complementing other initiatives to improve rural welfare. Potential negative impact on the poor of 

the tariff adjustment is mitigated. The majority of the poor does not have access and use electricity. 

In addition, there is already a tariff system that protects to the poor. Nonetheless, a PSIA will be 

conducted during calendar year 2018 by the NECALEP to assess the impact of the electricity 

measures and inform the government policy in the sector. Access to internet and mobile through 

the USF will allow for the expansion of e-voucher supporting social protection and subsidy 

programs targeting the poor.    

 

Some actions supported by the proposed series are expected to have a positive impact on gender 

                                                 
4 Societe Nigerienne d’Electricite (Niger electricity company). 



equality. The development of an action plan to better integrate Extractive Industries into the 

national economy envisages among other objectives the advancement of women in the sector. The 

formalization of the ASM will protect women and children for whom harsh working and living 

conditions are the norm The impact on gender of the prior actions on agriculture, rural finance, 

electricity and ICT will not be directly linked to the prior actions. However, their impact could 

benefit female-headed more proportionately given their more pronounced vulnerability if directed 

to hem. Increased access to electricity and broadband network is expected to benefit female-headed 

households who are more in need of new economic opportunities more proportionately. Similarly, 

the education and health reforms will allow the Government and public agencies to expand social 

services, which are critically important to women and female-headed households.  

 

Environment Aspects  

 

The proposed operation is likely to have positive effect on the Niger’s environment, forests, or 

other natural resources. Unregulated or poorly regulated artisanal mining activities in the extractive 

industries have resulted in significant environmental destruction. Such adverse impacts have been 

considered by the Government which has prepared a Strategic Environmental and Social 

Assessment (SESA) to identify and address negative (enhance positive) environmental and social 

impacts along the entire mining value chain. The SESA provides strategic guidance for enhancing 

environmental sustainability and social equity of the sector as a whole and specific 

recommendations to be incorporated into national policies and programs. The formalization of 

artisanal mining is likely to reduce such adverse impacts on the environment. Similarly, a stronger 

regulation and control of the quality of agricultural inputs will reduce potential environmental risks 

borne by unregulated seeds or fertilizers. The prior actions supporting the development of ICT, 

rural finance and the social sectors are not likely to have significant impacts on environment and 

forests 

 

Tentative financing 

 

Source: ($m.) 

BORROWER/RECIPIENT 0.00 

International Development Association (IDA) 110.0 

Borrower/Recipient  

IBRD 

Others (specifiy) 

 

 Total 110.0 

 
























































World Bank Document


PROGRAM INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 

APPRAISAL STAGE 

September 25, 2017 

Report No.:  AB7900 

 

Operation Name 

 

Region AFRICA 

Country Niger 

Sector Agriculture (30%); Extractives Industry (25%); Banking 

Institutions (5%); Energy (15%); Telecom (15%); and 

Governance (10%) 

Operation ID P163318 

Lending Instrument Development Policy Lending 

Borrower(s) THE REPUBLIC OF NIGER 

Implementing Agency MINISTRY OF PLANNING 

Date PID Prepared September 25, 2017 

Estimated Date of Appraisal October 17, 2017 

Estimated Date of Board Approval December 5, 2017 

Corporate Review Decision Proceed to Appraisal/Negotiations 

 

 Country and Sector Background 
 

1. Niger’s economy is undiversified, heavily relying on agriculture and the extractive 
industries. Agriculture is main driver of growth and accounts for 40 percent of GDP. The vast 

majority of Niger’s population and the poor live in rural areas and earn their living from 

agriculture. However, agricultural productivity is low due to very low uptake of modern inputs 

and poor extension services.  Niger has significant mineral wealth, including uranium and gold, 

and has started exporting refined oil products. These three products account for approximately 70 

percent of total export values. The extractive industry accounts for 10-15 percent of government 

revenue.  

2. Growth is volatile owing to frequent external shocks of different nature. Shocks 
impacting on the economy include security challenges, the Nigerian crisis, unfavorable weather 

conditions and commodity prices. Security challenges disrupted economic activities with 

growing social and humanitarian pressures linked to the flow of hundreds of thousand refugees 

and internally-displaced people. The economic downturn in Nigeria impacted export 

performance. Unfavorable weather conditions impacted agriculture, and depressed commodity 

prices adversely affected growth and revenue in the extractive industries.       

3. Although declining, poverty remains high, and is more pronounced in rural areas. Poverty 
incidence declined from 53.7 percent in 2005 to 44.5 percent in 2014. Despite the decline in 

overall poverty incidence, the rural poor became poorer relative to their urban counterparts 

during the same period. Their per capita consumption relative to that of the urban poor declined 

from 60 percent to 43 percent. Lack of economic diversification, volatile agricultural growth, 

low access to physical and institutional infrastructure, and a weak human capital base limit 

economic opportunities, especially in rural area. 

 

 Key development issues and rationale for Bank involvement  
 

4. A key objective of the Government of Niger is to focus on supporting rural growth, given 
the concentration of the poor in rural areas. Agriculture would be the leading sector supported by 

the government’s 3N initiative with a special focus on agro-industry, public investment in 

infrastructure and the social sectors. Niger is predominantly a rural economy and the majority of 

the population earn their living from agriculture. Agriculture is the main contributor to GDP but 

agricultural productivity is low compared to the secondary and tertiary sectors, to other countries 

in the region.1 The sector is handicapped by inadequate extension services,2 limited use of 

equipment and modern inputs, limited control of water, a weak organization of producers, and 

declines in soil fertility. Extremely low access to rural finance is identified as one of the key 

impediments to modern inputs, marketing channels and logistics—including inadequate storage 

facilities and ability to process agricultural products which also account for low productivity in 

agriculture. Strengthening of the links between the extractive industry and the local economy is 

also considered a key factor to rural growth. The greatest potential for the extractive industry 

social and economic contribution is in job creation either through local subcontracting and/or 

through the development of the informal mining sector, such as gold panning and small-scale 

mining. A framework needs to be established to formalize the local content in the sector and the 

artisanal mining sector needs to be formalized and better organized. Community development 

aimed at providing social infrastructure (roads, schools, hospitals, and mining cities) also 

enhances the benefits for the rural population. They provide an alternative to rural employment.  

5. Counterfactual analyses show that significant gains could be made if inefficiencies in 
infrastructure were fixed. Niger could grow by as much as 4.5 percentage points per capita if it 

expands and improves its infrastructure. Power would contribute around 1.51 percentage points 

to per capita growth if generation capacity and national access rates—which as of today are 

among the lowest in the region—were increased. ICT would also make an important contribution 

to economic prospects (1.31 percentage points), provided the mobile phone and Internet markets 

continue expanding.3 Creating a favorable environment for the private sector to invest in these 

sectors, improving access of the rural population to electricity and mobile/internet, and making 

sure that the NIGELEC, the state-owned company in electricity, remains financially viable are 

the main objectives of the Government.    

6. Niger’s domestic revenue is low, and is among the lowest in the WAEMU. One of the 
key challenges facing Niger is the need for increasing its tax revenue. First it will help continue 

financing Niger’s development challenges and avoid painful fiscal consolidation through cuts in 

expenditures as has been the case in the past years. Second, the current vicious circle of 

increasing public debt and interest payments represents a risk that would only be mitigated in the 

medium term under the assumption of a tightening fiscal stance. Government data show that tax 

         

expenditures and exemptions from the investment code -only - increased from 0.5 percent to 0.9 

percent of GDP between 2014 and 2015. A World Bank study showed that for customs revenues 

only, over the five years from 2011 to 2016, exemptions represented 47 percent of customs 

revenue, on average, peaking at 54 percent in 2015.4  

7. Niger’s macroeconomic framework remains adequate for the proposed operation. Growth 
is expected to be moderate averaging 4.5-5 percent in 2017-19 driven by agriculture and mining. 

To contain the substantial fiscal deficit of 7.5 percent in 2017, explained partly by security-

related spending, the government has initiated a process of fiscal consolidation which aims to 

bring Niger in line with the WAEMU fiscal target by 2020. The tax revenue measures included 

in this programmatic series support this consolidation effort.  This risk of debt distress is 

moderate. The macro policy framework is underpinned by the continued implementation of the 

International Monetary Fund (IMF) Extended Credit Facility (ECF) program and the 

macroeconomic anchor offered by Niger’s membership in the West African Economic and 

Monetary Union (WAEMU). Downside risks predominate and are mainly related to the 

vulnerability and exposure of the economy to weather, security, Nigeria’s economy and 

commodity prices. 

 

 Proposed Objective 
 

8. The proposed operation is the first of a series of two development policy operations to be 
disbursed over 2017-2018 under IDA 18. The operation will provide financial support to Niger 

as the authorities implement the (Plan de Développement Economique et Social) PDES II .   

9. The proposed series is fully aligned with the government’s development strategy and 
priorities as articulated in the PDES II.  It is designed to advance a number of key PDES II 

objectives. Pillar 1 supports the PDES II ’s objective of “Food security and sustainable 

agricultural development” by focusing on agricultural productivity and the dissemination of 

context-relevant farming practices. The focus on the extractive industry in Pillar 1 supports the 

PDES II’s objective of “A competitive and diversified economy” by strengthening the linkages 

between the extractive industries with the rural economy. The focus on rural finance under Pillar 

1 and infrastructure under Pillar 2 supports the PDES II’s objective of “A competitive and 

diversified economy”. Pillar 3, supports the PDES II’s objective of “Governance, Peace and 

Security”.    

 

 Preliminary Description 
 

10. The program development objective (PDO) is to foster rural growth. This will be 
achieved through a series of cross-cutting reform measures grouped in two pillars. The first pillar 

is “Increasing rural productivity growth”. It aims to (i) enhance the use of modern inputs and 

improve access to extension services systems; (ii) strengthen the linkages between the extractive 

industries and the local economy, and; (iii) deepen rural finance penetration. The second pillar is 

“Supporting growth-enabling sectors”. It aims to (i) develop a framework favorable to ICT 

                                                 
4
 Draft: Informal trade and customs revenue losses in Niger, (2017). 



investment, mainly in rural areas; (ii) improve the financial and the technical performance of 

NIGELEC5, and; (iii) broaden the tax base by rationalizing tax expenditure and exemption 

regimes  

 

 Poverty and Social Impacts and Environment Aspects 
 

11. Many of the actions supported by the proposed operation are expected to have positive 
poverty reduction and welfare enhancement impacts. Improvements in the agricultural input 

supply chain (seeds and fertilizers) and on the extension service delivery will contribute to higher 

agricultural yields and therefore to improved food security while reducing economic 

vulnerability of rural households. Artisanal and small-scale mining (ASM) is an important source 

for jobs for the rural population, and a way for many to complement agricultural incomes. In 

particular, the development of community projects financed by the extractive industry will 

impact positively the rural population. In addition, enforcement of existing regulation in the 

extractive industry will allow the development of a strategy to address the social, health and 

safety issues that are currently encountered in the artisanal mining areas: the child labor, the 

dangerous and unhealthy working conditions resulting in frequent accidents (collapsing tunnels 

and pits), the absence of adequate personal protective equipment. Greater access to rural finance 

will help producers access more economic opportunities.  

12. The development of the electricity and ICT sectors will create small business 
opportunities while complementing other initiatives to improve rural welfare. Potential negative 

impact on the poor of the tariff adjustment is mitigated. The majority of the poor does not have 

access and use electricity. In addition, there is already a tariff system that protects to the poor. 

Nonetheless, a PSIA will be conducted during calendar year 2018 by the NECALEP to assess the 

impact of the electricity measures and inform the government policy in the sector. Access to 

internet and mobile through the USF will allow for the expansion of e-voucher supporting social 

protection and subsidy programs targeting the poor.    

13. Some actions supported by the proposed series are expected to have a positive impact on 
gender equality. The development of an action plan to better integrate Extractive Industries into 

the national economy envisages among other objectives the advancement of women in the sector. 

The formalization of the ASM will protect women and children for whom harsh working and 

living conditions are the norm The impact on gender of the prior actions on agriculture, rural 

finance, electricity and ICT will not be directly linked to the prior actions. However, their impact 

could benefit female-headed more proportionately given their more pronounced vulnerability if 

directed to hem. Increased access to electricity and broadband network is expected to benefit 

female-headed households who are more in need of new economic opportunities more 

proportionately. Similarly, the education and health reforms will allow the Government and 

public agencies to expand social services, which are critically important to women and female-

headed households.  

 
Environment Aspects  

 

14. The proposed operation is likely to have positive effect on the Niger’s environment, 
forests, or other natural resources. Unregulated or poorly regulated artisanal mining activities in 

the extractive industries have resulted in significant environmental destruction. Such adverse 

impacts have been considered by the Government which has prepared a Strategic Environmental 

and Social Assessment (SESA) to identify and address negative (enhance positive) 

environmental and social impacts along the entire mining value chain. The SESA provides 

strategic guidance for enhancing environmental sustainability and social equity of the sector as a 

whole and specific recommendations to be incorporated into national policies and programs. The 

formalization of artisanal mining is likely to reduce such adverse impacts on the environment. 

Similarly, a stronger regulation and control of the quality of agricultural inputs will reduce 

potential environmental risks borne by unregulated seeds or fertilizers. The prior actions 

supporting the development of ICT, rural finance and the social sectors are not likely to have 

significant impacts on environment and forests 

 

Tentative financing 

 

Source: ($m.) 

BORROWER/RECIPIENT 0.00 

International Development Association (IDA) 120 

Borrower/Recipient  

IBRD 

Others (specify) 

 

 Total 120 

 


























































World Bank Document


COMBINED PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENTS / INTEGRATED 
SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET (PID/ISDS)  

APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: PIDISDSA17494

Date Prepared/Updated: 26-Apr-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION

  A.  Basic Project Data

Country: Sri Lanka Project ID: P156019
Parent 
Project ID 
(if any):

Project Name: Sri Lanka Agriculture Sector Modernization Project (P156019)
Region: SOUTH ASIA
Estimated 
Appraisal Date:

25-Apr-2016 Estimated 
Board Date:

15-Jun-2016

Practice Area
(Lead):

Agriculture Lending 
Instrument:

Investment Project Financing

Sector(s): Agricultural extension and research (20%), Crops (20%), Agro-industry, 
marketing, and trade (20%), Irrigation and drainage (20%), Ge neral agriculture, 
fishing and forestry sector (20%)

Theme(s): Rural markets (20%), Water resource management (20%), Rural policies and 
institutions (20%), Rural services and infrastructure (20%) , Nutrition and food 
security (20%)

Borrower(s): Ministry of Finance
Implementing 
Agency:

Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry Primary Industries, Provincial Councils of 
Northern, Eastern, North-Central,  Central and Uva Provinces

Financing (in USD Million)
Financing Source Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT 0.74
International Development Association (IDA) 125.00
Local Communities 0.00
Local Farmer Organizations 44.10
Financing Gap 0.00
Total Project Cost 169.84

Environmental 
Category:

B - Partial Assessment

Appraisal 
Review 
Decision (from 

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate


Decision Note):
Other Decision: .
Is this a 
Repeater 
project?

No

B.   Introduction and Context

Country Context
Sri Lanka is a lower-middle-income country of 20.5 million people and a per capita GDP of US$ 
3,811 (2014).  Growth over the past decade has been strong, averaging 6-7% per year.  Absolute 
poverty declined from 22.7 to 6.7% from 2002 to 2012.  Despite this progress, roughly one 
quarter of the Sri Lankans remain nearly poor, as defined by living above the national poverty line 
(about US$ 1.5 but below US$ 2.50 per day (2005 PPP terms).  Sri Lanka has comfortably 
surpassed most of the Millennium Development Goals. Primary school enrollment is near 
universal, while secondary and tertiary enrollment has substantially increased.  Maternal and 
infant mortality rates are at very low levels, and life expectancy at 74 years has been above its 
regional peers for over a decade. 
 
With the end of the civil war in 2009, reconstruction, infrastructure investment, and increased 
consumption have delivered a strong economic peace dividend, driven by the non-tradable sectors 
and public sector investments.  Sri Lanka is also undergoing a structural transformation away 
from agriculture, which now accounts for 10% of GDP towards industry (32.5%) and services 
(57.5%) with associated productivity growth and accelerating urbanization.  However, this 
transformation is progressing relatively slowly with 30% of the labor force remaining in 
agriculture.  Notwithstanding the post-conflict environment, Sri Lanka’s economic policies over 
last ten years have been inward-looking with an increasing degree of protectionism and anti-
export bias.  This has prevented the country from capitalizing on comparative advantage and 
exports; attracting domestic and foreign investments to foster technology transfer; and generating 
new sources of innovation driven growth and employment. 
 
The country’s fiscal landscape is challenging.  In 2014, a widened deficit and a slowdown in 
growth increased the fiscal deficit to 5.7% and the public debt 71.8%, as share of GDP, marking a 
slight reversal of the fiscal consolidation path of the post-conflict period.  The fiscal budget for 
2016 presented to Parliament projected a deficit of 6.0% of GDP for the years 2015 and 2016.  
The government presented its economic policy in November 2015 that includes as priorities the 
generation of one million job opportunities, enhancing income levels, developing the rural 
economy, and creating a wide and a strong middle class.  It proposed fiscal consolidation through 
increasing revenue collection, reforms of state owned enterprises, and enhanced trade and foreign 
investment.
Sectoral and institutional Context
Sri Lanka’s agriculture is characterized by a non-plantation sector and a plantation sector.  Of the 
country’s approximately 2.3 million hectares of agricultural land, 80% are used for non-plantation 
foods crops, comprising rice, maize, fruits, vegetables, and other crops that are primarily grown in 
small-holdings.  About 1.65 million smallholder farmers operate on average less than 2 hectares 
and contribute 80% of the total annual food production.  Commercial crops (minor export crops) 
include cinnamon, pepper, cocoa, and coffee and are grown on small and medium land holdings 

as well.  Plantation crops—coconut, rubber and tea—are cultivated in large estates and small and 
medium land holdings.  Typically, non-plantation crops are grown under irrigated conditions 
while plantation and minor export crops are grown in the rain-fed areas.  Monsoonal rainfall 
patterns shape the agricultural seasons and irrigation patterns.  Two thirds of the agricultural area 
are located in the dry zone where the bulk of the country’s irrigation infrastructure is located. 
 
Sri Lanka’s has successfully attained self-sufficiency in rice and recently also in maize 
production. Rice production has increased steadily from 2.9 million tons (2002) to 4.8 million 
tons in 2015, in part because previously inaccessible land was reopened for cultivation after the 
end of the war but also through introducing high-yielding varieties, expanding irrigation capacity, 
fertilizer subsidies, restrictions on crop choices, and import substitution.  Achieving self-
sufficiency has meant that the production structure has remained concentrated in the low value 
food crops. In 2013, about 45% of the cultivated area was under rice cultivation (up from 37% in 
1980) but the share of rice in the overall value of crop production was only 18%.  Furthermore, 
average rice yields of 4.06 tons/hectare are relatively low and agricultural productivity, as 
measured by total factor productivity, has only grown by an average of 0.6 percent per year since 
1980, lagging behind other South and East Asian countries. 
 
With rice self-sufficiency secured, there is a need to diversify the production structure out of the 
lower value food crops towards high-value agriculture.  Sector policy to date, however, has 
neglected the domestic fruits and vegetable sectors, despite growing domestic demand and 
potential for export growth.  Demand has instead been met by increased imports.  A broad 
recognition has however emerged recently that the modernization of agriculture is needed if 
agriculture is to realize its potential for greater value generation and as a renewed source of rural 
growth for poverty reduction and job creation. Such modernization will require a structural shift 
towards a more high-value oriented agriculture production structure, agro-processing and value 
addition activities, and increased competitiveness.  It will also involve aligning trade policies to 
become more consistent and conducive for high-value export agriculture; realigning and better 
targeting of public sector support, especially fertilizer subsidies; greater attention to R&D; and 
relaxing the rice self-sufficiency policy and allowing for more demand-driven and market 
oriented production.  This will require differentiated strategies for different parts and production 
arrangements across the country.  In the northern and eastern parts of the country, comprising 
primarily the dry zone, there is significant scope for agricultural productivity growth and potential 
for better linkages to domestic and export markets, including value-added production.  In other 
parts of the country, more robust and scaled-up private commercial investment and innovation 
through agri-enterprises and agri-enterprise-farmer partnerships is needed for value addition and 
farmer integration into high value chains through scaling up and diversification into more 
commercial crops.   
 
The proposed project provides a broad framework for Sri Lanka to experiment with innovative 
approaches to address the above mentioned sector issues, overcome the low productivity 
equilibrium, and strengthen agriculture’s contribution to the economy and employment creation.  
The strategic thrust reflected in the project design is to support overall agriculture sector 
development and addressing the longstanding constraints through: (a) developing an incentive 
structure for small, medium, and large enterprises, including farmer producer organizations, to 
invest in commercial agriculture and value chains; (b) promoting partnership arrangements 
between private sector partners and smallholder pro ducers for better linkages; (c) demonstrating 
new agriculture technologies and innovations at sufficient scale to enhance productivity, 

resilience, and diversification in selected prioritized lagging regions; (d) promoting technology 
diffusion through capacity building and training and new models for extension service delivery; 
and (e) supporting sector policy analysis and research for reform.

C.  Proposed Development Objective(s)

Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to support increasing agriculture productivity, 
improving market access, and enhancing value addition of smallholder farmers and agribusinesses 
in the project areas.

Key Results 
The achievement of the PDO will be measured using the following results indicators: (a) number 
of direct project beneficiaries, disaggregated by gender; (b) number and share of participating 
farm households adopting improved technology packages and production practices supported 
under the project; (c) number and share of project-supported farmer producer organizations and 
farmer – agribusiness partnerships making a profit; (d) percentage increase in average value of 
sales of agriculture products due to project interventions; and (e) the number of new jobs created 
through small and medium enterprise investments under the project.

D.  Project Description

The project comprises four components, as follows: 
 
Component 1: Agriculture Value Chain Development (Total US$102.7 million; IDA US$58.6 
million). The component would promote commercial and export-oriented agriculture through 
attracting and leveraging investments from farmer producer organizations and agribusinesses for 
high value agriculture production and value addition. Component 1 comprises the following sub-
components: 
 
Sub-component 1.1: Investment Preparation Support, supporting: a training program on principles 
and procedures of the Matching Grants Program under sub-component 2; public advertisements 
and information workshops at national, provincial and district levels for prospective grant 
applicants; support to the project’s Technical Review Group and Board; international advisory 
support to operationalize the Matching Grants Program; staffing support and equipment and 
operation cost for the Matching Grants Secretariat and three regional support offices; technical 
assistance support to assist applicants in the preparation of quality investment proposals; and 
technical assistance support to support the environmental and social safeguards requirements 
within the Matching Grants Program. 
 
Sub-component 1.2: Matching Grants to Producer Organizations and Agribusinesses, supporting a 
Matching Grants Program to support investments from farmer producer organizations and 
agribusinesses in agriculture. Matching Grants would be provided under two windows.  Matching 
Grants of US$5,000 up to US$75,000 would be provided for investments to be developed and 
implemented by farmer producer organizations.  Eligibility criteria for farmer producer 
organizations to participate in the program would include: formal registration; appointment of an 
accountant; a cash contribution of 10 percent of the total investment; and availability of 
commercial financing of 40 percent of the total investment.  Matching Grants of US$75,000 up to 
US$500,000 would be provided to agribusiness for agriculture value chain investments. 


Applications for grant support would be evaluated on criteria, such as outreach and capacity 
building to smallholder farmers, including women headed producer groups; focus on lagging 
regions; as well as technical quality, innovation, business rationale and others. 
 
Sub-component 1.3: Partial Credit Guarantee (PCG), supporting a PCG to share financial risk 
with participating financial institutions that have expressed interest in lending to beneficiaries of 
the Matching Grant Program.  The PCG would be administered by the Central Bank of Sri Lanka 
(CBSL) and operate on the basis of the World Bank Group Principles on Partial Credit Guarantee 
Schemes, published in December 2014, covering the governance, management, administration, 
sustainability, and monitoring of PCG. 
 
Component 2: Productivity Enhancement and Diversification Demonstrations (US$ 58.63 million, 
IDA US$ 58.63 million).  The component would support smallholder farmers to produce 
competitive and marketable commodities, improve their ability to respond to market 
requirements, and move towards increased commercialization.  Component 2 comprises three 
sub-components: 
 
Sub-component 2.1:  Farmer Training and Capacity Building, supporting knowledge building and 
capability improvements of smallholder farmers and the establishment of farmer organizations to 
help them to respond better to market opportunities.  Individual farmer capacity building and 
farmer producer organization training will be implemented through training programs reaching 
out to approximately 600 villages and approximately 500 farmer producers groups.  The trained 
and established farmer producer organizations would become eligible for participation in the 
Matching Grants Program under Component 1. 
 
Sub-component 2.2:  Modern Agriculture Technology Parks, supporting the introduction, 
demonstration, and scale-up of innovative agriculture technology packages to support 
productivity improvements, diversification, commercialization, more sustainable and climate 
resilient production patterns.  The sub-component would support 7 agriculture technology 
demonstration parks in the selected districts of Jaffna, Mullaitivu, Anuradhapura (Northern 
Province), Batticaloa, (Eastern Province), Matale (North-Central Province), Moneragala (Uva 
Province), and Polonnaruwa (Central Province) which have been identified based on high poverty 
headcounts and agriculture potential.  The agriculture parks would be established to demonstrate 
entire value chain approaches, involving farmer mobilization and training, production, post-
harvest handling and/or processing, and marketing. 
 
Sub-component 2.3: Up-grading Production and Marketing Infrastructure, supporting: (i) the up-
grading and rehabilitation of small-scale irrigation infrastructure and existing water tanks in 
selected areas and linked to the agriculture technology demonstrations parks; (ii) the improvement 
of existing production and market access roads and construction of new field access tracks to 
improve transportation, access to markets and accessibility for agricultural machinery; and (iii) 
village level storage and product handling facilities, including drying platforms and sheds, 
composting facilities of crop residues, storage facilities and others. Infrastructure investment 
would focus on public infrastructure and would be linked to gaps identified under the technology 
parks development (sub-component 2.2). 
 
Sub-component 2.4:  Analytical and Policy Advisory Support, supporting the CPCU, MOPI and 
MOA in addressing knowledge gaps; developing an evidence-based policy, legal and regulatory 
framework; and formulating sector and sub-sectoral strategies to provide an enabling environment 
for a sustainable and competitive modern agriculture and food system.  The component would 
provide support to evaluate policies and regulations and recommend adjustments, reforms or new 
policies to promote competitiveness, responsiveness to market demand, sustainability, and 
resilience; undertake market analyses for new exports, and analyze policy, regulatory and 
institutional constraints, and identify public investments to address these constraints; and evaluate 
the social and economic impact of policies and public expenditures and make recommendations to 
improve the efficiency and effectiveness of public expenditures.  The sub-component would also 
provide some technical support the MOA, including the design of a National Agriculture 
Information System and others. 
 
Component 3: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (Total Cost US$ 7.74 million, US
$ 7.7 million IDA).  The component would support the PMOs at MOPI and MOA at the central, 
provincial and district levels in project management and coordination, technical supervision, 
financial management, procurement, social and environmental safeguards, and monitoring and 
evaluation (M&E).

Component Name
Agriculture Value Chain Development
Comments (optional)

Component Name
Productivity Enhancement and Diversification Demonstrations
Comments (optional)

Component Name
Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation
Comments (optional)

E.  Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis (if known)

The project is national in scope and designed as framework approach.  Specific project locations 
and their characteristics are not yet known and would be identified during implementation as part 
of the project’s demand-driven Matching Grants Program approach. Itis expected that project sites 
would be located in all three major agro-ecological zones, including the wet zone (average annual 
rainfall above 2500 mm); the intermediate zone (annual rainfall between 1750-2500 mm); and the 
dry zone (annual rainfall less than 1750 mm).  The dry and intermediate zones cover about 66% 
of the agriculture land area and receive about 30% of the country’s annual surface water yield.  
They are extensively used for agriculture and require irrigation water to be productive.  The bulk 
of the country’s irrigation infrastructure is hence located in the dry zone.   The wet zone, on the 
other hand, comprises 34% of the agricultural land area and receives 70% of the country’s annual 
surface water yield.  The three major plantation crops, most other export crops and various types 
of fruits are grown here under rain-fed conditions. 
 
The project’s proposed agriculture technology demonstrations parks included under Component 2 
and the complementing production infrastructure investments will be located in the 7 priority 
districts of Jaffna, Mullaitivu, Anuradhapura, Batticaloa, Matale, Polonnaruwa, and Moneragala.  
While exact project sites are not yet known and will be determined as part of a detailed feasibility 
study process during implementation, the districts are located in the dry zone (except for 
Moneragala, which is located in the intermediate zone) and have been identified based on high 
poverty rates and high absolute numbers of poor.  The majority of these districts are located in the 
former conflict affected areas and are characterized by poor or dilapidated public infrastructure, 
lack of productive infrastructure at the farm level, and poor access to markets, as well as limited 
livelihood and employment opportunities.

F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

Mohamed Ghani Razaak (GSU06)

Mokshana Nerandika Wijeyeratne (GEN06)

II. Implementation
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
Institutional responsibilities and arrangements for project implementation will be established, as 
follows: 
 
A Central Project Coordination Unit (CPCU) will be set up in the Ministry of National Policies and 
Economic Affairs with representation from other government stakeholders.  The CPCU has the 
mandate to ensure effective coordination and communication between the Ministry of National 
Policies and Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance, Central Bank, Ministry of Primary Industries, 
Ministry of Agriculture, and Provincial Councils; provide overall policy guidance and support to the 
implementing ministries; mobilize and ensure coordination with public and private sector 
stakeholders; and oversee the project’s regular internal auditing/ third party-monitoring of the two 
main investment components to ensure adherence to project principles and transparency. 
 
Ministry of Primary Industries (MOPI).  MOPI will be responsible for implementing Component 1, 
sub-components 1.1 and 1.2, and will oversee the following project-relevant units and entities: 
 
A Project Management Unit (PMU) in MOPI is responsible for the management of Component 1, 
sub-components 1.1 and 1.2, including annual work and budget planning, coordination of the 
Department of Export Agriculture in Kandy and the three regional offices (Kilinochchi, Ampara, 
Matara); coordination with the three Provincial Councils and Provincial Ministries of Agriculture; 
procurement; fund withdrawal and financial reporting; technical and institutional aspects of 
implementation; general oversight, field supervision and acceptance checks; and training and 
capacity building, and the periodic progress reporting to the Bank.  A separate Secretariat would be 
set up in the PMU of MOPI to manage the day-to-day implementation of the matching grants 
program. 
 
A Board of Directors will be set up to oversee and govern the application process and approval of 
matching grants under sub-component 1.2.  The Board will be chaired by the Secretary of MOPI and 
include representatives from MOF, Board of Investment, Ceylon Export Board, Central Bank, 
Chamber of Commerce, Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Fisheries and the Provincial Councils 

and Provincial Ministries of Agriculture.  The Board would be responsible for reviewing and 
approving applications for matching grants that have passed the technical, institutional and business 
reviews, ensuring that proposals are in accordance with government policy directions and objectives, 
especially outreach and integration of farmers and female entrepreneurs; make good business sense; 
and are in compliance with project regulations, including safeguards. 
 
A Technical Review Group (TRG) will be appointed, comprising representatives from government 
technical departments, academia/ research, industry-related enterprises, and other stakeholders.  The 
TRG would provide guidance to farmer producer organizations and agribusinesses that have 
expressed interest in applying to the matching grants program on technical and business-related 
aspects of investment proposals, such as crop/ product selection, technology innovation, production 
organization and processing, marketing research, partnership arrangements, investment costing, and 
other elements of investment planning process.  The TRG would review finalized investment plans 
for farmer producer organizations and agribusinesses for technical and economic soundness and 
compliance with project regulations and recommend such proposals for approval to the Board.  
 
The Regional Development Department of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka would be responsible for 
administering the Partial Credit Guarantee (PCG) under Component 1, sub-components 1.3.  The 
Department would also maintain the PCG Operational Manual, develop a business plan and pricing 
model, continuously review the eligibility criteria for loans, establish a registration system for loans 
to be covered under the PCG, and manage the claims processing system under the project. 
 
Under the Ministry of Agriculture (MOA)  the following project-relevant units and entities would be 
set up or would be set up for the management of Component 2.  
 
A Coordinating Committee will be set up in MOA to be responsible for the regular coordination 
between MOA and the Provincial Councils of the participating provinces, based on the principles of 
the Wadduwa Declaration of the National and Provincial Ministers of Agriculture, signed on 
September 30, 2015. The Coordinating Committee would ensure that project’s sub-components 2.2 
(Agriculture Technology Demonstration Parks) and 2.3 (Upgrading Production and Marketing 
Infrastructure) are fully coordinated with the Provincial Councils based on the devolved provincial 
mandates for agriculture and rural development 
 
A Project Management Unit (PMU) in MOA will be responsible for overall day-to-day coordination 
and management of Component 2 in coordination with the five Provincial Councils and Provincial 
Ministries of Agriculture.  The PMU would be responsible for annual work and budget planning; 
coordination with provinces/ districts in public outreach and community mobilization, procurement 
and contract management, fund withdrawal and financial management, including and financial 
reporting; technical and institutional implementation aspects, field supervision and acceptance 
checks; and training and capacity building.  It would also be responsible for reporting on project 
progress and implementation issues to the Bank, including the relevant project M&E indicators and 
safeguards implementation performance. 
 
The Sri Lanka Council for Agriculture Research Policy (CARP) under MOA, would be responsible 
for implementation of sub-component 2.4. Day to day activities under the component will be 
managed by a small Policy Analysis Unit, housed in CARP with project support and reporting to the 
Chairman of CARP.  The primary responsibility of the Unit would be to support policy level 
discussions of the CPCU, Ministry Finance, MOPI and MOA; monitor consistency of economic 


policies across various parts of the government; develop an annual program of studies and analytical 
work, and monitor implementation during the year through periodic activity progress updates.

III. Safeguard Policies that might apply

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment 
OP/BP 4.01

Yes To mitigate potential environmental and social 
impacts that may be caused due to physical project 
interventions and ensure all negative impacts 
associated with project investments are avoided and/
or mitigated, an Environmental Assessment and 
Management Framework (EAMF) and a 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) have been 
prepared.  These will provide detailed guidance on 
the specific due diligence requirements as well as on 
the specific environmental and social safeguards 
instruments required for sub-projects, including 
screening, environmental management plans, 
resettlement action plans etc.) to mitigate any 
potential negative project impacts.

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes The project will support agriculture activities on 
existing farmland.  Expansion of farmland into 
fragile habitats is not foreseen. The project will 
improve agricultural practices and is expected to 
reduce the pressure on farmland and surrounding 
natural habitats.  Some activities might impact 
natural habitats because of their proximity to such 
habitats (construction and/or upgrading of rural 
infrastructure).  The EAMF prescribes a due 
diligence mechanism under OP 4.01 to ensure 
impacts are mitigated.  Preventive and mitigation 
measures will be included in sub-project EMPs, as 
needed.

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No Project-supported agricultural activities will take 
place on existing agricultural areas and there will be 
no expansion into forest areas.  No activities in 
commercial forests or in close proximity to forest 
areas are expected.

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes The project promotes Integrated Pest Management as 
a key thematic area,  however, the intensification and 
diversification of agriculture could to lead to changes 
in the application of pesticides for pest and disease 
control.  A Pest Management Plans (PMP) has been 
prepared based on Integrated Pest Management 
(IPM) principles, describing the national regulatory 
framework, current status of pest and disease control, 
monitoring and supervision mechanism, major 


experience and problems, and lessons learned from 
past projects.  It specifies a range of actions to 
strengthen integrated pest management practices and 
awareness and includes capacity building and 
monitoring program to facilitate implementation.

Physical Cultural Resources 
OP/BP 4.11

No No project-support activities are expected in the 
vicinity of or to affect physical cultural resources, as 
defined by OP/BP4.11. Measures on safeguard 
chance finds are  included as part of mitigation 
measures defined in EAMF OP/BP 4.01.

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 
4.10

No No conclusive evidence or data exist yet on the 
possible presence of indigenous peoples 
communities in the country.  In general, "forest 
dwellers" who live in remote locations and close to 
commercial forests and national forest reserves are 
considered native communities.  Their livelihood is 
dependent on forest resources.  Project supported 
agricultural activities will take place on existing 
agricultural areas and there will be no expansion into 
forest areas.  No activities in commercial forests or in 
close proximity to forest areas are expected and 
therefore forest dweller communities will not be 
affected through proposed investments under the 
project.

Involuntary Resettlement OP/
BP 4.12

Yes The project will not involve involuntary resettlement 
or physical displacement.  Small-scale land 
alignment or acquisition for village-level civil works 
may be necessary.  Where the need for land 
acquisition may arise, the project’s RPF will apply.  
The RPF provides the guidelines and procedures for 
land acquisition; describes provisions for 
compensation and mitigation measures, includes a 
grievance redress mechanism, and set up safeguards 
monitoring and institutional arrangements in the 
event of land acquisition and livelihood losses.

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 Yes The project may include the up-grading and 
rehabilitation of small-scale irrigation facilities   and 
water tanks.  OP/BP4.37 applies because of the 
dependence on water conveyance and control via 
irrigation systems and the links of smaller tanks with 
the storage and operation of upstream medium/ large 
dams, which is typical for Sri Lanka’s cascading tank 
and irrigation infrastructure.  The rehabilitation of 
small irrigation schemes and tanks will not include 
dams and embankments more than 15 meters high 
and will not include medium to large scale dams.  

The EAMF includes generic dam safety measures to 
be adopted in the design and implementation of 
rehabilitation/ improvement of irrigation structures.  
It also includes guidance on the preparation of 
operation and maintenance (O&M) plans and dam 
safety plans in accordance with OP/BP4.37.

Projects on International 
Waterways OP/BP 7.50

No The proposed project activities do not have any 
impacts to the international waterways and therefore 
this policy is not triggered.

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/
BP 7.60

No There are no disputed areas where project 
interventions are undertaken and therefore this policy 
is not triggered.

IV. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify 

and describe any potential large scale,  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project is expected to bring positive environmental benefits to the project areas through the 
introduction and expansion of modern technology applications that help improve current cropping 
patterns and farming methods, increase efficiency in the management of water resources, protect 
agriculture soils, and roll out integrated pest management. However, two components under the 
project may involve activities that could have significant environmental impacts if not mitigated 
properly, especially during the construction phase.   Component 1 will support commercial 
agriculture and agro-products processing. Component 2 would finance the establishment of 
agriculture technology demonstration parks and improvements of rural infrastructure, including 
access roads and tracks, rehabilitation of small irrigation schemes, land preparation, market 
facilities, and others. The project’s process-oriented and demand-driven framework approach does 
not allow to determine project investments and specific project locations for investments under 
these components at appraisal. However it is known that these will be conducted in existing 
agricultural areas. 
 
Sub-component 1.2: Matching Grants to Producer Organizations and Agribusinesses:  
 
The agricultural sector faces a number of challenges in managing land productivity which often 
results in encroachment of forest areas for search of new land for cultivation. Soil erosion, crop 
disease management, water use efficiency, water pollution from excessive use of chemicals, and 
cultivation of unsuitable crop varieties are among the key areas where focus in terms of 
environmental management are a priority.   
 
Supporting the commercial agriculture and agro-products processing will require that stringent 
environmental screening, identification of potential environmental and impacts and management 
in terms of set up and operations of the activity. Among other best practices would be organic 
cultivation and at the same time careful soil management needs to be taken care of to prevent soil 
erosion and top soil degradation.  As specific sites and nature of the agro-business activities are 
not yet known, best practices that need to be employed and general recommendations cannot be 
employed as the nature of the activity varies and depend upon the soil type, area of cultivation ,i.e. 
dry zone or wet zone, and topography, crop type and the specific agriculture sector.  A site-


specific Environmental Management Planning approach plays a key role and has been 
incorporated in to the Matching Grants Program.  In addition, via strengthening technical 
knowledge and extension services focusing on the careful and minimal use of chemical fertilizer 
and pesticides/herbicides through good practices such as Integrated Pest Management and 
Integrated Plant Nutrition Management via the project’s Pest Management Plan, activities that 
facilitate sustainable agricultural development should be essentially promoted. 
 
Sub-component 2.2: Establishment of Modern Agriculture Technology Parks: The sub-component 
would support 7 agriculture technology demonstration parks in selected districts in the Northern, 
Eastern, Central, North-Central and Uva Provinces, which have been identified based on high 
poverty headcounts and agriculture potential. The exact location of where these interventions will 
be taking places will only be deduced during the project implementation stage. Environmental 
screening will be an essential part of the site selection process in order to ensure project-supported 
agriculture-related activities would take place on existing farmland and no expansion or creation 
of new farmland into fragile habitats is foreseen. The project will bring improvements to 
agricultural practices that are expected to reduce the pressure on these areas and the likelihood of 
encroachment into sensitive natural habitats. 
 
Sub-component 2.3: Up-grading Production and Marketing Infrastructure:  This component will 
entail physical interventions under the following purview; (i) the up-grading and rehabilitation of 
small-scale irrigation infrastructure and existing water tanks and irrigation systems in selected 
priority areas, linked to the agriculture technology demonstrations parks; (ii) the improvement of 
existing production and market access roads and construction of new field access tracks to 
improve transportation, access to markets and accessibility for agricultural machinery; and (iii) 
village level storage and product handling facilities, including drying platforms and sheds, 
composting facilities of crop residues, storage facilities and others. Infrastructure investment 
would focus on public infrastructure and would be linked to gaps identified under the technology 
parks development.  Impacts to physical and ecological environments during the construction 
phase of physical interventions outlined under Sub-component will be predominantly during the 
construction phase and consist of impacts such as the stress of natural resources such as sand, 
water and spil, removal of productive topsoil, solid waste generation in the form of construction 
waste, localized dust and noise and safety and occupational health to laborers. These impacts will 
be management via mitigation measures that will be implements via sub-project specific 
environmental management plans. 
 
The project is expected to generate positive social benefits and provide sustainable poverty 
reduction opportunities into lagging rural areas. Improved agriculture productivity and value chain 
development are expected to create additional economic returns for farmer households.  Expected 
benefits include employment opportunities for poorer households, individual and collective 
empowerment through membership in formal farmer producer organizations and in partnership 
arrangements with agribusinesses, improved access to finance, technology, and markets, as well as 
technical and management skills. Attention to more equitable sharing of economic gains from 
investments in commercial agriculture modernized value chains will be paid during the process of 
farmer producer organization establishment. Investments in local infrastructure will have positive 
impacts if infrastructure is targeted to serve both agricultural production needs and the needs of 
local communities.  A mandatory social screening is specified in the Operations Manual and RPF 
and will allow for the detailed assessment of potential social impacts and risks and relevant 
mitigation measures of all sub-projects.  Land acquisition is expected to be small-scale and to be 
manageable through the RPF and Resettlement Action Plans.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities 
in the project area:
No potential indirect negative environmental or social impacts are expected under the project.  It is 
worthwhile to note that women producer organizations will receive priority in the matching grant 
facility and other project-supported activities. However, a number of issues deserve attention and 
monitoring from a social development perspective during implementation:  Women-headed and 
poor households may be especially vulnerable and their participation in project activities might be 
limited resulting in inequitable production arrangements within farmer producer organizations or 
in partnership arrangements with agribusinesses. Market risks will remain substantial, and timely 
access to market information will remain challenging.  This may result in producer organizations 
not being able to assess market and demand conditions adequately.   Modern agriculture requires 
more investment while some of the proposed commodities may provide returns only with some 
time lags.  Poorer households may therefore face increased risk of indebtedness because of their 
motivation to participate in the project.  Producer arrangements will require the organization and 
streamlining of large numbers of smallholder producers under unified production and land 
management arrangements, requiring special attention to ensuring voluntary and fully informed 
participation.  Complex land tenure and land ownership patterns in Sri Lanka’s smallholder 
agriculture might hinder the introduction of modern agriculture practices and new technologies.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse 
impacts.
Alternative design consideration included a three pronged approach that included major 
investment components on climate smart agriculture, value chain development for higher value 
agricultural products, and on reforms to the country’s research and development and extension 
systems.   This scope was considered to broad and complex, including from an environmental and 
social safeguards perspective and the project design was simplified as described above.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an 
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
An Environmental Assessment and Management Framework (EAMF) in lieu of an overall project-
specific Environmental Assessment (EA) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) have been 
prepared as details of specific sites and related activities and interventions are not yet available. 
The EAMF primarily includes an assessment of generic issues that are typically associated with 
anticipated interventions under the project, measures for environmental risk mitigation and 
institutional arrangements for conducting environmental assessment, instruction to the preparation 
of Environmental Management Plans (EMPs), implementation and monitoring. The RPF provides 
guidance on the land acquisition process and  the preparation of site-specific Resettlement Action 
Plans where needed. 
 
To ensure that project interventions supported under the Matching Grant Program are 
environmentally sound, the EAMF includes environmental screening and evaluation criteria which 
will be part of the screening process for matching grant applications under Component 1.   MOPI 
will be responsible for ensuring the environmental screening of all project concept notes and full 
proposals submitted by applicants to the matching grant program.  The environmental screening 
process and evaluation criteria presented in the EAMF are reflected in the Operational Manuel of 
the Matching Grant Program as well and built in to the eligibility assessment criteria of matching 
grant applications.  
 
All interventions (excepting those that obviously are environmentally benign or low impact) under 

Component 2 will be subject to an environmental screening with the objective to: (a) determine the 
anticipated environmental impacts, risks and opportunities of sub-project; and (ii) determine if the 
anticipated impacts and public concern warrant further environmental analysis, and if so to 
recommend the appropriate type and extent of Environmental Assessment needed as per the set 
criteria in the EAMF.   
 
The EAMF is taking the applicable safeguard policies into account as well as the national 
environmental requirements and will serve as a guide to the level of environmental analysis and 
mitigation required for all interventions supported by the project which will have the potential to 
trigger negative environmental impacts and thereby ensure compliance with the World Bank’s 
environmental safeguard policies and the relevant national Environmental regulations during 
implementation. As a category B project, all physical activities financed under the project in 
general will be required to prepare an EMP and follow the World Banks Environmental Health 
and Safety Guidelines and agriculture sector guidelines as defined in the EAMF. 
 
Interventions under Component 2, sub-component 2.3 may include the rehabilitation and up-
grading of small-scale irrigation infrastructure and existing water tanks (managed by the Agrarian 
Services Departments) linked to the agriculture technology demonstrations parks under sub-
component 2.2.  OP/BP4.37 applies because of the dependence on water conveyance and control 
via the irrigation systems and the links of smaller tanks with the water storage and operation of 
upstream medium/large dams, which is typical for Sri Lanka’s historical cascading tank and 
irrigation infrastructure.  There is an ongoing and effective dam safety program in Sri Lanka 
targeting all large to medium scale dams (upstream of small irrigation structures) and smaller 
dams along cascading irrigation systems.  Full-level inspections, dam safety assessments, and 
safety remedial measures have already been conducted and details are documented by the 
Government satisfactorily to the Bank and in compliance with the provisions of OP/BP4.37 on 
Dam Safety.   
 
Typical interventions under this project would include repairs and improvements, such as 
protection of downstream slopes of dam embankments, providing toe-filters and toe drains to 
improve downstream drainage and arresting excessive seepage flows, upstream slope protection 
strengthening of the structural stability of  spillways and sluice structures etc.  The anticipated 
project activities will result in an overall enhancement of the safety of dams (tank bunds) against 
the risk of failure.  The project, however, will not finance construction of new tanks (new dams/
tank bunds).  Small dams i ncluded under the project would be less than 5 meters in height. 
 
All irrigation infrastructure related interventions will require a screening, as per the EAMF to 
verify whether upstream medium to large scale dams are present and connected hydrologically, 
and to assess their dam safety status and, if needed outline follow-up actions.  If the presence of 
upstream and hydrologically connected dams is confirmed and these have not been rehabilitated or 
strengthened and thus have Dam Safety implications, the following will be conducted: an 
inspection and evaluation of the safety status of the dam, its appurtenances, and its performance 
history; and a review and evaluation of the mandated dam owners operation and maintenance 
procedures.  A report will be provided on the findings of the review, including recommendations 
for any remedial work or safety-related measures necessary to upgrade the existing dam to an 
acceptable standard of safety.  Necessary additional dam safety measures or remedial work may be 
financed under the project. When substantial remedial work is needed, these will be undertaken 
using the following procedures: a competent professional will be recruited to design and supervise 
the work.  Because the size of dams would be less than 5 meters in height, qualified professionals 


will be hired by MOA to design and supervise the work. 
 
The MOA and MOPI have limited prior experience with Bank-funded projects respectively and 
the capacity to manage environmental and social safeguards in project implementation is limited 
as well.  MOPI is a new entity.  MOA has been long established, however, does not partake in the 
implementation of national level environmental regulations and institutional capacity is weak.  
MOA has however sufficient capacity and technical expertise in pest management because MOA 
is implementing national programs in pest control and pesticide management.  To address capacity 
weaknesses, the PMUs under MOA and MOPI will both recruit full-time qualified environmental 
and social specialists prior to the commencement of field implementation to be responsible for the 
implementation of the project’s environmental and social regulations, including the EAMF, PMP, 
EMPs, and RPF and RAPs.  In addition, the project will provide training in environmental 
management and on environmental and social management to improve institutional capacity. The 
cost for monitoring and supervising the implementation of environmental and social project 
regulations have been integrated into the overall project investment cost.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure 
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Consultations with direct and indirect project beneficiaries, government stakeholders at various 
administrative levels and farmers will be conducted as part of the participatory process for 
designing and implementing sub-projects.  Consultation will aim at: sharing information, listening 
to feedback, engaging citizens in decision making, and involving stakeholders in participation in 
the implementation process.  Consultations will also enable the project team to hold joint 
discussions with the beneficiary communities, share ideas about planning and implementation, and 
benefit from local knowledge to take more informed decisions. Consultation will take place inform 
of public meetings, focus group discussions, sub-project specific community consultations as part 
of the social screening process and direct one-to-one consultations.  A Public Information Booklet 
will be used as an information dissemination technique to promote competition and innovation in 
technology development and advocate for poor framer groups, including women farmer groups, to 
take part in project activities.  Following review by the Bank, the safeguards instruments including 
RAPs, EMPs have been disclosed through the Infoshop and locally on the ministries’ websites, 
and through the PMUs and at Divisional Secretariats of project areas. 
 
The project will adopt following as citizen engagement mechanisms: (a) continuous community 
consultations as social preparation and screening of  subprojects; (b) social audit committees at 
local level to monitor subproject implementation; and (c) third party monitoring of project 
implementation to ensure projects benefits are distributed  equally and efficiently across different 
social groups and geographical regions.  The outcome of the citizen engagement exercises will be 
documented and reviewed during implementation support missions.


























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Climate-smart Irrigated Agriculture Project (P163742) 

 
 

  
Mar 13, 2018 Page 1 of 20  

     

 
 
 
      

 

Combined Project Information Documents /  
Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (PID/ISDS) 

 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 03-Sep-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSA23484 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Sri Lanka P163742 Climate Smart Irrigated 
Agriculture Project 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

SOUTH ASIA 28-Aug-2018 08-Nov-2018 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Finance Ministry of Agriculture  

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
The Project Development Objective is to improve the productivity and climate resilience of smallholder agriculture in 
selected hotspot areas. 

 
Components 

Agriculture Production and Marketing 
Water for Agriculture 
Project Management 
Contingent Emergency Response 

 
 

PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
   

SUMMARY-NewFin1  
 

Total Project Cost 140.00 

Total Financing 140.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 125.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 

 
   
DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) 125.00 

Non-World Bank Group Financing 



     Counterpart Funding 15.00 

          Borrowing Agency 10.00 

          LOCAL: BENEFICIARIES 5.00 

    

Environmental Assessment Category 

B-Partial Assessment 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate     
 
 
A. Introduction and Context 
 
1. Sri Lanka is a Lower Middle-Income country with a GDP per capita of USD 4,073 (2017) and a total population 
of 21.4 million people. Following 30 years of civil war that ended in 2009, Sri Lanka’s economy grew at an average 5.8 
percent during the period of 2010-2017, reflecting a peace dividend and a determined policy thrust towards 
reconstruction and growth; although there were some signs of a slowdown in the last few years. The economy is 
transitioning from a predominantly rural-based economy towards a more urbanized economy oriented around 
manufacturing and services.  Economic growth has contributed to the decline in the national poverty headcount ratio 
from 15.3 percent in 2006/07 to 4.1 percent in 2016. Extreme poverty is rare and concentrated in some geographical 
pockets. 
 
2. The Government that came to power in 2015 envisions promoting a globally competitive, export-led 
economy with an emphasis on inclusion. It has indicated keenness to undertake reforms in the areas of public finance, 
competitiveness, governance, and education sectors. In 2017, the Government presented Vision 2025, a policy 
document that both identified economic limitations due to the constrained fiscal space and presented structural 
reforms (including the promotion of private sector participation) to address key economic challenges and strengthen 
economic growth. Despite Sri Lanka’s remarkable economic achievements, many people continue to be at risk of falling 
back into poverty. 
 
3. Sri Lanka is vulnerable to climate-related natural disasters that have major economic impacts. Long-term, 
annual losses for housing, infrastructure, agriculture, and relief from natural disasters are estimated at LKR 50 billion 
(USD 327 million), with the highest annual expected losses from floods, cyclones or high winds, droughts and landslides. 
This is equivalent to 0.4 percent of GDP or 2.1 percent of GoSL expenditures. Due to the increased sophistication of the 
economy the damage caused by the 2016 and 2017 floods and landslides was more than twice as high in US$ terms 
than the worst flood disasters between 1992 and 2011. 
 

B. Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 

4. The agriculture sector remains the backbone of Sri Lanka’s culture and economy.  The agriculture sector 
contributes 7.7 percent to GDP and still employs approximately 27 percent of the population.  Of the country’s 
approximately 2.3 million hectares of agricultural land, around 80 percent is under smallholder production, with 
around 1.65 million smallholder farmers operating on average less than 2 hectares.  Sri Lanka has successfully attained 


self-sufficiency in rice through policy interventions including fertilizer subsidies. However, expenditures on vital public 
services, such as Research and Development (R&D) and extension services account for only three percent of total 
agriculture expenditure and much of this limited budget is spent on rice research. The focus on self-sufficiency in rice 
has limited farmer’s opportunities to diversify into higher value products and kept the sector concentrated in the low 
value food crops.  As a result, agriculture productivity, as measured by Total Factor Productivity (TFP), has only grown 
by an average of 0.6 percent per year since 1980 and Sri Lanka lags significantly behind other South and East Asian 
countries. Women contribute to over 38 percent of the farming operations in Sri Lanka. However, the unemployment 
rates of women are more than double that of men at all age levels, with more than 60 percent of women engaged in 
agriculture working as unpaid family labor. Furthermore, only 10 percent of female farmers receive extension services 
in comparison to 90 percent of male farmers.  
 
5. Irrigation is a key feature of the smallholder agriculture sector.  Sri Lanka has a long history of water 
management for agriculture production.  The expansion of crop cultivation into the dry zones of the north, east and 
south-east of the country was enabled through the construction of elaborate water management systems, dating back 
to the period between 500 BC and 300 AD. The systems are based on water capture in small reservoirs commonly 
known as “tanks” connected via canals into “cascades” which enabled crop cultivation throughout the country 
including those areas with long and variable dry seasons. Tank cascades remain the primary source of water for dry 
season cultivation of approximately 74,150 hectares, supporting the livelihoods of approximately 154,744 farmers.  
Recently, water scarcity has increased because of high inter-annual and inter-seasonal variability in rainfall, catchment 
area land-use changes which have reduced the proportion of rainfall available for capture in downstream tanks, and 
the growing demand for water to meet the needs of a growing population.  For example, drought in 2016 and 2017 
affected 1,927,069 people across 17 districts, according to the Disaster Management Centre. During the Maha season 
in 2016, 612,224 hectares of paddy were cultivated of which 50,615 hectares were damaged due to the drought, with 
total production of MT 2.383 million, 30 percent of the average in last ten years. 
 
6. Hotspot areas are the most vulnerable to climatic events .  Although much of the country has been subject 
to the increased frequency and severity of climate e vents, some areas have emerged as being particularly 
susceptible to either flood or drought events, or both.  These are areas which are predominantly agriculture based 
and therefore the livelihoods of smallholder farmers are at risk.  Hotspots have been identified through a rigorous, 
analysis of empirical evidence by the Department of Agrarian Development (DAD) of the Ministry of Agriculture (MoA), 
the World Food Program (WFP) and the International Water Management Institute (IWMI). 
 
7. The management of irrigation water suffers from institutional fragmentation and lack of local accountability. 
The management of irrigation tanks has undergone a transformation in the post-independence period. Community 
institutions which originally managed these tanks were initially replaced with a new GoSL-led institutional system that 
ultimately became ineffective. To overcome the top-down management of tank systems, since 1978 there have been 
experiments in Participatory Irrigation Management (PIM), involving local communities in the management of irrigation 
schemes. PIM was approved as official policy in 1992 and Farmer Organizations (FOs) were created by the Agrarian 
Services Act of 1991 to manage minor tanks. Despite this policy direction, less capacity of FOs to manage limited 
remaining water and lack of strong oversight from GoSL have compounded the situation. Within GoSL, the responsibility 
for the management of these tanks currently lies with three different institutions: Ministry of Irrigation, Water Resource 
and Disaster Management (MIWRDM); Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) and, Provincial Councils (PCs). The responsibility 
for system maintenance budgeting and implementation is shared across these institutions and FOs often with unclear 
mandates. Water user fees were removed after the independence, and GoSL started to allocate maintenance budgets 
which are insufficient to meet maintenance needs. But, FOs collect contribution from farmers and they are 
maintaining their own Operation and Maintenance (O&M) funds. 




 
8. While many of these tanks are still functioning, some are in a completely dilapidated condition and the 
overall performance is low.  Past tank rehabilitation efforts have largely failed to produce the desired results for many 
reasons. Firstly, insufficient attention has been paid to water and land use management in the upstream catchment 
areas. The supply of water from upstream catchment areas is in most cases decreasing because of land use changes, 
including deforestation and infrastructure development, which has also increased the flow of silt into the supply canals 
and tanks resulting in declined water inflows into the tanks and reduced water storage capacity in the tanks. Secondly, 
previous rehabilitation efforts have not adequately accounted for the hydraulic inter-connectedness of tanks within 
cascades resulting in sub-optimal development of water resources and negative downstream impacts. Finally, past 
rehabilitation efforts have not sufficiently factored in either growing water demand in the tank command areas or the 
likely future impacts of climate change, such that rehabilitated tanks have failed to provide enough water supply to 
meet even current demand. 
 

9. Improved access to irrigation and better water management needs to be addressed in conjunction with 
improving productivity in the sector.  Agriculture productivity is low due to an inhibiting policy framework, weak public 
services and low levels of private investment.  With rice self-sufficiency secured, a consensus has recently emerged 
within the GoSL that the country should take a more strategic approach to addressing low productivity by (i) 
modernizing water resource infrastructure, minimizing flood damages and managing water allocation more efficiently 
and (ii) diversifying the agricultural sector away from relatively low value food crops towards high value and export-
oriented commodities. In the water sector, an integrated basin approach to water investment and management needs 
to be built on integrated basin plans developed through effective stakeholder participation. As a middle-income country 
in an economically strong region, farmers can capitalize on growing domestic consumer demand for diversified, 
nutritious, and higher-valued foods and take advantage of the country’s proximity to fast growing neighboring markets. 
The GoSL has recently implemented measures to improve the competitiveness of the agriculture sector, such as 
promoting commercial and export-oriented agriculture through attracting and leveraging investments from farmer 
producer organizations and agribusinesses for high value agriculture production and value addition under the Bank-
supported Agriculture Sector Modernization Project.  
 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
Development Objective(s) (From PAD) 
  
10. The Project Development Objective is to improve the productivity and climate resilience of smallholder 
agriculture in selected hotspot areas. 

 
Key Results 

11. The key results indicators to assess project outcomes are: 

• KPI 1: Increase in water productivity at farm level (Custom); 

• KPI 2: Increase in agriculture productivity of crops (Custom); 

• KPI 3: Crop diversification index (Custom); and 

• KPI 4: Direct project beneficiaries, segregated by gender (CRI). 
 

D. Project Description 
  
12. Theory of Change: The project will address the key problem of the vulnerability of agriculture systems in 



climatic hotspot areas of the country.  The drivers of this vulnerability are (i) lack of farmer access to reliable 
sources of irrigation water, (ii) insufficient protection of agriculture land from floods; (iii) low levels of 
diversification in agriculture production; and (iv) limited adoption of climate-smart technologies. Addressing 
these issues will involve an approach that (i) addresses expected long-term trends in climate change including 
the frequency and severity of climatic events (flood and drought); (ii) adopts a catchment scale approach to water 
management; and (iii) integrates agriculture and water by working with farmers and Farmer Organizations (FOs) 
to improve the sustainable management of water and soil resources, and promote the adoption of suitable on-
farm water management and crop production technologies. 
 
13. The proposed project interventions will introduce catchment level hydrological assessments that 
incorporate future climate change projections to assess water availability and identify appropriate investments 
for upper catchment area treatments, water harvesting, rehabilitation of irrigation systems and reduced flood 
damage. Once water availability is assessed in a river basin, watersheds, sub-watersheds, cascades and individual 
tanks, then technical designs will be carried out for the tank irrigation systems, which consist of watershed 
catchment area, tank headworks, canal system and agriculture production area. The water stored in rehabilitated 
tanks will be used to commence CSA activities. Management of irrigation schemes will be enhanced through 
improved capacity of FOs. The project would support the identification, demonstration and adoption of 
technologies to both improve water use efficiency and enable farmers to diversify their production and move 
into higher value crops. Finally, support would be provided to enable farmers to have improved market access. 
Through these interventions, as stated below, the core project objectives of improving climate resilience and 
increased productivity would be achieved. 
 

 
 
 
14. Project Beneficiaries: The primary project beneficiaries will be over 470,000 smallholder farmers in 
hotspot areas (375,000 ha) in eleven administrative districts (Kilinochchi, Mullaitivu, Anuradhapura, 
Polonnaruwa, Puttalam, Kurunegala, Trincomalee, Batticaloa, Ampara, Hambantota and Moneragala) spread 
across six provinces (Northern, North Central, North Western, Eastern, Southern and Uva) in the dry zone of Sri 


Lanka (see Project Area in Annex 9). Smallholder farmers consist of small farmers (1.0 to 2.0 ha of farm land) and 
marginal farmers (less than 1.0 ha).  They will gain knowledge and technology transfer and access to 
infrastructure assets to enhance climate resilience in farming resulting in increased revenue from crop 
diversification and participation in emerging value chains.  Many technical and managerial staff of the 
participating agencies will benefit through training and capacity building activities. The project will also promote 
participation of youth and women in all key project interventions to ensure that they would benefit from the 
project activities. 

 
15. Hot-Spot Area Development Model: Given the centrality of tanks in the agrarian livelihoods of the dry 
zone of Sri Lanka, their current levels of neglect and the increasing vulnerability of these areas to both droughts 
and floods in quick succession with consequent impacts on agricultural production and incomes, the 
rehabilitation of tank-based irrigated agricultural systems is key to improving the resilience of these areas and 
the agrarian communities that depend on them. Resilience being ‘the ability of a system to bounce back or return 
to normal functioning after adversity’,1 the Hot-Spot Area Development model aims to enhance the resilience of 
these areas and those who depend on them for their livelihoods. Climate shocks add to relatively low paddy 
productivity. Resilience will be built through stable and rising incomes of agrarian families living in these hotspot 
areas despite increasing climatic variability. The expected results of this novel model will be achieved by (1) 
flexible and adaptive management of existing and improved irrigation water storage and delivery structures to 
make irrigation more reliable in the face of rising climatic variability (including more frequent episodes of high 
intensity rainfall and flooding and/or drought); (2) better agricultural inputs, techniques and practices that will 
help farmers maximize water use efficiency given rising climatic variability – and reduce crop harvest losses; and 
(3) better access to new markets and higher prices, through marketing higher up the value chain, more 
competitive agri-enterprises and upgraded infrastructure for agricultural trade to stabilize and increase incomes 
from agricultural livelihoods. The project will prioritize nutrient-rich foods to improve year-round nutrition. 
 

16. Phasing: In view of the complexity and innovativeness of the project and to learn lessons, the project will 
be implemented in three overlapping stages. The first stage (2018–2021) will cover three Hot-Spot Areas 
(Anuradhapura, Kurunegala and Kilinochchi districts), whereas the second (2020–2023) and third (2021–2024) 
stages will cover the balance eight districts. Progress will be reviewed annually and prior to completion of every 
stage, to sanction the next stage of implementation. All project financed activities in a stage will be completed in 
3 years but the O&M activities will continue till end of the project.  

 

Project Components 

 
17. Component 1: Agriculture Production and Marketing (US$ 42 million). The objective of this component 
is to improve agriculture productivity and diversification through the adoption of CSA practices and improved 
on-farm water management. 
 
18. Component 2: Water for Agriculture (US$ 92 million). The objective of this component is to facilitate (a) 
planning for water and other infrastructure necessary to support climate-resilient irrigated agriculture, (b) 

 
construction of the planned infrastructure; and (c) co-management of this infrastructure by central/provincial 
governments and the local community. 
 
19. Component 3: Project Management (US$ 6 million). The objective of this component is to ensure the 
quality of overall project management, while ensuring smooth coordination of activity implementation by various 
agencies and strategic partners at national and subnational levels. This component will finance (i) the consultancy 
and operating costs of the PMU and DPD Offices and of different project executing agencies, including for 
fiduciary and safeguard aspects; (ii) the monitoring and evaluation of project activities at baseline, midterm and 
end of project, including geotagging of the assets created; and (iii) information, education and communication 
campaigns to make all stakeholders aware of the project. 

 
20. Component 4: Contingent Emergency Response (US$ 0.0 million). This emergency response component 
will allow for rapid reallocation of project proceeds in the event of a natural or man-made disaster or crisis that 
has caused or is likely to imminently cause a major adverse economic and/or social impact. 

 

21. Climate Co-Benefits: The project seeks to derive Climate Co-Benefits (about 95 percent) through: (i) 
enhanced water security at farm level through the rehabilitation and modernization of irrigation systems and 
improvement in water efficiency; (ii) improved soil health through the adoption of good agricultural practices to 
improve soil fertility, soil nutrient management, and promote soil carbon sequestration; and (iii) improved 
adaptation to climate risks through increased farm productivity and crop diversification. 

 

22. Project Cost and Financing: The project will be financed through a six-year Investment Project 
Financing (IPF) loan. The total project cost is US$140 million and will be funded by an IBRD loan of US$125 million, 
with the GoSL contribution of US$ 10 million to cover salary costs on parallel basis and the Beneficiaries 
contributing US$ 5 million in kind.  Retroactive financing up to an aggregate amount of US$ 5 million will be 
available for eligible expenditures incurred under all project components and all categories prior to the date of 
signed Loan Agreement, but on or after July 01, 2018. 
 
E. Implementation 
 
23. The key design features incorporated in the institutional and implementation model include: multi-
stakeholder approach - different stakeholders involved in the field of climate resilient irrigation and agriculture 
are expected to contribute to project implementation from national to sub-national levels; coordinated 
approach - stakeholders are expected to share knowledge and resources in a collaborative manner at each level; 
citizen engagement - local smallholder farmers, medium sized agribusiness owners, common interest groups, 
producer organizations, individual entrepreneurs and their customers will be involved in the planning & 
implementation of project activities, along with government counterparts, NGOs, academia and the private 
sector; consistency with the National Poverty Alleviation Programme – since the project will also work with the 
People’s Company of the Grama Shakthi Programme implemented at Grama Niladhari Division (GND) level; Use 
of existing government staff – except a few of the full-time key professionals to be recruited from the open 
market, the rest of the staff will be from existing government cadres and work on a part-time basis at both 
national and provincial levels; and gender equality - the project design and approach will take into account the 
gender dimension and ensure that the project provides equal opportunities for women to participate in the 
project cycle. 

 

24. Institutional arrangements:  The project is fully integrated in the GOSL administration, and the 
implementation is designed to capitalize on existing government agencies at national, provincial, district, 
divisional, and   Grama Niladhari Division levels. A Project Management Unit (PMU) will be established under 
the Ministry of Agriculture, whereas Deputy Project Director’s Offices (DPD Offices) will be established under 
the Ministries of Irrigation & Water Resources Management and of Provincial Councils and Local Government. 
At provincial level, there will be Provincial DPD Offices set up in each of the participating Provinces to implement 
the project. The Provincial DPD Offices will be set up under the Chief Secretaries in Kilinochchi, Kurunegala, 
Anuradhapura, Trincomalee, Hambantota and Moneragala Districts, and they will cover the district level 
activities of the respective districts. In addition, a District Unit of the DPD Office will be established under the 
District Secretary at the Office of the Assistant Commissioner of Agrarian Development in Puttalam, Batticaloa, 
Mullaitivu, Polonnaruwa and Ampara Districts to coordinate all agencies operating at district level.  
 

25. There will be a Project Appraisal Team (PAT) set up at district level, and it will be coordinated by the 
District Planning Director. The PAT is an independent body and will report to the DPD. In addition, at the district 
level, there will be an advisory committee headed by the District Secretary. The Divisional secretaries of the 
participating divisions and district and divisional level heads of the government agencies, representatives of 
chamber of commerce, Associations of Farmer/Producer Organizations and NGOs will participate in the Advisory 
Committee. The Advisory Committee will guide the project implementers at the district level to implement CSIAP 
effectively. 

 
26. At Divisional level, there will be a Divisional Unit of the Provincial DPD Office set up at the Agrarian 
Service Center (ASC), and it will be headed by the Divisional Officer of the ASC. The Divisional Unit will function 
as a supporting unit to the Provincial DPD office and work closely with the District Unit to implement the Project 
effectively. The community based organizations, such as Farmer Organizations (FOs), Producer Groups (PGs), and 
Grama Shakthi People’s Company (GSPCs) operating at the Grama Niladhari Division (GND) level are the 
institutions that will be actively involved in the project together with the beneficiary farmers at the community 
level. Given the transformative nature of the project, institutional coordination across the relevant sectors is 
emerging as a critical task for the PMU in developing an effective project implementation mechanism to achieve 
convergence with other programs. The institutional arrangement is further described in Annex 2 of the PAD. 
 
27. Implementation arrangements:  Overall project implementation is the responsibility of the Ministry of 
Agriculture (MOA). Since the institutional capacity of MOA is limited and special skills are required to implement 
the complex project activities, the project will draw expertise from the Ministry of Irrigation, Water Resource 
and Disaster Management (MIWRDM), Department of Agriculture (DOA), Department of Agrarian Development 
(DAD) and Irrigation Department (ID), as well, and acquire outside expertise, including consulting services. The 
day-to-day management and operation of the project is the responsibility of the Project Management Unit 
(PMU), headed by a Project Director (PD) appointed by MOA and assisted by national level Deputy Project 
Director’s offices in MIWRDM and MSPCLG as well as provincial level Deputy Project Director’s offices. The 
project will give attention to institutional coordination across departments, agencies, and strategic partners 
involved in the implementation of project activities. Specifically, as the MoA has an existing PMU under the 
ASMP, core functions such procurement, FM and safeguards would maximize the use of existing capacity.  Overall 
project oversight is the responsibility of the National Project Steering Committee (NPSC), established in the 
Ministry of National Policies and Economic Affairs (MNPEA) and chaired by its Secretary. The main responsibility 
of the NPSC is to provide strategic guidance for the implementation of the project and to act as the interface 
between the central and provincial institutions. The NPSC also approves the annual work program and budget 
for the project, endorses the working arrangements with strategic partners, and is briefed by the Bank (and the 


PD) on the outcomes of implementation support and review missions carried out with the Bank team at least 
biannually. 

 
28. The PMU is responsible for ensuring that: (i) all project activities are planned, financed and 

implemented as per the project annual work program and budget, (ii) project implementation is in line with 
operational guidelines of the Project Implementation Plan (PIP), (iii) project procurement and financial 
management activities are carried out in timely manner as per the World Bank’s Procurement for IPF Borrowers 
(2016), the project fiduciary manuals and the procurement plan, and (iv) social and environmental safeguards 
applicable to the project are fully complied with. The PMU is also responsible for monitoring project activities, 
preparing the quarterly and annual project progress reports, and ensuring that all reports (including financial 
reports) are submitted to the World Bank in timely manner.  

 
 .    
F. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 

The proposed project will be implemented in 11 districts in the dry zone climate vulnerability hot spots, 
covering at least 5 major watersheds. The mean annual rainfall is under 900mm (much of it being received 
during the northeast monsoon season from November to January) and mean annual temperature ranges 
between 28°C to 32°C. Droughts that persist for more than three months are common. It has a climax 
vegetation of dry evergreen forest and moist deciduous forest, with forests giving way to a stunted, 
shrubby, drought-tolerant vegetation in its driest parts. The forests found in most parts are secondary 
vegetation, which developed after hundreds of years of repeated clearing and cultivation. The natural 
vegetation has adapted to the annual change from flood to drought. The forests have been largely cleared 
for agriculture, timber or grazing, and many of the dry evergreen forests have been significantly degraded. 
Several protected areas have been established to protect some of remaining natural forests. Agriculture, 
settlements and other development activities have fragmented most of the forests giving rise to human-
wildlife conflicts, particularly with elephants. Overall, about 30% of Sri Lanka’s labor force is engaged in 
agriculture, and in the dry zone that has been the frontier for irrigation based development, directly or 
indirectly connecting entire population to agriculture. However, most farm households have multiple 
livelihood strategies as income from one source is insufficient for living. The predominant form of 
settlement in the project area is ‘village’ organized around a tank that is part of a cascade system. Although 
many of these small tank based villages have been incorporated into large and medium scale irrigated 
agricultural development schemes managed by the government, a substantial number of tank-villages that 
are rain-fed, persists. Most settlers in the project area have been granted land ownership and smallholdings 
predominate, and sub-division and fragmentation is common in tandem with the occurrence of large 
operational holdings – all devoted to food crop cultivation. Irrigation communities in the dry zone are 
connected with the government system of administration and management, including for irrigation 
management. Additionally, highland agriculture and illegal slash and burn agriculture also can be observed 
alongside small-scale inland fishery activities which take place in man-made tanks. 


G. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 
 

Darshani De Silva, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 
Bandita Sijapati, Social Safeguards Specialist 

 
 
 

SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

In order to mitigate potential environmental and 
social impacts that may be caused due to physical 
interventions and to ensure all negative impacts 
associated with project investments are avoided 
and/or mitigated, appropriate environmental and 
social management measures will be guided by the 
EAMF. The EAMF provides detailed analysis of the 
scale of due diligence required (such as 
environmental assessments, environmental 
management plans, etc.) for potential activities 
under the project. Additionally, a RPF has been 
prepared to identify and mitigate land-related social 
impacts under the Project. A ToR for the proposed 
Strategic Environmental Social Assessment (SESA) 
has also been included in the EAMF. SESA will inform 
the mini-watershed planning process to ensure 
broader watershed-level impacts are integrated into 
the planning process. 

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No 
There will not be any financing of private sector 
entities under this project and therefore this policy is 
not applicable for this project. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

OP4.04 applies to all types of natural habitats 
including natural forests. There is the possibility of 
impacting catchment forests due to dam 
rehabilitation activities. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes 

Project-supported agricultural activities will take 
place on existing agricultural areas and there will be 
no expansion into forest areas. No activities on 
commercial forestry is supported by the project. 
However, dam improvement work may impact some 
of the catchment forests.  There will be watershed 
protection activities, which would have positive 
impact on forests. These impacts will be managed 



through the safeguard instruments that will be 
developed under OP 4.01 and OP 4.37. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

Because of the standardization, intensification and 
diversification of agricultural activities under the 
project, changes in the application of pesticides for 
pest and disease control are foreseen. It is not clear 
at this point, if the project would finance the 
procurement of pesticides. A Pest Management Plan 
(PMP) that has been prepared under the Agriculture 
Modernization Project building on Integrated Pest 
Management (IPM) principles has been adopted by 
this project. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No 

As of now, no project activities are expected in the 
vicinity of or affect physical cultural resources (PCR), 
as defined by OP 4.11.  There are also no new 
construction of irrigation infrastructure planned. 
Mitigation measures if any activity takes place closer 
to PCRs and measures on PCR chance finds will be 
included as part of the mitigation measures defined 
in EAMF under the OP 4.01. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 
There is no conclusive evidence/information 
available that establishes the presence of indigenous 
people in the project area. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

The project will support civil works and other 
activities associated with construction, rehabilitation 
and reconstruction of small-scale market 
infrastructure, tank systems, water harvesting 
structures, irrigation schemes, etc. At present, these 
activities are envisaged to take place on existing 
canals and schemes or land belonging to individual 
farmers, and the need for taking private land under 
the project is not expected. However, there may be 
need for additional land, albeit minimal, for 
catchment area treatment, reestablishment of canal 
reservations, and rehabilitation/reconstruction of 
irrigation schemes. Further, there may be 
encroachers or others using the land necessary for 
the civil works thus requiring adequate mitigation 
measures to be put in place during project 
implementation.  Accordingly, a Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF) has been prepared in accordance 
with OP/BP 4.12. Further, to support the mini-
watershed planning process, a ToR for the proposed 
Strategic Environmental Social Assessment (SESA) 
has also been included in the EAMF. 


Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 Yes 

The project plans to improve and rehabilitate small 
dams and the EAMF will include the process to be 
adopted on safety of dams including required 
expertise under the OP/BP 4.01. irrigation schemes 
to be reconstructed/rehabilitated would entail 
minor works to improve existing capacity of the 
tanks to ensure the cascade system functions 
efficiently. The Dam Safety and Water Resources 
Management Project financed by the World Bank  
has already rehabilitated most of the larger tanks 
and their respective dams and has also set up dam 
safety panel to monitor the interventions and 
operations. They will continue to provide guidance 
to the decisions that will be taken on this project.  All 
the requirements applicable to the project will be 
identified early during the implementation stage so 
that all the necessary plans and organization set-up 
are completed on time. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
The proposed project activities do not have any 
impacts to the international waterways and 
therefore this policy is not triggered. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
There are no disputed areas where project 
interventions are undertaken and therefore this 
policy is not triggered. 

 
 

KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project area covers hot spot areas spanning Ampara, Batticaloa, Trincomalee, Kilinochchi, Mullaitivu, 
Anuradhapura, Polonnaruwa, Puttalam, Kurunegala, Hambantota and Moneragala Districts in Eastern, Northern, 
North Central, North Western, and Uva Provinces. The first stage of the Project (2018-2021) will cover three Hot Spot 
Areas, whereas the second stage of the project (2020-2022) and third (2022-2024) will cover the balance eight 
districts. However, the exact locations for the specific interventions under the Project have not been identified, and 
the selection of activities will be determined only during implementation.  
 
The project is classified as an Environmental Category B.  It is expected to bring positive environmental and social 
benefits to the project areas through the scale-up of climate-resilient agricultural technologies and farming practices 
that help improve soil health, water-use efficiency and crop products, catchment area treatment to promote more 
efficient use of surface water and more sustainable use of groundwater for agriculture and development of waterbody 
capacity of climate hotspots, and overall improvement in the productivity of small-holder farmers. Components 1 and 
2 may involve physical activities that could have adverse environmental and social impacts if these aspects are not 

 

fully integrated into hot-spot area development plans and negative environmental and social risks are not identified 
and mitigated properly. Likewise, some activities supported under the project, such as small scale market 
infrastructure, construction and rehabilitation of irrigation canals, water storage facilities, etc.,  are likely to cause 
social risks and impacts, including land acquisition, impacts on livelihoods, loss of assets, etc. Although the project 
activities will be confined to rehabilitation of existing infrastructure and support to existing farmlands, some of the 
project districts consists of known physical cultural resources that can be impacted during works carried out under the 
Project. 
 
The promotion of climate smart agriculture systems and related value chains under the project could also lead to 
changes in the application of pesticides for pest and disease control. At present, project-supported climate-smart 
agricultural activities are envisaged to take place on existing farmland, and no expansion or creation of new 
agriculture systems into fragile habitats is foreseen. Likewise, the project will bring improvements to watershed 
protection and promote agricultural practices that are expected to reduce pressure on natural habitats and the 
likelihood of encroachment into sensitive ecosystems. However, some activities may negatively impact natural 
habitats because of the proximity of project activities, such as the construction or upgrading of rural infrastructure. 
The project plans to undertake catchment treatment as part of village-level watershed plans to make them more 
climate resilient and, which may bring positive impacts on natural forests in the upper catchment areas due to 
additional protection measures. Such areas that require additional protection related activities are expected to be 
identified through SESAs.  
 
Some negative impacts to forests are expected during tank rehabilitation work and while the project will primarily 
support the increase in the storage capacity of tanks through removal of excess sedimentation and establishment of 
mechanisms to reduce future sedimentation, some inundation of forests may still be possible, particularly in those 
areas where small tanks have been abandoned and natural forest regeneration has taken place on the tank bed.  
 
 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
Based on the available information, no potential indirect negative environmental or social impacts are expected under 
the project.The project interventions will spread across 11 hotspot areas where the nature/scope of future activities is 
presently not known. Regardless, the SESA proposed to be carried out during implementation for each hotspot will 
help in identifying any indirect and/or long-term impacts of future activities and mitigating such impacts as part of 
project interventions. 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. 
Alternatives to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts can be considered only during implementation once the 
project area and the specific activities are known. In principle however, the EAMF and the RPF include measures that 
need to be adopted in order to avoid or minimize adverse impacts. For instance, a 'negative list' has been prepared 
under the EAMF which among others indicates types of sub-projects that will not be financed under the project (e.g., 
activities that involve significant conversion or degradation of critical natural habitats, activities that would increase 
human-wildlife conflict, construction of large new infrastructure within or directly adjacent (in buffer zones) to 
protected areas, etc). Likewise, to avoid impacts of land acquisition, the RPF indicates that to the extent possible, sub-
project activities will be carried out in the existing footprint of the infrastructure facility, utilize public land or land that 
is voluntarily donated, and only in exceptional basis will there be acquisition of private land under the Project. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower 


capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
An Environmental Assessment and Management Framework (EAMF) has been prepared to guide the screening of 
activities for physical investments, technical assistance, project supported-advisory, and policy support interventions 
and resulting implementation from an environmental perspective and mitigation actions to manage their 
environmental impacts. The EAMF defines the screening and decision-making process based on the screening, the 
content, procedures and responsibilities for the preparation and implementation of individual sub-project 
Environmental Assessments (EAs) and Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) to address site-specific risks and 
impacts and subsequent monitoring and reporting requirements. The EAMF also includes sectoral environmental 
management guidelines for the subsectors of agricultural processing, which will be applicable under the matching 
grant program. To ensure impacts to natural habitats are mitigated, the EAMF prescribes proper due diligence 
mechanisms, including relevant preventive and mitigation measures to protect local ecosystems and habitats to be 
included in the respective sub-project EMPs with special attention given to ensure risks and impacts due to human-
elephant conflict are mitigated where such conflicts exist and using successful co-existence models that already have 
been demonstrated within the country. In order to ensure negative impacts to forests are minimized, the EAMF 
includes screening criteria and relevant mitigation measures. In addition, a separate Pest Management Plan (PMP) 
prepared under the Agriculture Modernization Project developed based on Integrated Pest Management (IPM) 
principles has been adopted by this project.  
 
Likewise, the RPF sets out principles and guidelines to identify and assess the potential social impacts and risks, 
prepare mitigation plans as part of sub-project preparation, institutional arrangements and processes to be followed 
for the Project. This includes: (i) principles and procedures for screening and assessing impacts; (ii) the criterion and 
due diligence processes based on risks, including the provisions for entitlements and eligibility criteria; (iii) guidelines 
for preparing time-bound action plans to ensure compliance with WB's OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement and 
national regulations relating to land acquisition; (iv) institutional arrangements for implementing resettlement action 
plans; (v) guidance for public consultation process and disclosure of safeguard documents; (vi) mechanisms for 
grievance redress, monitoring and evaluation of process and outcomes; and (vii) responsibilities of the GoSL and WB in 
relation to the preparation, implementation and progress review of social safeguards documents for the various CSIAP 
sub-projects.  
 
In addition to the EAMF and the RPF, as part of hot-spot area development, Strategic Environmental and Social 
Assessments (SESAs) will be undertaken to be integrated into the village-level plans. All irrigation infrastructure 
related interventions require a screening to be included in the SESA to verify whether upstream medium to large scale 
dams are present and connected hydrologically and to assess their dam safety status and, if needed, outline follow-up 
actions. If the presence of upstream and hydrologically connected dams is confirmed and these have not been 
rehabilitated or strengthened and have dam safety implications, the project will undertake an inspection and 
evaluation of the safety of the dam, its appurtenances, and its performance history, and a review and evaluation of 
the mandated dam owner’s operation and maintenance procedures. A report will be provided on the review’s 
findings, including recommendations for any remedial work or safety-related measures necessary to upgrade the 
existing dam to an acceptable standard of safety.  Necessary dam safety measures or remedial work will be financed 
under the project. When substantial remedial work is needed, these will be undertaken, including recruitment of a 
competent professional to design and supervise the work, and the Dam Safety Panels established under the 
Department of Irrigation and Mahaweli Authority of Sri Lanka will provide the guidance and continuous due diligence 
as necessary. As part of SESAs, physical cultural resources will be documented, and the EAMF includes screening 
criteria to ensure sub-projects will not produce any negative impacts to such resources. The EAMF also includes 
procedures to be adopted during a chance find.  
 


In terms of capacity, the Ministry of Agriculture has recently been exposed to world Bank-financed Project while the 
Irrigation Department has two ongoing operations supported by the Bank. In addition, some of the provincial councils 
(e.g., Northern and Eastern) have been involved in World Bank financed operations. However, a comprehensive 
capacity building program for implementation of safeguards instruments prepared under the Project as well as the 
social and environmental management within the sector, will be prepared during implementation. 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, 
with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The primary key stakeholders are smallholder farmers, producer organizations, productive alliances, agribusiness 
entrepreneurs, implementing organizations, government departments/units, including technical and managerial staff 
of participating agencies. The project will actively promote youth and women in all key project interventions to ensure 
that they are fully engaged in and also benefit from all project activities.  
 
During the preparation of the safeguards instruments, consultations were held on 18 June 2018 in Anuradhapura and 
on 21 June 2018 in Colombo, and feedback received during these consultations have been included as part of project 
design and minutes of the consultations with details of the participants, have been included as part the RPF. 
Additionally, the EAMF and the RPF also include consultation strategy which among others emphasizes that all 
stakeholders will be consulted in a culturally appropriate manner while preparing site-specific safeguards instruments 
as well as during implementation. The process of consultation will be documented and account taken of the results of 
consultatoins, including any agreed actions resulting from the consultation. The RPF and the EAMF also requires that 
all the social and environmental assessment documentation and site specific safeguards action plans (e.g., EMP, SIMP, 
RAP) will be made available to the public by the PMU through the project website and notices through media (as 
relevant), prior to start of civil works, and or tending of works contract. The EAMF and the RPF have also been 
disclosed in-country as well as through World Bank's external website. 
 
 
 
























































World Bank Document


COMBINED PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENTS / INTEGRATED 
SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET (PID/ISDS)

Additional Financing
.

Report No.: PIDISDSA16272
Date Prepared/Updated: 04-Mar-2017
I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data
Country: Pakistan Project ID: P157736

Parent Project ID (if 
any):

P125999

Project Name: Additional Financing for Punjab Irrigated Agriculture Productivity 
Program Phase-1 (P157736)

Parent Project Name: PK Punjab Irrig Agri Productivity Improvement Prog Phase-I 
(P125999)

Region: SOUTH ASIA

Estimated Appraisal Date: 18-Jan-2017 Estimated Board Date: 23-Mar-2017

Practice Area (Lead): Agriculture Lending Instrument: Investment Project 
Financing

Borrower(s) Islamic Republic of Pakistan
Implementing Agency Directorate General Agriculture (Water Management)
Financing (in USD Million)

    Financing Source Amount

International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 130.00

Local Farmer Organizations 70.00

Financing Gap 0.00

Total Project Cost 200.00

Environmental Category: B-Partial Assessment

Appraisal Review Decision 
(from Decision Note):

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate

Other Decision:

Is this a Repeater project? Yes
.

.

B. Introduction and Context
Country Context

Pakistan posted the GDP growth of 4.2 percent in FY2014/15, below the 5.1 percent target. Private 
investments as share of GDP declined to 9.7 percent, but overall deficit remained 5.3 percent of GDP, 
0.3 percent higher than estimated. While Pakistan continues to score poorly on doing business 
indicators, there are signs of improvement. Growth in FY16 was expected to be moderate at 4.5 
percent, well below the 5.5 percent target. For FY17, the expected growth is 5.2 percent while for 
FY18 it is projected at 5.5 percent.

Sectoral and Institutional Context

Pakistan’s agriculture sector is heavily depends on irrigation - more than 90 percent of production is 
form irrigated lands. However, per capita availability of useable water is decreasing with population 
growth, pollution and inefficient use of water. An estimated 40 percent of water is lost in the unlined 
watercourses due to seepage, spillage, side leakage and evapotranspiration. In Punjab, out of the total 
59,500 watercourses, about 43,700 were improved in various projects and Government’s National 
Program for Improvement of Watercourses (NPIW). Under PIPIPP 5,500 new watercourses are being 
improved leaving about 10,300 that still need improvements.

.

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
Original Project Development Objective(s) - ParentPHORGPDO

The project?s main objective is to improve productivity of water use in irrigated agriculture. This will 
be achieved through improved physical delivery efficiency and irrigation practices, crop 
diversification and effective application of inputs that will translate into greater agricultural output per 
unit of water used. The project?s objectives would contribute to increased agricultural production, 
employment and incomes, higher living standards and positive environmental outcomes.

Proposed Project Development Objective(s) - Additional Financing

The project?s main objective is to improve productivity of water use in irrigated agriculture. This will 
be achieved through improved physical delivery efficiency and irrigation practices, crop 
diversification and effective application of inputs that will translate into greater agricultural output per 
unit of water used. The project?s objectives would contribute to increased agricultural production, 
employment and incomes, higher living standards and positive environmental outcomes.

Key Results 

The AF would support: (a) installation of high efficiency irrigation systems; (b) improvement of 
community irrigation systems; (c) introduction of modern technologies and methods in irrigated 
agriculture, assistance in crop diversification and training; and (d) Project management, construction 
supervision, quality control, technical assistance and training.

.

D. Project Description

The AF would provide resources for: (i) component B of the project related to upgrading of the 
Community Irrigation Systems; (ii) a new sub-component C3 is added focusing on post-harvest 
processing, value addition and market linkages; and (iii) make up for loss of resources due to changes 
in exchange rates between SDRs to USD.
PHCOMP

Component Name:
Upgrading of the Community Irrigation Systems
Comments ( optional)
W/Cs would be improved using only pre-cast concrete sections (PCPS) with water-tight joints. The 
WUAs/farmers would share costs through providing labor, and the Government of the Punjab 



would provide PCPS and other material needed for watercourse improvement. The AF would 
improve 2,000 W/Cs and irrigation schemes – making the total number of schemes under 
component B 11,000.

PHCOMP

Component Name:
Improved Agriculture Technology/Practices and Monitoring and Evaluation
Comments ( optional)
Changes in this component are based on implementation experience and lessons learnt. These 
changes include: (i) supplementing support under sub-component C1 and C2 for monitoring and 
evaluation and impact assessment of the additional works under the AF; and (ii) adding a new sub-
component to address value addition and market access for farmers adopting efficient irrigation 
technologies.

E. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if 
known)
The AF project will be implemented in Punjab province of Pakistan. Agriculture in Punjab is affected 
by waterlogging and salinity. In central and southern Punjab, rainfall is more sporadic and agriculture 
is entirely irrigation dependent.

.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Ahmad Imran Aslam( GEN06 )

Salma Omar( GSU06 )

II. IMPLEMENTATION
The implementation arrangements under the AF will remain the same as for the Original 
Project. The Director General Agriculture (Water Management) (DG-AWM) will continue to be 
responsible for the implementation of the Project. The Directorate of On-Farm Water 
Management (OFWM) has demonstrated that it has the capacity to implement such programs in 
the Punjab.
.

III. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional)

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 
4.01

Yes The Government prepared an Environmental 
and Social Assessment (ESA) for the original 
project. An Addendum to ESA covering 
revised and up-scaled scope of work has also 
been prepared. The Addendum is cleared and 
disclosed. The key potentially negative 
environmental and social impacts of the 
proposed interventions under the AF project 
include changes in land use pattern 
particularly where barren/fallow land is 
brought under cultivation, contamination of 
soil and water caused by excessive use of 
agro-chemical inputs, salt build up in crop 
root zone, loss of natural vegetation and trees 
for water course improvement, loss of crops 
caused by water course improvement works, 



and reduced ground water recharge caused by 
water course lining.  These potential impacts 
are temporary and reversible in nature and can 
be mitigated with the help of appropriate 
mitigation measures, such as avoiding 
interventions in the environmental hot spots 
and wildlife protected areas when expanding 
the cultivation fields, awareness raising and 
capacity building of farmers for judicious use 
of chemical inputs, occasional flood irrigation 
in fields using high efficiency irrigation 
systems to avoid salt build-up in soil, tree 
plantation to compensate any tree cutting, 
avoiding cropped area while carrying out the 
water course improvement and other 
construction works during the project, and 
limiting the extent of water course lining in 
the sweet groundwater zone to minimize 
negative impacts on groundwater recharge. 
Some of the new activities proposed under AF 
may have additional environmental impacts 
like those related with disposal of waste and 
wastewater from fruit washing bays and 
cleaning platforms, construction related issues 
with small-scale platforms, and disposal of 
discarded fruits, vegetables (generally and 
largely biodegradable material). Occupational 
health and safety may be an additional 
potential environmental impacts for the new 
activities related to post-harvest processing 
centers. The Addendum proposes adequate 
mitigation measures for these issues and after 
the adequate implementation of mitigation 
measures, no residual impacts are forecasted.

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 No The project supports activities only in already 
disturbed environment and no project site is 
located in any natural habitat.

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No The project does not support any activity in 
the forest land.

Pest Management OP 4.09 No The proposed interventions are likely to 
reduce the quantities of agro-chemicals 
particularly the ones that are water soluble.

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 
4.11

No The project activities will be undertaken 
where cultivation is being practiced for 
decades if not longer. Hence presence of any 
physical cultural resources is extremely 
unlikely.  Chance Find procedures are 
nonetheless included in the main ESA.



Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No There are no indigenous communities in 
project area.

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 No No land acquisition is envisaged for the 
proposed activities.

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No The project does not include any component, 
which involves construction of new or 
rehabilitation/upgradation or renovation of 
any existing dam.

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50

Yes An exemption to notification was obtained for 
the original project that also applies to the AF.

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 
7.60

No The project is located in the Punjab province, 
which does not have any disputed area as 
defined in the policy.

.

IV. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and 
describe any potential large scale,  significant and/or irreversible impacts:

The project prepared an Environmental and Social Assessment (ESA) report, which suggests 
that the proposed project does not pose any long term or irreversible adverse environmental 
impacts. The key potentially negative environmental and social impacts of the proposed 
interventions under the original project include changes in land use pattern particularly where 
barren/fallow land is brought under cultivation, contamination of soil and water caused by 
excessive use of chemical inputs, salt build up in crop root zone, loss of natural vegetation and 
trees for water course improvement and reduced ground water recharge caused by water 
course lining.  Scope of additional work proposed under Component B does not bring in any 
additional or new environmental impacts other than those which have already been covered in 
the ESA prepared for the original project. New activities proposed under Component C3 may 
have additional environmental impacts like those related with disposal of waste and 
wastewater from fruit/vegetable washing bays and cleaning platforms, construction related 
issues with small-scale washing bays and platforms, and disposal of discarded fruits, 
vegetables (generally and largely biodegradable material). Occupational health and safety 
may be an additional potential environmental impacts for the new activities related to post-
harvest processing centers. These potential impacts are temporary and reversible in nature and 
can be mitigated with the help of appropriate mitigation measures, such as avoiding 
interventions in the environmental hot spots and wildlife protected areas when expanding the 
cultivation fields, awareness raising and capacity building of farmers for judicious use of 
chemical inputs, occasional flood irrigation in fields using high efficiency irrigation systems 
to avoid salt build-up in soil, tree plantation to compensate any tree cutting, avoiding cropped 
area while carrying out the water course improvement and other construction works during 
the project, and limiting the extent of water course lining in the sweet groundwater zone to 
minimize negative impacts on groundwater recharge. The Addendum proposes adequate 
mitigation measures for the issues arising out of the implementation of component C3 and 
after the adequate implementation of proposed mitigation measures, no residual impacts are 
forecasted. Land acquisition will not be required for the project rehabilitation works, which 



will be undertaken within their existing boundaries.  There are no indigenous communities in 
the project areas as defined under World Bank OP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples. The project 
will support livelihoods through improvements in food harvesting and handling of produce. In 
particular, women may benefit from these interventions through decreased work load in post-
harvest processing. The community water course improvement will benefit agricultural 
communities’ especially small farmers.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in 
the project area:

Agriculture and irrigation development are key priorities of the Government’s development 
agenda with the aim to improve agricultural productivity, irrigation efficiency and livelihood 
of the people. The long term impacts of the project will contribute to reduction in poverty in 
conjunction with environmental protection.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse 
impacts.

The ESA report elaborates on various project alternatives including, ‘no project’ option, 
alternative irrigation methods, alternative land-leveling methods, alternative methods of on-
farm water conservation and alternative methods of implementation. Analysis concluded that 
high efficiency irrigation results in reduced need of farm inputs such as fertilizers, pesticides, 
fungicides, and herbicides, as well as reduced vulnerability of crops to pest attacks and 
proliferation of weeds, leading to less use of pesticides and herbicides. In addition, fertigation 
(application of fertilizers or other soil additives through the irrigation system) is done through 
drip and sprinkler, which results in increased effectiveness of fertilizers with reduced 
quantities needed.  Similarly, through high efficiency irrigation systems, chemigation 
(application of pesticides, fungicides, and herbicides) is also done through drip and sprinklers, 
resulting in effective use of chemicals with reduced quantities needed. The overall result of 
high efficiency irrigation system is therefore a much reduced usage of chemical inputs and 
introduction of post-harvest technology under AF will help better achieve the PDO. The only 
comparable alternative for this activity is ‘no project option’.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an 
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.

The original ESA is based on detailed assessment and includes an Environment and Social 
Management Plan (ESMP) for any possible environmental and social impacts under the 
project. The Addendum to the ESA uses the same ESMP with some additions related to the 
proposed activities under Component C3 and proposes preparation of a separate ESMP for 
each post-harvest fruit/vegetable processing facility. These ESMPs will need to be cleared by 
the Bank before these facilities can be established. For establishing these facilities, transparent 
and accessible guidelines on the selection process will be established, and communicated 
widely to all farmers to ensure that the selection process is seen as transparent and fair, and 
possible social conflict is avoided. The ESA Addendum is cleared and disclosed.
The original ESA report presents a well-structured organogram for the implementation 
arrangements of EMP. The Director General Agriculture Water Management (DG-AWM) is 
overall responsible for environmental and social performance of the project in accordance 
with the national and WB requirements. An officer is designated as the Environmental and 
Social Coordinator (ESC) for ensuring effective implementation of ESMP. The ESC 



coordinates with the WMOs at the district level, who have been designated as the district 
environmental and social coordinators (DESCs) at district level. The DESCs supervise and 
coordinate with the WUAs and farmers for the actual implementation of the environmental 
and social guidelines and other ESMP requirements. These institutional arrangements have 
been effective in ESMP implementation of the original project and will be continued for AF 
project.
The Project Implementation and Supervision Consultant (PISC) are responsible for 
implementation of ESMP while M&E Consultants are responsible for monitoring. Production 
and maintenance of all documentation outlined in ESMP is to be done by PISC. The client has 
been successfully implementing the ESMP in the original project and understands fully the 
planning and operational levels of safeguards requirements. While GD-AWM does not have 
an environmental management unit within its operational hierarchy, it continues to implement 
project level implementation of ESMP. The implementation performance of environmental 
safeguards in the original project is satisfactory. Quarterly progress reports are done regularly 
and will continue for the AF. Training is conducted for field staff as outlined in the ESA and 
these will continue for the AF. Monitoring will include both quantitative and qualitative data 
through consultations and feedback from beneficiaries, especially women, and will be 
included in the progress reports.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on 
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

Key stakeholders consulted at various levels include: (i) People directly affected by the 
Project and Project beneficiaries (i.e., farmers, WUA members, and other villagers), (ii) Sales 
and service companies, (iii) Officials from the Agriculture Department and agriculture 
research institutes, (iv) Environment Protection Agency of Punjab, (v) Academia, (vi) Donors, 
and (vii) NGOs, international organizations, and other interest groups. Consultations with the 
project stakeholders were carried out during preparation of original ESA. The stakeholders 
have remained involved during the implementation including the project affected people, 
project beneficiaries and other local communities in several districts. Similar consultations 
were carried out for AF project during the preparation of the ESA Addendum and will 
continue during the implementation of the AF.

.

























































World Bank Document

COMBINED PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENTS / INTEGRATED 
SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET (PID/ISDS)  

CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: PIDISDSC18688

Date Prepared/Updated: 03-Aug-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION

  A.  Basic Project Data

Country: Angola Project ID: P159052
Parent 
Project ID 
(if any):

Project Name: Angola: Commercial Agriculture Development Project (P159052)
Region: AFRICA
Estimated 
Appraisal Date:

17-Jan-2017 Estimated 
Board Date:

18-Apr-2017

Practice Area
(Lead):

Agriculture Lending 
Instrument:

Investment Project Financing

Borrower(s): Republic of Angola
Implementing 
Agency:

Ministry of Agriculture

Financing (in USD Million)
Financing Source Amount
Borrower 0.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 230.00
Financing Gap 0.00
Total Project Cost 230.00

Environmental 
Category:

B - Partial Assessment

Concept 
Review 
Decision:

Track II - The review did authorize the preparation to continue

Is this a 
Repeater 
project?

No

Other Decision 
(as needed):

B. Introduction and Context

Country Context

1.  The Republic of Angola is still recovering from a turbulent past despite oil and mineral wealth. 
With approximately 25.8 million inhabitants,  it is the seventh most populated country in Africa. 
Angola is one of the largest oil exporters in the region, and is rich in diamonds and other mineral 
resources. Angola became independent from Portugal in 1975, but was then engulfed in a 27-year 
civil conflict, which ended with a peace accord in 2002. Despite the country➢❨ s upper-middle 
income status with GDP per capita of US$5,400 in 2014, poverty remains pervasive with 30.1 
percent of the population living below the international poverty line in 2008. 
 
2.     Propelled by the end of the civil conflict and the expansion of the oil sector, the Angolan 
economy posted an average growth rate of 12.5 percent between 2004 and 2008. This period of 
high growth was interrupted by the 2008-09 global financial crisis. Following a slowdown 
between 2009 and 2011, when GDP grew at 2.5 percent on average, fast growth resumed in 2012 
(7.6 percent). 
 
3.  Limited progress was made in improving social indicators during the oil boom years. Angola's 
remarkable growth has not been equally shared. Large parts of the population lack access to basic 
services. Life expectancy is 52.3 years and the country ranks 149th out of 188 in the Human 
Development Index. Income inequality is high and marked disparities in regional and urban/rural 
poverty persist. More than half of Angola➢❨ s poor are located in rural areas and depend almost 
exclusively on agriculture for their livelihood. Among the most vulnerable groups in the country 
are women-headed agriculture households, which represent 33 percent of agriculture households. 
 
4.  Angola is experiencing a major macroeconomic shock due to the dramatic oil price drop since 
2014. This is not surprising as oil represents about 30 percent of GDP, over 95 percent of export 
earnings, and 75 percent of government revenue. The country faces a scarcity of foreign exchange 
(FX), fiscal and external deficits, higher inflation and weakened economic activity. The impact on 
households are considerable. Lower government expenditures and a reduced public sector wage 
bill have resulted in reduced private consumption, compounded by the elimination of fuel 
subsidies. Because of the crisis, GDP growth is forecasted at just 0.9 percent in 2016, followed by 
a rebound of about 3 percent in 2017 . 
 
5. The government has implemented bold fiscal measures since mid-2015 to address the effects of 
the oil price drop, but challenges remain on the monetary front. A revised budget was adopted in 
March 2015 to reflect the major shortfall in revenue, with oil prices dropping from US$80 in the 
initial budget to US$40. The government cut capital expenditure by nearly half, and significantly 
reduced fuel subsidies. The Strategy to Exit the Crisis brought further fiscal consolidation 
measures such as the institution of a new tax on financial transactions and the cancellation of 
double payments to former combatants. The adjustment however has not progressed much on the 
monetary and external sector. Although interest rates have risen and the currency has devalued, 
inflation reached 29.2 percent in May and the spread between the official and parallel exchange 
rate has more than doubled. Imports have been contained and international reserves have been 
kept high due to strong administrative controls on access to foreign exchange (FX). As a result, 
companies are postponing investments and reducing production because they cannot import the 
inputs needed. 
 
6. Despite recent reforms, Angola➢❨ s investment climate remains challenging. The country 
underperforms in competitiveness, business environment, and governance rankings. For example, 
the World Economic Forum➢❨ s Global Competitiveness Report (GCR) 2014-2015 ranked 

Angola 140th out of 144 economies while the country ranks 181st out of 189 economies in the 
Doing Business 2016 report, suggesting a complex regulatory environment. Angola lags other 
Sub-Saharan Africa countries in the 2015 Worldwide Governance Indicators. Recent reforms 
include a reduction in the costs and requirements to start a business, a new Labor Code, and an 
overhaul of investment policy. Other efforts are underway to modernize tax and customs 
administration, and the justice sector. Well implemented, they could contribute to a more 
effective and transparent government interaction with the private sector. However, institutional 
weaknesses and governance issues defy reform implementation. Overall, Angola➢❨ s business 
environment is characterized by cumbersome regulations, constrained competition and 
considerable government presence in economic activity. Limited access to finance, poor 
infrastructure, weak workforce skills and corruption are the main constraints mentioned by firms. 
 
7. Diversifying the economy away from oil is an urgent priority and part of the Government➢❨ s 
response to the oil price crisis. Dependency on oil leaves Angola vulnerable to price and 
production shocks. For years, an overvalued exchange rate contributed to reduce the 
competitiveness of the non-oil sectors. The government crisis response strategy, presented in 
February 2016, aims at reducing the reliance on oil to generate revenues, substitute imports and 
promote non-traditional exports. Agricultural production plays a large role in the government➢❨  
strategy. Diversifying the economy will require economic transformation and eliminating 
obstacles to private investment, as well as efficient use of government resources to address 
infrastructure bottlenecks, and invest in human capital.
Sectoral and Institutional Context
8.  Angola➢❨ s agriculture potential remains largely untapped. The country has an abundance of 
land, water, and diversity of climatic and soil conditions for the production of a large variety of 
crops, but only 8 percent of its 58 million hectares of arable land is currently cultivated .  The 
agricultural sector in Angola currently represents around 5 percent of GDP, compared to 57.7 
percent for industry, including extractive, and 37.7 percent for services, and could contribute 
more to employment creation, especially for the youth. Nonetheless, agriculture is the main 
source of income for 90 percent of the 8.5 million Angolans living in rural areas (about 37 percent 
of the population). 
 
9.  Once a large exporter of coffee, cotton, sisal, sugar cane, bananas and tobacco, Angola➢❨ s 
agriculture sector suffered widespread destruction during the conflict and has not fully recovered 
since. Before the war the country was self-sufficient in all food crops except wheat. The exodus 
of Portuguese settlers after independence and the ensuing civil war that ravaged the country 
meant the loss of technical capacity and infrastructure destruction, cutting production areas from 
markets. Roads, bridges and other rural infrastructure were largely destroyed. Large-scale 
population displacement in rural areas and land mines➢❨ as many as 10 million➢❨ further 
constrained the sector recovery.  
 
10.  Production has been growing in recent years and the country has reached self-sufficiency in 
sweet potatoes and manioc, but Angola still relies on imports for most of its food consumption 
needs. For example, locally produced chicken supply only 40 percent of the local demand and 
production is limited by the lack of feed. In general, Angola has greater opportunities to compete 
with imports of perishable goods, including fruits, vegetables, and eggs, and local production of 
these goods has increased in recent years. Statistics on agriculture production are unreliable and 
outdated, but should improve with the planned agricultural census. According to MINAGRI 
2013/2014 production data, major crops based on volume include sweet potatoes, cassava, 

bananas, maize, pineapples, citrus fruits, beans, peanuts, and tomatoes. Agriculture exports 
represent less than 0.8 percent of total exports. Excluding fish, where little value is added in 
country, agriculture exports amount to just US$3.5 million. Coffee accounts for 43 percent, 
followed by non-alcoholic beverages (32 percent), beer (9 percent), fruit juice (5 percent) and 
medicinal plants (3 percent). The country is slowly opening new export markets including to 
neighboring DRC. It recently restarted exporting bananas to Portugal, 42 years later, with a 
shipment of 17 tons.  
 
11. Smallholders represent over 80 percent of agriculture production and 92 percent of land under 
cultivation. A small but growing formal distribution sector is establishing partnerships with local 
producers to ensure quality supply of primarily fresh produce. Still, most agriculture production is 
used for self-consumption or sold through informal channels. 
 
12. Macroeconomic conditions and the business climate constrain private investment in 
agriculture. An overvalued exchange rate in recent years and the current scarcity of foreign 
exchange affect the sector competitiveness and hamper private investment. The challenging 
business environment, including high cost of doing business, uncompetitive input markets, and 
insecurity of land tenure, as well as government crowding out the private sector, further reduce 
the sector➢❨ s attractiveness to private investors. However, based on discussions with private 
operators, investment opportunities exist in the production and processing for products such as 
horticulture, grains and beans, poultry and livestock, as well as aquaculture. While foreign 
exchange shortages are resulting in some of these investments being put on hold, they could 
materialize once macroeconomic conditions improve. New investment could bring much needed 
capital and know-how to the commercial agriculture sector. 
 
13. Access to finance is a serious hindrance to commercial agricultural development. 
Notwithstanding the high credit growth from 2004 to 2014 (going from 5 percent to 22 percent of 
GDP), the share of credit going to agriculture has remained very low at less than 5 percent of 
overall credit provided. Additionally, despite the general increase in access to finance over the 
five years between 2010 and 2014 (with an increase of two-thirds of branches, doubling of ATMs, 
and tripling of Points of Sale), there has been a clear urban/rural divide in access with Luanda 
accounting for the bulk of financial sector outreach. Specifically, Luanda, which has 27 percent of 
the population, accounted for 83 percent of credit, 94 percent of deposits and the majority of bank 
branches, ATMs and POS in 2015. Government programs such as the Angola Investe, offer 
subsidized credit, guarantees and a public risk capital fund, however most supported projects 
belong to non-agribusiness sectors and tend to be concentrated in Luanda. The Angola 
Development Bank also offers some lines of credit to the agriculture sector. Finally, the enabling 
environment for promoting agriculture finance (including agriculture insurance, warehouse 
receipts, equipment leasing, moveable collateral registry) is yet to be developed. 
 
14.  Infrastructure weaknesses hinder the creation of value addition through processing, and the 
integration of small producers into value chains. Market linkages are constrained by poor road 
and storage infrastructure. The total road network is about 76,000 km, many in need for 
rehabilitation, and the road density is 6 km /100 kmÂ², one of the lowest in Southern Africa. The 
rural access index is 42 percent, which is the fourth lowest in the world after South-Sudan, Chad 
and Mali (WDI). Although the government has heavily invested in improving the transport 
network over the last decade, including road and railways, limited budget is available for rural 
roads. Moreover, the limited reach of the electricity grid and the high cost of operating generators 

hamper the competitiveness of agribusiness, including agro-processing, irrigated agriculture, and 
livestock. The sector also suffers from lack of other adequate dedicated public services and 
infrastructure, such as phytosanitary and quality systems and commercial infrastructure. 
 
15.   Lack of technical knowledge and access to inputs further constrain commercial agriculture 
development. Poor agronomic practices, limited use of improved seeds, fertilizers, and irrigation 
technology, undermine productivity, growth and diversification. Most agricultural inputs, 
including fertilizers and machinery, are imported at high cost, and remain out of reach of small 
producers. These shortcomings are compounded by the very low technical capacity all along the 
value chain. 
 
16. Responsibility for agriculture policy and program development falls under the Ministry of 
Agriculture (MINAGRI). The Ministry is represented at the provincial level by the Provincial 
Directorates of Agriculture (DPA), and at the municipal level by the EstaÃ§Ã£o de 
Desenvolvimento AgrÃ¡rio (EDAs). MINAGRI➢❨ s capacity for program design and 
implementation has room for significant improvement. The World Bank Market Oriented 
Smallholder Agriculture Project (MOSAP), which closed in March 2016, and its follow up 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project (SADCP), approved by the 
Board of Directors on July 5, 2016, include activities to strengthen MINAGRI➢❨ s capacity at the 
local, provincial and national levels. This project will build on and complement these efforts. 
 
17.   Other Government agencies are involved in the development of the agribusiness sector. 
These include the Ministry of Economy, which manages the Angola Investe program to provide 
subsidized credit to productive investments, the Angola Development Bank, the Ministry of 
Commerce and Industry, which is in charge of investment promotion (through APIEX) and  the 
agriculture commercialization program (PAPAGRO). Other relevant agencies include the 
Ministry of Construction (for road construction), Ministry of Transport, and Ministry of Energy 
and Water. The coordination among the various Government agencies in the implementation of 
complex multisectoral projects to support agribusiness development needs substantial 
strengthening. This is hindered by limited technical capacity and a centralized approach to 
decision-making. 
 
18.  In an effort to spur commercial agriculture, the government has invested in spatial approaches 
and infrastructure development. Government-sponsored projects range from integrated socio-
economic projects, following Israel➢❨ s Kibutz model (Aldeia Nova) to large-scale agro-
industrial poles such as the 400,000 ha Capanda development pole, as well as irrigated perimeters 
with plots for large, medium and small-scale producers. These projects are often financed by 
foreign lines of credit, and management is frequently contracted out to foreign firms, which bring 
the technology and know-how to run them. A state owned company, Gesterra, sponsors many of 
these projects. While some of these projects have achieved productivity close to international 
good practices , others are still not operational or have failed to attract private producers (e.g. 
Family Aviculture Project). Overall, the financial and economic viability of these projects on a 
purely commercial basis needs to be confirmed. Other government investments include 
distribution centers and cold storage, some of which remain underutilized. Support infrastructure 
is still insufficient and existing facilities need to be more effectively used. 
 
19.  Low and declining public spending in agriculture highlights the need for mobilizing private 
investment. The share of agriculture in the national budget declined from 1.10 percent in 2013 



(US$701.76 million) to 0.41 percent (US$543.9 million) in 2015. In the current constrained fiscal 
environment, there is a need to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of public expenditures to 
develop strategic infrastructure, strengthen institutional capacity and improve research and 
extension services, and support smallholders. More efforts are needed to attract private 
investment and promote public-private partnerships under transparent criteria. The Commercial 
Agriculture Development project will contribute to these goals. 
 
20.  Weak public sector governance and poor capacity have considerably limited agriculture 
development efforts in the past. These issues affect resource allocation across a range of key areas 
in the agriculture sector, from access to land to financing of irrigation, agricultural infrastructure, 
and inputs. For example, one bottleneck for investment in agriculture is secured land access: land 
allocation procedures and coexistence of several legal systems for recognition and governance of 
land rights in Angola (state law and traditional rights) weaken legal certainty and hinder the 
sector➢❨ s development. To attract transformative private investments in the agriculture sector, 
particular attention will need to be paid to: (i) legal and regulatory measures; (ii) institutional 
mechanisms and delivery platforms; and (iii) transparency and social accountability. Besides 
involving several agencies/departments within the Ministry of Agriculture, the Project will need 
to work closely with, and reinforce the capacities of, several public institutions that have critical 
influence on agricultural investment generation.
Relationship to CAS/CPS/CPF
21. Supporting integrated national economic diversification is one of the pillars in the Country 
Partnership Strategy (CPS) FY14-16. Development of the agriculture sector, through productivity 
increases and market linkages, is seen as an important source of growth, employment creation and 
poverty reduction. Making progress toward the twin goals is found to be feasible building on the 
adoption of pro-poor growth strategies and policies. The draft Performance and Learning Review 
(PLR) envisions an extension of the CPS until FY18 and a reformulation of the objectives to 
respond to the macroeconomic challenges emerging from the oil price drop. The draft PLR 
maintains economic diversification as one of the key objectives of the CPS. A specific outcome 
related to enhancing productivity and competitiveness in the agriculture sector has been proposed, 
which is directly related to the activities of this project. 
 
22.  This Project will also build synergies with other World Bank Group projects, such as the 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project (SACDP, P154447) and 
Angola Statistics Project (P157671). Close coordination between the IFC and the Bank (IBRD) 
will play an important role to mobilize investment, sector financing and PPPs, where each 
institution will contribute on the basis of its respective mandates. 
 
23.  Economic diversification and the development of commercial agriculture are critical 
priorities for the government, as outlined in the National Development Plan (NDP) 2013-2017. 
The National Development Plan seeks to promote an enlargement of the productive base to 
increase employment, leveraging the country➢❨ s natural and human resources. It underscores the 
role of the private sector as the engine of economic growth, with the public sector playing a 
leveraging role. For the agriculture sector, the NDP objective is to achieve sustainable 
development building on the country➢❨ s natural resources and competitive advantage to ensure 
food security and self-sufficiency, as well as maximizing regional and international market 
opportunities. Developing a competitive agriculture sector, with increased private investment and 
market linkages for smallholders is an objective that will be supported by the activities of this 
project. The project also contributes to the objectives of Angola➢❨ s Medium Term Agriculture 



Development Plan 2013-2017, which seeks to foster agricultural and rural transformation, based 
on the development of smallholder agriculture, cooperatives and public-private partnerships, as 
well as contribute to the country➢❨ s industrialization.

C.  Proposed Development Objective(s)

Proposed Development Objective(s) (From PCN)
24.  The proposed project development objective (PDO) is to promote commercial agriculture 
development, increasing production and employment within selected value chains, in targeted 
areas in Angola.

Key Results (From PCN)
25.  The project strategy to achieve the PDO is to support the transformation of Angola➢❨ s 
agriculture towards a greater role for the private sector, building on existing programs, and 
focusing on value chains with the largest growth and employment creation potential. More private 
investment in agriculture is needed to increase production, productivity and commercialization, 
and to help create employment opportunities for the Angolan poor. This will be achieved by 
identifying and helping prepare Private-Public Partnerships (PPPs) ➢❨  private investment 
opportunities in selected value chains, and providing support to Small and Medium Enterprises 
(SMEs), including cooperatives, and producer organizations, in those value chains to increase 
their production, productivity and linkages with larger firms. In order to create the conditions for 
private investment the project will support investments in supporting infrastructure, as well as 
improvements in the regulatory environment and government capacity to play a catalytic role for 
the commercial agriculture sector development. 
 
26.  Success in achieving the PDO will be measured by the following PDO-level indicators: (i) 
increased investment in dollar terms; (ii) support infrastructure constructed or rehabilitated by the 
project; and (iii) jobs created in the beneficiary firms. 
 
27.  External factors may affect the realization of the PDO: (i) evolution of international markets 
(e.g., commodities prices, growth, and external financing), (ii) security and/or disease outbreak in 
Angola, and (iii) global warming, that may worsen droughts and lead to severe floods.

D.  Concept Description

28.  The overall approach is to foster commercial agriculture  through a set of integrated 
investments in hard and soft infrastructure, and developing an enabling environment for private 
participation in the sector. By simultaneously intervening along multiple dimensions, the project 
aims to remove key constraints to business formation and strengthen the platform for growth in 
high-potential value chains. World Bank support is required first to identify and prioritize these 
investments; and to develop the capacity to procure them and manage their execution. The project 
will also seek to mobilize private funds for the sector through PPPs and targeted investment 
promotion. At the same time, the project will support activities to create more conducive 
conditions for the future development of commercial agriculture, including regulatory reforms, 
and strengthening of research capacity. Strong coordination among the government agencies 
involved (agriculture, transport, energy, commerce, etc.) and building a constituency for the 
project among public, private and non-governmental stakeholders will be necessary, as suggested 
by previous experience in supporting integrated interventions along agriculture value chains. 
 

29.  Initially, two value chains will be supported and this would be scaled up during the life of the 
project to a maximum of five. Criteria for selecting value chains will be based on the 
competitiveness of specific value chain segments, potential impact (on jobs, food production, 
export diversification, and opportunities for upgrading), and readiness (existing production, 
necessary investments, and sector organization). Identifying competitive value chains in Angola 
will require a more in-depth analysis of demand, current cost structure and existing constraints. 
Two initial value chains will be selected during preparation, in consultation with the Government 
and private sector stakeholders. Existing studies of priority value chains for the Government, 
including horticulture, livestock, chicken and dairy, and by extension maize and soy, provide 
limited analysis on existing cost structures to assess their competitiveness. Preliminary work on 
the poultry sector inspired by the value chain segmentation methodology identified opportunities 
for competitive production of fresh chicken to supply the local market, provided reliable supply of 
local feed can be secured (see Annex 3). The Government has requested initial focus on poultry 
and by extension maize/soy as a priority due to growing demand, recent growth and the large 
share of chicken in the country➢❨ s imports. Support to export-oriented value chains, such as 
coffee, another government priority, also requires careful consideration of the competitiveness of 
Angola vis-➃❫ -vis other countries. Analytical work supported by the project will inform public-
private dialogue to agree on priority subsectors and constraints. The experience and capacity 
developed by the project will enable supporting other value chains in the future. 
 
30. The project will be geographically concentrated in the areas (to be defined during 
preparation), with the highest agricultural potential to meet domestic consumption (as would be 
the case for example in the poultry/maize/soy value chain) and export (e.g. coffee value chain). 
Other factors to select geographic areas include having a critical mass of potential commercially 
oriented producers, and access to downstream value chain activities and markets through 
proximity to agrologistical networks and platforms. 
 
31.  Moreover, the proposed project will ensure that: (1) equal opportunities and support will be 
provided to women➢❨ s and youth groups to participate in several aspects of the project; (2) 
training in gender awareness will be provided using appropriate media, language and gender-
sensitive approaches and methods; and (3) a gender informed M&E system will be implemented, 
will collect and present gender-disaggregated data on project beneficiaries. 
 
32. Given the institutional weaknesses, governance, and other risks, a flexible and modular design 
is called for. The project must remain flexible to potential delays in specific components, 
changing implementation realities, and to the response of private sector supply and demand. It 
should allow subcomponents to be removed or amended without compromising the overall 
project framework and the causal chain of activities.  Starting with a focus on existing investment 
opportunities and just two value chains will help test the approach while striving to deliver results 
early on in the project. In parallel, efforts to build client project implementation capacity and to 
improve the enabling environment will start.  Once key conditions   are established, such as: (i) 
progress in business environment reforms, PPD, analytical and implementation capacity (ii) 
selected area and pilot value chains under implementation, in compliance with all activities 
planned for the first two years of the project life, work on other value chain will be undertaken (to 
be defined during preparation). Therefore, the proposed time for the project implementation is 6 
years. 
 
33.  With an amount of $230 million,  the project will support commercial agriculture 


development through three interrelated components: (1) Agribusiness development by means of 
mobilizing investment, including PPPs, providing financial and non-financial support to value 
chain actors and developing support infrastructure (rural roads, storage, irrigation, and energy); 
(2) Support to create an enabling environment for commercial agriculture; and (3) Project 
management, coordination, and public-private dialogue. 
 
34.  Component 1 ➢❨  Agribusiness Development (US$ 190 million). This Component will 
address the following challenges: (i) underinvestment by SMEs in inputs, technology and skills 
development due to access to credit constraints and information failures; (ii) insufficient linkages 
among value chain actors due to coordination and information failures and (iii) underprovision of 
infrastructure oriented to underpin market-oriented agriculture. This component aims to mobilize 
investments in agribusiness and support improvements in productivity, quality assurance and 
market linkages through the following subcomponents: 
 
35. Subcomponent 1.1 Technical and financial support to SMEs development.  This 
subcomponent will have a value chain focus and will aim to (i) support SME development, 
including market-ready producer groups and cooperatives, and help them overcome constraints in 
access to credit and managerial/technical knowledge; and (ii) support links and partnerships 
between large, medium and small-scale producers and purchasers through business alliances. As a 
result of project investments, enhanced capabilities and links to larger firms, it is expected that 
SMEs will be able to grow their business, improve productivity and quality, strengthen market 
connections, and create jobs. An important aspect during preparation will be to assess the actual 
size of the SME sector in the pilot value chains and adapt the intervention design to uptake, 
capacity, and sustainability considerations. 
 
(a) This subcomponent will provide support through a competitive  matching grant facility: 
 
1. Provision of technical assistance for pre-investments. This window will provide financial 
resources for the development of innovative business and linkages between small producers and 
other actors along the value chain. 
 
The competitive grant will provide ➢❨ startup➢❨  capital for promoting the introduction of new 
sustainable practices and technologies, and processes that improve the competitiveness of 
agricultural production by SMEs. The grant will consider three main levels of support to be 
further defined during preparation. These could include: (i) extension and technology 
development; (ii) studies for business alliances, including the formulation of business plans and 
associated productive subprojects and pilots➢❨  investments; and (iii) capacity building for 
entrepreneurs, individually or as member of a formal group (e.g. associations, cooperatives, 
farmer organizations).  
 
2. Establish a Matching Grant facility for Value Chain Development.  . This window will 
finance investments based on the business plans directly linked to the selected value chains and 
will have a geographical focus.  
 
SMEs investments will be identified through a competitive process based on a review of feasible 
business plans and selected proposals identifying SMEs financial contribution through a matching 
grant (at least 60% of total investment, to be confirmed during preparation), and presenting social 
environmental and economic sustainability analysis.  


The grant will combine innovation with a focus on partnerships with the market and will consider 
to implement investments designed based on business plans agreed with their business partners. 
The objective of each proposal would be to reach the product specifications (quantity, quality, 
delivery, etc.) agreed and established in the business plan. Eligible activities that would be 
financed could include expenditures at the level of both individual producers and their 
organizations (e.g. cooperatives), such as: (i) minor on-farm infrastructure and working capital, 
(ii) technical assistance services, (iii) agriculture inputs, equipment, production facilities 
(nurseries, greenhouses), (iv) value addition investments (post-harvest processing and storage, 
packaging), soil and water conservation measures and (v) other minor infrastructure, e.g. off-farm 
infrastructure for storage specific to the needs of the business alliance. If needed, the project will 
provide additional training to improve their governance, organizational, managerial, business and 
risk-management skills and to facilitate adoption of good agricultural and environmental 
practices.  
 
Eligible applicants would include: (i) organized producer organizations associations and related 
farmers organizations with developed or developing linkages to agricultural value chains, and 
supporting the development of smallholder farmers; (ii) agribusinesses linked with smallholders, 
involved in processing, trading, and marketing of agricultural and food products/commodities 
which help to improve the growth and competitiveness of smallholder farmers either directly to 
farmers at the production stage, or further down the value chain as part of the processing chain of 
agricultural commodities; (iii) input suppliers; (iv) nucleus commercial farms working with 
smallholders; and (v) publicly and privately funded agricultural and industrial institutions and 
trusts.   
 
In addition, for mobilizing business alliance investments, the project will carry out a differentiated 
communication and dissemination campaigns to: (i) inform potential stakeholders about the scope 
and rules of the Project; (ii) the publication and dissemination of Project activities including, inter 
alia, information on demand, approvals, procurement and results; and (iii) promote investments 
and contract farming/buying contracts in agricultural sector value chains.  
 
 (b) This subcomponent will also provide support to mobilize and select larger private investors. 
 
1. Selected interventions will need to demonstrate (i) alignment with the value chain development 
and (ii) potential impact on job creation. The stakeholders jointly with the PIU will develop 
proposals to request select interventions that are not firm-specific but that benefit their segment of 
the value chain and the value chain as a whole (i.e. common goods). 
 
2. Following the Client➢❨ s and the Chamber of Commerce➢❨ s advice, the investors will need 
to be strongly involved in crafting these proposals for interventions to ensure their commitment 
aspect and consistency with the constraints faced by groups of firms in the VC. The project will 
support the creation of a national committee composed of public and private sector stakeholders 
that will be in charge of reviewing the requests for funds to finance catalytic activities, ensuring 
that they conform with the strict eligibility criteria that will be imposed (e.g. demonstrate direct 
contribution to the VC➢❨ s development and job creation) and selecting the best proposals that 
receive project support. 
 
36.  Subcomponent 1.3. Establish a Partial Credit Guarantee (PCG) fund to promote access to 


credit for the project target groups. The fund is expected to lower the risk exposure of financial 
institutions through a PCG arrangement and thus increase the incentives for financing agricultural 
activities. The fund would target the agribusiness SMEs in the selected value chains for their 
financing needs whether these are for fixed assets or for working capital. It would therefore 
support matching grants beneficiaries to provide the contribution required to benefit from the 
matching grants. It is anticipated that the project PCG fund will utilize the existing structure 
established by the Angola Investe Program. However, a dedicated Fund for commercial 
agriculture will be created and will be governed in accordance with applicable Bank Group➢❨ s 
policies and the recently issued Principles for Public Credit Guarantee Schemes for MSME, with 
IFC support. For participating banks wishing to benefit from the guarantee coverage, a 
prequalification process will be undertaken.  
 
Financial institution eligibility criteria will be transparent and open to all institutions that have an 
interest to lend to the beneficiaries of the Project.  The PCG will cover 50 percent of the risk pari-
pasu for loans to and it will be priced to cover the administration costs and risks it covers. 
However, the PCG fees would be priced, so that the facility would remain sustainable after the 
project conclusion and would continue to serve this market segment following project conclusion. 
 
37. Eligibility criteria and selection processes for investment support may vary according to the 
type of support required, and will be detailed during the preparation phase and described in the 
Project Appraisal Document (PAD). 
 
38. Subcomponent 1.3. Develop critical infrastructure. This subcomponent aims to (i) address 
existing gaps in infrastructure (rural roads, post-harvest facilities, irrigation, and energy); (ii) 
strengthening the capacity of public agencies to formulate, prepare and promote medium and 
long-term public-private partnerships in the sector. Special focus will be given to the promotion 
of climate smart agriculture approaches and renewable energy technologies. 
 
39. This subcomponent will support infrastructure investments in selected value chains and 
geographic areas of focus. It will leverage existing transport, logistics, energy, and irrigation 
infrastructures to support improvements in agriculture production and productivity, reduce post-
harvest losses, and connect production areas with markets: 
 
- Construction and rehabilitation of feeder roads. Once geographic areas of focus have been 
identified during preparation, a mapping will be conducted of existing road links and current gaps 
between production areas and the main national road networks (for example, the Luanda-Malanje 
corridor for the poultry/maize/soy value chain). Maximum length of rural roads supported by the 
project will be no more than 50 km to the main road (to be confirmed during preparation). The 
project will build on the existing Strategic Plan for the Rehabilitation of Tertiary Roads and the 
National Integrated Plan for Accessibility, Mobility and Transport (PENAMT) by the Ministry of 
Transport. 
 
- Post-harvest facilities: support to landing docks infrastructure and rehabilitation/construction of 
storage facilities to facilitate collection of production. 
- Irrigation infrastructure: support to irrigation infrastructure including water storage facilities and 
main canals will be agreed during preparation. Private investors will finance the construction of 
secondary canals to their farms. 
 
- Energy investments will be further explored during preparation phase, depending on 
confirmation of targeted value chains and the degree of electrification of the selected geographic 
areas of focus. Other sources of clean energy will also be explored. 
 
40.  This subcomponent will also support the identification and assessment of existing 
government storage and agro-industrial infrastructure amenable to private sector participation, as 
well as other rural infrastructure and agribusiness services that could advantageously be 
developed and implemented by private entities as PPP or as purely private investment. Whenever 
the local conditions so require, opportunities for the use of PPPs for the integrated development 
and management of rural facilities and services should be identified, particularly when those 
facilities and services are apt to be co-funded by commercial and individual users. Following that 
initial assessment, the project will support pre-feasibility studies for the 3-4 most promising 
opportunities to enable the government to decide whether to move ahead with a PPP. This 
subcomponent can also provide support to strengthen the legal framework for PPPs in Angola and 
support capacity building efforts in this area. This would be done not as an isolated effort, but in 
order to guarantee an adequate environment for private investment, and conditions for effective 
definition of incentives for private investors to implement the government➢❨ s agricultural 
policy. 
 
41.  Component 2 ➢❨  Support to develop an enabling environment for commercial agriculture 
(US$ 25 million). This component will focus on addressing challenges related to (i) existing gaps 
in the Government strategy for commercial agriculture development and analytical capacity; (ii) 
limited government investment generation capacity (iii) constraints in the agriculture input 
markets; (iv) high costs and uncertainty of doing business, related to burdensome regulations and 
procedures; and (iv) weaknesses in the agriculture research and development capacity. The 
component will focus on strengthening the building blocks for creating a competitive commercial 
agriculture sector, including strategy and regulatory reforms, as well as support to enhance 
research and development (R&D) for the sector. 
 
42.  Subcomponent 2.1 Support sector strategy development and enhance client analytical 
capacity. This subcomponent will contribute to strengthen institutional capacity at MINAGRI to 
develop strategies for competitive and sustainable agriculture value chain development based on 
analysis of local, regional and global demand and existing competitive advantage. By doing so, it 
will complement envisioned support by SADCP to strengthen the capacity of local, provincial, 
and national units of the Ministry of Agriculture to provide services to smallholders in the areas 
of irrigation, extension, market information, statistics and policy analysis. Specific areas of 
support will be defined during preparation, but may include: (i) capacity building for evidence-
based economic research, value chain segmentation analysis, and M&E; and (ii) technical 
assistance to develop Climate Smart Agriculture Country Profile .  It could be an important 
mechanism to build awareness of country options, facilitate dialogue, and help prioritize 
investments to deliver on the ➢❨ triple win➢❨ , implementing agriculture and food production 
practices that not only boost productivity but also enhance resilience and lower greenhouse gas 
emissions, the three pillars that form the basis of climate smart agriculture. 
 
In order to support the thinking on Government strategy, the project preparation advance will 
fund the organization of a practitioners➢❨  forum on international experiences, including 
successes and failures, in developing commercial agriculture with a special focus on value chain 
approaches and agroindustrial poles. 


43.  As part of this component, the project will also support the establishment of a team of 
analysts at MINAGRI with strong skills in economic and market analysis. They will be in charge 
of reviewing and validating the outputs of consultants hired previously by the Government, and in 
assessing the experience of failed prior agribusiness initiatives. They will receive training on 
value chain segmentation methodology and will conduct additional analysis as needed to identify 
the most promising value chain segments for Angola and the existing binding constraints for their 
development. This analysis will inform the discussions in the public-private dialogue platform 
(Component 3). The team will formulate proposals for addressing such constraints in 
collaboration with the relevant government agencies. This activity will be developed in 
coordination with other Government efforts to develop skills to support economic diversification 
strategies. 
 
44.  Subcomponent 2.2 Promote investment opportunities. This subcomponent will work with the 
recently established Agency for Investment and Export Promotion (APIEX) and MINAGRI➢❨ s 
Technical Unit for Investment Promotion to strengthen investment promotion, facilitation and 
aftercare in agribusiness. In particular, the project will support the compilation of a pipeline of 
investment leads and build capacity for assisting investors during the process of establishing their 
operations. Additionally, the project will assess current investor aftercare functions and provide 
training and other capacity building activities to ensure client➢❨ s effective support to existing 
investors, with the goal to encourage reinvestment. Technical assistance will be provided to 
prepare information packages and implement targeted investor outreach efforts in the priority 
value chains. Finally, the project will include additional support to the implementation of the 
revamped Investment policy and legal framework, including an assessment of existing incentives. 
 
45. Subcomponent 2.3 Improving the regulatory environment. This component will support key 
regulatory and administrative reforms to remove barriers to private sector activity in agribusiness. 
Strong emphasis will be given to ensure capacity for implementation of amended regulations is in 
place and adequate monitoring systems are developed. In these, the project will focus on those 
areas (i) have been identified as key constraints by analysis and private sector actors in the 
priority value chains, and (ii) where there is clear government commitment. This subcomponent 
will be closely coordinated with efforts to support regulatory improvements in the business 
environment under the DPL series and other World Bank Advisory work, including support in the 
areas measured by the Doing Business report. Areas for support will be confirmed based on the 
value chains selected. The following four areas have been identified as problematic in initial 
consultations with agribusiness private sector actors: 
 
- Policy and competition barriers in agricultural inputs: limited supply and high costs of improved 
seeds, fertilizers, and equipment is a critical constraint to increased productivity and production. 
The project will support studies to assess existing constraints affecting input availability including 
sector policies, tariffs, entry barriers and market competition. Recommendations emanating from 
these studies will inform public-private dialogue and the development of actions to address 
existing constraints. The project will provide technical assistance for implementation of these 
actions. 
 
- Trade facilitation and identification, classification and removal of Non-Tariff Barriers (NTBs): 
Given Angola➢❨ s dependency on imports for food and agriculture inputs and the country➢❨ s 
objective to develop exports as a way to diversify export revenues away from oil, an efficient 



trade environment is essential. Building on ongoing reform efforts, the project will identify 
activities that will further simplify trade logistics systems and services, focusing on reducing the 
time and cost associated with international trade, through coordinated agency efforts. In addition, 
NTBs in Angola severely hamper the import of key products and inputs. There is a strong need to 
streamline NTBs, especially those related to agriculture. This exercise would include building 
capacity for streamlining non-tariff measures (NTMs) and identifying and removing non-tariff 
barriers, effective simplification of import-export procedures, and strengthening risk-management 
approaches for SPS (Sanitary and Phytosanitary) and TBT (Technical Barriers to Trade) 
measures. 
 
- Land administration: This subcomponent will support targeted interventions to strengthen land 
management and administration. Land in Angola is owned by the Government and the 2004 Land 
Law (Lei de Terras de Angola, Lei 09/04) defines the mechanisms for the Government to grant 
transferable land use rights for rural and urban land. The law recognizes customary uses, and the 
Government can grant surface rights to individuals and entities. Land is a delicate issue in 
Angola. It is estimated that 85-90% of the land is not registered due to weaknesses in land 
administration institutions, among other factors. Given the magnitude of this challenge, the 
project will focus on local level interventions based on needs identified in the priority value 
chains and focus on transparent and fair procedures for land acquisition and regularization, 
protecting communities➢❨  rights to land use and natural resources. The project will build on the 
experience of the FAO implemented Land Project and will follow the ➢❨ principles for 
responsible agriculture investments➢❨ . 
 
- Regulatory reforms to promote agriculture finance: In addition to the catalytic interventions to 
promote access to credit, the project would support reform efforts to improve the enabling 
environment for agriculture finance. Activities will be defined during preparation, but may 
include diagnosis and support to reforms to enable agricultural equipment leasing, establish a 
moveable asset registry, warehouse receipts and commodities exchange development, and 
agriculture insurance (including weather base d index insurance). 
 
46.  Component 3 ➢❨  Project Management, Coordination and Public-Private Dialogue (PPD) 
(US$ 15 million). This component will support the costs of establishing and funding the Project 
Implementation Unit (PIU), which will be comprised of a technical team, supplemented by 
external consultants, to manage the following activities: Project Manager, Financial Management, 
Procurement, Social and Environmental Safeguards, Monitoring & Evaluation, Technology & 
Information, among others. Lessons learnt from Bank operations in several weak and fragile 
environments suggest that both Borrower and Bank teams typically tend to underestimate project 
implementation costs, and run into associated difficulties. The team will re-visit the estimated 
costs of implementation during project preparation. In addition, this component will address 
existing weaknesses in implementation capacity, coordination, and public-private dialogue for 
development of commercial agriculture by (i) providing capacity building and technical assistance 
to the inter-agency working group to be created by MINAGRI to coordinate project activities, and 
(ii) creating and implementing a PPD platform. 
 
47. Subcomponent 3.1 Project Implementation Unit and coordination support. This component 
will fund the activities of the Project Implementation Unit (PIU). Strong emphasis on capacity 
building based on the experience from MOSAP will be included in this component. The MOSAP 
PIU, which will remain in place for SADCP, will be used during project preparation, but the 


client has requested creating a separate PIU for this project. This component will also provide 
technical assistance and training to the inter-agency working group to be established by 
MINAGRI to coordinate project implementation. Support may include successful experiences 
from other countries in planning, development of action plans, and implementation monitoring, 
among others. 
 
48. Subcomponent 3.2. Establishing Public-Private Dialogue. The project will support increased 
public-private dialogue specific to the agribusiness sector. An assessment will be conducted on 
existing public-private dialogue mechanisms in Angola. Recommendations for establishing an 
inclusive public-private dialogue platform, including institutional arrangements, will be 
developed, followed by technical assistance for implementation. The objective of the dialogue 
will be to ensure private sector inputs to sector policies and programs, including the identification 
of priority value chains, identify specific constraints and remedy actions to increase private 
investment, and assess implementation progress, as well as avenues to improve the effectiveness 
of public investments. In addition to government and private sector, efforts will be undertaken to 
ensure the maximum representativeness of the PPD including farmer organizations, as well as 
other stakeholders as relevant, such as academia or civil society. Special attention will be given to 
ensure the voice of women is well represented and the specific constraints for women in 
agribusiness are discussed in the PPD.

II. SAFEGUARDS
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis (if known)
49.  The project is expected to be at national scale however, specific geographic details of the exact 
project footprint and its impacts will be determined during project preparation and will be reflected 
in the safeguards documents (ESMF, ESIA, MP, RPF, and RAP, PMP, etc.).

B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
50.  At the framework level, there are no relevant gaps between the Angolan environmental 
legislation and the World Bank➢❨ s Safeguard policy and guidelines. The environmental legislation 
in Angola is quite recent and inspired by the international Conventions that Angola takes part. In 
regard to the environmental impact assessment, the existing Angolan regulatory framework covers 
the most relevant principles and best practices, including public consultation and participation, 
monitoring and licensing procedures. 
 
51.  The Ministry of Agriculture (MINAGRI) through the Institute for Agriculture Development 
(IDA) will be the lead implementing agency. IDA will have the responsibility of coordinating 
implementation by hosting a Project Implementation Unit (PIU) with sub PIUs at Province level, 
tasked with the responsibility of project coordination and management using Technical Assistance 
(TA) when needed. MINAGRI has acquired reasonable experience in handling World Bank projects 
that require Safeguards attention, such as MOSAP. Hence, Commercial Agriculture Development 
Project will build up from the experience in safeguards management acquired by IDA-MINAGRI 
during MOSAP implementation. Nonetheless, substantial capacity building and training will be 
required to deal with this project Safeguards requirements, particularly in ensuring adequate 
subproject screening and subsequent preparation of ESIA/ESMP and RAP as necessary.

D. POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment 
OP/BP 4.01

Yes The construction of rural roads, electricity and water 
infrastructure for irrigation , including a series of 
land administration reforms, under component 2.3, 
may have adverse impacts on soil, water, air quality, 
flora and fauna. Some of the adverse impacts may 
include land right conflicts, soil erosion and water 
logging, alteration of water flows due to irrigation 
schemes, vegetation loss and fauna disturbance for 
access road and power transmission construction, 
risks to the human health by those handling 
pesticides. Consequently the OB/BP4.01 is triggered 
to comply with the Environmental Assessment 
safeguard requirements. Specific geographic details 
of the exact project footprint and its impacts are not 
yet know and will be determined during project 
preparation.  Hence, the recipient will prepare an 
Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) to help mitigate the potential environmental 
and social impacts by the direct and indirect 
investments in the project selected areas and to guide 
the preparation of ESIA and ESMP. The ESMF will 
be consulted and disclosed both in-country and at the 
Infoshop prior to appraisal.

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes The project is not expected to invest in activities that 
may have direct impacts on natural habitats. 
However, rural roads improvements and water 
infrastructure may happen in proximity to national 
parks or protected areas and therefore lead to 
downstream impacts that may affect ecosystem 
services and functions provided by natural habitats. 
Hence, OP/BP 4.04 is triggered and the ESMF will 
include the specific provisions to prevent or mitigate 
impacts on natural habitats.

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes The Project will not have any direct or indirect 
negative impacts on health and quality of forests, or 
the health and safety of people who depends on 
forests. However, clearance of vegetation for rural 
roads improvements and water infrastructures may 
require compensatory reforestation and tree 
maintenance along the rehabilitated roads. OP/BP 
4.36 is triggered and the ESMF will include specific 
provisions to address the requirements.


Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes Promotion of agriculture activities may include the 
use of small quantities of pesticides, though expected 
only at a small scale, to treat orchards and crops 
against pest and infestations to enhance agriculture 
productivity of project beneficiaries. Hence, OP/
BP4.09 is triggered and a Pest Management Plan will 
be prepared to help mitigate potential risks to human 
health and to the environment using the integrated 
pest management approaches.

Physical Cultural Resources 
OP/BP 4.11

Yes The policy is triggered as project investments 
involve infrastructures (roads, irrigation, electricity) 
that may require large movements of earth in areas 
likely to contain sites deemed physical cultural 
resources by communities living there (e.g. holy sites 
sacred graves, sacred forests, etc.). To ensure due 
diligence, the ESMF will include a Chance Find 
procedures that will be detailed in the ESIA/ESMP 
then reflected in the constructor contracts.

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 
4.10

TBD

Involuntary Resettlement OP/
BP 4.12

Yes The project will finance activities associated with 
construction/ rehabilitation of small scale irrigation 
infrastructures, rural roads, electricity transmission 
lines that could necessitate involuntary land 
acquisition resulting in physical of people and/or loss 
of assets, means of livelihoods or resources. The 
Borrower will prepare a Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF) to adequately deal with issues of 
land acquisition resulting with compensation and/or 
the physical displacement of peoples. The RPF will 
be consulted and disclosed both in-country and by 
the Bank prior to appraisal. The RPF will include 
detailed guidance for the preparation of site specific 
Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) prior or during 
project implementation.

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No

Projects on International 
Waterways OP/BP 7.50

TBD The proposed project is not expected to engage in 
large scale irrigation activities or other activities that 
would adversely affect the quality or quantity of 
water flow within shared waterways. 
Notwithstanding, triggering this policy will be 
determined once specific details of the project are 
known.

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No This policy is not triggered. The area in which the 
Project will be implemented is not known to include 


BP 7.60 any disputed areas, at this stage.

E. Safeguard Preparation Plan
1. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS
15-Sep-2016
2. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be 
needed. The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage 
ISDS.
The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS: September 2016 to 
March 2017


























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Turkey Resilient Landscape Integration Project (TULIP) (P172562) 

 
 

  
Mar 12, 2020 Page 1 of 15  

     

      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document (PID) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 06-Apr-2020 | Report No: PIDC28743 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Turkey P172562  Turkey Resilient 
Landscape Integration 
Project (TULIP) 
(P172562) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA Sep 28, 2020 Dec 17, 2020 Environment, Natural 
Resources & the Blue 
Economy 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Republic of Turkey General Directorate of 
Forestry (Ministry of 
Agriculture and Forestry) 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The project development objective is to strengthen integrated management of natural resources at the landscape level 
and increase access to climate-resilient infrastructure to communities in targeted areas of the Bolaman Basin. 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-NewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 300.00 

Total Financing 300.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 300.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) 300.00 

   
 

Environmental and Social Risk Classification Concept Review Decision 

Substantial  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
tbd 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

 
1. Turkey has achieved commendable economic and social development results between 2000 and 2016. GDP per 

capita more than doubled from US$4,200 in 2000 to US$9,505 in 2018. Poverty incidence more than halved over 2002-

2015, and extreme poverty fell even faster from 13 to 3.1 percent. During this period, Turkey urbanized dramatically, 

maintained strong macroeconomic and fiscal policy frameworks, opened to foreign trade and finance, harmonized many 

laws and regulations with European Union (EU) standards, and greatly expanded access to public services. However, 

growing economic vulnerabilities and a challenging external environment have threatened to undermine the 

sustainability of these achievements in the last few years. Turkey experienced a period of economic overheating in late 

2017 and early 2018 and intense market volatility in mid-2018, resulting in contracting economic output, rising 

unemployment (from 10 percent in January 2018 to 14 percent in mid-2019), and high inflation (estimated at around 15 

percent in September 2019). Recent adjustments in the Turkish economy have lessened external vulnerabilities and 

contributed to a more stable Lira. The economy grew in the first half of 2019 and has stabilized in the short-term. 

Nevertheless, stagnating output, high costs of production, and high consumer prices have also led to significant job losses 

and falling real wages. Poorer households have been most impacted because many low-income workers are employed 

in construction and agriculture – the sectors that saw a significant decline in jobs. Large regional disparities continue to 

persist, as rural poverty remains higher than urban poverty1. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 

 
2. Turkey has made progress in relatively decoupling growth from a range of environmental pressures, but rapid 

population growth, urbanization, and industrialization continue to take a heavy toll on the country’s natural resources 

and the environment2. Soil erosion, land degradation, and desertification are among the most severe environmental 

problems in Turkey. Soil erosion, mostly caused by human factors coupled with geographic, topographic, climatic, and 

soil characteristics, is observed at very large scales, affecting about 86% of Turkey’s lands3 and putting most of the country 

under risk of desertification4. Turkey has undertaken considerable afforestation efforts for erosion control, adding a total 

of 2.14 million hectares of forest land since 1973. Despite this increase in forest cover, about 43% of Turkey’s forests 

(9.64 out of 22.34 million hectares) are degraded5, and the deterioration of forest ecosystems and their associated 

ecosystem services and loss of biodiversity continue to be critical issues6. Water quality and scarcity are also of grave 

concern as they affect the availability of water resources for human consumption and economic uses. Deforestation, 

sedimentation, discharges of untreated industrial and domestic effluents into freshwater bodies and the sea, 

insufficiency of wastewater treatment facilities, and diffuse nitrogen and ammonia pollution from agricultural activities, 

all contribute to decreased water quality. By international standards, Turkey is currently considered a water-stressed 

country and, with rapid population growth, is predicted to be water-scarce by 20307. In addition to natural resource 


degradation problems, Turkey is also vulnerable to a range of natural disasters, with floods and landslides being the 

second (25.3 percent) and third (7.4 percent) most frequent and disastrous hazards after earthquakes8. Floods and 

landslides in Turkey are directly linked to topography, land use, land cover, urbanization levels, and rainfall regimes. 

Between 1975 and 2015, 1209 floods were recorded, causing loss of 720 lives and damaging 894,474 hectares of land. 

The amount of average annual property damage caused by floods has reached 300 million Turkish Liras. Hazardous floods 

are mostly observed in the Black Sea, Mediterranean, and Western Anatolia regions9. 

 
3. Climate change is expected to further exacerbate the pressure on the natural resource base of Turkey. The 

country is already experiencing an increase in annual mean temperature and changes in the precipitation regime. A long-

term downward trend in average yearly precipitation is projected for overall Turkey, although the distribution pattern 

varies across locations. The Eastern Black Sea and northeastern parts of the country will likely experience an increase in 

average annual precipitation, while the southern regions will experience a decrease. Projected climate change impacts 

include reduction in surface water availability, more frequent and severe incidences of floods, and more prolonged 

droughts. With a mostly arid and semiarid climate and environment, increased frequency and severity of droughts and 

extreme precipitation events will negatively affect water holding capacity of the upper layers of the soil, further 

exacerbating soil erosion and increasing the risks of flooding and landslides, particularly in terrains with rough 

topography10. More frequent droughts will negatively affect crop yields and threaten food security, while floods and 

landslides will continue to affect the safety and welfare of hundreds of thousands of people. Without accelerated actions, 

the combination of climate-induced hazards, a degrading natural resource base, and water scarcity and quality issues will 

increasingly affect societal wellbeing and act as constraints on growth. Poor rural communities whose livelihoods depend 

on natural resources will be disproportionately affected11, which could lead to an increase in rural-to-urban migration. 

 
4. Recognizing the importance of adapting to the impacts of climate change and protecting the country’s natural 

capital to sustain current gains, Turkey’s Eleventh Development Plan for the 2019-2023 period pays significant 

attention to a sustainable and inclusive growth pathway.  The Plan places “Livable Cities and Sustainable Environment” 

among its five fundamental pillars of development. Priorities and targets embraced under this pillar include reduction of 

environmental pollution, protection of biodiversity, and sustainable management and use of land, forest, water, and 

other natural resources through integrated watershed management. This pillar also includes targets to ensure access to 

healthy drinking water, including appropriate waste water treatment, combat poverty, promote the employability of 

rural labor force, prevent and mitigate disaster risks, and develop climate adaptation capacity and resilience of affected 

communities. The Plan highlights agriculture and forestry as one of the three priority development areas and emphasizes 

the need to bridge regional disparities and increase job opportunities and employment of women and youth12. 

 
5. Natural resource management in Turkey is guided by a multitude of sectoral strategies and plans, however 

integration among them is currently low. The Turkey National Forestry Program (2004 – 2023) has the objective to 

ensure sustainable forest management, ecosystems and biodiversity conservation, and efficient use of forest resources, 

with the participation of stakeholders, including local communities. A special emphasis is placed on the ecosystem 

services provided by forests, including soil conservation, water quality protection, prevention of desertification, erosion, 

and natural disasters, air quality regulation and carbon storage13. The National Strategy and Action Plan to Combat 

Desertification (2015-2023) aims at mitigating against the adverse effects of aridity, desertification, and land degradation 

and balancing conservation with efficient land use objectives14. The National Climate Change Action Plan (2011-2023) 

includes the objectives to increase the amount of carbon sequestered in forests and to reduce deforestation and 

associated GHG emissions from land use and land use change. The National Basin Management Strategy (NBMS) (2014-


2023) provides guidance for the medium and long-term investment programs for the sustainable management of 

Turkey’s 25 river basins15. Under the NBMS, River Basin Management Plans (RBMPs) are now been prepared for each of 

the basins to address the water quality and quantity issues and meet the ecological status for both surface and 

groundwater bodies as per the requirements of related EU water legislation, including the EU Water Framework 

Directive, Flood Directive, Drinking Water Directive, and Urban Waste Water Directive. The NBMS attempts to integrate 

the objectives of several relevant sectoral strategies and plans by promoting an integrated landscape-based ecosystem 

approach at basin or sub-basin scale, through coordinated efforts of related agencies and stakeholders to enhance the 

sustainability, while also improving the productivity of natural resources in Turkey’s river basins. Such integrated 

watershed/sub-basin management approach can address the interrelationships among land use, soil, and water and the 

interlinkage between upstream and downstream areas, and help link natural resources management with socioeconomic 

wellbeing and regional development.16 Nevertheless, the RBMPs (the planning tools under NBMS) that have been 

developed so far are highly water-focused and not sufficiently detailed to be operationalized at the sub-basin level. There 

is also a lack of integration among various basin-related plans (RBMPs, Flood Management Plans, Drought Management 

Plans, Sectoral Water Allocation Plans) and other sectoral plans including land use planning, spatial planning, and 

agricultural development plans. 

 
6. Institutional coordination also poses constraints to the implementation of integrated natural resources 

management (NRM) approaches in Turkey. Institutions directly involved in NRM include the Ministry of Agriculture and 

Forestry and its line agencies such as the General Directorate (DG) of Forestry, DG for Combatting Desertification and 

Erosion, DG of Agricultural Reform, DG of Water Management, and State Hydraulic Works (DSI); the Ministry of 

Environment and Urbanization, the Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources, the Disaster and Emergency Management 

Presidency under the Ministry of Interior, as well as the Provincial Directorates of these respective ministries, and local 

authorities, among others. The involvement of numerous institutions with often overlapping jurisdictions and 

responsibilities results in duplicities and fragmentation in management efforts, leading to inefficient use of public 

resources. The institutional arrangement for river basin management in Turkey is meant to bring these institutions 

together to coordinate their works, however, it has yet to be effectively implemented in practice.  

 
7. The Eastern Black Sea (EBS) Basin has the 3rd highest poverty rate (20.9%) in Turkey combined with a multitude 

of environmental challenges.17 The EBS Basin has the third-largest annual flow rate, after the Euphrates-Tigris and 

Eastern Mediterranean Basin18 and is home to approximately 2.46 million people19. It has a harsh mountainous 

topography with no extensive plains and the highest peak at 3,937 meters running parallel to shore. EBS has a prevailing 

humid-temperate Black Sea climate with the highest precipitation level in Turkey (averaged above 2500mm annually 

versus the national average of 574 mm)20. A combination of short rivers with rapid descending slopes, an abundance of 

snow and rains, and the highest rainfall level on the slopes facing the sea make EBS highly flood-prone, with flooding 

being the most commonly occurred natural disaster in EBS (39% of the total number of disasters). Climate-induced 

change in precipitation will likely further exacerbate flood risks. Additionally, soil erosion and landslide-caused disasters 

are prevalent in EBS due to topography, morphological structure, lithology, climate characteristics such as heavy 

precipitation, and land use change. The transformation of natural vegetation for hazelnut and tea cultivation since the 

1950s in the region has resulted in the formation and increased frequency of landslides.21 Landslide frequency is higher 

in the elevation range of 0-500 meters due to slope instability connected to the conversion of forest areas into hazelnut 

gardens and road construction.22 Despite the abundance in annual rainfall, EBS is considered water-stressed due to high 

seasonal rainfall variability, severe water pollution from agricultural and livestock activities, industrial and domestic 


     

waste discharges, and insufficient water storage capacity. EBS has four sub-basins, including Ordu-Giresun, Harşit Stream, 

Trabzon, and Rize-Artvin23. 

 
8. The Bolaman Basin, located within the Ordu-Giresun sub-basin of EBS, is an area severely challenged by 

landslides, flooding, and degradation of natural resources affecting the wellbeing and livelihoods of the local 

population. The Bolaman Basin has its distinct geographical boundaries and hydrological structure and covers an area of 

158,886 hectares almost entirely within the Ordu Province. With a population of 255,000, most of its residents live in 

rural areas across 97 villages, 53 of which are forest villages. Over 58 percent of the basin area is agricultural land, of 

which 39 percent is cultivated land, and 19 percent is pasture land. Forest land has been largely converted to hazelnut 

groves over the years and currently only accounts for 28.9 percent of the basin area. Hazelnut is cultivated monoculturally 

up to altitudes of 600-700 meters from the coast and accounts for 98 percent of cultivated lands. Ordu Province is the 

biggest hazelnut producer in Turkey. In 2018, Ordu produced 180,397 tons of hazelnut, accounting for 35 percent of the 

entire hazelnut production in Turkey with a total export value of US$3 billion. Hazelnut is almost the only source of 

income in all villages; the remaining comes from small-scale subsistence farming and livestock activities. Bolaman 

experiences a composite of problems typical for the EBS Basin, including soil erosion, degradation of forest ecosystems, 

surface water pollution, landslides, drought and floods. An estimated 457,411 tons of soil is moved annually due to 

erosion in the basin. Estimated annual point source and non-point source nitrogen and phosphorous pollution recorded 

in 2012 for the entire Ordu-Giresun sub-basin was the highest in EBS (6,866 tons/year and 421 tons/year, respectively)24. 

Drinking water in Bolaman is mostly supplied from surface water, and pollution of over 75 percent of surface water bodies 

seriously threatens the availability of drinking water sources for communities in Ordu. Turbidity problems experienced 

in heavy precipitation events and water level declines during episodes of drought further impede access to healthy 

drinking water. Ordu also experiences natural disasters that have caused the loss of life and properties to local 

communities. Between 1950 and 2011, 368 incidences of landslides, 44 incidences of flooding, and 36 incidences of falling 

rocks occurred in the province25. Landslides and floods due to excessive rainfall in 2016 and 2018 caused substantial 

damage to roads, settlements, bridges and agricultural and forest areas in Ordu.26 Recent landslide events resulted in the 

complete collapse of 15 and substantial damages to 30 houses and a flood in 2018 led to the collapse of a large bridge in 

the Ünye, Fatsa, and Çaybaşı districts. In 2019, a village completely collapsed by landslides in the Aybastı district and 

severe landslides affected the Kabataş district. The road system in the basin is frequently impacted and damaged by these 

disaster events, preventing access to markets and certain isolated settlements. Integrated solutions to the severe and 

multifaceted problems in the Bolaman Basin are urgently needed as this area has become a priority for the Government 

of Turkey (GoT). It also presents an opportunity for piloting innovative elements for integrated approaches to NRM that 

can generate valuable lessons for other basins in Turkey and the region. 

 
9. Turkey is well poised to pursue integrated approaches for the sustainable use of natural resources but lacks 

experience in current cost-effective innovations in NRM such as Nature-Based Solutions. Watershed management has 

evolved significantly since its inception. The first generation of watershed management projects in the 1970s and 1980s 

mostly applied an engineering approach to soil and water management with specific on-site and downstream physical 

outcomes. The investments were costly with limited benefits as the needs of upstream communities and their ownership 

of the interventions were not considered. The second generation of watershed management projects in the 1990s 

departed from this top-down engineering approach to focus more on farming systems and stakeholder participation, in 

order to create synergies between resources conservation and rural poverty reduction.27 In recent years, Nature-based 

Solutions (NBS), including Green Infrastructure (GI) and others, have been promoted as innovative, cost-effective and 

sustainable solutions to a variety of environmental, social, and economic challenges. NBS operationalizes the concept of 


ecosystem services to address specific problems and deliver multiple benefits such as buffering against natural disasters, 

regulating water, sequestrating carbon, and providing resources for sustaining livelihoods and economic activities.28 In 

many cases, combining GI with traditional gray infrastructure can create next generation solutions that can better protect 

communities by tackling the immediately pressing problems while restoring the regulatory functions of ecosystems that 

can enhance the performance, life cycle, and cost-effectiveness of gray infrastructure29. In the case of Turkey, this hybrid 

green-gray solution can prevent capital lock-in as most of the interventions implemented and planned at the basin level 

have been predominantly traditional gray infrastructure, which are highly expensive.30 In addition, previous investment 

operations spread out across large river basins have resulted in moderate visible results for local communities.  

 
Relationship to CPF 

 
10. The proposed project is aligned with the World Bank Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Turkey for the 

FY18-21 period and with the objectives of Turkey’s 11th Development Plan (2019–2023). The CPF sets out the overall 

objective of supporting Turkey in achieving more sustainable and inclusive development by focusing on growth, inclusion, 

and sustainability dimensions31. The proposed project will contribute to meeting CPF objective 9 (Increased sustainability 

of infrastructure assets and natural capitals) under the sustainability focus area to help Turkey orient its growth toward 

a more resilient and sustainable trajectory. 

 
11. The proposed project will also contribute to meeting Turkey’s sectoral objectives as set out in multiple national 

strategies and plans as well as commitments under global conventions. These include: (i) sustainable development 

objectives under the 11th Development Plan; (ii) voluntary national Land Degradation Neutrality targets for afforestation, 

soil conservation, and rehabilitation of forest lands and pastures per the commitments under the United Nations 

Convention on Combating Desertification and National Strategy and Action Plan to Combat Desertification (2015-2023); 

(iii) water quality and quantity as well as disaster reduction objectives in line with the EU Water Framework Directive, EU 

Flood Directive, Drinking Water Directive, Urban Waste Water Directive, and EU Integrated Environmental Approximation 

Strategy (2007-23); (iv) increased carbon capture and sink capacity of forests in line with the Intended National 

Determined Contribution under the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change and Turkey Climate Change Strategy 

(2010-2023); (v) climate change adaptation objectives per Turkey’s National Climate Change Adaptation  Strategy and 

Action Plan (2011-2023); and (vi) rural development and income generation for rural communities as targeted in the 

National Rural Development Strategy (2014-2020) and National Strategy for Regional Development (2014-2023). 

 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
The project development objective is to strengthen integrated management of natural resources at the landscape level 
and increase access to climate-resilient infrastructure to communities in targeted areas of the Bolaman Basin. 
 
Key Results (From PCN) 

 
12. The key results expected by the project and respective PDO indicators (including Corporate Results Indicators, 

CRIs) are: 

i. Land area under sustainable landscape management practices (ha) (CRI) 
ii. Improved institutional capacity for integrated NRM at the national level (number of integrated NRM plans 

adopted for other basins) 


iii. People provided with increased access to climate-resilient infrastructure included in an integrated NRM plan 
(number, disaggregated by gender and type of service). Composite indicator including the following underlying 
indicators: 

a. People provided with increased protection against landslides and/or flooding 
b. People provided with access to improved drinking water supply (CRI) 
c. People provided with access to improved sanitation services (CRI) 
d. People provided with access to rural roads rehabilitated for climate and disaster resilience. 

13. Gender, GHG, citizen engagement, and additional CRIs will be included in the project’s Results Framework.  

 
D. Concept Description 

 
14. The proposed project will support the GoT in addressing the multitude of environmental challenges facing the 

Bolaman Basin in the Ordu province, while enhancing the livelihood security and resilience of local communities 

against the risks and impacts of climate-induced landslides, flooding, and drought. The project will adopt an integrated 

landscape management approach at the sub-basin scale (Boloman) to achieve these objectives. This integrated approach 

can help address the interlinked problems in Bolaman and rebuild the resilience of the social-ecological system within 

the sub-basin. Building on GoT and the Bank’s previous experience in watershed management, this project will design a 

participatory planning process to take into account inputs from different stakeholder groups, allowing for the 

coordination and integration of solutions among different government agencies as well as between government and local 

stakeholders. Such participatory planning approach will contribute to bridging various stakeholders within the NRM 

sphere and improving institutional coordination. The project will also deploy integrated green and gray infrastructure 

solutions as both short-term and long-term responses to mitigate the risks of landslides, floods, and drought, and 

enhance climate resilience of the local populations and ecosystems. NBS in combination with sustainable and climate-

smart agricultural practices will be designed based on sound technical, social, and financial analysis to achieve synergies 

between resources conservation and livelihood enhancement and ensure local stakeholders’ ownership and thus, the 

sustainability of project interventions.  

 
15. The integrated NRM approach of the project will generate valuable lessons and innovative elements that can 

be applied to other basins with similar problems in Turkey and in other countries. To demonstrate and promote an 

integrated landscape approach to NRM, the project will also include a technical assistance and capacity building sub-

component that will develop and employ planning tools at the landscape level to optimize the synergies and integration 

of interventions across the sub-basin and establish associated institutional structures.  

 
16. Theory of Change and Project design. The central problem statement the Project tries to address is that the 

degradation of natural resources and unsustainable land use, coupled with climate change, and the lack of appropriate 

infrastructures for landslide and flooding control, water and sanitation, and mobility are affecting the well-being and 

livelihoods of the local population in the Ordu province. The proposed operation will address these issues through six 

groups of interventions: (i) strengthening of institutional capacity for INRM; (ii) restoration of ecosystem functions and 

services; (iii) promotion of sustainable land use practices and diversification of rural livelihoods; (iv) construction of 

resilient flood and sedimentation control structures; (v) construction of resilient water and sanitation facilities; and (vi) 

climate and disaster-proofing of rural road network. These groups of activities, organized under three interlinked 

components, are expected to strengthen integrated management of natural resources at the landscape level and increase 

access to climate-resilient infrastructure for flood and landslide control, water and sanitation services, and mobility for 

communities under the project lifetime. In the long run, these intermediate outcomes will help reduce the vulnerability 

to natural disasters and climate change impacts and enhance their well-being and livelihoods of the population in the 

Ordu Province and other vulnerable areas. The three project components are described below along with a menu of 

activities that have been pre-identified at concept stage. The detailed project activities will be refined during preparation 

through the development of a feasibility study and technical assistance to identify the right mix of green and gray 

infrastructure in consultation with local stakeholders. 

 

 
 
17. Component 1: Green and sustainable rural development (~US100 million). The objective of this component is to 

restore and maintain the health, function, and productivity of critical ecosystems and promote sustainable land uses 

within the watershed to improve the sustainability of the natural resource base, enhance the livelihood security of local 

communities, and build resilience against climate-induced hazards. Investments will include a variety of green 

infrastructure measures, sustainable and climate-smart agricultural practices, and livelihoods diversification 

implemented by the General Directorate of Forestry (OGM) and the General Directorate of Agricultural Reform (TRGM) 

through their regional and provincial units. Forests play a key role in protecting soil cover and regulating water. Green 

infrastructure can improve the resilience and strengthen the functions of ecosystems and produce long-term climate 

adaptation and mitigation co-benefits such as soil, water and sediment retention, buffering extreme flood events, and 

reducing CO2 emissions. Green infrastructure can also provide habitats to enhance biodiversity and provide economic 

benefits through tourism and circular economy related activities. Increasing forest cover and improving forest health can 

help prevent soil erosion and landslides and reduce the impacts of floods. Green infrastructure will be designed in 

conjunction with gray infrastructure to optimize the functionality, cost-effectiveness, and resilience of the integrated 

natural and built system. Income generation and livelihood diversification for the rural poor enhance their livelihood 

security and welfare while reducing the pressure on the forest ecosystems upon which these communities traditionally 

depend. This will also contribute to reversing the current trend of outward migration of the local population. 

 

18. Sub-component 1.1: Green infrastructure and rural livelihoods. This subcomponent will be implemented by OGM 

and aim at restoring and sustainably managing ecosystems that provide resources for income generation to local 

communities and critical services for soil retention and water regulation that contribute to buffering against landslides 

and floods and regulating the flow and quality of water. The menu of activities under this sub-component will include: (i) 

afforestation and reforestation; (ii) erosion and sedimentation control works; (iii) upstream natural water retention and 

storage works; (iv) restoration of riparian ecosystems and stream corridors; (v) rehabilitation and climate-smart pasture 

management; (vi) maintenance and sustainable management of secondary forests; (vii) income generation and livelihood 

diversification activities for poor forest communities, such as bee-keeping, non-timber forest products, and ecotourism. 

 

19. Sub-Component 1.2: Sustainable agriculture and climate-resilient value chains. This sub-component will be 

implemented by TRGM with the aim to promote sustainable and climate-smart agricultural practices and associated 

climate-resilient agri-food value chains. The menu of activities under this sub-component will include: i) sustainable and 

climate-smart agricultural production practices such as terracing for hazelnut gardens to protect topsoil layer, micro-

dosing to reduce the application pesticides and fertilizers, agroforestry, and rainwater harvesting to manage soils and 

water sustainably; ii) diversification of agricultural production (kiwi, persimmon, mushroom, truffles vegetables) to 

reduce land areas used for hazelnut cultivation; iii) improvement of livestock productivity to reduce environmental and 

natural resources footprint; iv) climate resilient and energy-efficient agri-food value chains to enhance market access for 

local farmers; and v) branding and marketing of sustainably produced agricultural products. 

 

20. Component 2: Climate resilient gray infrastructure (~US$ 185 million). The objective of this component is to 

increase access to climate-resilient infrastructure systems for protection against climate-related disasters such as 

landslides and floods, and for provision of drinking water supply, sanitation, and mobility for local communities. Although 

the Bolaman Basin is an area with relatively high annual rainfall, the lack of access to drinking water is a major problem 

in the cities and small villages within the basin due to the increase in population (particularly during the tourist season), 

seasonal changes in precipitation, polluted surface and groundwater sources, and turbidity problems in heavy 

precipitation and flooding events. Currently, Bolaman has a population of approximately 255,000 people, and the 

required drinking water need is 600 lt/s. By 2070, the population in the basin is projected to be roughly 550,000 people, 

with drinking water needs expected to rise to 1300 lt/s. Adequate infrastructures to meet drinking water needs and 

protect surface water and groundwater resources from domestic and industrial pollution are much needed. Drinking 

water sources are further threatened as wastewater from domestic and industrial sources are mostly discharged directly 

into the natural environment without any treatment due to a lack of wastewater treatment facilities, which could also 




treat water for reuse for agricultural purposes. The high precipitation levels in the region make it easier for bacteria, 

parasites, and harmful chemicals from untreated discharges to reach creeks, lakes, and rivers network. Landslides and 

floods that frequently occur in Bolaman are of a disastrous nature, causing the loss of life, property, transport and other 

infrastructure. All of these problems are threatening the wellbeing of the local population and requiring immediate 

solutions that can be readily met through “no-regret” gray infrastructure measures. The design of these infrastructure 

systems will integrate green infrastructure into their plans to deliver more cost-effective and resilient services and extend 

their lifespan. The design will also include appropriate measures to withhold the impacts of climate change. This 

component will be implemented by State Hydraulic Works (DSI) and the General Directorate of Highways (KGM), in close 

coordination with the Ordu Metropolitan Municipality General Directorate of Water and Sewerage Administration (OSKI). 

The scope and specific locations for some of these investments have already been pre-identified by participating 

institutions and will be assessed during preparation through a feasibility study. 

 

21. Sub-component 2.1: Flooding, landslide, and sedimentation control works. This subcomponent will be 

implemented by DSI. The menu of investments considered includes: (i) multipurpose reservoirs for effective use and 

regulation of water resources in the basin; (ii) flood control structures, precipitation levees, and sediment control 

structures; and (iii) disaster emergency maintenance of existing infrastructures and repair works. 

 

22. Sub-component 2.2: Drinking water and wastewater treatment works. This subcomponent will also be 

implemented by DSI. The menu of investments considered includes: (i) drinking water infrastructure systems 

rehabilitation and development (including treatment plants and distribution networks); and (ii) wastewater 

infrastructure systems rehabilitation and development (including wastewater treatment plants and sewage networks). 

The design of these systems will include energy-efficient measures and measures to minimize non-revenue water loss 

and promote water reuse where possible. 

 

23. Sub-component 2.3: Climate-resilient rural road system. This sub-component will be implemented by KGM and 

will invest in measures such as drainage and walls to climate and disaster-proof rural road segments that are frequently 

and heavily damaged by landslides, floods, and falling rocks, with the aim to provide safe access and mobility to local 

communities and markets. 

 

24. Component 3: Institutional coordination, project management and sustainability (~US$15 million). The 

objective of this component is to strengthen the capacities and coordination among participating institutions, to ensure 

not only effective and efficient project implementation, but also to support the institutional structures and processes 

that need to be established in a sustainable way to support integrated NRM planning and management in both the project 

area and elsewhere. Implementation of this component will be the responsibility of OGM and will include the following 

two sub-components: 

 

25. Sub-component 3.1: Institutional coordination and sustainability. Activities under this component will include: 

(i) technical assistance for developing an integrated NRM model, which will include planning tools at the landscape level 

that can be replicated in other basins with similar problems in Turkey; (ii) strengthening of institutional coordination and 

capacity building to establish institutional structures for integrated NRM to support the replicability and sustainability of 

the approach implemented by the project. 

 

26. Sub-component 3.2: Project management, environment and social aspects, monitoring and evaluation. 

Activities under this component will include: (i) project management support, including strengthening technical, 

fiduciary, environment and social capacities of participating institutions; (ii) support for environmental and social 

management aspects, including grievance redress, citizen engagement and communications; and (iii) monitoring and 

evaluation.  

 

27. Climate change. The project is designed to take into account Turkey’s climate change vulnerability context. In 

particular, climate change is expected to result in more frequent and severe incidences of floods, more prolonged arid 

seasons, and a reduction in surface water availability across the country. Climate change will also further exacerbate soil 

erosion and increase the risks of landslides in vulnerable locations. The Bolaman Basin is an area already prone to soil 

erosion, landslides, and floods due to its mountainous topography with steep slopes, morphological structure, lithology, 

and heavy precipitation. Climate change will further exacerbate these problems. The availability of drinking water during 

dry months will also be worsened due to more prolonged dry seasons and drought periods. The proposed project is 

designed to address these problems and enhance the resilience of local communities in the project area against the risks 

and impacts of climate change and climate-related hazards. The project will do so by implementing integrated green-gray 

infrastructure solutions for mitigating against landslides and floods, rehabilitating rural road system to be climate and 

disaster-resilient, and promoting climate-smart agricultural practices to enhance the livelihood security of the local 

population. Thus, activities under sub-component 1.1., 1.2, 2.1, 2.2, 2.3 will generate significant adaptation co-benefits. 

In addition, support for agricultural value chains under sub-component 1.2 and drinking water and wastewater treatment 

systems under sub-component 2.2 will include energy-efficient measures in their design and will generate mitigation co-

benefits. GHG accounting for applicable investments will be calculated using Bank approved methodologies in the 

subsequent stage of project preparation. 

 

28. Gender. The environmental and social impact assessment of the project will include a gender analysis of the 

conditions, needs, and aspirations of women and men living within the Bolaman Basin. The gender analysis will be 

conducted during project preparation to identify relevant gender gaps concerning rural livelihood, access to 

infrastructure (drinking water, sanitation, irrigation), and access to agricultural investments and services. The gender 

analysis will also help to define relevant actions and indicators to reduce identified gender gaps. A gender action plan will 

be developed for the project to guide the mainstreaming of efforts for equitable distribution of project benefits between 

men and women during and beyond implementation. 

 

29. Citizen Engagement. The project will establish effective participation of stakeholders through extensive Citizen 

Engagement activities at local and national levels during preparation and implementation. The project will explore 

extensive and meaningful stakeholder consultations through focus groups and surveys, and employ monitoring 

mechanisms such as satisfaction surveys, grievance redressal (GRM) and multi-stakeholder forums. Priority needs in local 

communities particularly among marginalized/vulnerable groups will be identified through participatory mechanisms 

under components 1 and 2, which will inform project design and implementation to ensure equitable distribution of 

project benefits. Under component 3, the project will support capacity building for government officials and community 

leaders on citizen engagement and efficient response to beneficiary/citizen needs. A detailed citizen engagement 

strategy that highlights mechanisms and actions for enhancing multi-stakeholder dialogue and inclusion throughout the 

project cycle will be designed. An indicator in citizen engagement will be included in the project’s Results Framework. 


Legal Operational Policies                                  Triggered? 

Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50 No 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60 No 

 
Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts 
.
























































World Bank Document


Page 1 of 9

.

PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID)
CONCEPT STAGE

Report No.: PIDC18482
.

Project Name Tanzania: Resilient Natural Resource Management for Tourism and 
Growth (P150523)

Region AFRICA
Country Tanzania
Project ID P150523
Borrower(s) United Republic of Tanzania
Implementing Agency Ministry of Natural Resources and Tourism
Environmental Category B-Partial Assessment
Date PID Prepared/Updated 30-Jan-2017
Date PID Approved/Disclosed 11-Jul-2017
Estimated Date of Board 
Approval

21-Sep-2017

.

I. Introduction and Context
Country Context

1. Tanzania has experienced strong and rapid economic growth, with its annual GDP growth averaging 
around seven percent in the last decade. Despite the strong economic growth, Tanzania is one of the 
poorest countries in Africa with approximately 13 million people (28 percent of the population) still 
living below the basic needs poverty line.

2. A rapidly expanding population will require continued growth, translating into the creation of 
employment opportunities and household wealth, just to keep pace. The population is growing at an 
average rate of 2.9 percent, one of the fastest in the world, with about 1.3 million people being added 
to the population annually (NBS, 2009). Economic expansion must be accompanied by creation of 
quality jobs if poverty rates are to continue to drop.

3. Tanzania's growth and economy depend heavily on its renewable natural assets such as water, 
forests, and wildlife. Almost half of GDP is harnessed from natural resources in agriculture, energy, 
and tourism.  An estimated 89 percent of the country's water withdrawals are for irrigation, which 
contributes to 20 percent of agricultural production from 6 percent of the land. An estimated 90 
percent of Tanzania's energy needs are satisfied by water and wood fuels: hydropower generates 39 
percent of the installed 1,438MW electricity generation capacity, while charcoal and fuel wood serve 
as the overwhelming source of energy for urban and rural households. Tanzania's tourism industry - 
which is largely based on the country's unique natural resources and wildlife - is an important driver of 
the national economy, generating $1.88 billion in revenues in 2013, or 13 percent of GDP, in 2013. 
Tourism contributes approximately 28% the total export earnings in 2013.

4. The majority of the population lives in rural areas, and is dependent on natural resources in the form 
of food, fuel, and fodder. In 2010, an estimated 73.6 percent of Tanzanians were rural residents. These 


people largely comprise 80 percent of Tanzanian households who depend on agriculture, the majority 
of which is rain fed, as their primary economic activity. Food security is often supplemented by bush 
meat protein. They depend overwhelmingly on forests for their energy; only 3 percent of rural 
populations have access to electricity, with most households being dependent on charcoal or fuel 
wood.

5. Rural poverty remains pervasive and deep. All data sources suggest that Tanzania has not made 
adequate progress in raising incomes in rural areas, where the majority of the poor live. Lack of access 
to technology, credit, water, and power resulted in stagnant productivity and high vulnerability to 
shocks, leaving many rural households in the same or weaker position as at the beginning of the 
century.

6. Slowing agricultural growth is a challenge in the rural space. The agricultural sector has seen its 
share of the economy decline from 48 percent in 1990 to 28 percent in 2010. Agricultural GDP grew at 
around 4 percent per year since 2000, or only around 1 percent in per capita terms, with acute droughts 
in 2004 and 2006. Yields of staple crops, which are the livelihood of small farmers, appear to have 
been flat or declining, with agricultural growth primarily driven by extension of cultivated areas, along 
with modest shifts in the composition of crop production.

7. Addressing rural poverty will require the creation of new off-farm jobs. The share of goods and 
services exports of GDP has grown from 13.4 percent in 2000 to 23.2 in 2009. In 1998, minerals and 
non-factor services, mainly tourism, accounted for 47 percent of exports, while they rose to 66 percent 
by 2010. In 2013, tourism represented the largest source of foreign exchange. At the same time, the 
share of traditional agricultural exports declined from 60 percent of total exports in 1998 to 12 percent 
in 2009, replaced mostly by tourism and minerals such as gold. Manufacturing exports have grown by 
about 17 percent annually since 2005, but account for less than 5 percent of GDP and 25 percent of 
total merchandise trade. Efforts to promote rural development must look to expanding off-farm 
employment opportunities. Tanzania's tourism industry, which is predominantly wildlife-based, 
provides an important potential source of new rural jobs and household revenues, provided linkages 
with local communities are in place.

Sectoral and Institutional Context

8. Tanzania's natural resource-based economic sectors such as wildlife-based tourism have strong 
potential for generating economic growth, creating jobs, and improving livelihoods. Tanzania is one of 
the world's mega diverse countries with its outstanding wildlife, ecosystems, and other natural assets, 
and represents a prime global tourist destination with significant potential for growth. It is the 
abundance of wildlife and unique ecosystems that have made Tanzania a prime African tourist 
destination, generating significant revenues. In fact, Tanzania is very successful in attracting high-
expenditure tourists; Tanzania earns more money per tourist than any other country in Sub-Saharan 
Africa. Notably, despite significantly fewer tourist arrivals, its tourism sector earned as much as 
neighboring Kenya before the recent decline of tourism in the latter due to security concerns. 
Tanzania's "low-volume high-value" approach has significant economic, social and environmental 
benefits, particularly in ecologically sensitive areas such as the greater Serengeti eco-system and other 
areas.

9. Tourism today is largely concentrated on a few areas, in and around the Serengeti, Ngorogoro 
Crater, and Mount Kilimanjaro (i.e., the "Northern Circuit") and Zanzibar. While there are many high-
potential tourism sites, ranging from high mountains to spectacular landscapes and coral-fringed 
beaches, there are signs of over-crowding. Pressures on the carrying capacity of key ecosystems such 
as the greater Serengeti lead to concerns that future expansion of visitors in some of Tanzania's key 



Page 3 of 9

attractions may soon undermine the quality of the tourism experience. As highlighted in a recent 
World Bank study (in draft), the expansion of the tourism sector must consider options to ensure that 
growth in tourism does not compromise the natural asset base; that is, efforts to increase tourism 
numbers and revenues must not undermine the quality of the very resource base that tourists are 
attracted and paying to see.

10. The Government of Tanzania (GOT) is keen to develop new tourism products to expand the 
tourism sector while in core areas maintaining the low-volume high-value approach that has been 
successful in capturing the highest per capita revenue in the region. Specifically, it is interested in 
developing a more diversified tourism sector that balances the focus on the "Northern Circuit" with 
developing the "Southern Circuit", which includes a number of parks (i.e., Ruaha, Katavi, Mahale, 
Kitulo), game reserves (Selous being the largest), two Rift Valley lakes (Nyasa and Tanganyika), and 
other areas of cultural interest. Such elements would be a core part of an updated tourism policy.

11. The sustainable management of natural resources is fundamental to Tanzania's economic growth. 
Natural resources are among the few assets that Tanzania's poor access and utilize. Sustainable 
management of natural resources is therefore an integral part of development, poverty alleviation and 
growth. This suggests that depletion of the natural resource base will inevitably compromise poverty 
alleviation efforts unless there is rapid and exponential growth in employment to absorb labor 
surpluses and provide high quality jobs. Already, poor land use and watershed management practices, 
which lead to degradation of forests and watercourses, are threatening the very natural resource base 
upon which Tanzania's economy and poor depend on, while rampant wildlife poaching threatens to 
reduce the assets that are key to current and future tourism potential. Recent GOT studies point to the 
need to ensure that decisions on development initiatives are supported by robust data and information 
in order to avoid unintentional externalities, which can in turn lead to constrained future development 
opportunities. Given the strong links with poverty, livelihoods, and food security, particular care 
should be taken to ensure sound management of land, water, and wildlife are a core focus of any rural 
intervention.

12. Water is at the heart of the sustainable natural resource management imperative. Tanzania, long 
considered a water-rich nation, is increasingly struggling with local incidences of water insecurity, 
driven by unsustainable levels of agricultural abstraction and poor watershed and land management. In 
some areas, such as the Pangani, Rufiji, Wami-Ruvu and the Internal Drainage Basins, conflicts over 
water among different users - farmers, hydropower plants, wildlife - are already undermining 
economic potential of sectoral investments in agriculture, energy and tourism, and may curtail 
Tanzania's ambitious growth plans. Notably, some of the areas targeted for increased irrigation under 
various government programs are already known to suffer from some degree of water conflict.

13. For example, the Great Ruaha River provides about 56 percent of flow to the Mtera and Kidatu 
power plants, which together are responsible for 50 percent of the country's total hydropower capacity. 
Within the Great Ruaha basin, expansion of (mainly rice) agriculture in the Usangu Plains from about 
14,500 ha in 1986, to 24,000 ha in 1998, to 115,000 ha in 2013, 87 percent of which is small-scale 
informal irrigation farms. As a result of this irrigation expansion, the Great Ruaha River has since 
2005 gone from a perennial river, serving as the lifeblood of Ruaha National Park, and a key input to 
the Mtera/Kidatu power system, to a seasonal river, leading to impacts on tourism and wildlife, power 
production and Tanzania's economy.

14. The sustainable management of natural resources across users at the watershed, landscape and 
ecosystem levels is a key condition to the success of the government's plans. Responding to this 
challenge requires strong cross-sectoral coordination and action. Improved watershed management, 



Page 4 of 9

including promoting sound landscape management and conservation practices, is needed to ensure the 
long-term productivity of key basins. Recent studies by the GOT suggest that while achieving 
important short-term goals in target sectors, these programs may unintentionally lead to negative 
consequences in other sectors and over the longer term.

15. Specifically, the impact of unplanned irrigation expansion in the Great Ruaha sub basin on 
downstream flow, has led to significant negative impacts on tourism (in Ruaha National Park) and 
energy generation (at Mtera and Kidatu dams) as noted in the Ministry of Water's Integrated Water 
Resources Management and Development Plan for Rufiji Basin. Likewise the Strategic Regional 
Environmental and Social Assessment undertaken for the Southern Agricultural Growth Corridor 
points to the need for careful planning of agricultural development in order to avoid unintended 
downstream impact on water quantity and quality.

16. Climate change represents an additional important risk for Tanzania's natural asset-based growth. 
Tanzania is already experiencing changes in its climate: the average temperature rose by 1°C between 
1960 and 2006, and models indicate future increases in average annual temperatures between 1°C to 
3°C by the 2050s. Likewise, precipitation is increasingly unpredictable with studies showing a shift in 
the onset of the rainy season(s). Changes in timing and quantity of rainfall are also predicted, with 10 
percent annual precipitation decreases possible in the south, decreases up to 26 percent in the north, 
and heavier, more concentrated rain events along the coast.  Water security, which is already under 
threat from current climate variability and social, economic and environmental change, is likely to be 
under greater threat from future changes in the climate. Increasing temperatures and changing rainfall 
patterns will have multi-dimensional effects on the Tanzanian economy, affecting agricultural 
productivity, energy use, water dynamics, and the wildlife upon which tourism depends. Efforts to 
promote climate resilience in these key natural asset-based sectors will have important longer-term 
effects on food security and livelihoods.

17. To achieve the GOT's goal to expand broad-based tourism in a sustainable way, a long-term 
concerted effort is needed.  The following deserve special attention:
- Managing water resources. Water is an increasingly scarce resource in many areas critical for 
wildlife and tou rism, including the Rufiji Basin, which is dominated by the Great Ruaha River. This 
has far reaching consequences for the ecology of parks, such as Ruaha.
- Developing the value proposition and strategy for tourism, with a focus on the "Southern Circuit". 
Market research, positioning, planning, and focused development are needed to utilize and 
commercialize the area's tourism potential. Strong public and private sector partnership would be 
important to leverage respective roles.
- Providing an enabling environment for the private sector. There are many obstacles for private 
operators to enter and operate in the tourism sector in Tanzania, particularly for local operators. The 
policy and regulatory environment, including a comprehensive look at the licensing requirements, 
would need to be reformed.
- Developing visitor infrastructure. Infrastructure, such as air strips, visitor services, logistics, 
hospitality, and park management investments, are essential elements of enhancing accessibility and 
the overall quality of the tourism product.
- Curbing wildlife poaching. One of the key threats to the management of existing and potential 
tourism assets is the recent unprecedented increase in wildlife poaching. Elephant populations in 
Tanzania have declined precipitously: between 2009 and 2013, populations in the Selous -Mikumi 
Ecosystem declined by 66 percent, while in the Ruaha-Rungwa ecosystem, populations declined by 
36.5 percent. The crisis has been fueled by the rising price of ivory in the illegal destination markets, 
which provides a strong incentive to local populations who do not otherwise see direct benefits from 
wildlife.



Page 5 of 9

- Linking tourism with local economies and communities. Despite the national economic importance 
of tourism, at the local level communities in and around protected areas are some of the poorest in the 
country. While in other African countries (such as Namibia, Mozambique and parts of Kenya), tourism 
is providing an important source of revenue and employment to local communities, Tanzania's current 
policies, which aim to promote local benefit from tourism, have not been as effective. Rather, local 
populations, which are highly dependent on natural resources for food, fodder and fuel, generally 
consider wildlife to be worth more dead than alive. Sustainable tourism development would need to 
rely on stronger connection with local economies through training and job creation, supply chain 
development, and other forms of benefit sharing.

Relationship to CAS

18. The proposed Project is consistent with the Bank's Country Partnership Strategy Progress Report 
(CPSPR) FY12-15 (Report No. 80313-TZ) for the United Republic of Tanzania that was discussed by 
the Board on July 3, 2014. The CPSPR has two strategic clusters: (i) Productive investments for 
growth of labor-intensive industries and job creation; and (ii) Programs that target reduction of 
extreme poverty and improvements in quality of social services and six strategic objectives. The 
proposed project contributes to CPSPR strategic cluster one - Productive investments for growth of 
labor-intensive industries and job creation. The proposed project contributes to the CPSPR's second set 
of activities under cluster one which addresses key infrastructure gaps and promotes sustainable 
management of natural resources. In particular, the proposed project enhances ecosystem resilience 
and improves the environmental services of natural resources through development of infrastructure to 
better protect environmental assets. The project would also enhance capacities of government 
institutions at the national, districts and village levels as well as park and wildlife management 
authorities.

19. The proposed Project is one of the initiatives which contribute to the TerrAfrica Platform for 
Sustainable Land and Water Management (SLWM). It also supports the African Wildlife for 
Development Program in support of the Elephant Protection Initiative supported by the Bank and the 
Global Environment Facility (GEF) along with other development partners.

20. The proposed project also contributes to the GOT's strategies and plans, in particular current jobs 
creation initiatives, tourism development and tourism growth, and rural economic development.

.

II. Proposed Development Objective(s)
Proposed Development Objective(s) (From PCN)

21. The Project Development Objective (PDO) and the Global Environment Objective (GEO) of the 
proposed project are to improve natural resources management in priority areas of Southern Tanzania. 
By achieving the proposed PDO, the Project will assist the GOT in addressing rural poverty which has 
been persistent in and around the country?s parks and game reserves, home to globally significant 
biodiversity. The objective would be achieved through the provision of capital investments, technical 
assistance and capacity building for communities living in and around the priority areas, and 
government institutions at the national, sub-national and local levels.
Key Results (From PCN)
22. The achievement of the PDO and key results will be measured by a set of key outcome indicators. 
Proposed key outcome indicators are listed below.

a. Land area brought under an improved and climate resilient catchment system (ha).
b. Protected area management effectiveness enhanced (%);
c. Number of visitor bed nights in targeted areas with tourism potential (%); and



Page 6 of 9

d. Direct project beneficiaries (#), of which XX% are female.
.

III. Preliminary Description
Concept Description

23. The PDO will be achieved through the following four project components.

24. Component 1 - Improving management and development of priority tourism assets (Total Cost 
US$50m). This component will focus on investments that aim at improving the management of natural 
resources inside priority protected areas in southern Tanzania to increase tourism. The expected 
outcome of this component is an increased number of tourists and bed nights in priority tourism sites. 
Expected outputs include (i) an adopted tourism strategy for Southern Tanzania; (ii) an adopted 
tourism master plan for southern Tanzania; (iii) number of roads, enhanced airstrips, viewing 
platforms, and visitor centers built; (v) a strengthened monitoring system in place to improve wildlife 
protection; (vi) number of trainings conducted; and (vii) strengthened policy and institutional 
framework.

Sub-Component 1.1: Improve the knowledge base at (i) the sub-national level by assessing tourism 
potential and investment needs, developing a new tourism strategy, and a tourism master plan for 
southern Tanzania; and (ii) the site level through ecological monitoring and conservation planning and 
integrated planning for key tourism aspects.

Sub-Component 1.2: Improve tourism infrastructure to enhance accessibility and the overall quality of 
the tourism product, including through, e.g., building unpaved roads inside protected areas to provide 
improved access to viewing areas, enhancing airstrips to allow for planes to safely land, and building 
viewing platforms and visitor centers. Develop Public Private Partnership (PPP) model to help 
enhance tourism asset management and accessibility.

Sub-Component 1.3: Improve the capacity for management of tourism assets. Improve the capacity for 
management and development of tourism assets through training and supplying of goods including for 
wildlife monitoring.

Sub-Component 1.4: Strengthen policy and institutional framework including through private-public 
dialogue.

25. Component 2 - Enhancing local economic benefits from tourism (Total Costs US$20m). This 
component will support investments that ensure local communities in vicinity to the protected areas 
benefit from tourism. The expected outcomes of this component are increased community employment 
levels in tourism and wildlife related sectors, while expected outputs include: (i) creation of PPP 
ventures in priority areas; (ii) number of micro-finance groups operational; (iii) number of tourism 
infrastructure outputs to promote local benefits built; and (iv) an adopted policy and institutional 
framework.

Sub-Component 2.1: Strengthen supply value chains for local communities and businesses that are 
linked to tourism (e.g., vocational training to enhance skills in communities to better participate in 
improved labor market such as hospitality industry and guide services), and infrastructure to promote 
local benefits may be supported (e.g., building schools).

Sub-Component 2.2: Build awareness and capacity to engage with the private sector including through 
nurturing SMEs and enabling PPPs. Develop model and associated processes to help ensure local 



Page 7 of 9

economic benefits when using PPP to enhance tourism asset management and accessibility.

Sub-Component 2.3: Build capacity for communities to manage wildlife and tourism (e.g., 
investments in community co-management initiatives).

Sub-Component 2.4: Provide access to finance (e.g., piloting targeted support in the form of micro-
finance or grants to support alternative livelihood development including activities linked with tourism 
supply and support).

Sub-Component 2.5: The policy and institutional framework will be strengthened.

26. Component 3 - Improving landscape management (Total Cost US$20m). This component will 
support investments and technical assistance to promote the integrated management of landscapes with 
an aim to securing environmental services within priority sub-basins in Southern Tanzania.  The 
expected outcomes for this component are improved land management in watersheds that are critical 
for agricultural productivity and/or priority tourism assets. Expected outputs include (i) number of 
watershed management plans prepared, (ii) number of improved soil and water management measures 
in place; and (iii) number of incentive programs established.

Sub-Component 3.1: Support activities to sustainably manage watersheds through a participatory 
process.  Depending on the size of the watershed, a planning unit will be micro-watershed of XX ha.  
The key activities include inter alia (i) planning, implementation of micro-watershed plans, and related 
capacity building (e.g., link village land use planning with watershed planning, studies), and (ii) 
communication and awareness raising activities.

Sub-Component 3.2: Strengthen small-scale water and land management through (i) implementation 
of measures developed in planning process referred to in component 1.1 above; (ii) check dams, 
control gates, and erosion control measures to reduce run-off and improve water use efficiency; (iii) 
reforestation and reduced deforestation; and (iv) sustainable incentive programs such as payment for 
environment services to promote water use efficiency and upper watershed management for protecting 
water sources.

Sub-Component 3.3: Strengthen policy and decision-making capabilities to support the protection of 
key natural assets. Activities will include (i) an inventory of key wetland, wildlife and tourism areas; 
(ii) improved monitoring; and (iii) capacity building for analytics to inform decision-making.

27. Component 4: Project management (Total cost: $10m). This Component will focus on project 
management arrangements and mechanisms including monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and 
implementation. In addition, funds under this Component will be used to support the procurement of 
essential goods and equipment such as vehicles, office equipment and furniture, imagery, software and 
other accessories, etc. To strengthen project management, funds would be available to finance selected 
technical assistance such as for safeguards, fiduciary management, and monitoring and evaluation. The 
expected outcome of this component would be the effective implementation of the project activities 
with due diligence and efficiency.

IV. Safeguard Policies that Might Apply
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No TBD

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 X



Page 8 of 9

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 X

Forests OP/BP 4.36 X

Pest Management OP 4.09 X

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 X

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 X

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 X

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 X

Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 X

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 X
.

.

V. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 150.00 Total Bank Financing: 150.00

Financing Gap: 0.00
Financing Source Amount

International Development Association (IDA) 150.00

Total 150.00
.


























































World Bank Document


PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
APPRAISAL STAGE

Report No.:  PIDA22127

Project Name MA-Large Scale Irrigation Modernization Project (P150930)
Region MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
Country Morocco
Sector(s) Agricultural extension and research (3%), Irrigation and drainage 

(80%), Public administration- Agriculture, fishing and forestry (1 
7%)

Theme(s) Rural services and infrastructure (67%), Water resource 
management (33%)

Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P150930
Borrower(s) Kingdom of Morocco
Implementing Agency DIAEA
Environmental Category B-Partial Assessment
Date PID Prepared/Updated 25-Mar-2015
Date PID Approved/Disclosed 26-Mar-2015
Estimated Date of Appraisal 
Completion

03-Apr-2015

Estimated Date of Board 
Approval

27-May-2015

Appraisal Review Decision 
(from Decision Note)

Appraisal was carried out from March 17 to 25.

I. Project Context
Country Context
Morocco has been on a steady path of growth in the past decades, which has proved relatively 
resilient in the face of the recent global economic slowdown. Growth averaged 4.8 percent over 
2001-12 compared to 2.8 percent in the 1990s, the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) per capita 
doubled from 2001 to 2012 reaching US$2,951, unemployment declined from 13.6 percent in 2000 
to 9 percent in 2012, and absolute poverty decreased from 15.3 percent in 2001 to 8.8 percent in 
2008. 
 
The Arab Spring that has swept the Middle East and North Africa (MENA) region in early 2011 
spurred a peaceful political transformation in Morocco. Morocco had engaged on a wide-ranging 
reform program, with the adoption of a new constitution through a popular referendum on July 1, 
2011. The new constitution lays the foundation for extended regionalization as a democratic and 
decentralized system of governance. It also contributes to improving the status of women through 
the adoption of the principle of gender equality and through provisions on increasing the 

participation of women in decision-making bodies. In November 2011, parliamentary elections 
followed the promulgation of the constitution, leading to the formation of a four-party coalition 
government that has embraced the constitution's principles and called for more social solidarity and 
inclusion.  
 
Inequality, poverty, and vulnerability remain important challenges in Morocco. A quarter of the 
population is still economically vulnerable (near-poverty). There are persistent disparities as 70 
percent of poverty is still rural, and most development indicators in rural areas lag behind urban 
areas, largely as a result of difficult geography, deteriorating infrastructure, poor access to basic 
services, and limited capital investments to improve labor value added and hence returns to self-
employment and contract labor. Ten percent of Morocco’s 13.4 million rural residents lived below 
the poverty line in 2011. Rural poverty exacerbates gender disparity with relatively higher illiteracy 
and primary school dropout rates for rural women, and higher infant and maternal mortality. 
 
Morocco has engaged in a dynamic process towards strengthening economic opportunities and 
social inclusion. Several high profile development programs (e.g. the second phase of the National 
Human Development Initiative, INDH) and new sectoral strategies in the areas of education, 
employment, and youth have been initiated. Nonetheless, additional efforts are needed to support 
the country-led reforms. The movements associated with the political transition and constitutional 
changes generate pressure on the Moroccan State for credible and faster reforms, notably in the 
areas of job creation and improvement of the quality of public services delivered.

  

Sectoral and institutional Context
Agriculture is central to Morocco’s economy, as evidenced by the strong correlation among GDP 
and agriculture GDP. Over the last agricultural campaign, thanks to favorable weather, the sector 
represented 15.6 percent of GDP, contributing the most to the country’s overall growth. The 20 
percent increase in agricultural production allowed Morocco’s GDP to jump from 2.7 percent in 
2012 to 4.4 percent in 2013. The agricultural sector represents a critical element in the country’s 
demographic and socio-economic situation, generating 40 percent of the jobs nationwide, mostly in 
rural areas where the majority of the poor live. The sector is largely composed of small farmers 
mostly dedicated to low-value agriculture, but also counts a limited group of dynamic and well 
performing large farmers with state-of-the-art technologies and well integrated into the national and 
international markets. The sector exhibits great gender disparities. Women’s work is typically 
unpaid (in 2003-04, 58 percent of cases; in 2008, 91 percent), or it is seasonal and unstable when 
remunerated (59 percent of cases in 2003-04; 84 percent in 2008). 
 
Irrigation increases both the level and stability of incomes in rural areas. Despite representing only 
16 percent of the cultivated land, irrigated agriculture contributes to about half of the agriculture 
GDP, 75 percent of agricultural exports, and 15 percent of overall merchandise exports. The 
country has 1.46 million ha of permanently irrigated land, 682,600 ha of which are part of nine 
Large Scale Irrigation (LSI) perimeters operated by nine public agricultural development agencies 
(ORMVA). ORMVAs are autonomous agencies under the supervision of the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Maritime Fisheries (MAPM), with the responsibility of constructing new irrigation 
schemes, rehabilitating and modernizing existing ones, ensuring Operation and Maintenance 
(O&M) of irrigation and drainage facilities, and providing extension services to farmers. The 
remaining area is shared between small and medium scale traditional irrigation schemes managed 
by Water Users Associations (WUA, 334,000 ha) and private irrigation (441,000 ha). Morocco is 



among the first countries with experience in irrigation Public-Private Partnership (PPP). In 2004, it 
launched the first successful irrigation PPP in the world, in the citrus production perimeter of 
Guerdane. Other PPP are at various stages of preparation (Azemmour Bir Jdid, Dar Khrofa, 
Chtouka). 
 
The ability of irrigated agriculture to continue to drive shared prosperity in Morocco is threatened 
by increasing water scarcity. Reduced rainfall, increased rainfall variability, reduced run off, 
groundwater depletion, and degradation of water resources have reached alarming levels. Annual 
renewable water resources total 22 billion m3, corresponding to 730 m3/inhabitant, which is below 
the United Nations’ threshold for indicating water stress (1,000 m3/inhabitant). The water deficit is 
estimated at around 2 billion m3. Climate change is expected to worsen this situation. Impacts of 
climate change are already visible in Morocco: the proportion of dry years increased by four times 
and surface water availability decreased by 35 percent between the period 1947-1976 and 
1977-2006. Water scarcity impacts irrigated agriculture in different ways: 
• In private irrigation, which largely relies on groundwater, reduced and more variable 
rainfall translates into groundwater overexploitation. The majority of the wells are neither 
registered nor monitored, and improvement in water pumping technologies and butane subsidy 
facilitate overextraction. Decreasing groundwater levels have a specific equity dimension, 
impacting at first smallholders with less capacity for drilling and pumping deeper.  
• In LSI perimeters, which rely on surface water, water scarcity translates into reduced 
volumes allocated to farmers and limits summer crops production. While agriculture remains the 
primary user of surface water, accounting for about 85 percent of the withdrawals, severe 
restrictions in irrigation have been common in the last 15 years. LSI perimeters in the Oum er Rbia 
river basin received, on average, only 60 percent of the water volumes they were designed for. 
These volumes were consistently lower than the water allocation stated in the Regional Masterplans 
for Integrated Water Resources Management (PDAIRE). Wherever possible, farmers in LSI 
perimeters have been making up for this shortfall by complementing water allocated by the 
ORMVAs with groundwater, bearing the extra pumping costs and further aggravating groundwater 
depletion.  
Farmers in LSI perimeters face structural constraints that limit the productive use of the scarce 
water resource. These include among others: collective water management, rigid water distribution 
rules, frequent shut-downs, unequal access to water, and land tenure issues. All of these constraints 
lock farmers in LSI perimeters into a low-risk and low return equilibrium in which they carry out 
low input, extensive farming focused on low value crops, and avoid more capital intensive 
strategies which allow for high value products and higher returns but bear higher risks in case of 
water deficiencies. 
 
LSI perimeters suffer from aging irrigation networks and poor Operation and Maintenance (O&M). 
The ORMVAs have limited budget to improve this situation. Recovery rates in Morocco are 
amongst the best in MENA, varying between 68 and 100 percent, with an average of 76 percent 
(2010). In some LSI perimeters, water tariffs are insufficient to cover the operation and 
maintenance (O&M) costs, and even more so the amortization costs, translating into the need for 
subsidies from the Government. Tariffs in LSI perimeters vary between 0.27 and 0.77DH/m3 
depending on the perimeters and the associated energy bill, compared to 1.30 to 1.80DH/m3 in 
perimeters managed through PPP. While there was an increase in O&M budget since 2009 (average 
2001-08: Tadla DH14.6 M, Doukkala: DH18.6 M; average 2009-13: Tadla DH31.1 M, Doukkala 
DH36.8 M), the allocation remains insufficient to meet the needs. Cost recovery rates in Morocco 
are amongst the highest in MENA, varying between, 68 and 100 percent, with an average of 76 

 percent. While the recovery of water bills should be improved in the LSI perimeters were 
the most important arrears are generated, this increase would not be sufficient to meet the financial 
needs of the ORMVAs. Consequently, a plan to increase water tariffs in LSI perimeters was laid out 
in 2011, but it sparked protests by farmers, which led the Government of Morocco (GoM) to 
postpone the measure. A political economy analysis of the irrigation sector reform, revealed that 
there is typically no capacity to pay problem, and that the main reason for farmers’ opposition was 
the lack of direct improvements in service quality associated with tariff increase. 
 
The GoM is putting in place incentives, investments, and institutional reforms to ensure greater 
returns at the farm and overall economy levels in light of increasingly restricted water resource. 
This is done through two synergic strategies: 
• The Morocco Green Plan (PMV) aims to double the agriculture sector’s value-added and 
create 1.5 million jobs by 2020, thus transforming the sector into a stable source of growth, 
competitiveness, and broad-based economic development. In addition to its transversal institutional 
and policy reforms, the PMV comprises two Pillars reflecting the dualistic nature of Moroccan 
agriculture: Pillar I targets commercial farmers and their integration into the national and 
international markets, while Pillar II targets small farmers mainly in marginal areas. Under both 
pillars, technology and organizational support is provided to implement an agri-food chain 
approach linking farmers to market. The Agricultural Development Fund (FDA), the GoM’s 
principal agricultural subsidy instrument, has been reformed and support measures aligned with the 
strategic directions of the PMV. Since PMV’s launch in 2008, production has increased by 45 
percent, agricultural exports have risen by 18 percent, and 77,000 permanent jobs have been 
created. 
• The National Plan for Saving Water in Irrigation (PNEEI) promotes more productive water 
use by introducing efficient irrigation technologies (mainly drip irrigation) on 555,000 ha of the 
country’s irrigated land by 2020, of which 335,000 ha in private farms and 220,000 ha in LSI 
perimeters. This process is supported though the FDA, with up to 100 percent subsidy for the 
adoption of drip and microsprinkler irrigation, and up to 70 percent subsidy for sprinkler irrigation. 
Since PNEEI’s launch in 2008, the adoption of drip irrigation has been proceeding at a fast pace in 
privately developed irrigation areas, with over 200,000 ha completed (60 percent of the 2020 
target). In LSI perimeters, conversion is ongoing on 57,000 ha only, due to the need for prior 
investments in the irrigation networks. The figure is expected to increase steadily in the coming 
future, considering that pre-feasibility studies in LSI perimeters have been completed for 100,000 
ha. While impacts remain to be observed, field experiments in Tadla demonstrated that agricultural 
water productivity (defined as value of produce per unit of water used) could be doubled by 
switching from the traditional surface irrigation to improved water management under drip 
irrigation. 
 
The Large Scale Irrigation Modernization project is fully aligned with the comprehensive reform 
process of Morocco. The project supports the ORMVAs of Tadla, Haouz, Doukkala and Gharb in 
providing farmers located in the LSI perimeters with an improved water service. This means 
individual access (rather than collective), on-demand (rather than on rotation), reliable (with faster 
re-establishment of the service in case of shut-downs), and equitable (in terms of flow and pressure 
across the irrigation network). Targeted farmers will be freed up of some structural constraints and 
have the opportunity to improve their farming choices, adopting improved irrigation technologies 
(mainly drip irrigation), which are more efficient in the use of the scarce water resource and better 
suited for high-value crops.


II. Proposed Development Objectives
The project development objectives are: (i) for targeted ORMVAs, to provide an improved water 
service to farmers, and (ii) for targeted farmers, to have better access to improved irrigation 
technologies.

III. Project Description
Component Name
Component 1: Improving the irrigation network infrastructure
Comments (optional)
Component 1 will construct pressurized irrigation networks to replace existing gravity networks and 
renovate existing pressurized irrigation networks. Under adequate management, the networks’ 
design will allow providing farmers with an improved water service, in line with the technical 
requirements of improved irrigation technologies. Activities include: (i) studies; (ii) technical 
assistance to monitor construction works; (iii) upgrading irrigation canals and constructing 
reservoirs; (iv) constructing feeder pipes and rehabilitating pumping stations; (v) constructing 
filtration stations; (vi) constructing distribution piped networks, or rehabilitating and extending 
existing distribution piped networks; and (vii) installing outlets and associated devices.

Component Name
Component 2: Supporting farmers’ access to improved irrigation technologies
Comments (optional)
Component 2 will strengthen farmers’ knowledge of and access to improved irrigation technologies, 
to allow them taking advantage of the improved water service provided by the ORMVAs. Farmers 
will become familiar with the advantages of the improved irrigation technologies, and will have 
easier access to financing opportunities to adopt them. Once the improved irrigation technologies is 
in place, farmers will receive irrigation advisory services, and their capacity to access, use, and 
maintain the irrigation systems will be strengthened. i Farmers will also develop better knowledge 
of their groundwater, where appropriate.

Component Name
Component 3: Supporting implementing agencies’ management of the irrigation network, and 
implementation of the project
Comments (optional)
Component 3 will strengthen the institutional capacity of the ORMVAs in operating and 
maintaining the irrigation networks, to ensure that new and improved networks are managed so to 
provide farmers with an improved water service, in line with the technical requirements of improved 
irrigation technologies. Component 3 will also support implementing the project. Component 3 
activities will include: (i) technical assistance to improve O&M of the irrigation network; (ii) 
training, technical assistance, computer equipment, and associated tools for project management; 
and (iii) implementation of the EMP; (iv) provision of equipment and infrastructure rehabilitation 
for DIAEA and ORMVAs.

IV. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 150.00 Total Bank Financing: 150.00
Financing Gap: 0.00
For Loans/Credits/Others Amount
Borrower 0.00


International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 150.00
Total 150.00

V. Implementation
The project will have five implementation entities. The ORMVAs of Tadla, Haouz, Doukkala, and 
Gharb will implement most of the activities. The Department of Irrigation and Rural Infrastructure 
(DIAEA) of the MAPM will implement one activity under Component 3 and will be responsible for 
overall project coordination, management, and reporting. 
 
The DIAEA and the ORMVAs are both experienced in managing World Bank-funded projects, the 
Oum er Rbia basin irrigated agriculture modernization project (PROMER, 2010-2016) being the 
most recent. Each ORMVA targeted by the project manages a LSI perimeter covering about 100,000 
ha. They have good technical and managerial capacity to implement large irrigation development 
and modernization projects. Training and technical assistance will be provided as needed.

VI. Safeguard Policies (including public consultation)
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖





















































PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
CONCEPT STAGE

Report No.: PIDC33685

Project Name Poyang Lake Basin Town Water Environment Management Project 
(P153604)

Region EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC
Country China
Sector(s) Wastewater Collection and Transportation (40%), Solid waste management 

(20%), Wastewater Treatment and Disposal (20%), Animal produc tion 
(20%)

Theme(s) Rural services and infrastructure (30%), Pollution management and 
environmental health (30%), Water resource management (30%), Parti 
cipation and civic engagement (10%)

Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P153604
Borrower(s) People's Republic of China
Implementing Agency Jiangxi Provincial Development and Reform Commission
Environmental 
Category

A-Full Assessment

Date PID Prepared/
Updated

27-Dec-2015

Date PID Approved/
Disclosed

10-Jan-2016

Estimated Date of 
Appraisal Completion

02-Nov-2016

Estimated Date of 
Board Approval

31-Mar-2017

Concept Review 
Decision

Track II - The review did authorize the preparation to continue

I. Introduction and Context
Country Context
China's rapid urbanization over the past three decades has facilitated impressive economic and 
social gains. The country became the second largest economy in the world in 2010, with over half of 
its population now living in cities. About 500 million people have been pulled out of poverty in the 
process. Further transition is projected to add another 300 million to China's urban population by 
2030 and continue boosting the economic growth. Unfortunately, China's economic gains came at a 
significant cost to its environment, with serious implications on health and quality of life, as 
environmental depletion and degradation were overlooked during China's impressive economic 
growth period. The cost of environmental degradation and resource depletion in China is estimated 


to approach 10 percent of GDP, of which water pollution accounts for 2.1 percent, based on China 
2030 Study estimates. The Government of China has recognized that it cannot continue on this road 
and has put in place plans to ensure the environmental sustainability of its economic development 
pathways.

Sectoral and Institutional Context
The Chinese water sector suffers from both water quantity and quality challenges. In terms of water 
quantity, with 20 percent of the world's population but only 7 percent of its freshwater, water 
scarcity is a major problem for sustainable urban development in China. Moreover, there is also a 
strong disparity in spatial distribution of its water resources, as only 19 percent of China's water 
resources are available to 40 percent of the population in the north, where most of the major grain 
production is located, and in the west. In terms of water quality, due to environmentally 
unsustainable development trajectory pursued over the last three decades, a significant portion of 
China's freshwater sources are polluted. According to 2010 data, about 40 percent of rivers in China 
were seriously polluted and unfit for drinking water. Similarly, the groundwater quality in more 
than half of 200 cities surveyed was classified as 'bad' (in 40.3 percent of cities) or 'extremely 
bad' (14.7 percent). Similar figures are reported for the quality of other water bodies in the country, 
including lakes. 
 
Poyang Lake is the largest freshwater lake in China with a maximum surface area reaching 5,050 
km2 and a storage capacity - 30 billion m3. The basin area of the lake is about 162,200 km2 
covering over 97 percent of the land area of Jiangxi Province. The lake plays many vital functions, 
such as hydro-morphologic, environmental, social, cultural and economic; the livelihood of more 
than 40 million people is closely linked to the water and environment of Poyang Lake. Poyang Lake 
connects to Yangtze River in the middle reach at Hukou, Jiujiang County. The dynamics of the lake 
water movement is governed by both the stages of the Yangtze River and the discharges from its 
five major tributaries (Gan, Xin, Fu, Rao and Xin Rivers). While the annual water level in the 
Poyang Lake has remained stable in the recent years, the area of the lake fluctuates dramatically 
between the wet and dry seasons. In normal years, the average lake area is about 3,200 km2. The 
fluctuations are also affected by severe climate events, e.g., in early 2002, due to serious drought, 
the area of the lake reached a low of 200 km2.   
  
Poyang Lake is also a wetland of national and global importance, which provides a key habitat for 
half a million migratory birds. It is a house for over 95% of world's white crane, 60% of world??s 
white-napped cranes, 55% of world's hooded crane, 60% of world's white storks, and 96% of 
world's swan goose population. Poyang Lake is also a species gene pool with 156 kinds of aquatic 
plants, 136 planktons, 230 kinds of benthic animals, 58 kinds of fishes, 89 kinds of water birds, etc. 
It also plays a significant role in the seasonal flow regulation of the Yangtze River. The average 
amount of lake water entering the Yangtze River is about 150 billion m3, amounting to 15.6% of the 
mean annual runoff of the river.  
 
The water quality of the Lake has been comparatively good (with 83% falling under Class I ~ III, 
13% under Class IV, and 4% under Class V ). However, research results of the World Bank 
supported TCC5 project and the available monitoring data of Ministry of Environmental Protection 
show a concerning trend of water quality deterioration, with chemical oxygen demand (COD) and 
ammonia-nitrogen (NH3-N) gradually increasing and dissolved oxygen (DO) gradually decreasing. 
The existing data on COD discharge collected by the local governments in the lake basin show that 
domestic wastewater (about 60%) and solid waste disposal (about 30%) produce the major water 

pollution. While industrial pollution remains an issue, discharges from industries are gradually 
decreasing. Site visit also found uncontrolled solid waste disposal and insufficient treatment, and 
improper fish feeding and improper habit of farm land fertilizing also lead to severe water pollution. 
By provincial environmental statistics, only 79% of domestic wastewater is treated in urban areas of 
Jiangxi province, which is much lower than the national average of 85%. Similarly, solid waste 
collection and treatment rate in the province is 69% compared to the national average of 80%.   
 
Conclusions from recent studies and discussions with Provincial governments identify the following 
key causes for increase of pollution levels in the waterbodies feeding into Poyang Lake: (a) lack of 
basin wide integrated water/environment management; (b) weak water quality and pollution source 
pollution monitoring and disclosure system; (c) lack of public awareness and incentives in the 
communities on environmental protection; (d) weak enforcement of regulations related to disposal 
of untreated industrial and domestic wastewater directly into water bodies; (e) lack of investment in 
infrastructure for wastewater collection and treatment systems in urban and rural areas as well as for 
solid waste management in the small cities and towns and rural areas; and (f) lack of use of good 
practices on proper domestic solid waste disposal and agriculture practices. 
 
Government of China and Jiangxi Provincial government recognize the needs to protect the Lake. 
Series of measures have been triggered at national, provincial, and county levels to protect the value 
the Poyang Lake as a unique resource and a national heritage, and to control the lake's pollution and 
to restore the vital water quality and its associa ted functions. The Government of China issued the 
Poyang Lake Ecological Economic Zone Development Plan (PLEDP) in 2009 focusing on 
ecological development of Poyang Lake. Under the PLEDP, there is an implementation plan and 18 
specific sector plans, including water environment management, water resources, five river 
management plan, etc. In 2014, Jiangxi government also issued a plan for establishment of 
ecological and civilization demonstration areas, stating actions and targets for industrial, domestic 
wastewater and solid waste management. Based on the plan, by 2020, COD would be decreased by 
5% compared to the 2015 baseline, wastewater treatment ratio would reach 90% and urban solid 
waste treatment ratio - 85%. The PLEDP together with other relevant sector plans foresee 
significant increase in size of population and economic activity by 2020, with the focus on tourism 
industry. This, together with unresolved improvements in infrastructure, is expected to result in big 
pressure on water quality in the lake basin. 
 
Following the series government plans, the government of Jiangxi has been conducting six major 
ecological environment protection group projects: (a) Poyang Lake wetland and biodiversity 
protection projects; (b) Poyang Lake-rim green belt projects; (c) pollution prevention and control 
projects including wastewater, solid waste and non-point agricultural pollution control; (d) blue sky 
action demonstration projects; (e) circular economy, energy conservation, and emission reduction 
projects; and (f) ecological cultural projects. 
 
In 2013, the World Bank approved the Jiangxi Poyang Lake Basin and Ecological Economic Zone 
Small Town Development Project with the objective to improve key public services in participating 
small towns of Jiangxi Province through improvements to priority infrastructure. Though overall 
project implementation has been satisfactory, there are a number of challenges including the rapid 
urbanization rendering some of the sub-projects irrelevant/unviable, capacity constraints and issues 
related to O&M for wetland, solid waste and wastewater facilities. The proposed project would 
expand the coverage to include seven additional counties, particularly focusing on water 
environment management and solid waste management infrastructure while taking into account 

lessons from the Small Town Development Project and incorporating in its design best international 
practices.  
 
Note : Chinese surface water quality standards: Class I is good quality water which with simple 
purification is drinkable (DO>7.5mg/l; COD<15; BOD5<3; NH3-N<0.15; P<0.02); Class II is good 
quality water which is slightly contaminated, drinkable after normal purification (DO>6mg/l; 
COD<15; BOD5<3; NH3-N<0.5; P<0.1); Class III contaminated water which could be drinkable 
after treatment (DO>5mg/l; COD<20; BOD5<4; NH3-N<1; P<0.2); Class IV water is not drinkable 
(DO>3mg/l; COD<30; BOD5<6; NH3-N<1.5; P<0.3); and Class V is bad quality water (DO>2mg/
l; COD<40; BOD5<10; NH3-N<2; P<0.4).

Relationship to CAS
The project is aligned with the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for 2013-2016, specifically the 
objectives set under focus area I --"Supporting greener growth", including Enhancing Urban 
Environmental Services; Promoting Sustainable Agriculture Practices; and Demonstrating 
Sustainable Natural Resource Management. The project design is in line with the national strategic 
development plan of China, as envisioned in the Poyang Lake Ecological Economic Zone 
Development Plan (2009) and Jiangxi Province implementation plan for establishment of ecological 
and civilization demonstration areas (2014). The project is also in line with 12th Five-year Plans 
and draft 13th Five-year plan at Jiangxi provincial and county levels. 
  
The project is expected to contribute to both China??s national strategy on water security agenda 
and to the World Bank Group twin goals of ending extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity. 
Water security has become a high priority at highest for decision makers at all levels (central and 
local government). The strategy focuses on applying systematic treatment and combination of 
structural and non-structural measures in water sector to promote ecological safety, economic 
security and the safety of human health and lives. The project would contribute to, through 
integrated and participatory approaches, sustainable water/environment management, improvement 
of ecological condition, promotion of social and economic environment of Poyang Lake Basin, as 
one of the key areas of Chinese water system. 
 
For the contribution to the twin goals, as the poor are known to live relatively closer to degraded 
and polluted areas, and have less access to water and solid waste disposal infrastructure, they are 
expected to directly benefit from the project. The project will aim at addressing specific challenges 
that the poor, vulnerable and women face, as identified through social assessment. The project is 
also expected to boost shared prosperity, as improved water quality and local living conditions will 
likely result in such benefits as increase in land value, access to income earning opportunities etc.     
 
To achieve maximum impact and to address the higher strategic objectives indicated above, the 
project will incorporate an "integrated" approach in the design of the activities in selected counties, 
and focus on enhancement of ecological and institutional sustainability of water/environment and 
strengthening of domestic wastewater and solid waste management system. This will involve 
participation of communities during project preparation and implementation as well as in designing 
long-term operation & maintenance mechanisms to ensure sustainability of the investments. 
Ultimately, successful implementation of the project will help to facilitate the improvement and 
restoration of water quality and ecological environment of the Poyang Lake basin. It would also 
contribute towards the enhancement of water regime in the Yangtze River. 
 

Note :   "Integrated approach" refers to a mechanism whereby structural and non-structural 
measures are fully utilized, as well as whereby management of environmental protection is done in 
a collaborative and coordinated way throughout the project cycle involving all stakeholders (from 
different sectors and disciplines) and based on consensus building to ensure sustainability.

II. Proposed Development Objective(s)
Proposed Development Objective(s) (From PCN)
The project development objective is to reduce the pollutant discharge into key selected waterways 
in the Poyang Lake basin and to improve management of water environment.

Key Results (From PCN)
The proposed PDO level results indicators include: (a) Direct project beneficiaries (core sector 
indicator), of which female beneficiaries; (b) Nutrient load reduction (nitrogen (N) and Phosphorus 
(P)) achieved under the project (core sector indicator, tons/year); (c) Volume (mass) of COD 
pollution load reduction achieved under the project (core sector indicator, tons/year); (d) domestic 
solid waste reduced or recycled under the project (core sector indicator; tons/year); (e) Increased 
number of counties in full compliance with Provincial Water and Environmental Protection 
Guidelines . 
 
Note :   The guidelines broadly include elements such as citizen participatory engagement and 
institutional capacity to undertake regular water monitoring, reporting and enforcement.

III. Preliminary Description
Concept Description
a. Overview.  
 
The Jiangxi Provincial Government proposes to utilize the World Bank loan in managing the water 
environment in the key towns of Poyang Lake Basin. Seven counties - Duchang, Poyang, Yugan, 
Jishui, Fengxin, Jingan, Shangli, have been selected for project planning and implementation; total 
population of the seven counties are about 5 million. These seven counties represent a mixed pattern 
of geographic distribution across the basin: three sites are in close proximity to the main Lake, one 
site along the mid-stream of a main river draining into the Lake, two sites adjacent to the tributary 
streams of a main river, and one site at the remotest distance from the Lake. The water quality of 
Poyang Lake is closely associated with the quality and environment of the water and land bodies in 
these contributing catchments, and vice versa.  
 
The project is designed to integrate different ways of environmental protection to improve the water 
quality of Poyang Lake basin, including by means of wastewater treatment and solid waste 
management, as well non-structural measures. As such, the project will focus not only on 
engineering aspects but also on enhancing institutional mechanisms, improving operation and 
maintenance (O&M) and monitoring systems to help the selected counties in Jiangxi Province to 
enhance water environmental services, including wastewater collection and treatment systems, 
urban storm water management, river and lake environment restoration, solid waste collection and 
transportation system, and participatory integrated environment management system.  
 
b. Proposed Project components.  
 


The proposed project activities consist of four main components as below:  
 
Component 1: Strengthening Institutional Capacity for Managing Water Environment in Poyang 
Lake Basin (US$15 million): This component will finance capacity building and awareness raising 
activities to improve participatory wastewater and solid waste management, enforcement of 
environmental regulations and creating pre-conditions for sustainability of project results. The 
component will be structured in two key sub-components: (a) institutional capacity building and 
enforcement and (b) sustainable Poyang Lake basin management.  
 
Sub-component 1.1: Institutional Capacity Building and Enforcement (USD11 million): This sub-
component will finance activities related to: (a) strengthening of the current integrated Poyang Lake 
Basin management institutional architecture (River manager as leader of the party - River 
implementer as the mayor of the county - high level leading group for strategic orientation and 
guidance, and Poyang Lake water/environment financial and investment mechanism study; (b) 
strengthen Basin-wide water/environment management planning: (i) support an integrated 
vulnerability and sensitivity assessment of Poyang Lake (water quality improvement and protection- 
water quantity control - land uses change -biodiversity conservation- urbanization and demographic 
changes- tourism impact and industrialization-basin pollution, and providing comments on 
integrated action plan leading to series of projects with implementation sequencing and synergies in 
line with the long-term commitment) along with resilience and adaptation measures; (ii) promotion 
of integrated basin plans for the five tributaries of the Poyang Lake; (c) strengthening knowledge 
sharing of integrated lake management and establish Lake management advisory platform - with the 
continuous pressure on water resources, the lakes under environmental stress are evidenced across 
China; and (d) strengthening the water/environment monitoring system through upgrade/newly 
installation of water/environment monitoring facilities, enhancement of the integrated monitoring 
information system, early warning system, real-time data disclosure etc. 
 
Sub-component 1.2: Sustainable Poyang Lake Basin Management (USD4 million): This sub-
component will finance activities related to enhancing conditions for lake basin environmental 
management sustainability, including: (a) enhancement of citizen participation and information 
disclosure - translating the high level ownership of the Poyang protection to grassroots level could 
contribute to the rapid and broader success of the Poyang Lake conservation. Building on the 
institutional structure and ecological compensation mechanism, the citizen participation could 
involve labor corporations (fishermen, farmers, factory workers and industries etc.) in having a 
voice in Poyang Lake protection; and (b) ensuring soundness of infrastructure design and its O&M 
sustainabilityÂ¡Âª the project will aim to increment the quality of innovation and appropriate 
technology with the economics of their financing for sustainable operation and maintenance 
implementation; and strengthening of incentive mechanisms, i.e., the compensation scheme for 
ecological protection of the Poyang Lake that could be further strengthened building on proven 
incentive mechanisms; 
 
Component 2: Improvement of Lake and River Environmental Restoration and Enhancement of 
Domestic Wastewater Management System (US$ 140 million). This component will finance 
activities related to protection and restoration of the water environment of selected rural and urban 
water environments in Poyang Lake basin through collection and treatment of urban and rural 
wastewater; collection and safe disposal of stormwater from both rural and urban watersheds; and 
implementation of integrated engineering and biological as well as Low Impact Development (LID) 
interventions in selected rural and urban waterways.  The aim of the component is to demonstrate an 


Integrated water
shed management approach by focusing on key areas for protection, improving 
water quality and environmental protection caused by the municipal wastewater and aquaculture 
sources, and establishing ecological pollution-control zones along the course of pollutant movement.
 
Sub-component 2.1: Improvement of Lake and River Environmental Restoration (USD66 million): 
This sub-component will finance implementation of integrated engineering and biological 
mitigation measures and Low Impact Development (LID) in selected small lakes, rivers, and 
catchments in Poyang Lake basin. This will include restoration of water environment in Zhuhu Lake 
in Poyang county, Pipa Lake (river) in Yugan county, and ecological restoration of stream corridor 
of Zoujiazui River in Duchang county. Key activities will include construction of stormwater 
collection and diversion systems from upland watersheds, rural wastewater treatment facilities, 
distributed wastewater collection along lake banks, introduction of good aquaculture practices (for 
fishing farming and pearl culture) and water environment monitoring system.  
 
Sub-component 2.2: Enhancement of Domestic Wastewater Management System (USD74 million): 
This sub-component will finance rehabilitation and expansion of urban wastewater collection and 
treatment systems to improve capacity of wastewater collection and treatment of selected counties. 
Main project activities include: construction of wastewater collection networks (including 
household connections); and construction and/or rehabilitation of wastewater treatment plants in 
Duchang, Jiang'an, and Jishui counties.  
 
Component 3: Construction of solid waste collection and transportation system (USD75 million): 
This component is to improve solid waste collection and transportation system in rural and urban 
areas to reduce solid waste disposal to river system of Poyang Lak Basin. This component will 
finance setting up solid waste separation system, construction of solid waste collection stations and 
transportation stations, and establishment of sustainable solid waste collection and transportation 
system, and establishment of monitoring and management systems in Shangli, Duchang, Poyang, 
Yugan, and Jing'an Counties. 
 
Component 4: Project Implementation Support (USD15 million). This component is to support the 
effective and efficient implementation of the project activities. This component will finance project 
management, project implementation supervision, project social, resettlement and environmental 
monitoring, domestic and international training and study tours, and relevant project management 
equipment and facilities. Main project activities will include procurement of office equipment, 
domestic and international training and study tours, procurement of project implementation 
supervisors, procurement of social and resettlement and environmental monitoring services, etc. 
 
d. Gender. 
 
There is strong evidence that gender inequalities contribute to poverty and reduce human well-
being, and that gender issues are an important dimension of the fight against poverty. In water 
supply operations specifically, there has long been an understanding of importance of incorporating 
a gender perspective, because women and girls are most often the primary users, providers and 
managers of water in their households and are the guardians of household hygiene. Limited access 
to water and poor water quality have direct impact on household welfare and health. If a water 
system falls into disrepair, women are the ones forced to travel long distances over many hours to 
meet their families' water needs. Therefore, women and girls benefit most when services are 
improved. Given women's household roles and responsibilities, they are also more likely to impact 


decisions related to ways to collect and dispose the domestic waste. Finally, women can greatly 
contribute to oversight of a well-functioning community enforcement of environmental reg  ulations 
and also such aspects as decisions related to water and solid waste collection fee levels.  
 
Worldwide good performance on gender mainstreaming in projects requires: (a) carrying out a 
gender analysis as part of the project's social assessment; (b) introducing relevant design elements; 
and (c) tracking project performance through the inclusion of gender disaggregated indicators. The 
project will conduct a standalone social assessment, in which a close attention to gender aspects will 
be paid. This will include investigating on and consulting with female beneficiaries in the project 
areas in order to clearly identify their needs and concerns, as well as possible project impacts, and 
explore both mitigation measures of such impacts and opportunities for women targeted activities to 
achieve project objectives. The project design will particularly emphasize female participation in 
project activities, capacity building and M&E activities. Specific indicator(s) related to women's 
participation will be included in the Results Framework and will be closely monitored during 
project implementation. 
 
e. Lessons learned from Jiangxi Poyang Lake Basin and Ecological Economic Zone Small 
Town Project 
 
There are valuable lessons of Jiangxi Poyang Lake Basin and Ecological Zone Small Town Project 
implementation that will be taken into account during further design of the proposed project. The 
on-going project faces challenges in terms of institutional capacity and inter-departmental 
coordination, issue that is also observed in other provinces in China. Collaboration in controlling 
and reducing substances at their source is the most effective way of keeping pollutants out of the 
lake. This requires clarity of responsibilities of each authority, as well as full collaboration to meet 
the joint objective. While industrial pollution control is under the responsibility of provincial 
Environmental Protection Department (EPD), agricultural land and aquaculture pollution control is 
managed by the provincial Agriculture Department (AD).   
 
To address these problems, it is critical that county Government maintains ownership of the 
proposed sub-projects, even with the change of the county leadership to ensure continued focus on 
initially agreed project activities and development objectives. Similarly, continuity and retention of 
project staff at the county level (including PMOs, PLGs and Expert Groups) is important to ensure 
good capacity developed under the project is maintained. Finally, the project will also raise 
awareness among communities and farmers.  
 
Equally important is to considerably strengthen institutional coordination mechanisms, not just for 
project purposes, but also for future management of the Lake. It would be important to assign a 
function of responsibility to review development proposals in the basin with a view on their 
implications on the Lake water quality to one of the institutions that is currently managing Poyang 
Lake, or to establish a Poyang Lake Management Commission. The institution would also be 
responsible to spearhead the improvement/ restoration of the Lake water quality over the long run. 
This entity could include representatives of relevant provincial and county governments, as well as 
concerned citizens and academic or research agencies.  
 
f. Global Lessons Learned and World Bank's Value Added 
 
World Bank participation has the added benefit of introducing and replicating, where possible, 


international best practices in the management of water body pollution control and environmental/
ecological improvement. Lessons learned from World Bank-financed pollution control and 
ecological restoration projects (such as Danube Water Program; Iran Northern Cities Water Supply 
and Sanitation Project to reduce pollutant loads to the Caspian Sea; Lake Victoria Environmental 
Protection Project; Aral Sea Restoration Project; Integrated Water Management in Metropolitan Sao 
Paulo Project) as well as lessons from other countries' experiences (such as the Great Lakes and 
Chesapeake Bay restoration programs in the US) are being used to inform the key concept of the 
project, and include: (a) investments in infrastructure upgrading needs to be matched consistently 
with required institutional support for appropriate maintenance and management competencies, to 
ensure sustainability of investment; (b) the needs within the basin exceed the current scale of 
investments and therefore (i) investments need to be modelled, targeted and monitored to establish 
the most cost-effective interventions to improve basin health and green resilient growth that 
supports livelihood and maintains the sustainability of economic development; (ii) capacity and 
investments need to be leveraged from a variety of public and private partners; (c) problems related 
to water quality management, pollution control and urban upgrading are complex and require multi-
sectoral and integrated approaches; (d) both the institutional and environmental objectives 
associated with addressing such complex issues should be treated as long-term program goals rather 
than short-to medium-term project objectives; (e) integrated approaches to water quality 
management can enhance additional benefits and contribute to poverty alleviation; (f) participatory 
approach, though time-consuming, is essential for sustainability of project results as it ensures 
consensus building between all stakeholders in reaching agreement on project design and achieving 
institutional and policy reform and public support; and (g) ex-post monitoring of activities to collect 
evidence of costs and benefits help to enhance chances for successful replication. 
 
Specific best practices that will be examined for application of proposed project activities include: 
(a) strengthening of the current institutional architecture - River manager as leader of the party - 
River implementer as the mayor of the county - high level leading group for strategic orientation 
and guidance (the Great Lakes National Program Office (GLNPO in the USA); the Office of the 
Prime Minister Program for the Lake Balaton (Hungary); and the creation of the Commission and 
Secretariat of the Lake Balaton from above mentioned office); (b) strengthening of incentive 
mechanisms (direct and indirect payment fee mechanism in Biwa Lake (Japan); environmental fee 
on net revenue from chemical factories around Lake Toba (Indonesia); fee grid for water 
consumption in Lake Constance (Germany-Switzerland and Austria) and; the revolving polluter-
payer fee/subsidy mechanism of the Seine Normandy River Basin Agency (France)); (c) citizen 
participation and information disclosure - (Women Association for the Lake Balaton which 
pioneered the lake's protection in earlier 1990; the Lake Naivasha (home of Kenya??s flowers 
export) Riparian Association (LNRA) and Lake Naivasha Growers Group (LNGG)); (d) ensuring 
soundness of infrastructure design and its O&M sustainability (the Chesapeake Bay restoration 
program (USA); Lake Champlain basin program (USA/Canada); the Lake Balaton water quality and 
tourism program; and Danube Water Program); (e) integrated action plan to maximize impact of 
interventions (the Great Lakes restoration program; the lake Ponchartrain restoration plan 
(Louisiana); the Lake Balaton program). 
 
Note:   Proposed project activities have been selected based on the following criteria: (a) cost 
effectiveness - each sub-project should have economic/financial return; (b) sub-projects should not 
cause any negative social and environmental impacts that cannot be mitigated through proper design 
and contract execution; (c) sub-projects must be in compliance with government development plans; 
(d) all land used for construction purposes shall conform to general land utilization plans of the 


cities and / or townships and their annual land use plans; (e) proposed interventions should solve 
existing problems systematically rather than only solve part of the problem; and (f) sub-projects 
should have demonstration value.

IV. Safeguard Policies that might apply
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No TBD
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 â��
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 â��
Forests OP/BP 4.36 â��
Pest Management OP 4.09 â��
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 â��
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 â��
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 â��
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 â��
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 â��
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 â��

V. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 263.80 Total Bank Financing: 150.00
Financing Gap: 0.00
Financing Source Amount
 Borrower 113.80
 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 150.00
 Total 263.80

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Integrated Management of Agricultural Risk (P162316) 

 
 

  
Apr 02, 2017 Page 1 of 19  

     

 

 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal. 
 

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 11-May-2017 | Report No: PIDISDSC20468 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Argentina P162316  Integrated 
Management of 
Agricultural Risk 
(P162316) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

LATIN AMERICA AND 
CARIBBEAN 

Aug 22, 2017 Oct 03, 2017 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Argentine Republic, Ministry 
of Finance 

Ministry of Agroindustry  

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The objective of the project is to contribute to strengthen resilience of the agroindustrial sector, particularly among the 
most vulnerable producers. This objective will be achieved through reduction of producers' vulnerability and exposure 
to climatic and market risk. 

 

 Financing (in USD Million)      

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B-Partial Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

Finance OLD 

Financing Source Amount  

Borrower   37.50  

International Bank for Reconstruction and Development  150.00  

LOCAL: BENEFICIARIES    0.00  

Total Project Cost  187.50  

    
 
 

 
 

Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here. 



 
 
B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
 
1. After taking office in December 2015, the new Argentine Government moved with significant speed to 
implement reforms. The Government has rapidly implemented various macroeconomic reforms and initiated a program 
of structural reforms. These include inter alia (a) the elimination of export taxes on major crops, beef, and most 
industrial manufacturing products and the reduction by 5 percent of export taxes on soy; (b) unification of the exchange 
rate, effectively ending most foreign exchange restrictions; (c) moving from a system of discretionary to automatically 
provided import licenses in line with World Trade Organization procedures; (d) resolution of the dispute with holdout 
creditors; and (e)  measures to enhance public transparency and accountability. In addition, the National Institute for 
Statistics launched a new inflation index and improved the overall quality of statistics. Electricity tariffs and transport 
fees were increased to reduce subsidies, while protecting low-income users with a social tariff. Broader efforts to reduce 
energy subsidies (which account for a large portion of fiscal deficit) are under way.  

2. Economic activity contracted in 2016, but growth is expected in 2017. Economic activity contracted 2.3 percent 
during 2016, taking a toll on labor markets, where up to 0.9 percent of formal private sector jobs were lost in the first 
semester

1
. However, GDP expanded in the second half of 2016 (0.6 percent), and employment in the formal private 

sector recovered to its previous peak level (October 2015). The economy is expected to continue to grow in 2017 (+2.7 
percent

2
) on the assumption that the positive impact of recent policy changes kicks in and the global economy recovers. 

Inflation in the city of Buenos Aires was 40 percent in 2016, mostly due to currency depreciation and the reduction of 
energy and transport subsidies. However, inflation is expected to decrease to 21 percent in 2017

3
, despite further 

increases in energy and transport tariffs. The central government primary deficit in 2016 was 4.6 percent of GDP, below 
the official target (4.8 percent). The target primary deficit for 2017 (4.2 percent), though higher than originally planned, 
will require further fiscal consolidation efforts. 

3. The Argentine Government has made important steps to address the key macroeconomic imbalances with the 
objective of creating an environment conducive to economic growth and employment creation.  Argentina offers 
many opportunities in a weak global environment, and there is a strong interest from foreign investors and firms. Going 
forward, Argentina aims to continue building a growth enabling policy framework to enhance credibility and support 
broad based growth and quality employment. In particular, the following policies will be important to permanently 
reduce inflation and put Argentina on a sustainable growth path: (a) increase public spending efficiency as well as its 
efficacy and reduce the fiscal deficit in line with government targets; (b) continue fostering the credibility of the Central 
Bank so that monetary policy can further anchor inflation expectations; (c) strengthen competitiveness and productivity 
through an improved business environment and investments in infrastructure and increasing competition in markets 
and improving the regulatory framework in sectors; (d) continue strengthening the credibility of official statistics; and (e) 
continue improving the provision of public goods (including transportation, health, and education) and reducing regional 
disparities. 

                                            
1
 Source: Ministerio de Trabajo, Empleo y Seguridad Social  

2
 Source: World Bank Group. 2017. Global Economic Prospects, January 2017 Weak Investment in Uncertain Times. Washington, DC: 

World Bank. doi:10.1596/978-1-4648-1016-9. 
3
 Source: Relevamiento de Expectativas de Mercado (REM), Banco Central de la República Argentina, April 2017.  



 
The World Bank  
Integrated Management of Agricultural Risk (P162316) 

 
 

  
Apr 02, 2017 Page 4 of 19  

     

4. Because of its geographical characteristics, Argentina is exposed to a variety of natural hazards. According to 
the Third National Communication (2015) by the Government of Argentina to the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change (TNC, 2015)

4
, the projections of climate models during this century generally indicate 

that the extremes of high temperatures and extreme precipitation will continue to increase in most of the country, 
although the precise quantification of this change presents considerable levels of uncertainty.  For example, droughts 
and floods during the last decades have increased due to the influence of stronger El Niño Southern Oscillation (ENSO) 
events and due to climate change.

5
 The natural disaster loss per capita in Argentina is high and relates predominantly to 

hydro-meteorological hazards, which represent 58 percent of the total economic losses over the last 50 years.
6
 

According to Swiss-Re, Argentina is among the 10 emerging economies with the highest flood hazard exposure, with 
potential losses in excess of US$ 3 billion a year (0.5% of GDP).  Drought, hail, and frosts are other hazards that 
significantly affect the economic performance of the country. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
5. Argentina is one of the world’s leading food exporters, enjoying vast farmlands and favorable natural 
conditions. Despite these advantages, the country’s agricultural sector is at a point of inflection. Over much of the past 
decade, the sector enjoyed high global prices but was buffeted by public policies that narrowed profit margins and 
stifled investment. The new administration made a major shift in taxes and regulation towards supporting economic 
incentives for development and investment, but global commodity prices have weakened over the past two years and 
prospects over the medium term are uncertain (World Bank, 2016). Lower commodity prices and slower growth in 
China, the major commodities consumer, seem to be here to stay.  Argentina and other major agricultural exporters face 
a difficult transition to a new equilibrium, a “new normal.” 

6. Despite a boom in global commodity prices, from 2002 to 2013 investment in agriculture/agribusiness fell and 
the rate of total factor productivity growth slowed compared to its neighbors. The Agriculture Production Index of the 
United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) for Paraguay, Brazil and Uruguay was between 20 percent and 
30 percent higher than that of Argentina in 2013. This trend was closely associated with domestic policies that imposed 
export tariffs, quotas and exchange rate controls. In December 2015 the new administration eliminated most of the 
tariffs and quotas, unleashing new potential. Simulations that only look at the potential benefits from the removal and 
lowering of agricultural export tariffs and controls suggest a significant gain in both production and employment. By 
2019 grain and oilseed production may increase to 137 million tons, cattle stocks to 56.8 million head, and employment 
by 500,000 new jobs. 

7. While the sector prognosis is positive, there remain a number of important challenges that will determine the 
quality of sector growth and sustainability going forward. The main challenge the sector faces is the low and volatile 
productivity growth with a yield gap reaching 20 percent in selected crops. Dilapidating infrastructure and inadequate 
transportation and logistics networks further hurt the sector competitiveness, and can account as much as 35 percent of 
the total cost of a ton in the case of soy. Environmental degradation contributes further to significant losses, estimated 
to be in the range of 1 to 8 percent of GDP

7
. Because of these rising costs and accumulating underinvestment, export 

                                            
4
product diversification equivalents fell from 2.1 to 1.7 from 1995 to 2009. Going forward, a key role for public policy will 
be to enable a conducive business environment (both for investments and cost competitiveness) as the private sector 
shifts gears from extensive to intensive production systems, and promote diversification towards higher price and value 
markets. 

8. Furthermore, given that agriculture is one of Argentina’s core economic activities, the country appears to be 
quite vulnerable to risks, in particular to more intense heat and extreme precipitation events.  Given the geographic 
extension of Argentina, the country faces a large set of natural hazards that have adverse economic impacts on a regular 
basis.  The hazards that are most reported to cause systemic losses in the agriculture sector are floods, extreme 
precipitation, droughts, hail, frosts and volcanic eruptions.  These macro and sector-level constraints and the sector risks 
outlined above have led to the Agriculture Sector of Argentina to show a drop in Total Factor Productivity (TFP) in 
relation to neighboring countries in recent years, as well as a drop in the adoption of agriculture technologies (see 
graphs below). These risks will likely intensify with rising climate variability and change.  

  
 
9. Agriculture production losses in Argentina during the past 20 years due to extreme weather events are 
estimated to amount to US$12 billion (current value)

8
.  Extreme losses

9
 in agriculture production between 1993/94 and 

2014/2015 have been estimated at US$8.7 billion for soy, US$2 billion for maize, US$860 million for wheat and US$493 
for sunflower.  The worse years in terms of agriculture production losses in the past two decades have been 2008/9 and 
2011/12 due to an extreme drought in the central “key” agriculture region (zona núcleo) of the country, which reached 
losses of more than US$9 billion.  Unfortunately, farmers in Argentina, especially family farmers, do not have access to 
financial instruments that would allow them to cover themselves against such systemic events.  Agriculture insurance in 
Argentina is concentrated on covering hail, with very few insurance policies being sold to cover for rainfall risks (excess 
rainfall, drought, and floods). 

10. Flood is the hazard that has caused the largest losses to the Argentinean economy historically.  It is 
estimated

10
 that the accumulated losses between 1950 and 2015 from the 10 worst floods were US$8.77 billion 

throughout the entire economy.  Many of these events have been linked to El Niño (ENSO) events, such as the floods of 
1982/83, 1992, 1997/1998, and 2015.  In relation to the most vulnerable areas, the La Plata Basin is one of the most 
affected given its level of exposure.  It is estimated that 80 percent of the Argentinean population lives in this basin, and 
it concentrates the main industrial (including agroindustrial) investments of the country. 

11. Within the Argentinean economy, the agriculture sector is the most susceptible to losses due to flooding.  In 
2000, for example, approximately 1.85 million hectares (4.5% of total cultivated area) were flooded due to extreme 
rainfall.  Losses to the sector amounted to US$187 million.  In 2001, a similar area was affected, producing losses of up 

           
to 70 percent of pastureland, a 15 percent drop in milk production, and between 50 and 60 percent drop in maize and 
wheat production, respectively

11
. 

12. The second most important hazard in terms of agriculture losses has been extreme drought.  The events of 
2005, and 2007-2009 have been very damaging for the livestock sector.  In 2009 the National Meteorological Service 
(SMN) reported that 90 percent of the national territory was under some type of drought situation; with the most 
severe droughts being recorded in the North of La Pampa and South of Buenos Aires and Cordoba Provinces

12
.  Because 

of these events, the number of cattle dropped considerably from 58.7 million in 2007 to 49.9 million in 2012 (15 
percent)

13
. 

13. Price volatility has also increased for international agriculture commodities since 2006/2007.  This has had a 
negative effect on Argentinean farmers.  From the beginning of the cropping seasons for grains (October), local prices in 
Argentina have had a tendency to drop until harvest, which highlights the need for Argentinean farmers to hedge their 
positions before planting.  Although Argentina has one of the oldest agriculture commodity exchanges globally, with 
futures and options for several grains, family farmers do not have access to such financial instruments to allow them to 
hedge against drastic price movements. 

14. Public policies and programs in Argentina that look towards the management of agriculture risks are 
concentrated in responding to agriculture emergencies.  This is quite different from other countries in the Region and 
other developed economies, which have a wider set of instruments and tools to manage agriculture sector risks in a 
more integrated fashion.  In Argentina, the main public policies and programs for agriculture risk management are in the 
area of agriculture emergency response, agroclimatic information systems (including price), and animal and plant health.  
From the private sector side, the main agriculture risk management instruments are the development and marketing of 
climate smart technologies (improved seeds, fertilizers, software and machinery, etc.), animal and plant health products, 
storage facilities, and agriculture insurance and commodity price derivatives.  

 
Relationship to CPF 
 
15. The project is fully aligned with the FY2015-18 World Bank Group’s Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for 
Argentina. The CPS identifies maintaining Argentina’s position as one of the world’s top food providers through adapting 
to climate change and addressing the needs of small farmers as one of the country’s development challenges for 
sustained poverty reduction and shared prosperity. Argentina’s high potential in agriculture is at risk due to the 
increasing number of severe climate events such as droughts and floods.  

16. The CPS focuses on reducing poverty and promoting shared prosperity.
14

 It is organized around nine results 
areas within three broad strategic pillars. The proposed project is aligned with Strategic Pillars I--“Sustaining 
Employment Creation in Farms and Firms”--and III--“Reducing Environmental Risks and Safeguarding Natural 
Resources”. Additionally,  the proposed project is also aligned with the recently widened focus to unlock long-term 
productivity growth and job creation under Pilar I, in response to the reorientation of policies by the new 
Administration.

15
   The project would contribute strongly to “Raising agricultural productivity of small- and medium-size 

farms in low income regions” (Result Area 3 of the CPS). It may also support outcomes included in two other CPS result 
areas: “Reducing exposure to extreme flooding in the Province of Buenos Aires” (Result Area 7), and “Improving natural 

                                            
11

 Occhiuzzi and Mercuri, 2011.   
12

 Sousa, 2009.   
13

 FAOSTAT. 
14

 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for the Argentine Republic for the period FY15-FY18 (Report No. 81361-AR). 
15

 Performance Learning Review (PLR) of the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for the Argentine Republic for the period FY15-FY18 
(Report No. 11546-AR). 


forest cover in the Chaco Eco Region” through the development of an agriculture and climate change information 
system that facilitates producers’ access to climate-related data.  

17. This project builds on previous work in Argentina and in the region on the improvement of the management 
of agriculture risks.  The Bank has provided support to Argentina in 2016 through the development of an Agriculture 
Risk Management Policy Note (P156197) and a technical assistance program for building the institutional capacity for 
managing agriculture risks and preparing for ENSO events (P159720).  This project also builds on the information 
systems and farm-level climate resilience technology adoption experiences of the ongoing Project for Increasing Climate 
Resilience & Enhancing Sustainable Land Management in the Southwest of the Buenos Aires Province (P125804) funded 
by the Adaptation Fund and executed through the Ministry of Environment, and the study on “Agricultura y ganadería. 
Impacto y vulnerabilidad al cambio climático” (2015)

16
 funded by the GEF Argentina Third National Communication 

UNFCCC (P116974) project.  The project will also work alongside ongoing and future IFC advisory services and 
investments financing green technologies for agribusinesses in Argentina through commercial Banks.  Furthermore, the 
Bank has provided support to the Ministry of Agroindustry in the past years, helping in the design of agriculture risk 
transfer instruments for the livestock sector in Buenos Aires Province and cotton producers in Chaco Province.  Finally, 
this project is based on the Bank’s approach towards an integrated management of agriculture risks, promoting 
resilience and sector competitiveness, focusing on the most vulnerable farmers

17
. 

18. The project would contribute to poverty reduction by ensuring the inclusion of the most vulnerable farm 
households in the risk management strategies and subsequent activities, as these households tend to be among the 
poorest in the country. Reduction of agricultural output volatility and improvements in emergency response times 
would also benefit firms and employees along the value chains benefitting from project interventions, mitigating income 
shocks and variations, which disproportionately affect the poorest sectors of society, and thus contributing to shared 
prosperity. 

19. Climate change co-benefits. By increasing the resilience of the sector, the project would contribute to climate 
change adaptation. While the focus of agriculture risk reduction strategies and plans to be supported by the project is on 
retrospective risk, they will also consider climate change impacts.  Project investments in infrastructure and technology 
adoption can be considered as “no regrets”, given that key future climate change hazards would likely manifest through 
increased frequency and intensity of current trends.

18
 

20. Nutrition co-benefits. The Project is expected to contribute to improvements in food security by its focus on: (i) 
improved information for planning and response to production and climate-related hazards in agriculture; (ii) mitigation 
of risks of vulnerable small farmers, who depend on their output for daily sustenance; (iii) mitigation of risks in high-
value sub-sectors, which provide permanent and temporary employment to significant numbers of people up and 
downstream agriculture value chains; and (iv) improved recovery of agricultural systems and thus reduction of volatility 
of food prices, which affect disproportionately the poor, nationally and globally. 

 
 

                                            
16

 Full document can be found at: http://ambiente.gob.ar/tercera-comunicacion-nacional/   
17

 See Agriculture Sector Risk Assessment Methodology: 
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/586561467994685817/Agricultural-sector-risk-assessment-methodological-guidance-
for-practitioners  
18

 World Bank, Argentina, Cambio climático proyectado y su impacto en la agricultura 2050-2100, Policy Not
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 

 
 
The objective of the project is to contribute to strengthen resilience of the agroindustrial sector, particularly among 
the most vulnerable producers. This objective will be achieved through reduction of producers' vulnerability and 
exposure to climatic and market risk. 

 
Key Results (From PCN) 

 
i. Adoption of technologies and/or instruments for increased resilience (measured by number, type and gender 

of farmers; and area that has adopted production/market resilient technologies/instruments). [CORE SD 
INDICATOR: Farmers adopting improved agricultural technology] 

ii. Number of farmers (and/or area cultivated) that are part of an improved agriculture emergency system, by 
type of farmer and segregated by gender. [ CORE SD INDICATOR: Farmers reached with agricultural assets or 
services] 

iii. Number of Provinces that have adopted an integrated agriculture risk management plan. 
iv. Number of farmers participating in international value chains, among beneficiaries, by type and gender.

19
 

 
 
D. Concept Description 

 
21. Beneficiaries. The project will have as direct beneficiaries the most vulnerable small and medium-sized 
agricultural producers and small and medium-sized agricultural enterprises, located in the provinces where activities are 
carried out. It would reach about 70,000 small and medium producers and a number (TBD) of small and medium 
agribusiness firms. Small and medium farms, in particular those outside the main cereal production zones, are among 
the most vulnerable and have the lowest capacity to recover from negative impacts caused by external factors like 
extreme weather or market shocks. Small and medium-sized farmers conform mostly family-based units. Agriculture 
plays a varied role in these households, mostly depending on size and location, along a continuum of situations. 
Agriculture in small farms in marginal areas may function as a safety-net, part of a set of multiple activities in their 
livelihood strategies (close to 70 percent of the family members also work outside the farm, in other farms or sectors

20
). 

Many medium farms are well-integrated into markets, deploying advanced agriculture techniques and using wage labor.  

22. Gender. Women occupy a variety of roles in this continuum, from farm management to farm workers and are 
slightly over-represented in the smallest farms’ workforce. There are important gaps related to gender equality in the 
agroindustrial sector, though data is scant. Migration from poor rural areas may disproportionally affect both single and 
married women. Nevertheless, some young women are changing this trend by deciding to stay in rural areas in order to 
develop opportunities for themselves. Project preparation will explore gender aspects of vulnerability in order to 
determine if there is a need for specific support to women’s livelihood strategies. 

                                            
19

 This indicator would be included if project design incorporates financing for export diversification, to reduce market risks and in 
line with Argentina’s policy to  become one of the world’s “supermarkets”. 
20

 Edith Scheikerman de Obschatko et al.,Los pequeños productores en la república Argentina, PROINDER-SAGPyA/IICA, 2007. Up to 
date information on small and medium-sized producers is scant. The latest agricultural census was carried out in 2002. Argentina 
does not include rural areas and small towns, about 30 percent of the total population, in its regular household survey e ither. 

Note to Task Teams: The PDO has been pre-populated from the datasheet for the first time for your convenience. 
Please keep it up to date whenever it is changed in the datasheet. 

 
     

23. Indirect beneficiaries. Contractors (firms and employees) who provide services to farmers and whose income 
often collapses when disaster strikes agriculture production; firms and their employees, up- and downstream the 
agriculture value chains, who depend on reliable supplies of agricultural products; provincial governments, which 
allocate scarce public funds to attending emergencies and whose revenues suffer when these occur in their jurisdictions. 
In addition, the project will strengthen the institutions responsible for generating and disseminating critical information 
for risk management and the offices responsible for managing responses to agricultural emergencies. 

24. Integrated framework for managing agriculture risks. The implementation of the framework implies a balance 
between existing public policies and programs, available public resources, and existing private sector technologies and 
instruments.  It also requires the development of a robust institutional structure to ensure policy and program 
integration and clear communications across various sector stakeholders.  Interinstitutional coordination to reduce 
response times after an event, improving targeting of risk management programs to the most vulnerable population and 
changing the risk management paradigm from an ex post to an ex ante system are key issues to be tackled by the 
proposed operation.  Thus, this project seeks to provide the public sector with the capacity and strategies for managing 
agriculture sector risks in an integrated fashion, increasing the resilience of the most vulnerable farmers while improving 
the effectiveness and efficiency of public spending.  

25. Components.  In order to contribute to implementing an integrated approach to risk management, the project is 
divided into three components that have been identified as the key areas of improvement within the existing public 
sector policies and programs in Argentina. Component 1 focuses on the provision of agroclimatic information (public 
service) for the management of agriculture risks, while components 2 and 3 focus on bringing integrated management of 
agriculture risks at the farm level, addressing different agriculture risk layers with different risk management strategies 
(risk mitigation, transfer and coping – see risk layering figure below). 

 

 
 
 

26. Component 1 - Strengthening agro-climatic information systems (approximate cost USD 15 million, of which 
80% from the Bank). Despite the fact that the GoA has made important progress in facilitating access of agro-climatic 
information and commodity prices for agriculture risk management purposes, there remain important limitations – 
technical and financial – that hinder sustained cooperation among government institutions, and the use of data by the 
private sector and the public. For instance and despite the existence of cooperation agreements among institutions that 

generate data, heterogeneity of IT infrastructure and information systems still impedes coordination and cooperation. 
These constraints make it difficult to carry out risk monitoring and risk analyses in a timely manner. 

27. Based on an approach that intends to leverage public funds with private assets and participation, the 
component would finance improvements in capacity and interoperability of agroclimatic and price information systems 
operated or disseminated by the Ministry of Agroindustry (MAI) and other selected public and private entities linked to 
the agriculture sector. An example of this is the work being done to standardize and disseminate the agroclimatic data 
collected by private networks of meteorological stations with the ones of the National Meteorological Service (SMN) and 
of the National Agriculture Technology Institute (INTA).  Another example is the ongoing development of an information 
system that collects and publishes real-time spot prices of basic grains (Operations Information Systems for Grains

21
), 

which is a joint effort between MAI and the Agriculture Commodity Exchanges of Argentina. It would also improve the 
institutional capacity of selected institutions to analyze georeferenced data. The component would finance goods, 
training, consultant services and operational costs for the development or enhancement of agro-ecological data and 
information management systems. The project would also allocate resources to promote private- and public-sector 
development and implementation of IT systems and software solutions that improve access to agro-industrial 
information and enhance the assessment of agricultural risks associated with climate variability, climate change, and 
market price fluctuations. The key expected results from this component are: (i) a well-functioning early-warning system 
for the main hazards that affect agricultural value chains

22
; and (ii) a reliable and easily accessible system for the 

provision of production, price and meteorological information to the public. 

28. Subcomponent 1.1. Development of Tools and Systems. The purpose of this subcomponent is to consolidate 
and integrate production, price and meteorological information generated by a variety of public and private institutions. 
It envisages financing for the following activities: 

a. diagnostic of sector ICT capacities and systems;  
b. diagnostic of existing capacity for generation, transmission, maintenance, quality assurance and security 

of information;  
c. design and implementation of the infrastructure for provision of agro-industrial agro-climatic data, 

including systems for downloading, analyzing, visualizing and consulting data and information;  
d. design of protocols, standards and operation and maintenance manuals for supported tools and 

systems;  
e. integration and strengthening of key price and meteorological networks and data;  
f. development of historical synthetic data series for agroclimatic variables for probabilistic analysis; and 
g. strengthening of provincial and regional spatial data infrastructure selected on the basis of information 

gaps. 

                                            
21

 The real time price information system can be accessed at: www.siogranos.com.ar.  This information system received technical 
assistance from the World Bank in 2015 for its development and it is a unified system for the purchase and sale of grains that make 
up the Physical Market ("disponible", "cash", "forwards" a fijar "," directas ", etc.) and that arises according to the estab lished in the 
CNV - SAGyP Joint Resolution Nº 208 and 628. This system has been developed by the Cereal Stocks exchanges of Bahía Blanca, 
Buenos Aires, Córdoba and Entre Ríos, and the Stock Exchanges of Chaco, Rosario and Santa Fe, the Mercado a Término de Buenos 
Aires SA (MATba) and the Mercado a Término de Rosario S.A. (ROFEX). The products on which the aforementioned operations are to 
be reported are: wheat, corn, sunflower, soybean, soybean oil, forage barley and sorghum. The aim of the joint action is to improve 
transparency in the physical grain market and, in particular, to promote the link between the quality and the price of the products 
traded. 
22

 An example is the linkage and coordination with the Information and Early Warning System (IEWS) established under our 
Argentina Adaptation Fund: Increasing Climate Resilience & Enhancing Sustainable Land Management in the Southwest of the 
Buenos Aires Province (P125804) and coordinated between National Agriculture Technology Institute (INTA) and the National 
Meteorological Service (SMN). 

 
29. Subcomponent 1.2. Institutional Capacity Development. This subcomponent aims at building the capacity of 
selected national and provincial government institutions for the operation of the supported information systems.  It 
would also promote the development of software solutions by the private sector, based on the data generated by the 
improved systems. This subcomponent would finance the following activities: 

a. hardware, software and training required for effective operation of selected national, provincial and 
decentralized entities; 

b. promotion and dissemination of visualization, consultation, analysis and data download tools developed 
by MAI, under an open data approach for private sector developers and use by other institutions; 

c. training of government staff and potential software developers in data management and information for 
agricultural risk management; and 

d. technical assistance for the design of market price references, agro-meteorological indexes and event 
impact analysis. 

 
30. Component 2 – Agriculture risk mitigation investments (approximate cost USD 125 million, of which 80% from 
the Bank). The purpose of the component would be to improve the resilience of agricultural systems prioritized through 
regional-level (inter-provincial) agriculture value-chain risk strategies and provincial-level integrated agriculture sector 
risk-management plans. The component would finance: (i) Rural public Infrastructure works; (ii) Afforestation, 
reforestation and watershed management to protect water sources, reduce flood risks, and as a basis to encourage the 
adoption of good practices and climate smart technologies; and (iii) incentives for the adoption of climate-smart 
agriculture technology and risk management instruments at the farm-level.  These would be financed through two 
subcomponents: 

 
31. Subcomponent 2.1. Infrastructure and natural resources management. This subcomponent aims to reduce the 
impact of climate and production risks events at the sub-regional level, as prioritized by risk management instruments. It 
would finance on-lending to provinces for the execution of risk mitigation subprojects (combinations of works, goods, 
consulting and non-consulting services, and operational costs) for:  

a. water for agriculture, including activities destined to capture, collect, store, distribute and use of water for 
agricultural production, as well as improvement in the efficiency in use of water (construction, rehabilitation and 
improvement of irrigation, micro-irrigation, surface and subterranean storage); 

b. natural resources management, including watershed management, drainage, forestation, reforestation and 
protection and recovery of forest, soil and water resources; 

c. other activities (to be defined) that may be prioritized in the risk management plans and which have 
demonstrated impacts on risk reduction. 

 
32. Subcomponent 2.2. Technical assistance to vulnerable producers. The purpose of this subcomponent is to 
promote the farm-level adoption of validated technologies to improve resilience of agricultural production systems. It 
may be deployed in combination with activities financed through subcomponent 2.2., or as standalone programs, all 
within approved risk management plans. The subcomponent would finance training and technical assistance services to 
farmer and farmer groups to:  

a. facilitate the adoption of good practices and climate smart production and storage technologies;  
b. improve the efficiency and sustainable operation of existing or new infrastructure; and 
c. facilitate access and use of agriculture insurance and price hedging instruments, and improve knowledge and 

purchase of such financial risk transfer instruments. 



 
The World Bank  
Integrated Management of Agricultural Risk (P162316) 

 
 

  
Apr 02, 2017 Page 12 of 19  

     

 
33. The subcomponent may also finance: (i) applied research, piloting and dissemination of promising but un-tested 
climate-smart technologies; (ii) research, piloting and dissemination for technological diversification (e.g. marine and 
aquaculture, agroforestry systems); and (iii) support for the implementation of certification and traceability systems (e.g. 
country-level value chains of global importance). 

34. The project would explore the provision of incentives through financial institutions (such as partial credit 
guarantees, credit lines, etc.) and/or matching grants for poor and vulnerable farmers whenever a public goods element 
is envisaged (effectiveness of regional works, food safety, human nutrition or food security, climate change adaptation 
or mitigation, demonstration effects, etc.), or to mitigate a market failure.  

35. The Project may also work on market risk with a long-term view, and at a high level, supporting a set of (inter-
ministerial) policies and interventions, as well as to their coordination, which aim to reduce Argentina’s heavy 
dependence on undiversified and basic commodity exports, and make Argentinian agriculture more competitive in the 
world stage. This is in line with the Government’s vision to make Argentina the “supermarket of the world”. To this end, 
the Project would support and scale up existing and new measures that aim to improve value-addition, and 
diversify/differentiate exports and markets in agriculture/agribusiness. It would finance, among others, technical 
assistance programs on marketing and standard development, and other private sector development initiatives, to 
accelerate productivity growth and global integration in a strategic set of agricultural value-chains. 

 
36. Component 3 – Agriculture Emergency Response Financing (approximate cost USD 37 million, of which 80% 
from Bank). This component aims to improve the operation of the current agricultural emergency system enacted by 
Law  26.509 (of 2009), in order to increase coverage for vulnerable producers.  This Agriculture Emergency Law (AEL) 
provides the main response mechanism that assists the agricultural sector against extreme events. Nevertheless, the 
National Emergency and Disaster Agricultural Fund, constituted through the AEL, lacks enough resources to implement 
risk preparedness, mitigation and response activities. The AEL does not provide a clear distinction of roles and 
responsibilities between federal and provincial governments in the aftermath of an extreme event, and all farmers are 
entitled to receive the same benefits, irrespective of their characteristics. Allocation of benefits is not governed by clear 
rules and the system lacks transparency.  Most AEL benefits are not able to be used by family farmers because they are 
linked to cancelation or delays in the repayment of formal bank loans, and since most family farmers to do not have 
access to formal credit, they are de facto excluded from this support, although they are the most affected by natural 
disasters. 

37. The component would work in two directions: (i) improving the efficiency, equity and transparency of the 
agriculture emergency system; and (ii) introducing risk mitigation and risk transfer instruments to improve the financial 
sustainability of the agriculture emergency systems, in particular in terms of climate-related events.   The project will 
also improve provincial institutional capacities for the management of agriculture emergencies, promoting the use of a 
more integrated risk financing structure. At the national level, it would support the design, implementation and 
purchase of risk financing instruments (credits, guarantees, insurance, derivatives, etc.) in a pari passu modality with 
selected provincial governments.  The component would finance the following activities: 

a. Technical assistance for MAI’s Agricultural Emergency Subsecretariat in order to strengthen the systems for 
decision making, benefit allocation, and registry and monitoring of beneficiaries; 

b. Development of aggregate (provincial or regional-level) agriculture risk financing instruments (parametric 
insurance, catastrophe bonds, contingent lines of credit, weather derivatives, etc.), as well as training and 
technical assistance for their validation and adoption; and  

c. Payment of premiums and related costs of agriculture risk financing instruments to be piloted under the 
framework of the system of agricultural emergency, on the basis of national and/or provincial demands. 
     

38. The component may also include support for the design of instruments for price risk transfer for agricultural 
commodities and risks that are covered by current private sector agents. It may also provide support to build capacities 
in the public and private sectors for agricultural risk valuation and analysis. 

 
39. Component 4-- Project coordination, monitoring and evaluation (approximate cost USD 10 million, of which 
80% from the Bank). Provision of support to MAI, through its Rural Change Unit (UCAR), for carrying out: (a) project 
coordination and management; (b) monitoring, results evaluation and impact assessment of project activities; (c) project 
fiduciary administration, internal controls and audits; (d) project environmental and social risk/safeguards management; 
(e) a citizen’s engagement mechanism; and (vii) project-related studies. 

 
 

 
 
    

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
Specific subprojects to be financed under component 2 to strengthen resilience of the agricultural sector will not be 

identified before the project appraisal, and therefore their specific locations and environmental and social conditions are 
not known at the moment. While the project is national in scope, the natural environments of the Argentine provinces 
are very varied, including high diversity of ecosystems ranging from forests to desert and the Andes Mountains. The 
respective social and productive contexts are also diverse, the producer groups varying from large producers to 
subsistence farmers. Due to the national scope of the project, the project addresses potential presence of Indigenous 
Peoples. 
 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
The implementing agency will be the Ministry of Agroindustry (MAI), through the Rural Change Unit (Unidad para el 

Cambio Rural-UCAR). The project’s environmental and social risk and safeguards management will be responsibility of 
UCAR’s Environmental and Social Unit, and previous experience has allowed it to enhance its capacity to streamline 
safeguards implementation and monitoring. However, beyond UCAR with previous experience with Bank-financed 
agriculture development projects and its strong commitment and active involvement during implementation of said 
operations, the project’s decentralized implementation approach will involve a number of provinces with uneven 
institutional capacities and diverse regulations, including limited resources to implement the required safeguards 
procedures. Further, despite of UCAR’s wide experience, it has recently faced some challenges regarding implementation 
of OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement, in particular when addressing existing gaps between national and provincial 
regulatory and institutional frameworks and the OP 4.12 requirements. In conclusion, there is room for safeguards 
related capacity building. UCAR’s and the responsible provincial agencies’ institutional capacity needs will be assessed in 
detail as the project preparation proceeds and the identified actions included in the project design. 
 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 
Lilian Pedersen, Tuuli Johanna Bernardini, Claudio Luis Daniele, German Nicolas Freire 

Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal. 

 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The project will implement an integrated framework 
for managing agriculture risks, including a diverse set 
of investments. It aims to have an overall highly 
positive socioeconomic and environmental impact, 
including improvements in watershed management, 
reforestation, and application of climatic information 
systems to facilitate agricultural production planning 
and decrease climate related income loss. OP/BP 4.01 
is triggered as the physical interventions/subprojects 
under component 2 could have negative 
environmental impacts in case not properly managed. 
However, the majority of project activities are 
expected to have low to moderate impacts that can be 
prevented or mitigated. In socioeconomic terms, 
positive impacts are expected in terms of 
improvement of existing public infrastructure e.g. on 
irrigation.  
 
Negative cumulative impacts are not expected as all 
activities will be implemented in areas already under 
agricultural production. Further, the project will 
promote good environmental practices as a means to 
improved management of agricultural risks and thus 
reduction of producers' vulnerability through exposure 
to climatic and market risks. The project will also 
finance activities to avoid or restore land degradation 
in adjacent watersheds. 
 
As the subprojects will only be defined during project 
implementation, the project requires an 
Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) that UCAR will prepare, including a framework 
level Environmental and Social Management Plan 
(ESMP). The ESMF will guide identification and 
adoption of measures to mitigate environmental and 
social impacts and good practices to create 
environmental and social value added. The ESMF will 
be structured to prevent, minimize and mitigate 
impacts on forests, water resources, worker and 
community health and safety, as well as public 
infrastructure and services. The ESMF will reference 
the relevant sections of the World Bank Group General 


Environmental, Health and Safety (EHS) Guidelines e.g. 
on annual crop production, perennial crops and 
related water consumption and management. 
 
As part of the ESMF preparation, UCAR will prepare a 
Social Assessment (SA) that will focus on the analysis 
of the situation of small and medium, indigenous and 
female farmers; in general those that are primarily 
linked to regional economies and thus the most 
vulnerable against climate related risks and with the 
lowest capacity to recover from negative impacts 
caused by external factors like extreme weather or 
market shocks. The scope of the SA will include 
indigenous communities/farmers in order to assess 
whether there are specific challenges they face to 
recover from negative impacts. 
 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

The project will develop capacity of national and local 
institutions for effective environmental planning and 
management in relation to climatic risks and improved 
land use practices. Even though all the productive 
activities financed by the project will be implemented 
in areas already under agricultural production, OP/BP 
4.04 is triggered for precautionary purposes as 
watershed management and flood control 
investments financed by the project may require 
restoration activities e.g. on buffer or adjacent zones 
to protected areas. If such situation is identified at the 
subproject screening stage, the ESMF will require 
identification of support activities to strengthen the 
associated management instruments/practices. 
Triggering OP/BP 4.04 will secure the project is able to 
implement potential restoration activities related to 
any type of natural habitat. The ESMF will include a 
negative list that will exclude any investment that 
might impact negatively any type of natural habitat. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes 

OP/BP 4.36 is triggered as project is expected to 
finance forestation, reforestation, and protection and 
recovery of forests, particularly as part of watershed 
management. Only investments with positive impacts 
on forests and/or people dependent on forests will be 
eligible. The project will not intervene in the forest 
value chain. As component 2 will promote 
diversification of agricultural production and finance 
climate-smart technologies (e.g. agroforestry systems 
and agro-silvo-pastoral models), the project is 

     

expected to contribute to reducing pressure on forests 
and favor their management and conservation efforts. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The project will finance subprojects in agricultural 
systems that may require use of agrochemicals. By 
project appraisal, a list of agriculture innovations to be 
promoted by the project will be prepared, and some 
of them will most probably include use of agro-
chemicals. Additional technologies might be 
incorporated later on, and support is also envisioned 
to agricultural technology research that may involve 
agrochemicals. In every case, the policy will be applied 
using a negative list on prohibited substances and 
promoting integrated pest management. 
 
The ESMF will guide related screening and preparation 
of an Integrated Pest Management Plan (IPMP) for 
each subproject that may require use of 
agrochemicals, including proper management of any 
chemical waste. 
 
A positive list will be prepared to identify relevant 
natural/organic and low toxic pesticides and 
herbicides. Related training and capacity building 
activities will be included in the ESMF. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 

Project implementation is not expected to have any 
negative impact on identified physical cultural 
resources. However, the OP/BP 4.11 is triggered for 
precautionary purposes. The ESMF will provide 
guidance to address potential chance finds during 
implementation of construction activities and soil 
excavation. The Environmental and Social Unit of 
UCAR has proven experience and appropriate 
procedures in place to address chance finds, aligned 
with Argentina’s well-developed legislative framework 
on the subject. The ESMF will also include reference to 
further guidance in case any subproject would relate 
to landscapes with historical/cultural significance, yet 
that is not envisioned at least at the PCN stage. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 Yes 

The project will trigger OP 4.10 due to its national 
scope. Indigenous peoples are present in Argentina 
(about 2.5 percent of the population), and the income 
of several indigenous communities is linked to 
agriculture. As part of the preparation of the social 
assessment, UCAR will prepare an Indigenous Peoples 
Planning Framework (IPPF) to ensure that: (i) 
indigenous peoples' groups are afforded opportunities 

to participate in planning of project activities that 
affects them; (ii) opportunities to provide such groups 
with culturally appropriate benefits are considered; 
and (iii) any subproject that could have a negative 
impact on indigenous peoples will not be eligible for 
project funding, or otherwise minimized and 
mitigated. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

The project will trigger OP 4.12 since it includes 
infrastructure works that may imply either physical or 
economic displacement of people and/or business in 
the project area (e.g. activities like irrigation, and flood 
risk reduction may imply involuntary resettlement). 
UCAR will prepare a Resettlement Policy Framework 
(RPF) that will guide the preparation of specific 
Resettlement Action Plans (RAP), as required. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 Yes 

The Project will not finance building of any large dam. 
However, OP/BP 4.37 is triggered as it is possible that 
irrigation or water supply may rely on performance of 
an existing dam. The ESMF will guide, when needed, 
the applicable review and evaluation of the operation 
and maintenance procedures of the relevant existing 
dam and presentation of the related report. Said 
report will include findings and recommendations for 
any remedial work or safety measures that, if needed, 
will have to be undertaken before the start of 
operations on the relevant subproject.  
 
Similar procedures have been in use and proven 
satisfactory during the implementation of other Bank-
funded projects with UCAR (e.g.  Second Provincial 
Agricultural Development Project - P106684). UCAR 
has signed an agreement with ORSEP, the Argentine 
Dam Safety Regulatory Agency, which will ensure 
proper dam safety supervision when needed. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

TBD 

The project is not expected to finance activities that 
could adversely affect other riparians, particularly as 
most of them would be upstream. The project will not 
finance large dams, and potential irrigation projects 
are expected to relate with ongoing and/or minor 
schemes that (i) will not adversely change the quality 
or quantity of water flows to the other riparians; and 
(ii) will not be adversely affected by the other 
riparians' possible water use. Triggering and 
addressing of OP/BP 7.50 will be analyzed in further 
detail with UCAR and the World Bank legal specialists 
as the project preparation proceeds. 



 
The World Bank  
Integrated Management of Agricultural Risk (P162316) 

 
 

  
Apr 02, 2017 Page 18 of 19  

     

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
OP 7.60 is not triggered as the Project will not finance 
activities in disputed areas as defined in the policy. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Jul 31, 2017 
 

Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
UCAR will prepare, consult and disclose the ESMF, SA, IPPF and RPF with support and respective approvals by the World 

Bank by the project appraisal that is currently scheduled for August 22, 2017. The ESMF will be prepared based on the 
ESMFs of UCAR's earlier projects with World Bank financing, including improvements and adjustments/additions in terms 
of related lessons learnt and the particular features of this new operation, particularly in terms of climate-smart practices. 
 
The criteria and methodology to be used to select project beneficiaries with focus on the most vulnerable producers, as 

well as the mechanisms to be used for project related consultations and grievances will be discussed with UCAR as the 
project preparation proceeds. 
 
 


























































World Bank Document

PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
CONCEPT STAGE

Report No.: PIDC974

Project Name Poverty Alleviation and Agriculture Development Demonstration in Poor 
Areas Project (P133326)

Region EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC
Country China
Sector(s) Crops (30%), Irrigation and drainage (20%), Animal production (20%), 

Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (20%), Agricultural extensi on and 
research (10%)

Theme(s) Rural markets (40%), Rural services and infrastructure (40%), Rural 
policies and institutions (20%)

Lending Instrument Specific Investment Loan
Project ID P133326
Borrower(s) International Department, Ministry of Finance
Implementing Agency State Council's Leading Group for Poverty Reduction(LGPR), Foreign 

Capital Project Management Center
Environmental 
Category

B-Partial Assessment

Date PID Prepared/
Updated

28-May-2013

Date PID Approved/
Disclosed

28-May-2013

Estimated Date of 
Appraisal Completion

20-Feb-2014

Estimated Date of 
Board Approval

20-Aug-2014

Concept Review 
Decision

Track II - The review did authorize the preparation to continue

I. Introduction and Context
Country Context
The Chinese Government has always made poverty reduction an important goal and task of national 
development and China’s success in reducing poverty has been remarkable, an achievement that is 
acknowledged worldwide.  In the mid-1980s, the Government started the development-oriented 
poverty reduction programs in rural areas. Subsequently, the Government formulated and 
implemented the Seven-year Priority Poverty Reduction Program (1994-2000) and the Outline for 
Poverty Reduction and Development of China’s Rural Areas (2001-2010). After three decades of 
successful poverty alleviation and strong economic growth that has lifted some 600 million people 
out of poverty, the rate of poverty reduction, however, is beginning to show signs of becoming less 

responsive to broad-based growth. In addition, with increasing rural-urban disparities and diverging 
living standards, the Government recognized that the number of remaining rural poor was likely to 
be underestimated and adjustments to the previous poverty reduction policy were needed to better 
understand the patters of the remaining rural poverty and to integrate traditional rural poverty 
reduction with rural-urban transformation and urbanization policies.  
 
Consequently, in 2011, the Government revised the rural poverty line from CNY1,196 (2009) to 
CNY2,300 (US$361) which increased the number of rural poor from 27 million in 2010 to 128 
million in 2011. In addition, the State Council’s Leading Group for Poverty Reduction and 
Development released the Outline for Development-oriented Poverty Reduction for China’s Rural 
Areas (2011-2020) to provide a new strategic direction for addressing rural poverty. The strategy 
complements the traditional geographical targeting of designated poverty counties with the concept 
of adjacent destitute mountain areas of which 14 are prioritized for comprehensive regional 
development investments. The new strategy aims to eliminate hunger and elementary needs by 
2020, achieve a growth rate in rural per-capita income in poor areas that is above the national 
average, and promote the convergence of human development indicators and public services 
coverage across rural and urban areas. To narrow the rural-urban gap, the strategy lays out a broad 
approach that includes rural industrialization based on comparative advantage, infrastructure 
development, relocation and village consolidation, rural-urban integration, comprehensive public 
service provision and expansion of household-based social protection programs, such as the 
minimum living allowance (dibao), rural pension, and healthcare, and education, family planning, 
and environmental management.

Sectoral and Institutional Context
The project is proposed to be implemented in Gansu, Sichuan, and Guizhou provinces.  The three 
provinces face the common challenge of persistent rural poverty in remote rural areas.  Many of the 
project areas are traditional semi-subsistence areas where the poverty rate ranges between 30 to 50 
percent.  Agriculture remains an important source of local employment and income but geographic 
and climatic conditions, labor migration, underinvestment, and underdeveloped infrastructure pose 
challenges to future agricultural development.  In all three provinces, a gradual restructuring of the 
agricultural sector is needed to allow productivity and farm income to increase and to overcome 
constraints to agriculture modernization.  
 
Gansu Province.  Project counties are situated in the Liupan Mountains of Gansu in northwestern 
China.  Project areas have comparative advantages in horticulture, and several counties have 
successfully developed advanced production and marketing bases for apple, pear, grapes, medicinal 
herbs, and potato.  Still, rural poverty is high, often above 40 percent.  Poverty appears not so much 
rooted in poor production potential but more in the dominance of enterprises in the horticulture 
sector which appear to capture a considerable share of revenue in the value-chain while relatively 
little value is reaching the household or farm level.  One of the challenges in Gansu under this 
project is to strengthen the institutional environment for smallholders through the promotion of 
effective farmer cooperative arrangements that allow farmers to participate effectively in the 
modernization of the sector and to benefit from the high-value agricultural production chains. 
 
Sichuan Province.  Project areas are located in the Wumeng and Wuliang Mountains of southern 
Sichuan.  They are characterized by high mountains, narrow and steep valleys, and very limited flat 
or terraced land for farming.  Per capita farmland is often less than half a mu or about 0.03 hectares.  
Altitudes within one county range from several hundred to over 4,000 meters above sea level and 


agro-climatic conditions vary widely.  Alpine meadows and shrublands are generally used of 
livestock grazing, often in unsustainable ways with visible degradation of vegetation and soils. At 
lower elevations, steep slopes and narrow valleys are used for cropping and erosion risk is high. 
 
Local communities belong nearly exclusively to the Yi Minority.  Yi language is used widely while 
only few people speak Mandarin Chinese in rural areas. Due to the remoteness of these areas, the 
unique cultural background of the population, as well as low education levels, communities are not 
well integrated into the mainstream society and labor mobility is limited as compared to other areas. 
Development opportunities are limited as well; and investments in public service expansion appear 
to be prohibitively expensive in many remote locations.   The development challenge in Sichuan is 
to identify and focus on those project areas with long-term development potential and to promote 
agricultural production systems that can generate income and are environmentally sustainable. 
Opportunities exist for producing and primary processing of higher value and niche-market 
products, such as walnuts, medicinal herbs, and fruits, and for restructuring the high altitude 
livestock sector to become environmentally and economically sustainable.  
 
Guizhou Province.  Guizhou Province is located in southwest China. Out of Guizhou’s total 
population of 40 million, 11.5 million live below the national poverty line. About 80 percent of the 
province belongs to the limestone and karst areas of the Wuling and Wumeng Mountains in which 
sixty-five poor counties and 85 percent of Guizhou’s poor are located.  These areas are 
characterized by relatively fertile but often shallow soils and are subject to severe water and soil 
erosion and management problems.  The unique geographic conditions and the limited availability 
of productive farmland, combined with inaccessibility and underdeveloped infrastructure, represent 
significant challenges to agricultural development.  Recent improvements in transportation 
infrastructure, both highways and village access roads, however, are providing potential 
opportunities to reach large urban markets in Chongqing and Guiyang.  These remain un-tapped to 
date because of the limited investment into the agricultural sector itself. For the future, modern 
agricultural production systems that build on: (a) more sustainable land use; (b) improvements of 
the organizational level of farmers, and (c) carefully designed land consolidation programs offer 
promising ways to overcome technology constraints, attract investment, and link agricultural value 
chains to urban markets.

Relationship to CAS
The project would support the CPS’ strategic theme two: promoting more inclusive development, 
by geographically focusing on lagging regions and small towns and by supporting policies and 
demonstration projects that address inequalities. It would contribute to the CPS outcome 2.3: 
enhancing opportunities in rural areas and small towns, by piloting new ways to boost rural incomes 
and reduce poverty under the umbrella of the new Poverty Reduction for China’s Rural Areas 
Strategy (2011-2020) and by promoting inclusive innovation to decrease disparities.

II. Proposed Development Objective(s)

Key Results (From PCN)
The achievement of the Project Development Objective would be measured through the following 
key performance indicators, namely the:  
 
a)       The generation of incremental net value of agricultural production through project 
investments;  
b) The fair and equitable distribution of the net production value among the various  
stakeholders in the value chain; 
c)  Additional private sector investment leveraged through project investments; and  
d) Viability and sustainability of the project models and potential for up-scaling.  
 
Additional component-specific performance indicators as well as sector core indicators will be 
formulated and included into the results framework during project preparation

III. Preliminary Description
Concept Description
The proposed project seeks to assist the Government in developing models to advance the rural-
urban integration and rural sector modernization agenda in representative destitute rural and 
mountain areas.  The focus of the project would be on demonstrating approaches to rural income 
generation that are based on the modernization of selected agricultural sub-sectors and value-chain 
development, institutional farmer cooperative development, the provision of grant funds for poor 
farmer households and cooperatives to support their participation in agricultural value chains, and 
capacity building for rural households, cooperatives, enterprises, and local governments.   
 
The project would seek to achieve the development objective through the implementation of the 
following components and activities: 
 
Component 1: Integrated Value Chain Development.  The objective of this component would be to 
develop more efficient agricultural value chains focusing on 2 to 4 agricultural or rural pillar 
industries in each project county.  This would be achieved through the restructuring and 
modernization of the current production patterns and by supporting the enabling institutions in each 
pillar industry.  The modernization would aim at creating or supporting larger, economically more 
viable and long-term sustainable production arrangements, for example cooperatives, household 
groups, or enterprises, which are capable to use better technologies and can capture value added in 
the up-stream processing and marketing value chains.  The component would also support the 
establishment of socially acceptable models of cooperatives, household groups, company-farmer 
household, and company-farmer household-cooperative organizations through a business and 
market-based approach. 
 
Component 2: Public infrastructure and services support.  The objective of this component would be 
to improve public infrastructure and public services in order to enable and facilitate restructuring of 
the agricultural sub-sectors under Component 1.  The component would support investments in: (a) 
production road infrastructure; (b) irrigation and drainage, terracing, etc. (c) communications and 
information and telecommunications (ICT) infrastructure and equipment; and (d) public market 
facilities, electricity supply and other infrastructure necessary to facilitate and complement farmer 
and private investments.  In addition, the component would provide investment in other supporting 
public services, such as food safety testing and control, public extension and training services, 
marketing systems and agriculture research and technology transfer. 
 
Component 3: Rural and Agricultural Business Development Support.  The objective of this 
component would be to provide business development services to farmer households and 


cooperatives in support of the agriculture-value chain development under omponent 1.  Specific 
investments would include:  (a) a conditional grant program to poor households and households 
groups to encourage the self-organization of households and provide means for the purchasing of 
agricultural and other inputs to allow them to participate in new production arrangements; (b) 
training and mentoring for new and existing enterprises and cooperatives and for community-based 
economic groups in ethnic minority areas; (c) training for government officials on the roles of 
government and private sector and on how to built public-private partnership arrangements; in 
addition, training on appraisal guidelines for public sector support in rural areas; (d) technical 
assistance to value-chain operators; (e) policy studies on how to improve investment climate, good 
governance, and fair benefit-sharing in cooperative-enterprise arrangements; and (f) marketing 
studies for selected products, analytical studies related to poverty reduction and agricultural sector 
development, policy guidelines, and the development of appraisal guidelines for public sector 
support in rural areas.  
 
Component 4: Project management, monitoring and evaluation (M&E).  The component would 
establish the project management and M&E system of the project and provide office equipment, 
transportation and technical assistance services. It would support the coordination between 
implementation agencies at all levels and with other government programs and institutions and the 
capture of implementation lessons from value chain development.  It would also include support to 
establishing and operatingthe project’s progress and impact M&E system.

IV. Safeguard Policies that might apply
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No TBD
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖

V. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost:  300.00 Total Bank Financing:  150.00
Total Cofinancing:  Financing Gap:  0.00
Financing Source Amount
 Borrower 150.00
 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 150.00
 Total 300.00


























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Groundnut Competitiveness and Agriculture Diversification Project (P164967) 

 
 

  
Jun 18, 2018 Page 1 of 15  

     

 

 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Program Information Document 
 (PID) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 15-Sep-2018 | Report No: PIDC153189 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

A. Basic Program Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Program Name 

Senegal P164967  Groundnut 
Competitiveness and 
Agriculture 
Diversification Program 
For Results 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date 
Does this operation 
have an IPF 
component? 

AFRICA 18-Mar-2019 14-Feb-2019 No 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency Practice Area (Lead) 

Program-for-Results 
Financing 

Ministry of Finance, 
Economy and Planning 

Ministry of Agriculture and 
Rural Equipment 

Agriculture 

 

Proposed Program Development Objective(s)  
   

to improve the competitiveness of the groundnut value chain and to increase the resilience to climate and market risks 
of farmers and herders  in the Groundnut Basin. 

  

COST & FINANCING 
   
FIN_SRC_TABLE1 
SUMMARY (USD Millions) 
 

Government program Cost 700.00 

Total Operation Cost 225.00 

Total Program Cost 225.00 

Total Financing 225.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 

 
  
FINANCING (USD Millions) 

Total World Bank Group Financing 150.00 

     World Bank Lending 150.00 
 


 

Total Government Contribution 75.00 

     
 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

1. After decades of slow growth, past reform initiatives have cumulatively strengthened structural 
competitiveness and positioned Senegal among the fastest-growing economies in Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) in recent 
years. Driven by progressively resurgent exports, the Senegalese economy has been expanding at almost 7 percent 
annually since 2015, when external conditions have also become more supportive, as global oil, commodities and food 
prices declined. Growth decomposition highlights the critical role of more competitive and diversified exports not only in 
the past three years, but starting from 2010, when the country reversed a historic trend of declining international 
competitiveness, although this positive effect was initially offset by large negative external shocks. The recent progress 
contrasts starkly with decades of paradoxically modest economic development, when Senegal’s per capita GDP, almost 
uniquely in Sub-Saharan Africa, remained below its level at Independence, as the economy was persistently stifled by high 
vulnerability to shocks, weak productivity and omnipresent informality.  

2. Wide-based accelerated growth since 2015 has been driven by expanding exports, fueled by economic reforms 
and a robust external demand. GDP growth accelerated from 6.5% in 2015 to 6.7% in 2016, positioning Senegal among 
the fastest growing economies in the African continent. All sectors of the economy contributed significantly to growth in 
2016 with services being the sector that contributed the most due to its large size as a share of GDP. Other demand 
components performed well, but their role as growth drivers were not as strong as exports. Total investment grew by 
8.8% in 2016 (up from 6.3% in 2015) as a result of the investment program adopted as part of the Plan Senegal Emergent 
(PSE-2014-2035, and its ongoing 5-year Priority Action Plan 2014-2018), as well as policy interventions in specific sectors, 
including agriculture. While the strong import component of investments reduces their short-term impact on growth, the 
increase in both public and private investments bodes well for future growth, particularly if the efficiency of public 
investment can be enhanced. Private consumption accelerated also as its growth rate increased from 5% in 2015 to 5.3% 
in 2016 thanks to higher income and optimistic expectations about the future of the Senegalese economy.  

3. The recent structural turnaround is anchored in prudent macro fiscal policies and supported by a favorable 
environment. On the fiscal side, the balance has improved significantly with the fiscal deficit reduced to 4.2% of GDP in 
2016 (from 4.8% in 2015) as a result of rationalized current spending stemming from the current fiscal consolidation efforts 
and higher revenues driven by better collection of custom taxes. According to the latest IMF-World Bank (WB) debt 
sustainability analysis, public debt in Senegal (60.6% of GDP in 2016) remains at a low risk of distress, but indicators are 
showing emergent strains with respect to sustainability. Also, inflation has remained under control and below the 2% 
target set by the regional central bank, thanks to the prudent regional monetary policy, exchange rate stability and 
ongoing fiscal consolidation efforts.  

4. Higher growth has resulted in an estimated drop in poverty incidence by 4 to 7 percentage points since 2011 
(from 47 percent, to 38 percent based on the international poverty line). Agriculture appears to have been one of the 
main drivers of this reduction, as it has registered low, but positive growth with two exceptionally good years in 2015 and 
2016. At the same time, rural areas have witnessed some job reallocation out of the primary sector, as households have 
diversified their livelihoods, tapping into a growing rural non-farm economy. Moreover, moderate improvements in 
general value added per agricultural worker have reversed a negative trend of more than a decade, pointing to signs of 



nascent structural transformation. In urban areas, labor income among the poor has been boosted by growth in labor-
intensive sectors, such as construction.  

5. However persistent spatial disparities are evidenced, with rural areas- particularly the Groundnut Basin (GNB)- 
lagging behind their urban counterparts on a wide range of non-monetary indicators. In 2011, nearly 70 percent of the 
poor and 84 percent of the extreme poor lived in rural areas, accounting for 57 percent of the total population and 
suggesting rural poverty to be deeper and more severe. Female-headed households were less likely to be poor, as women 
tend to head smaller households, and are more likely to receive cash and in-kind transfer1. The poorest communes are 
located in the center of the country known as the Groundnut Basin (particularly in the region of Diourbel, Fatick, Kaolack 
and Kaffrine), and in the Kolda (south) and the eastern part of Tambacounda (south-east), which is also part of the 
extended groundnut basin. The poverty profile constructed using the DHS wealth indicators for 2015 suggests that the 
characteristics of the poor have largely remained unchanged since 2011 in terms of geographic distribution, households’ 
size and education levels. The extended Groundnut Basin is the country’s bread basket, supplying key staples (mostly 
millet, sorghum, and maize) and fodder from groundnuts and cowpeas. Those areas have the highest population density 
(100-120 people/km2) after the capital city area. 

6. Agriculture employs the largest share of the poor, particularly in the Groundnut Basin. Indeed, 62 percent of 
the rural population depend on agriculture, which employs more than 36 percent of the total labor force of the country, 
according to the 2015 Labor Force Survey, and poverty incidence among farmers is the highest. In rural areas, nearly 80 
percent of paid workers in the bottom quintile of the distribution of consumption worked in agriculture, while the more 
prosperous are engaged in largely informal services. Among the poorest are the farmers growing rain-fed crops particularly 
in the Groundnut Basin. Households having animal production as a main source of livelihood are also among the poorest. 
On the other hand, poverty is at its lowest rates among horticulture farmers, mainly based in the Niayes, on the coast 
between Saint-Louis and Dakar, or rice producers along the Senegal River valley. Groundnut farming is a primary source 
of income for a vast majority of family farms, accounting for about half of the total cropped area in the country and 
employing two-thirds of the rural population, mostly below the official poverty line. In fact, groundnuts are grown by 27 
percent of all households in Senegal, and by 52 percent of households in extreme poverty (ANSD, 2011). Moreover, 
supporting labor-intensive activities down the value chain, such as transportation, storage, and processing, remains an 
important source of non-farm employment in both formal and informal sectors.  

7. While the economic prospects are good with a projected real GDP growth at 7.0% in 2019, much more needs to 
be done in implementing the Government’s longer-term strategy (PSE) to transform the rural economy and reduce 
poverty and spatial imbalances. Supported by robust macroeconomic fundamentals, Senegal is expected to remain one 
of West Africa’s top growth performers, if the current internal and external conditions continue supporting this trend. 
Indeed, higher exports from the agriculture, fishery and extractives sectors would continue to drive economic growth. 
However, external shocks, delayed critical reforms to remove bottlenecks to competitiveness of key sectors and increase 
private investments, insufficient funding and/or delays in implementation major PSE programs, poor quality of public 
spending, uncertainties or slow pace of critical reforms to address key bottlenecks due to non-technical motivations are 
major risks to growth expectations. In particular and despite recent improvements in competitiveness and diversification, 
the agriculture sector would continue to be adversely exposed to volatile climatic conditions, particularly if adequate 
reforms are not implemented and substantial investments not made to reduce agricultural dependency on rainfed 
cropping systems, to adapt the groundnut value chain to changing markets, and to improve the overall resilience of the 
crops and livestock production systems to worsening climate conditions in the poorest regions, particularly the groundnut 
basin. 

                                            
1 Moreover, due to self-selection women, heading their households, may represent a sub-sample of women with different preferences, norms, and 

characteristics. 


 

B. Sectoral (or multi-sectoral) and Institutional Context of the Program 

8. The agriculture sector has played a critical role in the Senegalese economy, but remains vulnerable to external 
shocks, which are likely to intensify with greater openness of the economy and climate change. The agriculture sector 
grew at an average rate of 3.2 percent between 2000 and 2016, but volatility around that average was large. The big 
swings in agriculture growth, which are highly correlated to large changes in the Senegalese economy’s growth rates, are 
mainly the result of weather and climatic hazards which heavily impact pastoralism and rain-fed crops such as groundnut, 
millet and other cereals that have traditionally dominated the sector. This suggests that for Senegal to maintain the high 
output growth attained since 2015, more efforts are needed to protect the agriculture sector against climatic variability 
and enhance the resilience of livelihoods in rural areas. Deteriorating climatic conditions in areas surrounding cities are 
likely to increase human migration into cities, further increasing already high urbanization rates. If left unmanaged, urban 
sprawl may worsen or even cause natural hazard events.   

9. Recent improvements in agriculture output in the past few years have been driven by expansion of cropped 
areas and an increase in the use of inputs encouraged by public policies, with limited impact on productivity and job 
creation. The Senegalese government has adopted several policies to modernize and develop the agriculture sector over 
the past few years. These policies, such as developing the skills and financial capabilities of farmers, subsidizing of high 
quality seeds, and supporting agricultural mechanization, have helped boost agriculture yields and production, in cereals, 
horticulture and pulses. The main crops that have benefited are those tagged as priority value chains under PRACAS (rice, 
onions and groundnuts, with steady increases by 160%, 74%, and 108% respectively between 2013 and 2017). Continued 
public support for rice over the last two decades - by increasing investments and implementing reforms in the irrigation 
management systems and expanding low land (and rainfed) cropping systems - is paying off with higher rice yields, 
surpassing the African average and closing the gap with the World average. The private sector has contributed to the 
improvement in agriculture productivity due to the modern processing units that were developed along the Senegal River 
Valley. However labor productivity did not improve over time - and even decreased for certain crops - mainly due to a 
decreasing land-to-labor ratio. In fact, the increase in agriculture output was largely due to an expansion of input use per 
unit of land, and to a much lesser degree to overall improvements in Total Factor Productivity (TFP), through innovation 
and better skills. Therefore, to achieve the objective of poverty reduction - poverty remains prevalent in rural areas - and 
to drive the agricultural transformation agenda, total factor productivity, and labor productivity in particular, should 
significantly increase. This requires creating more jobs for the rural workforce ('move-out' track), while supporting farmers 
to modernize and better connect to downstream segments of value chains and with the rest of the economy ('move-up' 
track) 

10. Low productivity, a weak land regime and underdeveloped infrastructure and logistics limit the potential of 
agriculture to reduce poverty. Despite the importance attributed by the Government to the agricultural sector in the Plan 
Senegal Emergent, agriculture still has the lowest productivity among all sectors, the average farmer being more than six 
times less productive than his average counterpart in the rest of the economy. This result is not surprising if one thinks 
that only 3 percent of cultivated land is irrigated; the production system is still archaic; harvest losses span between 10 
and 30 percent and access to inputs is problematic. Productivity is particularly low among the poor for whom these 
problems are exacerbated by the lack of access to productive assets and financing for farm operations. The recent success 
recorded in the subsectors of horticulture and rice, where productivity increased significantly during the last 10 years, was 
made possible by addressing some of those constraints, including through improved water management particularly in 
the Senegal River Valley, increased access to inputs (seeds, fertilizers) and machinery, and better connectivity.  

11. Addressing the overreliance of the agriculture and livestock production systems on rainfall in the Groundnut 
Basin is critical to secure agricultural growth and sustainable development. The World Bank Disaster and Risk Climate 
portal recorded the following extreme events in the past years, which have certainly influenced performance of the 
agriculture sector : (i) statistically significant decrease in wet season rainfall between 1960 and 2006, with the 500 mm 
isohyets regressing about 100 kilometers (km) to the south; (ii) high variability on inter-annual and inter-decadal 



timescales, which can make long-term trends difficult to identify ; (iii) a period of particularly high rainfall in the early 
1960s, whilst the early 1980s were particularly dry; (iv) some unusually high rainfalls have occurred in the dry season in 
very recent years (2000-2006), but this has not been part of a consistent trend; (v) increased mean annual temperature 
by 0.9°C since 1960, an average rate of 0.20°C per decade. Recent projections indicate that those phenomenon are likely 
to amplify with : (i) mean annual temperatures projected to increase by 1.1 to 3.1°C by the 2060s, and 1.7 to 4.9°C by the 
2090s, with projected rates of warming faster in the interior than in those areas closer to the coast; (ii) substantial 
increases in the frequency of days and nights that are considered ‘hot’ in the current climate, with such increases occurring 
more rapidly in the south and east of the country; (iii) decreases in the frequency of days and nights considered ‘cold’ in 
the current climate; (iv) a wide range of changes in the mean annual rainfall averaged over the country, from -41 to +48% 
by the 2090s—but more models show decreases. While it is difficult to draw robust conclusions of changes in precipitation, 
it is likely however that a greater proportion of precipitation will occur in heavy rainfall events, so it is important to 
incorporate scenarios of both precipitation increases (which will further fuel soil erosion) and decreases (amplifying 
drought frequency) in future planning.  

12. The production systems in the Groundnut Basin, both for crops and livestock, are overwhelmingly rainfed and 
driven by small farmers with holdings of less than 5 ha per households. Unlike other major agroecological areas of the 
country (Senegal river valley which concentrates major irrigation investments, Costal Niayes which is the traditional 
horticultural region, and Casamance with significant water resources both from rainfall and surface water), the natural 
resource base in the Groundnut basin is poorly endowed and fragile. The majority of the area is composed of poor quality 
sandy-low organic matter content of tropical ferruginous, with allomorphic brown soils located on low lands (Badiane et 
al., 2001). Rainfall regime is increasingly erratic (600 to 900mm per year) while water quality (salinization and high 
presence of chlorine) is a major constraint to use of surface and superficial groundwater around the Sine and Saloum river 
system. Good quality and productive deep water for agriculture is available in significant amount in the deep groundwater 
tables (the Miocene and Maestrichien) in the eastern part of the Groundnut Basin but requires important investments 
well beyond the capabilities of small-scale farmers.  

13. Demographic pressure and high exposure of production systems to climate risks have led to unsustainable 
short-term coping strategies, e.g. overgrazing, extension of cultivated area, which further contribute to accelerating the 
depletion of the agricultural resource base in the Groundnut Basin. Whilst land degradation has become a genuine issue 
across the country, with 64% of the country’s 3.8 million hectares of arable land affected, the Groundnut Basin alone 
carries the heaviest burden with 47% of the total degraded land. Negative impacts of land degradation include stagnant 
or decreasing agricultural productivity, imbalanced ecosystems, which threatens waterways and the viability of wildlife 
habitats. Continuous land degradation and recurrent droughts in the Groundnut Basin increases the volatility of 
agricultural production, resulting in increased poverty and vulnerability, with a strong rate of rural and international 
migration.  These migratory flows are also at the origin of land conflicts, particularly in the Senegal River valley and in 
Casamance. 

14. Delayed adjustments to global markets trends and inefficient policies in the groundnut value chains have 
trapped groundnut farmers into a vicious cycle of low productivity-low-income-poverty loop. The global groundnut 
trade has gradually shifted from oil and meal to whole nuts, and Asia has become the major producer. Indeed, shifts in 
relative transport costs and in consumer preferences have led to a decline in global trade in groundnut products and 
significant increases in the export of whole nuts. As a result, even highly industrialized exporters tend to produce cake and 
oil only for domestic consumption, while exporting the rest as whole nuts that now dominate global trade flows2.  
Furthermore, high public spending on the groundnut value chain through various subsidies schemes (46% on seed 
subsidies, 30% on price subsidies directed to oil industries, 13% on fertilizers subsidies) accounted for around 50% of total 
public expenditures on agriculture but resulted in less than proportional impact on the added value created in the 

                                            
2 World Bank- Senegal Groundnut Competitiveness Report, 2017. 


economy. Completing the longstanding reforms in the groundnut value chain and establishing a stable and credible policy 
framework for whole nut exports would unleash the economic potential of the groundnut value chain and accelerate the 
modernization and realignment of the groundnut sector to the international markets trends. The government could also 
reorient its agricultural spending from less productive fertilizer subsidies, which were found to play little or no role in 
substantially boosting productivity across several Asian countries, to productivity-enhancing input factors such as 
agricultural R&D, climate resilient technologies and advanced irrigation techniques. This could be paired with well targeted 
social protection mechanisms to support the poorest rural households. 

15. Young men and women are subject to considerable social pressures and norms in general, and more so in rural 
areas. Key gender-based constraints facing women in the agriculture and economic growth sector are: limited access to 
and control over land because of discriminatory inheritance and land allocation practices; social beliefs about women’s 
primary roles as mothers and wives; limited access to credit and/or cash that constraints purchase of agricultural inputs; 
limited literacy and numeracy skills among rural women; and limited opportunities for business development training or 
access to agricultural extension. Finally, social norms limit youth empowerment, particularly their occupational choices or 
access to productive inputs3. School drop- out is high among young girls to marry early with limited time left for productive 
activities. Young men are encouraged to start working early, before getting married, and / or to take over the family 
business. Furthermore, access to key assets, such as land, is largely determined by customary inheritance practices4. When 
active in business, women face different challenges depending on their profiles. Those in the processing Economic Interest 
Group (EIG) are faced with the challenge of growing their operation from a semi-domestic processing unit to a high-density 
industrial production. Access to energy, growth markets, and financing are decisive factors for the expansion of their 
business. Women group may have much more complex challenges, as they have to migrate from an organizational model 
of individualized work to a collective model under a group form, with access to training and to management of group 
project, access to production inputs (fertilizers, seeds) and access to land amongst the key challenges they have to face5. 

16. The proposed Program for Results would support the Government’s Development Plan for Economic 
Emergence (Plan Senegal Emergent- PSE- 2010-2035) and its Agriculture Chapters (the Accelerated Agricultural Growth 
Program- PRACAS6, and the National Livestock Development Plan- PNDE7). The strategic objectives of PSE are to: (i) 
stimulate structural transformation of the economy to support a sustainable and dynamic growth; (ii) facilitate broad 
access to social services while preserving conditions for sustainable development, and (iii) meet requirements for good 
governance through strengthening the country’s institutions and the promotion of peace, security and regional 
integration. The PSE specific objective for the agricultural sector- understood in its broader scope (e.g. including livestock, 
fisheries and agroindustry) which is meant to spearhead the structural transformation of the economy are to : (i) 
strengthen the country’s food security to reduce the food import bill; (ii) develop competitive, high-value added and 
integrated value chains; and (iii) preserve socio-economic balance and reinvigorate the rural economy. This will be driven 
by the development of commercial agriculture as detailed in the sector operational Program (PRACAS).   

17. Implementation of the first phase of PRACAS in the period 2014-2017 has yielded significant results and 
contributing to redressing the overall performance of the agriculture sector and to the country’s economic 
performance. In the groundnut sector in particular, the Government's performance targets under PRACAS were met or 
exceeded by 2016, both in terms of seed capital renewal with 55,000 metric tons (mt) of certified seeds produced against 
a target of 40,000 mt, and in terms of total output with 1,050,000 metric tons of groundnut produced against a target of 
1,000,000 mt for 2017. Furthermore, the government has taken significant steps to eliminate monopsony around the 

                                            
3 Deborah Robin, Oumoul Khairy Niang-Mbodj – Senegal Gender Assessment. USAID, 2010 
4 The World Bank. Senegal Strategic Country Diagnostic, Draft for Decision meeting, January 2018 
5 World Food Program. Gender, markets and Agricultural Organizations in Senegal. VAM Gender & Markets Study #6. WFP, USAID, 2016-2017. 
6 Programme d’accélération de la cadence de l’agriculture sénégalaise, with the first phase covering the period 2014-2017, and second phase under 
preparation. 
7 Senegal Ministère de l’Elevage et des Ressources Animales - Programme National de Développement de l’Elevage (PNDE 2017-2021) 


supply chain of oil mills, SONACOS in particular, and to improve competition for the collection and marketing of 
groundnuts in the region. The government has encouraged the entry of new operators in the collection, processing and 
export of groundnut oils and seeds, and took over SONACOS from the main shareholder for its next privatization. In 
addition, the government has also launched initiatives to encourage the diversification of cropping systems in the 
groundnut basin, with expansion of rain-fed and low-land rice cropping systems, sesame and horticulture in addition to 
livestock. 

18. Deepening the reforms in the groundnut sector, including a stable policy framework for private investments in 
the value chains and mitigating climate risks and price volatility will lay the foundation for agricultural transformation 
in the Groundnut Basin (GNB). Reforms undertaken by the government since 2014 to liberalize the groundnut market 
have started to yield results, with larger exports of nuts and new investments in the value chain (storage, deshelling 
facilities, with significant potential in term of off-farm employments). However, distortive policies to keep alive the less 
profitable segment of processing of crude oils have prevented farmers from getting the full value of expanding to global 
whole nuts markets. Within that context, developing a new value chain centered on producing high quality groundnuts 
for whole nuts exports and for the confectionery industry is needed. This requires establishing a level playing field for the 
private sector to invest and innovate in the processing and marketing segments. A key step in this direction would be to 
privatize SONACOS. At the farmers’ level reforms should address the issue of revenues volatility, including safety net 
mechanisms when both international prices and domestic production are low. 

19. The proposed Program will support the adaptation of the groundnut value chain to evolving climate and 
markets conditions and accelerate the diversification of the agricultural production systems in the Groundnut Basin for 
greater resilience to external shocks. To seize emerging market opportunities, Senegal would need to substantially 
increase and stabilize groundnut yields (actually 60% of the world average yield, compared to 200% for China), tackle the 
protracted issue of aflatoxins to meet the requirements of the high quality confectionery nuts export market, improve 
competition along the value chain and particularly in the inputs and processing segment, while accelerating the 
diversification of production systems and scaling up the adoption of climate smart-agriculture in the groundnut basin.  
This will require implementing several  adaptation measures including the wide adoption of agro-forestry techniques and 
crop diversification; the use of short-cycle varieties and that of varieties tolerant to salinity; improved collection and water 
storage (i.e. dams, retention basins, anti-salt structures, windbreaks); the expansion of community woodlots; the 
prevention of bush fires; the dissemination of fertilization techniques; the establishment of an early warning system in 
rural areas, and preventing and tackling  pest infestations, such as the West Africa Desert Locust and fruit flies which are 
major threats to expanding the lucrative business of mangoes exports from the groundnut basin 

Relationship to CAS/CPF 

20. The World Bank Group’s Strategic Country Diagnostic (SCD) for Senegal identifies four main constraint areas to 
inclusive growth and equity, three major constraints to the sustainability of this inclusive growth and two underlying 
institutional constraints (see diagram). Summing up, the constraints and solution areas identified by the SCD delineate 
three main pathways to poverty reduction and increased shared prosperity in Senegal.  

• Boosting Senegal’s Competitiveness to ensure a dynamic private-sector led growth and capitalize on the growing 
young urban population by focusing on reforms of the fiscal and monetary frameworks and improvements of the business 
environment as well as measures aimed at an increased and equitable availability of productive inputs, such as skills and 
land, and improved critical infrastructure, including energy and ICT.  

• Enhancing Equity and Resilience unlocking the economic potential of non-extractive natural resources, including 
agriculture and livestock, from which most of the poor still derive their livelihoods, while enhancing the ability of the 
population in rural areas to engage in the growth process and cope with shocks through appropriate government support 
allowing for the accumulation and protection of their asset base.  


• Managing Risks Associated with Natural Resources by addressing the perils inherent in the nascent oil and gas 
sector, particularly the ‘resource curse’ and potential erosion of the competitiveness of labor-intensive exports, as well as 
diverse impacts of the climate change, threatening to erase years of progress in poverty reduction.  

21. The proposed Program aligns well with the three pathways outlined in the SCD and the World Bank Groups’ 
Africa Region’s Climate Change Business Plan, in particular the one on ‘Enhancing Equity and Resilience’. While the 
Country Partnership Framework is being developed, it is likely that it will be consistent with the proposed pathways which 
all echo the priority areas of the proposed Program. By fusing its intervention on climate change adaptation, the Program 
also   contributes to the Region’s climate change business plan. 

 
C. Program Development Objective(s) (PDO) and PDO Level Results Indicators 

 
Program Development Objective(s) 

22. The Development Objectives of the proposed Program are to improve the competitiveness of the groundnut 
value chain and to increase the resilience to climate and market risks of farmers and herders in the Groundnut Basin.  

    PDO Level Results Indicators 
 

23. At PDO-level the following indicators are proposed to assess the Program’s results: 

(i) Number of farmers/herders reached with climate-smart agricultural practices and technologies (e.g. drought 
resistant varieties, new seeds/feedstocks for crop diversification; soil and land management practices and 
technologies); 

(ii) Increase in yields of groundnuts and selected crops; 
(iii) Increased exports of high value crops (shelled groundnuts and horticultural produce); 
(iv) Reduced variability in production of groundnuts and selected crops. 

 
D. Program Description 

 
PforR Program Boundary 

1. Government program objectives and results 

24. The objective of the Government’s updated agriculture program as set in the LPDSA is “to develop a performant, 
competitive, diverse and sustainable agriculture that provides stable income to farmers and promotes economic and social 
development”.  This is further broken down into four specific objectives, five programs and 15 lines of activities:  

(i) Increased agricultural production and productivity with the following activities. This objective aims to 
sustainably increase agricultural production and productivity through diversified and qualitative products, able to 
meet the consumption needs of the population, to provide raw materials for the domestic processing industry 
and to be competitive in international and regional markets;  
(ii) Diversified agricultural production systems. This objective aims at developing diversified agricultural value-
chains, taking full advantage of the various agro-ecological zones of the country, in order to give rural populations 
more income opportunities, in particular through increased support to high added-value agricultural value-chains;  
(iii) Strengthened agricultural services framework. This objective aims at developing agricultural and rural 
research, training and advice, facilitate farmers’ access to finance and creating a regulatory environment 
conducive to private sector investments;  

(iv) Improved agriculture sector governance facilitating the dialogue between all relevant stakeholders to ensure 
an efficient implementation of the sector’s development policies 

2. Proposed Program for Results operation context 

25. The proposed Program will contribute to the government’s programs addressing the volatility of agricultural 
production and farmers revenues, while positively impacting longer term productivity in the Groundnut Basin, and is 
anchored within PSE’s vision regarding the development of the agriculture sector, and its sectoral program’s (PRACAS) 
objectives. In agreement with the GoS, the proposed Program would focus mainly on the Groundnut Basin, the traditional 
area for peanut production that is lagging behind in terms of development. The proposed Program will focus on areas of 
intervention identified in Senegal’s agriculture development strategy that are key to addressing the high vulnerability of 
farmers to climate and market risks and improving the competitiveness of the groundnut value chain.   

26. The proposed Program will support the economic transformation of agricultural households, in particular through 
the supply, through public and private entities, of quality agricultural services. Two different trajectories have been 
identified to achieve that purpose: (i) the diversification of family farms through increased technologies adoption and 
digitalization and (ii) the creation of jobs opportunities along agri-food value-chains of high commercial potential. 

27. The approach will consist in putting the private sector8 at the heart of the proposed Program’s interventions. For 
that purpose, the proposed Program would support the GoS’s efforts in establishing a favorable environment for the 
development of private sector, via the pursuit of reforms initiated in the agri-food sector, the institutional strengthening 
of dedicated organizations and targeted public investments to improve the factors of competitiveness (e.g. productive 
and market infrastructures, research and development, agricultural extension, quality management…). 

28. Given the vulnerability of the country’s agricultural sector to climate change, particularly in the targeted areas of 
intervention (Groundnut Basin), the proposed Program would carry-out several activities to achieve climate Co-Benefits. 
The proposed Program aims at enhancing the adaptation of production systems to climate change (mainly increase in 
temperatures and reduction in rainfall) and to strengthen the resilience of farmers to climate shocks. This will be achieved 
through better management of water resources with improved irrigation systems, the adoption of climate-smart 
technologies and climate-resilient crops, and higher integration of agriculture and livestock production systems. The 
proposed Program also aims at achieving climate Co-Benefits by reducing GHG emissions. It will promote climate-smart 
agricultural and husbandry practices, favor restoration of soil to allows greater carbon absorption, and reduce food losses 
and waste through increased connectivity of farms to markets and improved storage and processing capacity.  

Results areas 

29. To achieve its development objective, the proposed Program would focus on three results areas: (i) increased 
productivity and diversification to strengthen resilience, (ii) increased market access, and (iii) sector governance, 
coordination and programs management private sector development. Those results areas have strong synergies and are 
mutually supportive. 

30. Result area 1: Increased productivity and diversification to strengthen resilience. The proposed Program would 
aim at developing solutions to mitigate the risks that farmers face in the targeted areas of the Program, in particular 
market and climate-related risks.  

• Development of the agricultural resource base in the Groundnut Basin. The Program would aim at strengthening 
the sustainable use of natural resources the agricultural sector relies on. In particular, the Ministry of Agriculture 

                                            
8 In the context of the Program “private sector” includes all type of entrepreneurial activities, from smallholder’s farms, to cooperatives, small and 

medium agri-business enterprises, national and multinational agri-food industries…
 

and Rural Equipment (MAER) and the Ministry of Livestock and Animal Resources (MERA) would closely 
coordinate with the Ministry of Water on ongoing assessments of water resources for an integrated and 
sustainable use of existing resources, in order to scale up efficient water and soil management programs in the 
Groundnut Basin. Those would include use of existing water infrastructure or the development - where 
conditions for sustainability so allow - of small scale water infrastructure to expand efficient irrigated systems in 
the Groundnut Basin, improvement of livestock watering points, the rehabilitation of degraded land/soil through 
investments and building capacity of farmers and herders on water and soil management infrastructure and 
techniques. The proposed Program would also enhance knowledge management on the state of these natural 
resources (water, soil, climate) in the Groundnut Basin.  

• Strengthening family farms’ productivity and resilience. The proposed Program would support the 
transformation at scale of part of the rainfed dependent family farms to more resilient, irrigation-based 
diversified farming systems. Both the development of irrigation and the diversification of production systems in 
the Groundnut Basin would allow farmers to reach higher labor productivity and full employment all year long. 
Furthermore, better water management through access to irrigation as well as adoption of climate-smart 
technologies would improve the resilience of farmers to climate-related risks, reducing their exposure to 
droughts. Based on ongoing analysis of the agricultural and livestock resources base in the Groundnut Basin, 
MAER and MERA will assess during the Program’s preparation, value-chains, business models and business 
alliances, which the proposed Program will help expand, through technical assistance, training, and investments. 

• Facilitating access to improved seeds. Access to adapted and productive panting material is a prerequisite for 
successful development of modern farms. This result would be achieved through increased availably of breeder 
and foundation seeds from the research system and efficient seed multiplication system. The Program would 
support development of a market-driven, private-sector-led seed multiplication system to disseminate quality 
seeds adapted to climate change, notably the new breeds recently released in Senegal and West Africa under 
the West Africa Productivity Program (WAAPP). The national agronomic research institute (ISRA) and public 
institutions (e.g. MAER’s Division of Seed control) would be strengthened in their role on breeder seed 
production and seed quality control.  

• Insuring commercial herders and farmers against shocks. The Program would support the expansion of the 
ongoing agricultural index-based-insurance scheme9 to address residual production risk and reduce the 
incidence of systematic shock on farmers’ and herders’ revenues. The insurance program would be part of a 
package of support to project beneficiaries aimed at accelerating uptake of improved technologies and adoption 
of good farm management practices, and de-risking access to credit. The Program’s support on insurance could 
be coupled with ongoing social protection programs such as the Government “Bourses Familiales” and upcoming 
World Bank Social Protection program to ensure that poorest and non-insurable households in the Groundnut 
Basin are provided with the adequate instrument to emerge from climate related disasters, with emergency 
relief and the provision of assets to re-start production cycles. 

31. Result area 2: Increased market integration. The proposed Program aims at strengthening the links between 
agricultural production and other segments of the value-chain, promoting inclusive business alliances, removing critical 
impediments (physical impediments as well as capacity building) to promote the development of private-sector-led 
services and agro-industries along the value chains.   

                                            
9 Index based Insurance was been introduced in Senegal with WBG support since 2009, but its development has been very slow until recently with 

increased interest from the private sector and contract farming in the groundnuts value chain. See more on the design of the product in “The World 

Bank : Index-based Crop Insurance in Senegal – Promoting Access of Agricultural Insurance for Small Farmers. Sustainable Department-Africa Region, 

and Finance and Private Sector Department, March 2009 



• Structuring farmers associations and promoting contractual farming. This result area would focus on the 
improvement of storage, processing and marketing of agri-food products so as to improve the connection of 
production systems to the agro-industry and markets in general. The proposed Program would (i) identify and 
support business models strengthening the links between producers and agro-industries, (ii) support the 
development of farmgate small scale crops and animal feed/fodder storage facilities, as village aggregation 
centers and cottage processing center within the production areas to facilitate linkages with off-takers;  

• Increasing control of aflatoxins and fruit flies. The proposed Program would tackle these major hurdles to access 
to markets for key produces which could otherwise develop rapidly in the Groundnut basin, such as 
confectionery groundnuts, maize for animal feed, and exportable mangoes10. The Program would support (i) the 
dissemination of appropriates technologies to control aflatoxins on groundnuts and maize along the value chain; 
(ii) the Department of Plant protection (DPV) to extend the coverage of areas infested by the fruit flies; (iii) the 
strengthening of the quality control system for agri-food products on aflatoxin and fruit flies. 

• Supporting the emergence of Agropole-Centre. While large scale infrastructure, such as roads, power plant and 
construction of manufacturing or industrial processing facilities are excluded from PforR financing, the proposed 
Program may support the feasibility studies for the Agropole Centre, which aimed at addressing critical 
impediments to the development of processing and marketing of agricultural products. In parallel, the Program 
would support the construction and rehabilitation of small-scale rural infrastructure such feeder and connecting 
roads, aggregation/storage and processing parks in and/or around selected economic poles. The Program would 
ensure climate-resilience of implemented investments. 

32. The World Bank and IFC teams are working closely in the preparation of the proposed Program and will further 
deepen the collaboration during implementation to promote private investments in agricultural value chains and facilitate 
access to domestic and international markets. Specific areas of collaboration could include the extension of the warehouse 
receipt systems to value chains of interest for the groundnut basin (groundnuts, and animal feed crops such as cowpeas 
and maize), agricultural finance including insurance, and structuring contract farming between producer associations, 
traders/aggregators, agro-processing companies and exporters. 

33. Result area 3: Improving sector governance, coordination and programs management. The proposed Program 
would address the policy and markets failures that prevent efficient private sector development in the agri-food sector, 
focusing in particular on the groundnut value chain which development has been affected by inefficient interventions. The 
Program would also support the strengthening of the organizational and institutional environment to facilitate the 
development of diversified and resilient agri-food value-chains and improve coordination and execution of government 
programs in the agriculture sector. 

• Improving the policy environment for production, processing and marketing of agri-food products. The Program would 
focus on implementing key reforms to create an efficient and conducive environment for private sector development 
in agri-food value chains. This include (i) implementing the policies and activities defined in the Groundnut sector 
strategy (Note d’orientation pour le Développement et l’Optimisation des Performances de la Filière Arachide- Draft 
May 2018), (ii) establishing a more targeted – both in terms of beneficiaries and technologies focusing on climate-
smart agriculture- and cost-efficient inputs and mechanization support program, (iii) setting up a permanent public-
private sector dialogue on the agricultural sector, strengthening quality control and improving governance of 
government’s inputs subsidy programs, (vi) implementing a conducive fiscal environment for the development of 
agro-processing, and (vii) implementing sustainable financing of agricultural services (research-development-
extension) and facilitating access to finance for productive activities. 

                                            
10 Senegal has received 24 alerts notice from EU in 2017 on fruit flies on mango 



• Program Performance tracking, Sector coordination and capacity building. To accelerate the implementation of key 
reforms in the groundnut sector and implementation of investments supported by the proposed Program there is a 
need for capacity building and institutional strengthening. Key capacity building efforts under the Program would be 
directed at (i) selected inter-professions to enable them to carry out their mandate and become effective and inclusive 
platforms for intra-branch coordination and public-private dialogue, (ii) the Ministry of Agriculture (MAER) and its 
regional directorates to strengthen its ability to plan and coordinate different stakeholders and projects in 
implementing the second phase of PRACAS; (iii) national institutions in charge of data collection, treatment and 
analyses (MAER-DAPSA, DHORT, PAPA, DRD, MEFP-ANSD, PM-BPE) to improve their capacities to inform policies and 
monitor implementation programs; (iv) national organizations and institutions providing business development and 
technical support services to the agri-food sector; (v) authorities and laboratories ensuring quality control  of 
agricultural inputs and food products (DPV, CERES-Locustox, ITA, LCI) in particular for the control of aflatoxins and 
fruit flies (vi) national institutions in charge of monitoring natural resources (soil and water) management and 
infrastructures. 

E. Initial Environmental and Social Screening 

34. It is assumed that the proposed Program by its nature will yield significant positive environmental and social 
benefits by promoting climate-smart agriculture, soil restoration, reduction of food losses, improved water management, 
etc., while its environmental and risk from  the promotion of PRACAS and PNDE, of increasing yields, developing 
infrastructure (such small catchment dams/weirs, retention basins, cattle watering points, crop and fodder storage 
facilities, cottage processing platforms, etc ), use of chemicals, will be limited. Interventions proposed for the Program’s 
support exclude activities which normally would be considered as Category A under Investment Financing Projects. For 
this reason, the proposed Program for Results is not considering heavy infrastructure on irrigation or infrastructure 
necessary to establishing a full Agropole, such as power plant or connection to high voltage power grid and connecting 
roads. Furthermore, intervention on irrigation will not consider transfer of significant flow of groundwater for irrigation 
development, but rather small-scale irrigation around existing water infrastructure or small-scale infrastructure such as 
catchment weirs and boreholes fit for purpose. Environmental and social impacts of such infrastructure would be limited 
in scope and manageable. Implementation of some investments may require acquisition of land or displacement of 
people, even though affected people during construction may also be ultimate beneficiaries of such investment. Regarding 
land acquisition, the structure of farming systems in the Groundnut Basin, overwhelmingly dominated by small scale family 
farming holdings, and the high population density prevent distribution or acquisition of massive amount of land for 
agribusiness operations, which in any case the project cannot support. Therefore, the proposed Program’s approach 
consists of developing targeted value chains around family farming.  

35. Although the Program will strive to promote climate friendly agriculture, agricultural intensification including 
agroforestry, drought-tolerant and salt-tolerant varieties, crop diversification, efficient soil and water management 
techniques) may involve increased use of chemicals for soil fertilization and for plants diseases, weeds and pest control. 
For instance, the control fruit flies on fruit crops and may involve use of pesticide at a significant scale or acquisition of 
advance technology to produce sterile males of ceratitis.    

36. Ministries of agriculture and livestock have long-standing experience of managing World Bank operations and are 
relatively well familiar with the Bank's guidelines and procedures on environmental and social risks management, but 
mostly through dedicated projects implementation units with qualified and competitively selected staff. As part of the 
Program's preparation, the Bank task team will prepare an environmental and social systems assessment (ESSA). The ESSA 
will review existing regulations and policies, their legal and practical applicability at the program level, institutional 
capacity, and the effectiveness of implementation in practice, using empirical information and data to be provided by the 
GoS and supplemented with information from other stakeholders and other available sources. The ESSA will include 
measures required to manage environmental and social impacts and risks and will include actions to strengthen 
institutions and increase the capacity of the whole program. 
 

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Responding to COVID-19: Modern and Resilient Agri-food Value Chains (P173480) 

 
 

  
Jun 01, 2020 Page 1 of 10  

     

 
 
 
      

 

Project Information Document (PID) 
 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 09-Jun-2020 | Report No: PIDA29373 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Guatemala P173480 Responding to COVID-19: 
Modern and Resilient 
Agri-food Value Chains 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

LATIN AMERICA AND CARIBBEAN 09-Jun-2020 20-Aug-2020 Agriculture and Food 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Finance 
Guatemala (MINFIN) 

Ministry of Economy 
Guatemala (MINECO) 

 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
The PDO is to contribute to reducing food losses, increasing adoption of climate resilient technologies and providing 
emergency response to COVID-19 to beneficiaries in select value chains 

 
Components 

Component 1: Emergency Response to COVID-19 impacts on agro-industrial economic activities 
Component 2: Investments to Enhance MSMEs Efficiency and Resiliency 
Component 3: Institutional strengthening in support of Guatemala’s agri-food system 
Component 4. Monitoring, Evaluation and Project Management 
Component 5: Contingency Emergency Response (CERC) 

 
OPS_TABLE_FCC The processing of this project is applying the policy requirements exceptions for situations of urgent need of 
assistance or capacity constraints that are outlined in OP 10.00, paragraph 12.     
Yes 

 

PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
   

SUMMARY-NewFin1  
 

Total Project Cost 211.00 

Total Financing 211.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 150.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 

 
   
DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 
nk Group Financing 

     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) 150.00 

Non-World Bank Group Financing 

     Counterpart Funding 50.00 

          Local Beneficiaries 50.00 

     Other Sources 11.00 

          International Fund for Agriculture Development 11.00 

    

Environmental and Social Risk Classification 

Substantial 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate     
 



 

The World Bank  
Responding to COVID-19: Modern and Resilient Agri-food Value Chains (P173480) 

 

 

  
Jun 01, 2020 Page 4 of 10  

 

B. Introduction and Context 
Country Context 
 
1. Despite a stable macroeconomic framework, Guatemala struggles with low rates of economic growth and 
high poverty compared to its neighbors. Measured by per capita Gross Domestic Product (GDP), Guatemala is the fifth 
poorest economy of Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC) and remains one of the region’s countries with the highest 
rates of social and economic exclusion. GDP growth averaged only 3.3 percent over 2015-2018, with real GDP per 
capita growth stagnating and falling behind its Central America peers over the same period. Guatemala’s ability to 
provide basic public services and respond to changing conditions and demands is hampered by low collection of taxes 
by the Central Government (tax revenues are close to 10 percent of GDP) and highly rigid expenditures, as well as 
significant gaps in knowledge and job skills. For example, around two-thirds of Guatemalan children at late primary age 
today do not possess basic literacy skills.  
 
2. Poverty, inequality, and rurality are high and persistent.  Guatemala has one of the highest poverty rates in 
LAC, and deep inequality persist across various dimensions. In 2014, an estimated 60 percent of the total population 
of 17 million was estimated to live in poverty, up from 55 percent in 2000. Almost 80 percent of Indigenous people  
live in poverty (2014), and 50 percent live in extreme poverty. Income inequality is high, and the Gini coefficient rating 
stood at 0.49 in 2014. Vulnerability is particularly high among the Indigenous peoples, with almost 80 percent living in 
poverty in 2014, and half in extreme poverty. In 2017, about 48 percent of the total population was estimated to live 
in rural areas, where poverty is significantly higher (76 percent) than in urban areas (42 percent). Assessing more recent 
changes in poverty and inequality is difficult, due to the scarce availability of socio-economic data (Guatemala has had 
the second-lowest number of household surveys available in the region (after Haiti), in the period since 2000). 
However, qualitative evidence, available data and recent developments, do not point to progress on these metrics.  
 
3. Guatemala is among the highest rates in the Gender Inequality Index and has the lowest rate of female labor 
force participation in Latin America and the Caribbean. Many indicators of women’s economic opportunities have not 
improved since 2000 and are worse than the average in LAC and similar countries. Only 4 out of 10 women are in the 
labor force, less than half the corresponding rate of men. Similarly, female youth unemployment is almost twice that 
of men. Women are at a disadvantage with respect to their male counterparts also in terms of technical and soft skills, 
as well as business opportunities and access to information, technology, and markets for inputs and outputs – all of 
which translate into lower income levels. In terms of Gender-Based Violence (GBV), Guatemala registers one of the 
highest rates of violent deaths among women in the world: 6.4 in 100,000 in 2018, almost 5 times the global rate. An 
estimated 628 women lost their lives to violence in 2018, almost two deaths per day. Lack of education, inclusion, and 
gender inequality are among the most relevant triggers of GBV.  

 
4. Guatemala has the sixth highest rate of chronic malnutrition in the world and the highest in LAC, with 
Indigenous and rural populations disproportionately affected. In 2019, Guatemala ranked 68th in food security out of 
113 countries, with only 40 percent of Guatemalan families enjoying food security. Some 77 percent of families have a 
poor or inadequate diet, characterized by high consumption of cereals (maize) and low consumption of foods of animal 
origin, fruits, and vegetables. Chronic child malnutrition (stunting) is very high according to the World Health 
Organization (WHO), affecting 47 percent of all Guatemalan children under five, 58 percent of Indigenous children, and 
66 percent of children in the lowest income quintile. On the opposite side of the spectrum, overweight and obesity are 
on the rise, affecting over 50 percent of the adult population. 

 
5. Guatemala is extremely affected by climate and weather events and its poorer populations are particularly 
vulnerable. Guatemala is the ninth most at risk country worldwide from climate change. By 2050, economic losses 



from drought, flooding, and other extreme weather events are projected to reduce GDP by between 1.3 percent and 
3.7 percent. On the other hand, Guatemala's contribution to global Green House Gas (GHG) emissions is low compared 
to other countries: in 2011 the country emitted 3.4 tCO2e/capita (half of the average per capita emissions of LAC).  
Agriculture is one of the strategic sectors for climate change mitigation and adaptation goals under Guatemala’s 
Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCC). 

 
6. On March 11, 2020, the WHO declared the novel coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak a pandemic. and the 
impacts on Guatemala are expected to be severe. The economic impacts of the disease outbreak are envisaged to 
lead to a significant decline in GDP in 2020, and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) has revised the country’s 
economic growth projections for 2020 to negative 2 percent.  Impacts are starting to be felt mainly through reductions 
in exports and tourism, and through reduced remittances (12 percent of GDP in 2018). The COVID-19 outbreak will 
have significant effects on the external accounts, inflation, and government balances, with expected higher financing 
needs and public deficit. On March 18, 2020, in preparation for the spread of COVID-19 in Guatemala, the Government 
launched the “National Program for Emergency and Economic Recovery” to respond to the crisis. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 

7. Agriculture plays a significant role in Guatemala’s economic performance and employment. Primary agriculture 
accounts for about 10 percent of the country’s GDP with a significant multiplier when accounting for the full backward 
and forward linkages in the agri-food system and employs around 30 percent of the population. In 2015, the broader 
food sector represented 45 percent of the country’s total merchandise exports. Secondary processing activities also 
create opportunities for job creation and diversification of local production. Market-linkage programs in the sub-sectors 
of vegetable and fruit preparation for exports have in some cases, proven particularly beneficial for small-scale 
organized producers. 
 
8. Limited market access and inefficient value addition/preservation capacity and lack of market information 
result in low productivity and variable sales and incomes, for Guatemala’s micro, small and medium agro-industrial 
enterprises and small producers.  Within the domestic markets, smaller producers and SME agribusinesses face a 
number of challenges. Limited market transparency, lack of investment in on-farm and post-harvest technologies and 
other logistical market-access barriers lead to an abundance of middlemen, who capture a large portion of the value 
of any transaction. In addition, the quality of infrastructure varies greatly across Guatemala, which exacerbates regional 
income inequality, particularly between urban and rural areas. This also has severe impacts on access to agricultural 
markets, including contributing to high food losses (on-farm and throughout the VC and affecting food quality and 
safety.  

 

9. In particular, the Guatemalan agri-food sector faces the challenge of substantial post-harvest food losses, due 
to insufficient investment in storage facilities, limited market information and low uptake of good post-harvest 
practices.  According to the United Nations Environment Programme, 52,000 tons of post-harvest food is lost or wasted 
annually in Guatemala. More than 35 percent of beans and maize are spoiled due to poor harvest management, pests 
and animals, salmonella and aflatoxins. In addition, lack of information about market location and prices leads to high 
levels of food loss at the farm level and additional upstream loss in the value chain. Food Loss and Waste (FLW) also 
significantly contributes to GHG emissions 

 

10. To build toward its anti-poverty and growth potential as part of the new Government’s “economic wall of 
opportunities,” the agri-food system must improve significantly its productive and post-harvest efficiency while 
mitigating the deleterious impacts of the recent COVID-19 pandemic. COVID-19 is expected to impact in 



unprecedented ways the productivity and food security of producers and consumers within Guatemala’s food systems, 
as well as agri-food exports. While the sector has clear potential for continued expansion and diversification in export 
and domestic markets, the urgent challenge related to COVID-19 threatens producers, agribusiness micro-, small- and 
medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs), other supply chain actors, markets, and domestic and international demand. To 
improve access to markets and build resilience in the system, especially given the current dual health and economic 
emergencies, the proposed Project offers an opportunity to make investments that contribute to strengthening and 
improving efficiency in productive and post-harvest capacity, and to promoting food safety, food quality, 
competitiveness and broader resilience considerations. 

 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
Development Objective(s) (From PAD)  
The project development objective (PDO) is to contribute to reducing food losses, increasing adoption of climate resilient 
technologies and providing emergency response to COVID-19 to beneficiaries in select value chains 
 

Key Results 

 

Reducing Food Losses 
• Reduction of food losses in selected value chains (as a percentage of total production)   

• Reduction of products rejected due to food safety received by buyers in selected value chains (as a 
percentage share of baseline).   

Increasing adoption of climate 
resilient technologies  

• Beneficiaries adopting improved agricultural technologies promoted by the Project to enhance climate 
resiliency, disaggregated by gender and ethnicity (number)  

• Beneficiaries demonstrating an improvement in empowerment  disaggregated by gender (IFAD core 
indicator) (percentage)1 

Providing emergency response 
to the Covid-19 pandemic 

• MSMES supported under MINECO’s COVID-19 emergency response fund, disaggregated by gender - 
(number) 

• Number of PFIs that use the guarantee fund (number)  

 
 
D. Project Description  
 

11. The proposed Project will prioritize investments in select, strategic Value Chains (VCs) pre-identified by 
the Ministry of Economy (MINECO).  Project-supported beneficiaries will be eligible micro, small and medium 
agribusinesses and agro-industry, producers’ associations, and producers’ groups (hereinafter referred to as 
MSMEs).  

12. Component 1: Emergency Response to COVID-19 Impacts on Agro-industrial Economic Activities. This 
component will invest in two strategic priority areas (i) Emergency relief to MSMEs through a MINECO partial 
guarantee fund, and (ii) Skills development for greater employability through training and an on-line labor-

 
1 This is a survey-based index for measuring empowerment, agency, and inclusion of women in the agriculture sector. Developed jointly by the 
International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI), the Oxford Poverty and Human Development Initiative (OPHI), and thirteen partner projects 
in IFPRI’s GAAP2 portfolio, Pro-WEAI is composed of twelve indicators of women’s empowerment in agriculture: autonomy in income, self-
efficacy, attitudes about domestic violence, input in productive decisions, ownership of land and other assets, access to and decisions on credit, 
control over use of income, work balance, visiting important locations, group membership, membership in influential groups, and respect among 
household members. 

matching platform. 

13. Component 2: Investments to Enhance MSMEs Efficiency and Resiliency. This component will operate 
at a national level, focusing on subprojects in select, strategic VCs. Eligible beneficiary MSMEs will receive 
financial support based on approved business plans to improve the quality of their productive processes through 
investments in post-harvest practices, including activities such as storage, agro-logistics, aggregation, and 
transformation of harvested products along the selected VCs. The Project will provide grants and beneficiaries 
will be expected to provide contributions.  The grants will be provided by MINECO with both IFAD and World 
Bank resources.  

14. Component 3: Institutional strengthening in support of Guatemala’s agri-food system.  The objective of 
this component is to strengthen public sector institutions that are considered strategic in supporting the 
efficiency of the country’s agri-food system.  It is divided into two sub-components: (i) improving public 
infrastructure to enhance SPS standards, food safety, food quality and traceability and (ii) institutional 
strengthening of key public sector institutions, including MINECO, MAGA, and National Quality System and INE.  

15. Component 4. Monitoring, Evaluation and Project Management. This Component will finance the overall 
project management, monitoring, and implementation of Components 1 to 3.  

16. Component 5. Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC). The objective of this component is 
to support the Government’s emergency response to disasters. This will be activated upon request of the 
Borrower, upon the official declaration of a national emergency.  

.

.  
Legal Operational Policies 

            Triggered? 

Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50             Yes  

Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60             No  

 

Summary of Assessment of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts 
. 

 
17. Whereas the environmental risk rating is assessed as moderate, the combined Environmental and Social risk 
rating is considered SUBSTANTIAL, particularly driven by contextual social factors and borrower’s capacity: (i) the 
inherent challenges of implementing projects with multiple and diverse Indigenous groups with their own governance 
structures, languages and socio-cultural characteristics dispersed nationally; (ii) potential implementation of 
subprojects in remote and difficult to access areas due to inadequate and limited infrastructure, particularly during 
the rainy season, as well as potential overlapping with high crime and violence areas, creating challenges for providing 
technical support and effective monitoring; (iii) use of a guarantee scheme that triggers participation of financial 
intermediaries with no previous experience working with the World Bank; and, (iv) no existing institutional capacity in 
MINECO to develop and monitor Environmental and Social (E&S) instruments and no previous experience with the 
new areas covered by the Environmental and Social Framework. 
 
18. Given that the exact scope and location of subprojects will be defined only during project implementation, 
based on demand and subject to the specific eligibility criteria, and because specific risks are unknown, the project has 
adopted a framework approach to environmental and social management. The framework approach and phased 



preparation of E&S instruments is also required to accommodate project preparation with condensed procedures 
under paragraph 12 of the Investment Project Financing policy in response to the Covid-19 pandemic. The E&S 
instruments will be developed in two phases. The Government of Guatemala (GoG) will develop, consult with key 
stakeholders, and disclose prior to appraisal a draft Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP), including a project-level 
Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) and an Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP). Consultations for 
these instruments took place in the context of country-wide quarantine with strong mobility restrictions, following the 
recommendations set forth in the WB’s Technical Note, avoiding in-person gatherings, and using virtual interactive 
meetings, emails, online surveys, WhatsApp and traditional telephone calls, when stakeholders did not have access to 
online channels or were not used to them. The results of these consultations have been documented in the draft SEP 
and integrated into the design of the project and the SEP. 
 
19. The Borrower will also develop, consult with stakeholders and disclose within 30 days of effectiveness: an (i) 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF); (ii) Labor Management Procedures with a dedicated GRM 
for project workers; (iii) an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF); and, (vi) a final SEP, including a project-
level GRM. The ESCP reflects the GoG’s requirements to implement the above-mentioned instruments at the site-
specific level and to complete periodic reporting to the Bank on its compliance. During implementation, as business 
plans are approved, Environmental and Social screenings will be carried out for each subproject. Environmental and 
Social Management Plans (ESMPs) covering environmental, social, health and safety (ESHS) issues, as well as 
Indigenous Peoples Plans (IPPs), will also be developed when applicable. All required construction phase mitigation, 
management and monitoring measures identified in the ESMF will be reflected in bidding and contracting documents. 

 

20. The PIU will include dedicated environmental, social and gender specialists and will be responsible for 
complying with environmental and social commitments, supervising firms and contractors to ensure application of 
mitigation measures, monitoring implementation and reporting to the Bank and relevant national authorities. MINECO 
will submit semiannual implementation reports to the Bank, including a dedicated section on compliance with the 
environmental and social requirements set forth in the ESCP and specified in each of the E&S instruments developed 
for this Project. 

 
E. Implementation 

 
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements  

21. The Project will be implemented by MINECO. MINECO is the entity in charge of formulating and executing 
consumer protection and competition promotion policies. Specifically, it formulates and executes policies for 
national and foreign investment, promotion of competitiveness, industrial and commercial development. In 
addition, by delegation of the President of the Republic, it is the entity in charge of carrying out the negotiations 
of bilateral and multilateral international trade agreements and treaties. It also proposes, in coordination with 
the other ministries and State agencies, the specifications and technical and quality standards of national 
production; and facilitates the competitive development of micro, MSMEs through the provision of financial 
services and business development. The Project will be headed by the Vice Ministry of Investment and 
Competition of MINECO and the National Program on Competitiveness (PRONACOM).  
 
22. As part of the support to the agriculture sector, MINECO will provide technical support and capacity 
building for the other key institution in the sector - the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Food (MAGA). 
Among its functions, MAGA is in charge of implementing the food and nutrition security policy, as well as 
promoting community organization through productive agricultural projects by means of extension services, 


training, and technical assistance. In addition, it is responsible for generating, processing and disseminating 
geographic, cartographic, food security and risk management information to prevent and mitigate the effects 
caused by natural disasters. MAGA will receive technical support and capacity building through project activities.  

 . 
   

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Malawi Resilient Productive Landscapes Project (P167860) 

 
 

  
Nov 27, 2018 Page 1 of 12  

     

 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document (PID) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 05-Dec-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSC25413 


BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Malawi P167860  Malawi Resilient 
Productive Landscapes 
Project (P167860) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA Jun 17, 2019 Sep 25, 2019 Water 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Republic of Malawi Minstry of Agriculture, 
Irrigation and Water 
Development 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
Increase adoption of resilience-enhancing landscape management practices in targeted watersheds and strengthen 
capacity for improved water resources management 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 125.00 

Total Financing 125.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 120.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 120.00 

          IDA Credit 120.00 

Non-World Bank Group Financing 

     Trust Funds 5.00 

          Global Environment Facility (GEF) 5.00 

  



 

Environmental and Social Risk Classification Concept Review Decision 

Substantial  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

 
1. Malawi is a small, peaceful and democratic country, with a population of about 17 million people. Most of the 
population (85 percent) lives in rural areas. Population growth rate is estimated at 2.8 percent per annum. At this growth 
rate, Malawi’s population is expected to reach 23 million by 2025. The country is land-locked and is highly vulnerable to 
climatic shocks. Despite a recent difficult economic period, Malawi has a stable democratic political system and has 
initiated economic and political reforms. The country remains one of the world’s poorest, with over half of its population 
living in poverty.  

2. Malawi has a narrow export base consisting mostly of tobacco, with high dependence on imports and external 
aid flows. Investment climate constraints hinder private investment. The 2018 Doing Business report ranks Malawi 111 
out of 190 on the ease of doing business.  The main obstacles to doing business include poor infrastructure and services 
such as electricity, water, transport, an uncertain economic environment, poor legal and regulatory framework, lack of 
access to long-term finance and a limited skills base. Business confidence remains subdued following two years of 
drought conditions and weak economic growth. 

3. Poverty levels in Malawi are high. In 2017, poverty headcount at US$1.9/day (2011 PPP) remained stubbornly 
high at 70 percent of the population1. Gross National Income (GNI) per capita2 was estimated at US$320 in 2017. Malawi 
is ranked 170 out of 188 countries on the United Nations Human Development Index, and 125 out of 157 on the World 
Bank’s Human Capital Index. Almost half (47 percent) of the children under age five in Malawi are short for their age 
due to long-term effects of malnutrition and 20 percent are severely stunted.   Malawi’s economic growth rates have 
fallen below the average of 2.8 percent in non-resource rich African economies during the last twenty years.  Real per 
capita Gross Domestic Product (GDP) has grown at an average of just above 1.5 percent per year between 1995 and 
2014.  With these persistent low growth rates, successive governments in Malawi have struggled to lift people out of 
poverty.   Wealth accounting data3 shows that more than half of Malawi’s wealth (estimated at US$10,442 per capita in 
2014) is renewable natural capital, mainly cropland with smaller shares contributed by pastureland, forests and 
protected areas. The natural capital base however is under extreme pressure due population growth, agricultural 
expansion and climate change. There is also a strong correlation between areas with highly degraded land and those 
with a high incidence of poverty, although there is currently insufficient evidence to point to a causal link4.   


4. Natural resources underpin Malawi’s productive sectors and are the main source of livelihood for over 80 
percent of the population.  For instance, the agriculture sector contributes 28 percent of Malawi’s GDP and 78 percent 
of export earnings, and employs 64 percent of the workforce, which consists mainly of subsistence farmers. Smallholders 
account for 80 percent of agricultural production and 70 percent of agricultural GDP.  The forestry sector contributes 
6.2 percent to the GDP (and this does not account for the value of non-wood forest products, processed timber or the 
enormous informal trade in wood fuel and charcoal). Some 33,000 jobs are heavily dependent on the existence of 
Malawi's forests.  Forests provide a range of environmental services, such as GHG mitigation, watershed regulation, 
climate regulation, soil and water conservation, biodiversity support and nutrient cycling. The nine protected areas in 
the Shire river basin store an estimated 80 million tons of CO2e5.  Malawi is also heavily dependent on hydropower for 
its energy needs, with about 98 percent of current electricity generation coming from run-of-river6 hydropower plants 
on the Shire River. 

5. Agriculture remains the lifeblood of Malawi’s economy, and growth in GDP has historically followed growth in 
agriculture.  However, most of the population is engaged in smallholder, low-productivity rain-fed agriculture which 
regularly suffers exogenous climate-induced shocks with significant negative impacts on overall growth and poverty 
reduction. In recent years, weak fiscal policy, low investor confidence, significant weather shocks and land degradation 
have had detrimental effects on agricultural output and food security.  Malawi regularly suffers from droughts and 
floods, and its economic growth is closely correlated with hydrological variability. In recent years, the country has 
suffered from weather shocks with increasing frequency, including both floods and droughts in early 2015, followed by 
another major drought in 2016. Irrigation potential has not been fully developed. Only about four percent of crop land 
is currently irrigated, severely constraining agricultural intensification and commercialization. 

6. Medium-term economic prospects however appear positive as the country recovers from the recent weather-
induced shocks in 2016. Real GDP growth after two consecutive years of drought, fell below three percent in 2016 but 
is projected to pick up in the range of four to five percent over the next two years. Increased output is expected to be 
driven by a rebound in the agriculture sector, although this outlook is susceptible to downward risks such as a potential 
El Niño-induced weather shocks.  The continued vulnerability of Malawi’s agricultural sector and spillovers to other 
sectors point to the critical need to promote measures that improve resilience.  The Government of Malawi (GoM) has 
recently developed a medium-term strategy7, looking beyond the recent crisis, to establish strong foundations for a 
productive, competitive and resilient nation. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
7. Malawi’s water resources are under threat from severe land degradation and loss of forest cover.  Critical 
watersheds are becoming degraded leading to reduced water availability, deteriorating water quality, increased 
vulnerability to droughts and floods, reduced energy security and reduced agricultural productivity. Malawi has a large 
network of surface waterbodies covering about 21 percent of the country’s total area; about 20 percent of this area is 
Lake Malawi itself.  Malawi’s drainage system is divided into 17 Water Resources Areas (WRAs)8. Major river systems 
include Shire (WRA 1), Ruo (WRA 14), Linthipe (WRA 4), Bua (WRA 5), Dwangwa (WRA 6), South Rukuru (WRA 7), North 
Rukuru (WRA 8) and Songwe (WRA 9).  Most of the rivers are subject to natural seasonal flows but maintain at least 
some base flow (at least in their lower reaches) throughout the dry season. The total renewable water resource available 
in Malawi is estimated at 17.3 km3/year, or 1,027 m3/capita/year.  While availability of water resources in the aggregate 

                                            
5 Bayliss (2015). Carbon Storage Analysis of select Protected Areas under the SRBMP.   Report to Government of Malawi 
6 ‘Run-of-river’ means that there is little or no storage capacity upstream of the power plant except small pondage for peaking. The amount of 
electricity that can be produced depends on the daily flow of the river.  
7 Malawi Growth and Development Strategy (2017-2022) 
8 A Water Resources Area is essentially a single large, or in some cases a collection of smaller, hydrological catchments. 



     

is considered satisfactory, per capita water availability has been declining at a rapid rate.  Malawi is now dangerously 
close to becoming water scarce9. Further, water resources in Malawi are highly variable between wet and dry seasons 
and from year to year, and the country’s stock of water storage infrastructure is one of the lowest in the region. GoM’s 
Water Resources Investment Strategy (WRIS, 2011) identifies poor catchment conditions and deteriorating water quality 
as significant risks to water resources and associated infrastructure (dams, hydropower plants, irrigation systems), and 
recommends investments in catchment management in strategically important WRAs.     

8. Land degradation10 in Malawi’s most important watersheds has reached alarming levels, with major impacts on 
water security, agricultural productivity, and hydropower generation.  Recent studies suggest that land degradation 
hotspots cover about half (41 percent) of the land area in the country11. Soil erosion and nutrient depletion are major 
forms of land degradation that are reported to affect more than 60 percent of the entire land area. The average annual 
national soil loss rates in 2014 was 29 tons per hectare12. Chemical land degradation, including soil pollution and 
salinization/alkalization, has led to 15 percent loss in the arable land in Malawi in the last decade alone. Projections for 
future land degradation and soil loss under different climate and population growth rate scenarios suggest that land 
degradation will become increasingly severe, with one study suggesting that overall rates of soil loss will increase by 
between three and four times 2010 baseline levels13. The Shire River Basin (WRA 1) remains the most prominent hotspot 
of land degradation. High loads of sediment are deposited in river beds, reservoirs and floodplain wetlands, affecting 
irrigation canals, fisheries and hydropower generation.  Existing hydropower plants on the Shire River are often unable 
to meet peak demand, partly due to low flows and sediments in the river caused by degradation of catchments upstream 
of the plants14.  

9. Forest degradation is a major contributor to land and water resources degradation.  Over the last 40 years, more 
than half of Malawi’s forests and woodlands have vanished and those that remain are being ‘thinned’ through over-
extraction and more frequent forest fires. Yet, forests make a substantial contribution to livelihoods and the economy 
and are needed to protect vital ecosystem services. They also provide the bulk of Malawi’s energy supply in the form of 
charcoal and firewood.  Wood fuels dominate Malawi’s energy sector and are used by 98 percent of the population. The 
industry provides large numbers of jobs and is worth nearly US$295 million per annum – equivalent to four percent of 
GDP15.  Forests and woodlands also play a key role in protecting watersheds from erosion, sustain the biodiversity that 
underpins a large proportion of Malawi’s tourism sector and make an important contribution to mitigating carbon 
emissions.   

10. The underlying drivers of land degradation in Malawi are well known. These include a growing demand for 
agricultural land due to increased population pressure and reduced agricultural productivity; insecure land tenure which 
reduces incentives to invest in soil and water conservation measures; and limited access to markets and rural finance. 
The proximate causes of land degradation include a wide range of biophysical factors and poor land management 

                                            
9 Under the Falkenmark definitions of water scarcity, a country with a total renewable water resource of less than 1000 m3/capita/year is 
considered water scarce 
10 Defined here as: “the reduction or loss of the biological or economic productivity and complexity of rainfed cropland, irrigated cropland, or range, 
pasture, forest or woodlands resulting from natural processes, land uses or other human activities and habitation patterns such as land 
contamination, soil erosion and the destruction of the vegetation cover” 
11 MoNREM (2017). Forest Landscape Restoration Opportunities Assessment of Malawi. Lilongwe, Ministry of Natural Resources, Energy and 
Mining, Government of Malawi.  
12 Vargus R. and Omuto, C. (2016). Soil Loss Assessment in Malawi. FAO, UNEP and UNDP and MoAIWD.  Available at 
http://unpei.org/sites/default/files/Soil_Loss_Assessment_in%20Malawi.pdf [accessed on November 20, 2018] 
13 LTS (2013). Integrated Assessment of Land Use Options in Malawi.  Report to the World Bank and Government of Malawi 
14 In 2017, Malawi’s power generation utility (EGENCO) spent around US$150,000 per ton on sediment management to enable operation of the 
hydropower facilities. 
15 World Bank (2018). Malawi Country Environmental Analysis. World Bank, October 2018 

     

practices. Important biophysical factors that affect land degradation include topography, land cover, climate and soil 
erodibility.  

11. Efforts to address land degradation are hampered by a multitude of factors.  The major challenge is the weak 
institutional capacity for natural resource management at both national and local levels and the severe lack of funding 
for these activities in local government budgets. With insufficient resources, weak capacity and incentives, local 
governments are generally unable to play an effective role in addressing land degradation at the local level. In addition, 
changes to climate and weather patterns exacerbate the impacts of natural resources degradation, making it harder to 
address the problem.  Future climate change scenarios suggest that Malawi will see increasing climatic variability, higher 
temperatures, longer dry periods, and more erratic and intense rainfall events16. More intense flood events will cause 
greater soil erosion and land degradation. Hotter and drier periods will contribute to forest fire risks. Droughts will 
continue to negatively impact food production, causing food insecurity and increased poverty. Increased poverty results 
in greater demand for agricultural land, thus exerting more pressure on the natural resources base.  Yet, Malawi remains 
unprepared to anticipate, respond to and recover from the effects of climate change.  The country lacks reliable hydro-
meteorological information that is needed for building climate resilience.  For example, out of the 140 hydrological 
monitoring stations in Malawi that are considered a priority, 70 percent are not operational.  Systems for data storage 
and quick relay to modelling and forecasting systems are either non-existent or not integrated across agencies. Building 
a national and more integrated hydrometeorological service is key to building climate resilience across productive 
sectors and reducing pressure on the natural resources base.  

12. Reversing the rate of land degradation remains a government priority. The Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and 
Water Development (MoAIWD) and the Ministry of Natural Resources, Energy and Mining (MoNREM) recognize the 
interdependence between natural resource management, agricultural production, water and energy security. Sound 
policies and institutional frameworks for natural resources management exist. A new Environmental Management Act 
2017 has been enacted to strengthen environmental management and protection, while the Water Resources Act of 
2013 provides for the management, conservation, use and control of water resources, including management of 
watersheds.  

13. The recent establishment of the National Water Resources Authority (NWRA)17 is expected to help strengthen 
multi-sectoral planning and management of water resources in the country, and pave way for establishment of 
sustainable watershed management institutions at the community level. Land reforms introduced in 2016 are 
expected to improve land tenure security and strengthen incentives for small-holder farmers and businesses to invest 
in sustainable land and water management practices. Further, a new National Charcoal Strategy has been approved, 
which for the first time, provides an opportunity to legalize the charcoal value chain and move towards more sustainable 
charcoal production, and thus reducing pressure on forests and community woodlands. However, the ability to 
implement policy and legislation, both nationally and locally, remains weak.  Monitoring is often limited and ineffective, 
compliance is low and the structures necessary for providing guidance and procedures are not in place. Weak 
institutional capacity is particularly acute at district and local levels, partly because of the slow pace of decentralization 
and severe under-funding18 which constrains the effective functioning of institutions at district and local level, limiting 
their ability to implement policy. 

14. To reverse landscape degradation and protect watersheds, Malawi needs to invest at scale in the protection of 
renewable natural resources and their restoration where appropriate and cost-effective, using a broad suite of 

                                            
16 Government of Malawi (2017). Strategic Program for Climate Resilience: Pilot Program on Climate Resilience (PPCR).   
17 GoM recently appointed the governing board for NWRA – a move that is seen as an important milestone in operationalizing the institutional 
framework for water resources management as laid out in the Water Resources Act of 2013.  
18 For instance, the share of agricultural spending on extension support – a critical service for promoting the uptake of SLM practices –reduced 
from 25 percent in 2005 to just 5 percent in 2012.  


interventions. These will include sustainable forest management and restoration interventions, development of water 
management infrastructure, scaling-up of climate smart agriculture and resilient livelihoods. At the same time, GoM 
needs to invest in strengthening institutions and improving the monitoring, management and use of hydro-
meteorological information.  GoM’s National Forest and Landscape Restoration Strategy (NFLRS), published in July 2017, 
proposed that land restoration should be elevated to a higher national priority level, backed by financial investment to 
implement a large scale national program for land restoration. In this regard, GoM has committed to restore 4.5 million 
hectares19 of landscape by 2030, through a combination of interventions, including soil and water conservation, river 
and stream bank restoration, conservation agriculture, farmer-managed natural regeneration and agroforestry; natural 
forest management; community forests and private woodlots. The total cost of achieving this target is estimated at 
US$385 million (or US$86 per hectare). GoM is currently in the process of mobilizing finance from development partners 
to support implementation of the strategy, either through a new large scale national program or a series of separate 
programs targeting major river basins 20.    

15. One such program which GoM has been implementing since 2012 with World Bank support is the Shire River 
Basin Management Program (SRBMP) 21. Part of the investment under SRBMP targets degraded hotspots in the basin 
covering a total area of 129,500 ha (about 5 percent of the basin land area). These catchments have been undergoing 
rehabilitation over the past two years with promising results.  Available data shows that a total of 35,385 ha (i.e. 27 
percent of the targeted catchment area and 1.3 percent of the entire basin) has been rehabilitated, including 10,173ha 
of previously degraded community forests which have been regenerated. Vegetative protection measures have been 
implemented on 4,000km of water courses (rivers and streams) in the targeted catchments. Various infrastructure 
packages–rural feeder roads (80km), bridges (11) and markets (13)–designed to support alternative livelihoods and 
improve market access have been completed and commissioned. A total of 366 Common Interest Groups (CIGs) have 
been established, trained and provided with start-up capital for various non-farm business enterprises.  Finally, a total 
of 80 Farmer Field Schools (FFS) are now promoting conservation agriculture and improved farming practices using a 
farmer-to-farmer extension approach. To date, about 77 percent of households within the targeted catchments are 
reported to be engaged in sustainable land and water management.  These results, although achieved at a small scale, 
have demonstrated that it is possible to restore degraded landscapes through an integrated package of interventions 
involving land and water management, forestry management and livelihood support.  GoM would like to scale up these 
interventions in other degraded hotspots in the Shire River Basin and elsewhere in line with the national landscape 
restoration strategy. The proposed Resilient Productive Landscapes Project (RPLP) has been conceived in response to 
GoM’s letter of request for World Bank support dated June 28, 2017. 

 
Relationship to CPF 

 
16. The project is aligned with the new growth-oriented Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Malawi which is 
currently under preparation. The CPF focus on four themes which emerged from the Systematic Country Diagnostic 
(SCD).  These are: (i) human capital; (ii) governance and macroeconomy; (iii) energy and infrastructure; and (iv) 
environment and rural resilience.  The project contributes to the environment and rural resilience theme by addressing 
land degradation, improving natural resources management and boosting agricultural productivity.  Addressing these 
issues will contribute to protecting critical watersheds and securing water resources for existing and proposed 
hydropower plants on the Shire river as well as the large-scale irrigation scheme currently under implementation as part 
of the Shire Valley Transformation Program.   

                                            
19 This represents about half of the entire land area in Malawi 
20 So far, GoM has developed and is implementing two river basin management programs – Shire River Basin Management Program supported by 
the World Bank and the Songwe River Basin Management Program – supported by African Development Bank 
21 Current World Bank support to SRBMP ends on January 31, 2019 



 
The World Bank  
Malawi Resilient Productive Landscapes Project (P167860) 

 
 

  
Nov 27, 2018 Page 8 of 12  

     

17. The project is also expected to contribute to the human capital agenda in Malawi. A recent study22 found that 
upstream watershed conditions were a strong predictor children’s health across 35 developing countries, including 
Malawi.  Specifically, the study found that in areas with no access to improved water sources, higher upstream tree 
cover is associated with lower probability of diarrheal diseases downstream, even after controlling for socio-economic 
and climate factors23. This suggests that improving watershed management is not only an investment in environmental 
resilience, it is also an investment in public health. 

18. The project responds directly to GoM’s priorities as laid out in the Malawi Growth and Development Strategy 
(MGDS III) 2017-2022.  The objective of the strategy is to move Malawi to a productive, competitive and resilient nation 
through sustainable agriculture and economic growth, energy, industrial and infrastructure development while 
addressing water, climate change, environmental management and population challenges.  The project contributes 
directly to the MGDS III priority areas of agriculture, water development and climate change management by supporting 
investments that address land degradation and its impacts on water resources, agricultural productivity and rural 
resilience.  Given the critical role water plays in Malawi’s economy, and given that the country’s wealth is still largely 
dominated by natural resources (largely cropland), future growth will depend on reversing land degradation to improve 
productivity, and sustainable management of natural capital (especially forests) to protect water security.     

19. The project also contributes to the WBG’s twin goals of ending extreme poverty and promoting shared 
prosperity. The project area targets the poorest region of Malawi, where rural poverty rates are above 80 percent.  A 
recent study24 shows a strong correlation between areas with highly degraded land and those with a high incidence of 
poverty, implying that increasing levels of land degradation may be contributing to the poverty of millions of Malawians. 
The project will contribute to reversing this trend. 

 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
20. The proposed Project Development Objectove (PDO) is to increase adoption of resilience-enhancing landscape 
management practices in targeted watersheds and strengthen capacity for improved water resources management. 

 
Key Results (From PCN) 
 
21. The following PDO results indicators will be used to measure achievement of the PDO: 

1. Land area under resilience-enhancing landscape management practices (ha) 

a. Agricultural land area with productivity enhancing practices applied (ha) 

b. Forest land area restored, reforested or under improved management (ha) 

2. Proportion (%) of targeted watershed area showing: 

a. an increase in Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI)25 correcting for climate effects; 

b. an increase in Land Surface Water Index (LSWI)26 correcting for climate effects (percent); 

3. Number of farmers (disaggregated by gender) adopting improved agricultural technologies; and  

                                            
22 Herrera, D. et al (2016). Upstream watershed condition predicts rural children’s health across 35 developing countries. Nature communications, 
Vol 8, 811 (2017).  
23 This finding is consistent with other literature on the role of forests in regulating water quality.   
24 World Bank (2018). Malawi Country Environmental Analysis. October 2018 (under preparation) 
25 NDVI uses the visible and near-infrared bands of the electromagnetic spectrum to analyze remote sensing measurements (based on satellite 
imagery data) to determine the extent to which a target contains live green vegetation. 
26 LSWI uses the shortwave infrared and near-infrared bands of the electromagnetic spectrum to analyze remote sensing measurements (based on 
satellite imagery data) to determine the amount of water in vegetation and soil. 


     

4. Number of people (disaggregated by gender) adopting alternative livelihood activities supported by the 
project. 

5. Operationalization of the National Water Resources Authority 

 
D. Concept Description 

 
22. The proposed project responds to Malawi’s most pressing environmental challenge – severe degradation of the 
renewable natural resources base (land, forests and water resources) that underpins the productive sectors of the 
economy.  The project’s central thesis is that degradation of the renewable natural resources base and high exposure 
and vulnerability to climate change have adversely affected energy and water security, agricultural productivity and 
livelihoods.  The project will contribute to breaking the cycle of degradation in selected watersheds and reducing climate 
vulnerability by (i) strengthening the institutional enabling environment for landscape management at the national, 
local and community level; (ii) investing in productive landscape management and livelihoods in targeted watersheds; 
and (iii) improving hydrometeorological information and services for resilience.  Intervention in these three areas is 
expected to result in increased adoption of resilience-enhancing landscape management practices, which would 
ultimately contribute to improving water and energy security, agricultural productivity and livelihoods.   

23. The proposed project will support GoM’s National Forest and Landscape Restoration Strategy (NFLRS). The 
overall objective of the NFLRS is to restore degraded landscapes for improved water and energy security, agricultural 
productivity and livelihoods. The project will contribute to achieving this objective by investing in restoration activities 
in selected priority watersheds, while at the same strengthening institutions and information for resilience and 
sustainability. Proposed project activities will be organized under five components as outlined in the following 
paragraphs.  

24. Component 1 – Institutional capacity strengthening.  This national level component will finance a package of 
activities designed to strengthen the institutional and policy framework for integrated landscape and water resources 
management at national, district and local levels and will also support the development and piloting of a Payments for 
Ecosystem Services (PES) mechanism for the Shire river basin that could deliver longer-term financing for efforts to 
address land degradation and protect natural resources that generate ecosystem services.    

25. Component 2 – Landscape management and livelihoods support. This component will finance an integrated 
package of interventions designed to protect environmental services and restore degraded landscapes in selected 
watersheds in ways that will also build resilient livelihoods. The component will support: 

• Sustainable land and water management (SLWM) interventions that will focus on catchment planning, river 
and streambank management; and soil and water conservation.  The approach will be based on the successful 
participatory approach tested under SRBMP and codified in the new national guidelines on integrated 
catchment management; 

• Agriculture and resilient livelihoods interventions that will support climate smart agriculture practices to 
increase the resilience of both farmers and landscapes. Support for livelihood diversification through stronger 
engagement with the private sector will also be encouraged; 

• Forestry and protected areas interventions that will be delivered in the context of the NFLRS and will focus on 
strengthening the management and productive contribution of existing natural forests in both state-managed 
forest reserves and on customary land, and protected areas. Forest reserves and protected areas comprise a 
large proportion of the upper part of the landscape, play a key role in protecting ecosystem services and offer 
cost-effective opportunities for avoid the need for costly restoration of natural resources; and  



 
The World Bank  
Malawi Resilient Productive Landscapes Project (P167860) 

 
 

  
Nov 27, 2018 Page 10 of 12  

     

• Development of water management infrastructure will focus on small-scale investments for harvesting, 
storing, and delivering water for people, livestock and agriculture. The menu of water infrastructure 
investments will include small-to-medium dams, small sand and sub-surface dams in dry river beds, area 
infiltration interventions such as semi-circular bunds or soil bunds, and rock catchments. The component 
could also support rehabilitation and/or construction of boreholes for groundwater extraction. Diversification 
of water sources in each target watershed will increase the supply of water for multiple use and therefore 
mitigate against the risk of droughts. 

 
26. Component 3- Hydro-meteorological monitoring and climate services improvement.  This component will invest 
in the expansion and modernization of Malawi’s hydrometeorological monitoring network and associated data 
management and decision-support systems. It will also support the integration, efficiency and scaling up of climate 
information services.  It will support Malawi’s efforts to establish a National Framework for Climate Services (NFCS) 
through investments in the entire value-chain of climate products and services. This component will complement an 
ongoing Green Climate Fund-supported initiative by extending geographical focus to cover southern Malawi and by 
strengthening development of digital solutions.  

27. Component 4–Project management support. This component will finance a package of project management 
support activities to ensure cost-efficient, timely and quality delivery of project activities and results, and will include: 
(i) establishment of a project management support unit with specialized project management professionals to provide 
support to the lead implementing ministry/department and the multi-sectoral technical team; (ii) incremental 
operating costs for day-to-day management of project activities at the national and district levels; and (iii) support to 
multi-sectoral coordination and implementation at the district and local levels.   

28. Component 5 –Contingency Emergency Response. A Contingency Emergency Response Component (CERC) with 
zero allocation will be created and made implementation-ready to allow the GoM to respond quickly in case of an 
eligible emergency. The CERC will complement those in place already under agriculture and nutrition projects and the 
forthcoming Malawi CAT DDO.   The mechanism will be defined in a specific CERC Operational Manual that will clearly 
outline the triggers, eligible expenditures, procurement thresholds, and procedures for using part of IDA resources of 
the project to respond quickly in the event of an eligible emergency. 

29. The project will use, where appropriate, community‐led landscape approaches—that is, an integrated approach 
to sustainably manage natural resources for multiple purposes and functions. Managing natural resources in an 
integrated way across different land uses and connecting them at the landscape level provides the basis for addressing 
trade‐offs and enhancing people’s livelihoods and resilience to climate variability and change.  In the context of the 
project, the operational boundaries of the landscapes are those of the watersheds or micro-watersheds targeted by 
the project.  The project area will include a total of 500 micro-watersheds located in the degradation hotspot areas of 
the Shire River Basin (upper and middle Shire), averaging approximately 500 hectares each.  This includes a total of 305 
micro-watersheds supported under SRBMP and a total of 195 new micro-watersheds to be selected in the upper and 
middle reaches of the Shire river basin, upstream of existing and proposed hydropower plants.  The watersheds 
supported under SRBMP will continue to receive support to allow for full implementation of the watershed 
management plans (or Village-Level Action Plans).  These watersheds will also receive technical assistance to graduate 
from project-based support, including establishment of catchment management committees, in accordance with the 
Water Resources Act 2013.   

30. The estimated cost of the proposed project is US$125 million.  It is proposed to finance this cost through an IDA 
credit of US$120 million and a GEF grant of US$5 million. The final project financing structure will be decided in 
consultation with MoFEPD. 

 

 
Legal Operational Policies                                  Triggered? 

Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50 Yes 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60 No 

 
Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts 

Project subprojects have not been identified, however screening of potential environmental and social 
impacts has been undertaken on similar subprojects. Possible risks and impacts that are likely to arise from 
some of the proposed subprojects include construction related health and safety risks to both labour and 
local communities; possible influx of populations and the social risks associated with that such as disease 
transmission and spread of HIV, potential for Gender Based Violence; and land acquisition leading to 
temporary or permanent physical displacement and loss of assets, land and livelihoods. Environmental risks 
include those related to civil works construction (controlling on-site erosion and pollution), localized changes 
in water use and distribution. unregulated wood cutting in areas with improved road access (absent adequate 
control measures), potential damage to patches of natural habitat (such as miombo woodland or dambos), 
and possibly increased agro-chemical use. 

 
























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Odisha Integrated Irrigation Project for Climate Resilient Agriculture (P163533) 

 
 

  
Sep 11, 2018 Page 1 of 14  

     

 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 03-Oct-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSC23298 


BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

India P163533  Odisha Integrated 
Irrigation Project for 
Climate Resilient 
Agriculture (P163533) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

SOUTH ASIA Nov 13, 2018 Jan 28, 2019 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Republic of India Odisha Community Tank 
Development and 
Management Society 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The Project Development Objective is to intensify and diversify agricultural production, enhance climate resilience and 
improve water productivity in selected cascades of Odisha. 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 235.74 

Total Financing 235.74 

of which IBRD/IDA 164.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) 164.00 

Non-World Bank Group Financing 

     Counterpart Funding 71.74 

          Borrower 71.74 

   


 

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B - Partial Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 
 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

1. Over the past ten years, India has seen strong economic growth - exceeding 7 percent per annum - driven primarily 
by robust private consumption, a resilient services sector, and a revival in some industrial activities. The reduced 
momentum in investment and exports notwithstanding, annual growth rates are still projected to average 7.5 percent per 
annum in coming years because of the diversity in the country’s drivers of growth and the vast scope for improvement in 
many areas.   

2. Alongside this growth, India has achieved significant progress in reducing extreme poverty - from 46 percent in 1993 
to 21 percent in 2011 (using the international poverty line of $1.90 per person per day in 2011 purchasing power parity). 
World Bank estimates point to continued reduction in poverty in more recent years, indicating that the country is on track 
to eliminating extreme poverty by 2030. Urban growth and rising labor earnings due to movement of labor from agriculture 
to non-farm work, an unprecedented rise in wages for unskilled labor, and demographic changes (e.g. a declining 
dependency ratio), underlie the rapid poverty decline.  

3. Over the past three decades, the economy has undergone a structural shift from agriculture as the dominant sector, 
to services and industry. Even then, agriculture continues to be essential for achieving India’s development goals, as the 
sector employs about 59 percent of the country’s total workforce, is a source of livelihood for 70 percent of India’s rural 
households, and is the main source of economic linkages in rural areas. In 2017, the sector contributed about 17 percent 
to the national Gross Domestic Product (GDP). While its contribution to the economy is likely to keep declining, agriculture 
will continue being the single largest contributor to employment and income of the rural population in the foreseeable 
future. 

4. Because of a complex web of policies and institutions that limit the performance of agricultural markets, diminishing 
returns to technologies that once sparked the green revolution, and suboptimal diversification among others, the 
agriculture sector continues to perform below its potential. Long-term agricultural growth has averaged about 3 percent 
per year1 and generally lags the growth rate for the larger economy. Sector growth is subject to large annual shocks, which 
as projected, are expected to be exacerbated by climate change. In addition, India’s agriculture has, for long, been based 
on an unsustainable resource-intensive model, predominantly characterized by inefficient use of water and land 
resources, and as an imperative, will have to shift to higher levels of resource use efficiency, given the country’s low per 
capita natural resource endowments2 and the projected impacts of climate change.  

                                            
1 With decelerating productivity growth of food grains. 
2 With annual per capita water availability of only about 1,000 m3, India is one of the most water-stressed countries in the world. 



     

5. Moving away from its long-running policy focus on raising agricultural output and improving food security, the 
Government of India has now prioritized the doubling of farmers’ incomes by 2022 and through a number of interventions 
e.g. the Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY) is also committed to accord high priority to improving water use 
efficiency - more crop per drop - in a focused manner3. 

 

Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
6.  Odisha ranks among the fastest growing economies in India, consistently growing at rates higher than the national 
average. Mirroring the national level, Odisha’s economic growth has been mainly driven by services (43.5 percent of GDP) 
and industry (36.6 percent of GDP). Between 2012 and 2017, per capita incomes in the State increased by 30 percent 
(from Rs. 47,632 to Rs. 61,678) and poverty reduced at an annual rate of 3.5 percent. Despite this good progress, Odisha’s 
per capita income still stands at only 75 percent of the national average.  

7. While Odisha’s economy has transformed from a predominantly agro-based economy, agriculture remains a key 
sector, providing employment and livelihoods to more than 62 percent of the State’s workforce, and contributing close to 
20 percent to its GDP. Indeed, a strong correlation exists between agriculture sector performance and overall state GDP, 
pointing to strong linkages between agriculture and other sectors. 

8. Like much of India, Odisha’s agriculture sector performance, relative to potential, is low. The officially reported 
compound annual average growth rate of 2.8 percent for the sector for the period 2011-17, is below the national average, 
and masks the highly volatile sector performance, which in reality is characterized by significant negative growth every 
alternative year. Consequently, because of low sector performance, Odisha ranks at the bottom in terms of annual farmer 
income (i.e. Rs. 16,884 per family), only outperforming West Bengal, where the average farmer income stands at Rs. 
11,748 per annum.4 

9. Among others, key constraints to the improved performance of Odisha’s agriculture sector include: (i) low 
productivity; (ii) limited diversification; (iii) high exposure and vulnerability to extreme weather events; (iv) access to 
reliable irrigation; and (v) dysfunctional or non-existing value chains for important crops. First off, average yields for major 
crops in Odisha still lag both those in neighboring states with comparable factor endowments and the national averages 
(Table 1), and are far below their potential5.   

 Table 1. Average Yields, 2016-2017 

Crop  

------------------------------Crop Yields (ton/ha)------------------------------ 

Odisha 
Andra 

Pradesh 
Madhya 
Pradesh 

Telangana West Bengal 
India 

Paddy 1.49 3.47 1.75 2.91 2.89 2.40 
Pulses 0.55 0.30 0.94 0.77 0.97 0.79 
Wheat 1.33 na 2.98 1.40 2.68 3.20 
Potato 12.00 14.92 20.07 25.96 26.16 21.51 

10. According to the findings of a State-level NITI Aayog Task Force on Agriculture6, these low farm-level yields are 
largely due to limited adoption of productivity enhancing technologies (including the use of improved germplasm), a 

                                            
3 PMKSY seeks to achieve convergence of investments in irrigation at the field level, expand cultivable area under assured irrigation, improve 
on-farm water use efficiency, enhance adoption of precision-irrigation and other water saving technologies (more crop per drop), etc. 
4 National Sample Survey Organization, 2013.  Situation Assessment Survey of Agricultural Households, All India Debt and Investment & Land 
and Livestock Holdings in India (January – December 2013) 
5 World Bank. 2014. Republic of India: Accelerating Agricultural Productivity Growth. Washington, DC.   
6 Government of Odisha, 2016. Rejuvenation of Agriculture: Recommendations of State NITI Aayog Task Force. 



 
The World Bank  
Odisha Integrated Irrigation Project for Climate Resilient Agriculture (P163533) 

 
 

  
Sep 11, 2018 Page 5 of 14  

     

degrading natural resource base, inadequate and mostly unreliable irrigation7,8, and weaknesses in the extension system.  

11. Due to several factors9, Odisha’s progress with respect to diversification – an important vehicle for agricultural 
growth - has been mixed at best, even against a backdrop of real shifts in consumer demand towards more diversified 
food baskets. While the net area devoted to rice showed some reduction between 2006 and 2015, the latest year for 
which comprehensive data sets exist, the total area devoted to food grains has been increasing. In fact, according to the 
Odisha Economic Survey of 2017-18 example, the areas under spices, vegetables, fruits, and floriculture - a proxy for 
diversification - declined by 20 percent, 6 percent, 9 percent and 12 percent, respectively, between 2014 and 201710. 

12. In addition, extreme weather events, largely droughts, and to a lesser extent, floods and cyclones, also continue to 
undermine Odisha’s agriculture performance and have been the principal driver of the volatility in sector growth. Figure 
1 for example, shows percent annual growth in rice production-the major crop - over five decades, and attests to the 
vulnerability of the State’s agriculture to the debilitating impacts of extreme weather events, which seem to occur with 
almost predictable periodicity.   

Figure 1: Percent annual  growth in rice production, 1962-201411 

 

 

13. While Odisha has a long history with the menace of drought – going all the way to the drought of 186612 - recent 
trends point to an increasing frequency13 as well as more agricultural areas coming under the ambit of droughts. As 
pointed out in the Odisha Climate Change Action Plan, this trend will be further amplified in the future due to climate 

                                            
7 About 2/3 of the State’s gross cropped area is rain-fed and depends on monsoon – a vast reliance on nature in an environment with highly 
skewed annual rainfall availability.  
8 Of the total cultivable area of 8.7 million ha in the State, irrigation potential has been developed for 2.96 million ha in Kharif and 1.48 million 
ha in Rabi season.  
9 A comprehensive understanding of which will be developed during preparation. 
10 Government of Odisha, 2018: Odisha Economic Survey of 2017-18. 
11 Data source: Government of Odisha, Status of Agriculture in Odisha, 2014-2015.  
12 Reputed to have caused the death of one third of Odisha’s population due to famine. 
13 From 1 in 5 years to 1 in 2 years since 2009. 


change14. With 2/3 of its gross cropped area under rainfed production and an insignificant use of groundwater, the State 
has few and inadequate instruments to mitigate against climate change-induced weather vagaries.  

14. Moreover, even when Odisha has relatively more water resources than many States in India, Irrigation 
development is low and below the national average.  Of the total cultivated area of 8.7 million ha, only 1.9 million ha (21 
percent) is under irrigation. Only 34 percent of the total irrigation potential of 5.5 million ha has been developed and 
groundwater use is negligible. With limited irrigation development and seasonally skewed rainfall, Odisha is not making 
the most out of every drop of water. In fact, estimates indicate that about 40-50 percent of available rainfall is lost as non-
beneficial evapotranspiration, a loss higher than the neighboring states. In addition, many of the irrigation systems have 
become victim to a vicious cycle of the build-neglect-rebuild. Operation and Maintenance (O&M) is not conduced 
systematically as a result of insufficient funds, the quality of irrigation services degrades and further undermines farmers’ 
willingness and capacity to pay for services. Arrangements for irrigation management have not been adapted to the 
requirements of recent developments, including the use of groundwater, adoption of more individual irrigation 
technologies, and the need to adopt a cascade perspective on irrigation management. 

15. Furthermore, remunerative and reliable markets in Odisha, a precondition for sustained agricultural growth are 
limited, mainly due to poorly functioning value chains. For example, supply chains for otherwise high-value commodities 
(e.g. spices, vegetables) are fragmented and uncoordinated, often involving multiple layers of intermediaries in some 
places, and completely no players in many other places. 

16. The Government of Odisha (GoO) has identified increasing production and productivity, reducing the vulnerability 
of agriculture to climate change, diversification towards high-value crops, rainwater harvesting and improving efficiency 
of water use, improved produce marketing, and addressing absentee landlordism inter alia, as important issues to be 
addressed to improve the performance of the agricultural sector and raise farmer incomes. The proposed project 
contributes to these efforts. The proposal is to support higher agriculture growth, more efficient water use, better quality 
and reliability of irrigation service delivery, and strengthen the resilience to climate change of production systems in six 
districts (see Table 2) in Odisha.  

17. Characterized by highly skewed and variable rainfall patterns15, a lack of perennial rivers, these districts depend on 
a cycle of dry seasons alternating with increasingly uneven and erratic monsoons for water. On average, they suffer from 
marginal drought one in three to five years, moderate drought in six to eight years, and severe drought one in thirty years. 
Among other reasons, the undulating physiography and the predominantly small-sized land holdings limit the technically 
and economically efficient development of centralized major and medium irrigation systems (reservoirs and canals) to 
serve these areas and, they therefore, generally have comparatively lower irrigation coverage than other parts of the State 
(Table 2).  

    Table 2. Irrigation potential created as a ratio of cultivated land 

Project District Ratio of irrigation potential created to total cultivated area 
Kharif Rabi 

Ganjam 0.74 0.29 
Kandhamal 0.30 0.38 
Kalahandi 0.55 0.70 
Nuapada 0.42 0.58 
Mayurbhanji 0.55 1.15 
Keonjhar 0.37 0.51 

                                            
14 Climate projections indicate that drier areas will become drier and flood prone areas will be subject to more flooding. Other problems such 
as pest and disease outbreaks are also likely to increase due to climate change. 
15 When it rains, eighty six percent of the rains fall in the monsoon period (June-October), while the remaining 14 percent occurs during the 
other 7 months of the year, from November to May. 



State average 0.62 0.72 

 
18. The districts therefore, have historically relied on water, stored in cascades of impoundments (tanks) for agricultural 
production and as a buffer against droughts. The tanks support livelihoods of over 300,000 households, most of whom 
are in the poorest quintile. Besides sustaining agricultural livelihoods, the network of tanks in these areas also serves other 
important purposes such as controlling and reducing the impacts of floods - when they occur-and recharging the 
groundwater table. Investing in these districts will also help meet a key policy objective of the GoO to more evenly spread 
the benefits of irrigation - currently confined to a few districts in the form of major and medium irrigation projects16.   

19. Specifically, the project will support sustainable and resilient intensification, judicious diversification17 to high-value 
commodities (especially during the Rabi season and for some areas under upland rice in Kharif), improved produce 
marketing and also incentivize and improve the quality of irrigation service delivery and the reliability of water supply to 
ensure a more efficient, productive and equitable distribution of water to beneficiary farmers throughout the year that is 
more responsive to the more demanding higher value crops. The project builds on the successes of an earlier Bank-
financed Odisha Community Tanks Management Project in bridging the gap between the then existing irrigation potential 
and actual irrigation coverage of selected tanks and expands the engagement further into institutional reforms and 
capacity strengthening for improved system performance, diversification and marketing of farmer produce. 

 

Relationship to CPF 
 

20. The India CPF (2018-2022) argues that for the country to maintain its trajectory of high growth and poverty 
reduction, it must: (i) embrace much more efficient use of the country’s resources, particularly water and land and address 
the impacts of climate change; (ii) foster inclusiveness both for poverty reduction and as a key condition for sustaining 
high rates of economic growth; and (iii) strengthen the agility, performance and responsiveness of public sector 
institutions. One of the three CPF focus areas (Focus Area 1) proposed for Bank engagement is “resource efficient growth” 
where one of the Objectives is promotion of a more resource-efficient, inclusive and diversified growth in the rural sector. 
The proposed project dovetails and is consistent with Bank support (to include inter alia, support to sustainable 
productivity gains, CSA practices, diversification, investments in irrigation and drainage for improved water use efficiency, 
value chains etc.) that is envisaged under this Objective.  

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
21. The Project Development Objective is to intensify and diversify agricultural production, enhance climate resilience 
and improve water productivity in selected cascades of Odisha. Project beneficiaries include small and marginal farmers, 
Water Users’ Associations (Pani Panchayats), farmer producer organizations, and other agro-entrepreneurs. Targeted 
investments will be undertaken to address any gender gaps as well as benefit other vulnerable groups. 

Key Results (From PCN) 
 

22. The project is expected to lead to increased average yields, increases in the range, volume and value of marketed 
agricultural output, more productive and efficient use of scarce water resources, a more reliable supply and a better 
quality of irrigation service delivery, and improvements in farmers’ capacity to adapt to climate change. Proposed key 
outcome level performance indicators include the following: (i) increase in productivity of selected agricultural 

                                            
16 Government of Odisha, 2013. State Agriculture Policy, Department of Agriculture, Bhubaneswar. 
17 Diversification in this context is defined as reducing the emphasis on food grains and increasing the share of high-value 
agriculture. This would be done taking cognizance of the overall country policy intent to shift rice production towards relatively 
more water abundant states like Odisha. 


commodities supported by the project (t/ha); (ii) farmers adopting improved agricultural technology (number); (iii) share 
of non-rice products in total production in project areas(percent); (iv) water users provided with new/improved irrigation 
and drainage services (number); (v) acreage under crops that are less water demanding (ha); (vi) productivity of water use 
(kg/m3), and (vii) number of direct project beneficiaries (disaggregated by gender).  

 
D. Concept Description 

 
23. Agricultural production system improvements (e.g. improving productivity, system resilience to climate change and 
resource use efficiency) and market development are known to reinforce each other and are therefore better pursued 
and accomplished together. The proposed project primarily seeks to improve and diversify farmer yields and production, 
improve water productivity and efficiency, build resilience to climate change risks, and improve market access for farmers 
who can generate a marketable surplus in selected districts in Odisha. Producing higher value and more diverse crops puts 
a high premium on the quality and reliability of irrigation service delivery, as they leave no room for water supply errors 
and the higher use of farm inputs significantly increases the stakes. Higher value horticulture crops generally use less 
water as compared to wheat, paddy, sugarcane and cotton. The conceptual framework underlying the proposed design 
therefore links efforts to promote adoption of CSA practices18, diversification and productivity increases, with 
improvements in incentives for technology adoption, quality of water service delivery and water resource management. 
The project will comprise three components as described below: 

Component 1: Climate-Smart Intensification and Diversification of Agriculture 

24. The objective of this component is to increase agricultural productivity, strengthen the capacity of organized farmer 
groups to cope or adapt to climate change stresses affecting crop production, and diversify production in Rabi in response 
to effective demand as expressed by pre-identified commercial off-takers or gleaned from other reliable market signals. 
Support under this component is proposed to be organized around two mutually inclusive, overlapping and reinforcing 
subcomponents. 

Subcomponent 1.1: Support to Improved Productivity and Resilience 

25. This subcomponent aims at supporting and incentivizing farmer adoption of technologies and practices that 
demonstrably deliver the triple-wins of increased productivity, improved resilience to climate shocks and reduced GHG 
emissions, as a co-benefit. The exact nature of technology support will be: (i) a function of the specificities of production 
environments and unique climate vulnerabilities19 in individual cascade; (ii) scaled to farmer capacities and endowments 
and (iii) based on the principles of response to market demand, good choice of improved germplasm, adequate plant 
nutrition, and effective pest and disease management. 

26. In this respect, project support is envisaged to go towards organizing farmers for technology transfer purposes (e.g. 
through farmer field schools), technology sourcing and demonstration, farmer training, improving availability and access 
to productivity enhancing and resilient germplasm by strengthening key segments in the State’s seed production and 
distribution system, and strengthening advisory service provision, currently plagued by weaknesses in the extension 
system - such as inadequate manpower and limited knowledge and skills.   

Subcomponent 1.2: Support to Diversification and Produce Marketing 

27. The objective of this subcomponent is twofold: (i) support farmers to reduce the current emphasis on food grains 

                                            
18 In this context, CSA practices are defined as practices that sustainably increase productivity and farmers’ income and build resilience to 
climate change, while reducing GHG emissions where possible and appropriate 
19 To be mapped for the target districts following approaches developed through a World Bank Non- Lending Technical Assistance to Support 
Implementation of Odisha State Climate Change Action Plan. 


(especially rice and wheat) while increasing the share of high-value agriculture (e.g. fruits, spices and vegetables) in their 
overall production structure; and (ii) improve produce marketing to increase incomes and reduce price risks associated 
with diversification. A successful shift in favor of more diversified production would not only generate faster productivity 
and superior incomes for targeted farmers, but will also result into improved nutrition security, help reduce the water 
footprint of paddy, foster biodiversity, and strengthen resilience of the production systems to climate change.  

28. Project support to diversification and improved marketing is proposed to follow productive alliance approaches, 
which bring together organized farmers, produce buyers, technical service providers and leverage private sector financing 
to address market imperfections and build competitive value chains for select commodities. In this respect, the project 
could provide funding for several activities, including but not limited to: (i) awareness creation of diversification among 
farmers; (ii) identification of competitive value chains; (iii) farmer experimentation with new crops and 
training/demonstration of relevant production technology; (iv) strengthening of farmers for collective action (including in 
production, aggregation, technology transfer, among others); (v) business plan development; and (vi) selected productive 
investments - as would be identified in the business plans. Project support to crop diversification will be based on 
agronomic/agro-ecological suitability, comparative advantage of specific cascades, and local, national or international 
market opportunities. To further diversify farmer income streams (a key adaptation strategy) and maximize the utility and 
productivity of water stored in the tanks, during preparation, the project will explore the feasibility of using the tanks for 
seasonal aquaculture.  

Component 2: Improving Access to Irrigation and Water Productivity  

29. Access to reliable irrigation is generally critical to enhancing crop productivity, building resilience to climate change, 
promoting diversification and access to markets. It is doubly important in the targeted project areas that are characterized 
by frequent droughts and highly variable rainfall availability. Bridging increasingly longer dry spells during Kharif and 
producing more demanding higher value and more diverse crops during Rabi when the stakes are higher and when there 
is no margin for water supply errors, puts a high premium on the quality of irrigation services.   

30. Among others, reliability of irrigation services and a more productive use of water resources in the project areas is 
weighed down by: (i) the poor condition of hydraulic assets- mainly due to deferred maintenance; (ii) limited knowledge 
and skills in water management - often inadequate to provide supplemental irrigation during Kharif season, and to cover 
water-stress conditions during Rabi; and (iii) weak arrangements for O&M. Additionally, most of the tank irrigation 
systems have been developed for rice cultivation and need to be adapted for a more diversified and more demanding 
cropping system.  

31. The proposed project aims to improve the performance of irrigation throughout the year and across cascades of 
selected tank irrigation systems through modernization of hydraulic assets, institutional reforms, and capacity 
strengthening. The objective is to use water more efficiently, reduce water losses and save water during Kharif season, 
and transfer these savings to Rabi season. Capacities for irrigation management (including the introduction of asset 
management) will be strengthened to provide higher quality services. In addition, the project will promote sustainable 
groundwater use to supplement scanty rainfall and mitigate increasing rainfall variability. Key outcome indicators include 
the productivity of water use ($/m3) and the number of water users provided with new/improved irrigation and drainage 
services (number). 

Subcomponent 2.1: Irrigation Modernization 

32. The project will invest in the modernization of hydraulic assets. To that end, a comprehensive water assessment will 
be conducted in the Project cascades to identify opportunities for reducing water losses and for transferring the savings 
to Rabi season. For each of these opportunities, the implications on downstream water use will be identified through 
preparation of a pre- and post-project cascade-wide water balance. Investments include strengthening of canal bunds, 
modernizing hydraulic canal structures, installation of field channels and sub-surface pressurized pipes, and developing 

groundwater extraction. The project will also help farmers access subsidies at central and state level for the promotion of 
pressurized irrigation at chak level. In line with GoO’s intention, where feasible, the project will finance investments 
through DBOTs on a Hybrid Annuity Basis. 

Subcomponent 2.2: Irrigation Management 

33. Crop diversification and intensification require a higher quality of irrigation service delivery to meet the 
requirements of more demanding crops. Traditional arrangements for irrigation management often lack the capacities 
and incentives to deliver these improved services. The project will pursue institutional reforms and pilot the use of private 
(publicly funded) operators that will be incentivized to deliver high performing irrigation and O&M services through DBOT 
contracts on a Hybrid Annuity basis – in conformity with GoO’s intentions.  

34. The Project will promote conjunctive management and sustainable use of both ground- and surface water resources 
by improving groundwater monitoring linking these with irrigation scheduling decisions. The Project will also establish a 
surface and groundwater monitoring and benchmarking system and will (i) link these data to decision making on irrigation 
scheduling, and (ii) significantly improve citizen engagement in the management of irrigation systems.  

35. The project will strengthen capacities of farmers and Pani Panchayats through Farmers’ Field Schools and 
demonstrations, among others in modern irrigation technologies, improving irrigation efficiency and rational hydraulic 
asset management. The project will also introduce the allocation of investment resources on the basis of scheme 
performance (including abidance by agreed water allocation, meeting efficiency targets and cost recovery). Capacities will 
also be strengthened to improve the management and maintenance of hydraulic assets. 

Component 3: Project Management 

36. This component will strengthen capacities for project management, monitoring and evaluation (M&E) (including, 
inter alia, the areas of procurement and financial management) through the provision of goods, consultant services, 
training, and financing of incremental operating costs. This component will also develop a comprehensive management 
information and data collection and reporting system on key performance outputs and impact indicators through baseline 
surveys, participatory assessments, mid-term reviews and final evaluations. Staffing of the PMU will include a number of 
technical, financial management, M&E and safeguards (social and environmental) experts. Detailed implementation 
arrangements will be spelled out in the Project Operational Manual. (POM). Regular training of PMU staff will be organized 
to strengthen their capacities to implement the project. 

 
    

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
Odisha is located on the east coast of India along the Bay of the Bengal. The state has coastal line of about 450 km, and a 

geographical area of 155,707 sq. km which accounts for 4.87% of the total area of India. The state of Odisha can be 
divided into five agro-ecological zones: (1) The coastal plains, (2) The middle mountainous range – part of Eastern Ghats 
mountain range, (3) The rolling uplands, (4) river valleys, and (5) subdued plateaus. While the state has a wide network of 
river basins and sub-basins, it is mainly associated with 3 major river basins; Brahamani, Mahanadi and Vansadhara. 
Despite such diverse natural resource base, it’s agriculture sector has been performing well below its potential. Among 
key constraints to the improved performance of Odisha’s agriculture sector include: (i) low productivity; (ii) limited 
diversification; (iii) high exposure and vulnerability to extreme weather events; and (iv) dysfunctional or non-existing 
value chains for important crops. 
  


To address these concerns, the project will invest on repair and rehabilitation of about 600 tanks spread across the state 
to revive small holder farming. The interventions will include: improving the efficiency of water assets, modernizing the 
irrigation systems, enhancing agriculture productivity, promoting adaptive agriculture practices, enhancing fishery 
production,  and promotion of climate friendly agri-business practices. 
  
 
 

 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
Government of Odisha has recently completed a project of this nature, reflecting that the implementation capacity has 

already been established to address environment and social safeguard implications. The PMU is already in place, and the 
consultancy services for conducting ESMF, IPNM and TDP are already in place. Safeguard compliance tools needed are 
already available with the Government of Odisha to be used during the proposed project. 
 

 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 
Gopalaswamy Srihari, Social Specialist 
Anupam Joshi, Environmental Specialist 
Sharlene Jehanbux Chichgar, Environmental Specialist 

 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The physical investments under the project would 
include rehabilitation of existing water assets such as 
strengthening of canal bunds, modernizing hydraulic 
canal structures, installation of field channels, etc. 
where improper construction could result in adverse 
impacts. The investments under the climate resilient 
agriculture practices could result in positive impacts 
on the environment with effective planning and 
implementation. The project has been categorized as 
category B. There is no large scale, significant and/or 
irreversible impacts envisaged due to the proposed 
project interventions. An Environmental and Social 
Assessment (ESA) will be undertaken to identify 
environment and social issues of significance. Based 
on ESA, an Environmental and Social and Management 
Framework (ESMF) will be prepared toadress the 
requirements of a category B project, to manage risks 
and maximize environmental and social opportunities. 
Both the ESA and ESMF will take into account 
experiences and lessons from the previous project. 

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No No impact is expected due to project interventions. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

The rehabilitation and modernization of the tank 
system is likely to improve the water storage capacity 
and wetlands in the upper catchment. As the 
rehabilitation of tanks may impact natural resources 
including wetlands (if any). The ESA that  will help 
ascertain such impacts, and will develop a screening 
mechanisms that will help identify and avoid impacts 
on sensitive environmental habitats and important 
ecosystems. As details of the exact sites of the 
proposed investments are yet to be finalized, the 
ESMF would include all adequate measures for any 
negative effects on natural habitats. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No No activities impacting on forests will be undertaken 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The project will not directly finance pesticides, but 
improved irrigation efficiency and subsequent increase 
in crop productivity and diversification may induce 
pesticide use. The project will strictly use IPNM 
(Integrated Pest and Nutrition Management) 
approach. In addition, the ESMF will have a detailed 
local specific IPNM strategy for the project. This will 
reduce the reliance on chemical pesticides, include all 
measure for labour health and safety for pesticide 
application and usage, and guidance on training and 
demonstrations, that will be provided so that there is 
no significant adverse impact on the environment and 
public health. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No No impact is expected due to project interventions. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 Yes 

The state has a sizeable tribal population - 22.5% of 
the total population. In fact, Odisha is unique in having 
distinct tribal areas enshrined under the 5th Schedule 
of the Indian Constitution. At this stage, investment 
plans and locations are not known, and therefore, a 
Tribal Peoples Planning Framework (TPPF) will be 
prepared. Subsequently, sub-project specific Tribal 
Development Plans will be developed as and when 
sub-project locations are finalized. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 No 

The project does not anticipate any form of land 
acquisition or involuntary resettlement impacts as it 
would cover the existing  tank with a focus on repair 
and rehabilitation only. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 Yes 
No new dam construction will be  supported under the 
project. The project will rehabilitate and modernize 
the existing rainwater harvesting structures (known as 

Tanks and each having more than 40 Ha of command 
areas). Some of them would be having earthen 
embankments above 10 meters high, hence the 
project is triggered. 
This policy was triggered during the previous project, 
and a Dam Safety panel was put in place. The same 
Dam Safety panel will continue for this project under 
the technical guidance from the Chief Engineer, 
Central Designs Organization. The project will seek 
better coordination with the Dam Safety panel and 
support safety enhancement of the tank system as 
part of the tank rehabilitation. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
There is no evidence that the project would impact on 
any international water ways 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No Project areas do not fall in any disputed areas. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Mar 31, 2019 
 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
The Borrower has already engaged consultants who shall commence preparation of the safeguards instruments soon. 

They shall undertake ESA to prepare Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF), Tribal Peoples Planning 
Framework (TPPF), Integrated Pest Management Plan (IPMP) / Integrated Nutrient Management Plan (IPNM). These 
instruments are expected to be ready by March 31, 2019, or before appraisal and will be publically disclosed.  
The ESMF will provide essential baseline data, confirm policies that are triggered, assess likely impacts of the project 

interventions. The ESMF will also propose mitigation measures for any adverse impacts that may be envisaged through 
the design and construction phases of various interventions. Recommendations for strengthening institutional capacity, 
and estimate the budget required for the implementation will also be included. Assessments will be participatory with 
extensive consultations with all the stakeholders. 
 
 

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Uganda Irrigation Modernisation Project (P163836) 

 
 

  
Nov 27, 2017 Page 1 of 18  

     

 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 03-Apr-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSC23380 


BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Uganda P163836  Uganda irrigation 
development and 
climate resilience 
project (P163836) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA Jan 15, 2019 May 30, 2019 Water 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Finance, Planning 
and Economic Development 

Ministry of Water and 
Environment 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
To provide irrigation and drainage services, and develop institutional capacity for irrigated agriculture production in the 
project areas. 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-NewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 200.00 

Total Financing 200.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 195.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 195.00 

          IDA Credit 195.00 

Non-World Bank Group Financing 

     Counterpart Funding 5.00 

          Borrower 5.00 
   
 

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

A-Full Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 
 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

 

1. Uganda has made significant progress in economic growth and poverty reduction over the last 30 years, 

rural poverty remains a major challenge. Following policy reforms that allowed market liberalization and led to 

political stability, Uganda registered high economic growth between 1987 and 2010, with Gross Domestic 

Product (GDP) averaging 5.1 percent1 in the last five years. The structure of the Ugandan economy has also 

undergone a major transformation during the same period, with a notable shift from a primarily agriculture-based 

economy to one dominated by services and industry. In 20152, the service sector became the largest contributor 

to GDP (52.8 percent), followed by agriculture (25.8 percent) and industry (21.4 percent), respectively. In line 

with its economic growth, the country achieved remarkable results in poverty reduction, cutting extreme poverty 

by half, between 1993 and 20063. The recent National Household Survey has however showed an increase in 

poverty from 19.7% in 2012/13 to 27% in 2016/17. The main poverty challenges are food insecurity, low 

agricultural productivity, a degrading natural resource base, inadequate planning for the rapid urbanization and 

low access to basic infrastructure and services.  

 

2. Agriculture has been a key driver of economic growth and poverty reduction in Uganda, irrigation 

development is essential for food security and agriculture transformation. As Uganda’s largest single economic 

sector, generating about one quarter of GDP and employing 70 percent of the labor force, agriculture plays a 

critical role for income generation, employment and livelihoods, particularly for the bottom 40% of the 

population, as well as overall economic development. In spite of the gradual decline in its GDP contribution, 

typical of transforming economies, agriculture remains the key source of exports contributing 80% of total 

exports. The agriculture sector supports over 80% of the poorest of the population, the rural areas account for 

94% of the poor, and 85% of the population. This demonstrates the high potential multiplier effect of agricultural 

growth on the socio-economic development of the country. Irrigation development which is now very limited in 

the Uganda is essential to increase agricultural productivity, manage the increasing climate risks and enable 

 
1 World Bank Data: Uganda Economic Overview (2017) 
2 World Development Indicators (2015)  
3 Uganda Poverty Assessment Report (2013): Ugandan poverty line USD 0.94 and 1.07 per day depending on the region and area). 



commercial cultivation in the country. In recognizing the critical roles of irrigation, the government in the Vision 

2040 and NDP II (2016-2020) lists irrigation investment as a high priority along with agricultural value-chain 

development. The goal is to transform the small-holder subsistence cultivation into modern commercial farming 

to increase production, productivity and farm income.  
 

Sectoral and Institutional Context 

 

3. The regulatory framework for irrigation in Uganda is generally aligned with international good 

practice although detailed implementation regulations and management institutions require strengthening.   

The Water Act (1995) provides the institutional framework and legislation for water resources management, 

irrigation, water supply and sanitation. The National Water Policy defines the responsibilities of different entities 

in water resource development, promotes water resource assessment and planning for irrigation, and calls for 

increasing the capacity of the farmers to access and use water for crop, fishery and livestock production. The 

Water Resources Management Reform Strategy (2005) provides for decentralized water resources management 

at the zone and basin levels. On the agricultural side, the 2010 National Agricultural Policy (NAP) stipulates the 

sectoral approach to the National Development Plan, emphasizes the need for rehabilitating government irrigation 

schemes, transferring the management responsibility of irrigation schemes to lowest appropriate levels, 

establishing new irrigation schemes, and increasing water storage for livestock and wildlife. The Agriculture 

Sector Strategic Plan (2015/16-2019/20) includes strategic interventions to increase access to water for 

agricultural production. The National Irrigation Policy (2017) lays out the guiding principles and general 

institutional arrangement for irrigation development and management, including coordinated planning, 

implementation, and service delivery, as well as cost recovery and beneficiary participation through water user 

associations (WUAs). The policy recognizes the role of farmers managing small-scale schemes, and encourages 

a community-based irrigation management approach. The National Irrigation Master plan (MWE 2011-2035) 

stipulates the priority irrigation development areas and schemes over short, medium and long terms.  

 

4. Irrigation, also called water for agricultural production (WfAP), is a shared responsibility between the 

Ministry of Water and Environment (MWE) and the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries 

(MAAIF). MWE takes overall responsibility for irrigation and off-farm irrigation development while MAAIF for 

water use and management of on-farm agricultural water facilities. Horizontal and vertical coordination is often 

lacking. Overall policy guidance to the water subsector is provided by the Water Policy Committee, comprising 

members from relevant sectors. Technical guidance to the sector is provided by the cross-sectoral Water and 

Environment Sector Working Group (WESWG), which includes recommendations of budget and programs, and 

sector performance assessment.   

 

5. Agriculture and irrigation are performing well below their potentials.    Uganda has a diverse agricultural 

production system primarily based on small-scale manual subsistence farming, and comprising a system of mixed 

agriculture with perennial and annual crops in most of the seven agro-ecological zones. The main crops are cereals 

(maize, sorghum, millet, rice) on some 1.7 million ha for the two cropping cycles out of the total 14.4 million ha 

agricultural area: root crops (25%), banana (17%), as well as pulses, oil seeds, coffee, vegetables and fruits. Export 

crops include coffee, tea, tobacco, cotton, cut flowers, and cocoa. Food crop production dominates the agriculture 

sector, contributing over 55% of the agricultural GDP, while cash crops contribute 17% and livestock 15%. 

Despite the dominance of food crop production, one third is marketed with export being less than 7%. The sector 

is seeing a trend of moving towards higher-value crops (perennial and seasonal) such as Tea, Cocoa, fruits etc., 


with more clear commercial and export orientation.  

 

6. Agriculture is mainly rain-fed with only 1.3% of total cultivated land under irrigation over a potential of 

1.1million ha (AICD/IFPRI, 2010) and 3.0 million ha (NBI 2012). Therefore, the sector is very vulnerable to 

climate change and variability. According to the 2017 National Food Security Assessment and IPC, around 31 

percent of the population was food insecure (in January 2017) and this deterioration was partly due to the drought 

conditions caused by the 2016/17 El Niño and La Niña climatic events. This highlights the inadequate climate 

resilience of agricultural production and farming communities. The crop yield and productivity in the country are 

well below their potentials, for example, the yield of maize in the country is around 2.4 tons/ha while in some 

parts of world farmers could easily produce with irrigation, 10-15 ton/ha of maize. The main contributing factors 

found by different studies are lack of reliable water supply (irrigation), quality of production inputs, poor 

extension services and little value-chain development. As a result, food insecurity and malnutrition as well as 

very low agricultural income are still major challenges for the country. Many households suffer from food 

insecurity and high levels of malnutrition, with 34% of children under 5 years being stunted. The most food-

insecure region is the North, followed by the East, in terms of dietary energy consumption. In the North, 59% of 

households consume only one meal per day. The number of food-insecure people in Uganda is projected to rise 

from 7 million in 2015 to 30 million by 2025. 

 

7. Irrigation development is still at preliminary stage in the country. To date, a total of some 15,000 ha of 

public small scale irrigation schemes (largest 600-800 ha) has been developed, mostly in the form of valley tanks 

and river diversion schemes. The government ministries are responsible for scheme construction, and once the 

schemes are completed farmers operate the schemes. There is no dedicated irrigation management authority and 

the irrigation service concept is not fully developed. Irrigation water charge is being exercised in some places. 

Operation and maintenance of irrigation schemes have been essentially informal until in the past few years when 

farmer-based irrigation management through WUAs and farmer cooperative societies were piloted under AfDB 

funded irrigation rehabilitation project, which has mixed results. Negligence and deferred maintenance are 

common phenomena, management capacity at national, district and scheme levels is rather limited, sustainability 

of the existing schemes are questionable. 

8. The Government has developed a strategy for irrigation development and management.     The NDP II 

(2016-2020) and the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) both recognize investment in irrigation as one of the 

keys to the country’s transformation. The NDP II Objectives related to irrigation include: increasing production 

and productivity along the value chain; addressing challenges in selected thematic technical areas including 

critical farm inputs, mechanization and irrigation; improving agricultural markets and institutional strengthening 

for agricultural development. Institutional strengthening is crucial, alongside investments in rural infrastructure 

and markets, farmer aggregation in producer associations and agricultural extension systems, to support the shift 

to higher-value agricultural production. The government has committed itself to increasing agricultural growth to 

6 percent per year and allocate at least 10 percent of the budget to the agricultural sector. In order to address the 

irrigation development and management challenges, the government has formulated an irrigation development 

strategy. The strategy includes the following key elements: (a) boosting irrigation infrastructure development 

investment through difference sources; (b) promoting integrated planning and coordinated implementation among 

irrigation, agriculture and related sectors; (c) rolling out the National Irrigation Policy and detailed 

implementation regulations; (d) developing  irrigation management institutions and farmer water user groups 

(WUAs) as well as service charge based cost recovery mechanisms for sustainable irrigation service delivery; and 

(e) strengthening agricultural support services through different pathways, including public service delivery, 


farmer-based cooperatives/enterprises and partnership with the private sector. The 2017 National Irrigation 

Policy sets an ambitious target of total irrigated area of 400,000 ha by 2040, with the objectives of achieving 

national food security, transforming the agriculture sector and significantly increasing agricultural income, 

through increasing production and productivity, improving drought-resilience of farming communities, and 

investing in agricultural value-chain development. To implement the above strategy, the government requested 

the World Bank to support its irrigation development agenda with focus on irrigation infrastructure development, 

irrigation management institution development and value-chain development.  

 
Relationship to CPF 

 

9. The CPF of the World Bank Group for the Republic of Uganda for the period of FY16-21 responds to the 

Government of Uganda vision of a transformed society from a peasant economy to a modern and prosperous 

country by 2040, and its interim goal to attain middle income status by 2020 as described in the second National 

Development Plan (NDP II). The CPF is designed to contribute directly to achieving the Sustainable Development 

Goals, focusing on three strategic areas: (a) strengthening governance, accountability and service delivery; (b) 

Raising incomes in rural areas; and (c) boosting inclusive growth in urban areas. 

 

10. The proposed project, marked as an FY19 lending operation, directly supports the Strategic Focus Area B 

of the CPF: Raising incomes in rural areas, by increasing agricultural productivity, improving the climate 

resilience of the poor and vulnerable farming communities. The project aims to modernize both the physical 

infrastructure system (including technology) and management and service institutions, required for sustainable 

irrigation services and agricultural transformation. This is well aligned with the GoU’s Vision 2040 and 

agricultural development strategy.  
 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 

11. Program Development Objective:   The proposed program development objectives are to improve 

financially sustainable irrigation and drainage services, and increase farmers’ agricultural revenue in the project 

areas. The objective will be achieved through a phased investment program to be implemented over 10-12 years, 
with each phase focusing on one or two priority region(s). 

 

12. Proposed (Phase 1) Project Development Objectives:   The development objectives of the project are 

to develop irrigation and drainage infrastructure and services, and institutional capacity for irrigated agricultural 

production in the project areas. The schemes under Phase 1 will focus in one or two regions such as southwestern 

and northern regions. 

Key Results (From PCN) 

 

13. The key results (PDO) indicators for Phase 1 Project would likely include the following: (a) Farmers/Area 

provided with new/improved irrigation and drainage infrastructure services (no./ha); (b) Operational WUAs 

established or strengthened (number); (c) farmer cooperatives or organizations established or strengthened 

(number); (d) Change in crop intensity; and (e) Irrigation service fee established.  


D. Concept Description 
 

14. Project concept and overall approach:    The proposed project will adopt a programmatic approach, 

based on the strategic vision that sustainable irrigation infrastructure operation and services depend upon 

helping farmers turn agriculture into a profitable business. The overall thinking is that reliable and affordable 

irrigation infrastructure and services enable high agricultural production and productivity leading to increase in 

farmer household income, that will enable farmers to pay for the irrigation and associated support services, and 

invest in high-value cultivation including value-chain development; and such investments demand high quality 

services to achieve the expected returns and foster a virtuous cycle of irrigated agriculture development. In view 

of the time required to complete the above development cycle, a three bite-sized program through a series of 

projects (SOP) is conceived for the proposed operation.  

 

15. The Program would be implemented over a period of 10-12 years. It targets a total irrigated area of some 

25,000-35,000 ha at a cost of US$400-500 million directly benefiting some 200,000 small and medium sized 

farmers (tentative, assuming an average 1 ha landholding for a household of six) in the water stressed areas with 

high development potential and/or where there is significant food insecurity issues. Phase 1 project will lay the 

foundation for the subsequent phases. Each phase will have different focus on infrastructure, institutions and 

productivity/income. Each phase prepares follow-up investments for the next phase, while every phase aims to 

bring the project objectives of the previous phase to a new level. Funding sources of the Program beyond Phase 

1 would be more diverse including possible private sector investments. The program focus, phasing, and coverage 

are shown in the Annex. 

 

16. Project Design Guiding Principles and Scheme Selection Criteria:  The project design will follow the 

guiding principles below: (a) integrated investment planning and joint preparation; (b) complementarity and 

synergy with related (agricultural) investment programs; (c) institutional design to ensure sustainability of project 

facilities and service delivery, with adequate arrangements, capacity building for cost recovery and user/private 

sector involvement; and (d) simple project design with adequate implementation readiness before approval.  

 

17. Project Composition:    The proposed Phase 1 Project at an initially estimated cost of US$150-200 

million, will have three components, i.e. irrigation infrastructure development, essential support services for 

agricultural production and value-chain development, and institutional strengthening including implementation 

support. At this stage, the project is estimated to develop some 10,000 ha of new irrigated area, directly benefiting 

around 60,000 poor small to medium farmers. The component description and indicative costs are as follows:   

Component 1.  Irrigation infrastructure development (US$175 million):   The objective of this component is to 

develop the irrigation and drainage infrastructure primarily for supplemental gravity irrigation services. It will 

finance construction and equipment for the water source works (storage reservoirs, river diversion weirs and 

pumping stations), related catchment management interventions, and three to five irrigation systems (including 

main canal and drainage system, cross structures, on-farm works, and operation and maintenance (O&M) 

facilities), associated resettlement and environmental management costs. It will also finance consultancies for 

scheme feasibility studies, designs and safeguards assessments including for the follow-up investments. The 

schemes are likely to concentrate on southwestern and northern regions. This is in view of the promising 

commercial production prospect (southwestern) and high drought-vulnerability and severe food insecurity 

(northern), and very importantly implementation readiness for a successful first phase. Scheme selection will be 

guided by the GoU irrigation master plan and groundwater option considered where adequate studies exist. 
     

Component 2.  Essential support services for agricultural production and value-chain development (US$15 

million):   This component aims at filling critical gaps in provision of essential support services for crop 

production and value-chain development.  It will include strengthening farmer groups/cooperatives for better 

access to quality inputs and appropriate technologies or practices with the aim of improving production and 

productivity. It will also support value chain development and market linkages to increase the value of traded 

items for better economic gains to the target population. The interventions will largely involve retaining experts 

for diagnostic assessments and for imparting knowledge and skills to the beneficiary communities; and provide 

financial support in form of credit or matching grants towards investment in produce storage facilities and value 

addition technologies. Interventions under this component will be complementary to the ongoing agricultural 

development operations by the government and other development partners, such as the Bank-financed 

Agricultural Cluster Development Project (ACDP), the Millennium Village Project (MVP), and the EU-funded 

Common Market for East and Southern Africa (COMESA) initiative. The approach to be adopted for this 

component would be consistent with that followed by the ACDP for improving farmer access to quality 

agricultural inputs and post-harvest handling.  

Component 3.  Institutional Strengthening and Implementation Support (US$8 million):  This component is 

intended to strengthen irrigation management institutions through technical assistance and capacity building and 

implementation support. The institutional strengthening will finance: (a) consultancies for irrigation regulations 

and guidelines development, and necessary supporting studies (e.g. irrigation water tariff) for implementing the 

national irrigation policy; (b) consultancies and training for formulation and capacity building of irrigation 

management organizations for irrigation service delivery and system O&M , including management entities and 

farmer irrigation water users associations (WUAs); and (c) training and consultancies for skills development for 

staff at national, district and scheme levels including beneficiary communities and farmers, in irrigation policy 

and regulations, irrigation technology and management, and agricultural water management. Implementation 

support will include technical and project management consultancies, necessary facilities (goods) and incremental 

operating costs for project implementation management.  

18. Lessons learned and considered in the project design:  The lessons learned from irrigation and irrigated 

agriculture operations supported by the Bank and other development partners in Uganda and elsewhere, which 

will be incorporated in the project design include the following: 

(a) Sustainable irrigation investments require development at adequate scale and support over a sufficiently 
long period to break the vicious cycle of irrigation (or irrigated agriculture) development; 

(b) Project design (complexity) should be compatible with the client capacity and development stage in the 
sector. The general implementation performance of Bank-financed agricultural operations in Uganda has 

been significantly below expectation, and therefore warranting a simple and realistic project design;  

(c) Integrated irrigation and agricultural investment planning, preparation, implementation and operational 
management are crucial prerequisite to successful irrigation projects;  

(d) Institutional design for irrigation operations should cover the entire project cycle. Participation of 
beneficiary communities through water user groups in irrigation system O&M and service delivery is 

essential for sustainable operation. Private sector involvements in irrigation and agricultural supporting 

services can enhance service delivery efficiency and performance;  

(e) Farmer-based irrigation scheme management arrangements have limitations particularly for larger 
schemes as reflected under the Uganda’s irrigation rehabilitation projects and other management models 

(options) need to be explored for managing the project schemes;  



(f) The project related social and environmental risks are adequately assessed and used to inform and 
influence the project design, and a robust institutional mechanism put in place for resettlement and 

safeguards risk management during implementation; and 

(g) Project implementation readiness at appraisal is critical for smooth implementation and timely completion 

19.    The proposed project will be implemented by the Ministry of Water and Environment (MWE). The 

Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fishery (MAAIF) will be involved in implementation of Component 

2. The district local governments (DLGs) and local communities at the locations of the project schemes will 

participate in implementation of different components. A project steering committee (PSC) chaired by the 

permanent secretary for water, and comprising senior officials from MAAIF and related ministries and districts, 

will be established to provide strategic directions, policy guidance, and high-level coordination. The existing 

project management unit (PMU) of MWE with experienced project management, procurement and safeguards 

staff, will function as the PMU for overall project management and coordination, and the secretariat to the PSC. 

An integrated implementation team comprising technical, agricultural and institutional staff from national and 

local government will be established at each location for execution of scheme-specific activities.    

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
The schemes are likely to concentrate on southwestern and northern regions. This is in view of the promising commercial 

production prospect (southwestern) and high drought-vulnerability and severe food insecurity (northern), and very 
importantly implementation readiness for a successful first phase. Scheme selection will be guided by the Government of 
Uganda (GoU) irrigation master plan and agreed selection criteria and process. Groundwater option shall be considered 
where adequate studies exist. As described in the project concept note, the project will finance construction of 20-30 m 
high storage dams on rivers and other water source works, several large scale new irrigation and drainage canal systems 
each with 1,000-4,000 ha of command area, as well as catchment management and agricultural water management and 
essential supporting services. Significant resettlement and labor influx are anticipated at some project schemes although 
land redistribution is not required. The project is expected to boost agricultural productivity through crop intensification 
and diversifications as well as value chain development. 
 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
Although the ministry of water and environment (MWE) as the implementing agency for the project has substantial 

experience in implementing World Bank funded projects and have overall social and environmental safeguards capacity, 
the envisaged project implementation unit (Directorate of Water Development, DWD) may require capacity 
enhancement. As such, a project management unit (PMU) will be established in the ministry's liaison department which 
has long years of experiences in managing water infrastructure projects financed by the Bank, to augment DWD’s capacity 
to manage the project. At District/Local Government level, there are District and Community Development Officers whose 
Safeguards Capacity will be enhanced as appropriate. A comprehensive safeguards capacity assessment of the project 
implementers will be carried out as part of the formulation of safeguards instruments and where necessary, 
enhancement measures will be proposed and implemented before project activities start. 
 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 
Herbert Oule, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 


Boyenge Isasi Dieng, Social Safeguards Specialist 
 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The project involves a number of interventions and 
investments such as large-scale irrigation 
infrastructure. Typically the irrigation infrastructure 
works will occur over a large area of some 10,000 
hectares in Phase 1 (25,000 – 35,000 hectares over 3 
phases) and may lead to large scale environmental and 
social impacts, affecting a wider area, and resulting in 
significant health and safety impacts, including labor 
influx and associated socio-economic aspects. Because 
of this, the project has been assigned EA Category A. 
This Category A project is preparing two independent 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs) 
for the planned Nyimur (North East) and Kabuyanda 
(South West) schemes, which will respectively cover 
approximately 2,741 and 3,663 hectares, under Phase 
1 project. Civil works will include construction of dams 
20-30 meters high and associated reservoirs, and 
establishement of irrigation systems in the command 
areas. The studies will also include Environmental and 
Social Management Plans (ESMP), Pest Management 
Plans (PMP) for the priority schemes. During 
preparation of ESIAs for the individual sub-projects 
sites, Cumulative Impact Assessment will be part of 
the assessment and appropriate mitigation measures 
captured in the ESMPs for implementation. The ESIAs’ 
preparation has included extensive stakeholder 
consultations, which will continue after the ESIA 
reports are publicly disclosed and during project 
implementation. Since these two ESIAs are 
deliberative, their findings (including impacts) shall be 
included in the Appraisal ISDS after clearance by the 
RSA and disclosure by both the Bank and GoU. Since at 
this stage only two irrigation schemes shall be 
subjected to ESIAs and RAPs, Environmental and Social 
Management Frameworks (ESMFs) will be drafted to 
guide the mitigation of impacts for schemes whose 
detailed designs are to be completed during 
implementation stage. They will include an annex with 
an Environmental and Social Screening form for sub-
project activities under component 1.. The 
Frameworks will also cover auxiliary facilities which 


are normally not covered under the first set of 
ESIAs/RAPs, and these shall include guidance on 
acquisition, operation and management of facilities 
such as workers’ camps, equipment storage areas, 
material sites, waste management sites, etc. The 
ESMPs will include environmental rules for contractors 
that cover site-specific technical specifications, Labor 
Influx Management Plans, Labor Camp Management 
Plans, Code of Conducts for all construction personnel, 
and recommended penalties for non-compliance. 
These ESIAs and ESMPs will demonstrate how the 
project would comply with all applicable rules and 
guidelines, including: (i) all triggered World Bank 
Safeguard Policies; (ii) relevant World Bank Group 
Environmental, Health and Safety Guidelines; (iii) 
World Bank guidance on Managing the Risks of 
Adverse Impacts on Communities from Temporary 
Project Induced Labor Influx; (iv) Guidelines on the 
establishment of a functioning Grievance Redress 
Mechanism (GRM); (v) World Bank Africa Region’s 
Interim Guidelines for Safeguards Application in 
Agricultural Water Management Projects; and (vi) 
Uganda National Environment Management 
Authority’s (NEMA) Guidelines for Environmental 
Impact Assessment and Environmental Auditing for 
Irrigation and Drainage Operations. In addition, a 
Stakeholder Engagement/Communication Plan will be 
drafted during project preparation to ensure that two 
levels of consultations are carried out  with adequate 
involvement of all stakeholders, including women and 
members of vulnerable groups. These Plans will serve 
as a tool for having an open and continuous 
communication with the affected communities. The 
communications strategy will be updated to include 
measures to address specific issues related to labor 
influx that will be explored by the social assessments, 
such as child labor, harassment of any sort, safety and 
security, gender-based violence (GBV), Sexual 
Exploitation and Abuse (SEA), HIV/AIDS and so on. 
 
The ESIAs and RAPs, including ESMPs and PMPs for the 
priority schemes and the framework instruments 
(ESMF and RPF) will be cleared and disclosed in-
country and on the World Bank’s external website by 
project’s appraisal.  


Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

  

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

The project is designed to minimize any adverse 
impacts on natural habitats as a result of irrigation 
development, while strengthening the management of 
vulnerable catchment areas. This policy is triggered 
because irrigation development will take place in 
wetlands and river areas and may have an impact on 
the remnants of natural habitats, both downstream of 
the command area, and in the catchments where 
deforestation and land clearing activities may be 
carried out. It is, however, expected that no 
environmentally sensitive habitats will be significantly 
converted under this project, rather environmental 
conservation will be encouraged at the project sites. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes 

The policy is triggered because of envisaged potential 
impacts on forest habitats as a result of dam 
construction and water collection/harvesting and 
delivery systems. Detailed information on site specific 
impacts on forests will be provided in the ESIAs to be 
prepared for the different project sites and 
appropriate mitigation actions included in the 
respective ESMPs. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The policy is triggered due to potential expansion, 
intensification of agricultural activities, and 
diversification into new crops that often require more 
frequent usage of combinations of agro-chemicals. A 
generic Pest Management Plan (PMP) will be prepared 
as part of the ESMF and disclosed by appraisal. Where 
use of pesticides will be anticipated, site specific PMPs 
will be included in the respective ESIAs. The PMPs will 
be adopted and included in the project 
implementation manual to address pest management 
issues that may arise in project sites due to both area 
expansion under irrigation and expected increase in 
pesticide use associated with productivity 
improvement. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 

The policy is triggered as construction activities may 
lead to opportunistic finds of archaeological artifacts 
and/or may have an impact on graves and other 
cultural sites. Chance find provisions will therefore, be 
included in construction contracts while potential 
impacts on other identified physical cultural resources 
will be addressed by site-specific environmental 
management plans (EMPs). 


     

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 

This policy is not triggered because none of the people 
within the planned project area meet the specific 
criteria under which indigenous peoples are defined in 
OP 4.10. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

This policy is triggered because of anticipated impacts 
under component 1, which objective is to develop the 
irrigation and drainage infrastructure (primarily for 
supplemental gravity irrigation services) and finance 
construction and equipment for the water source 
works (storage reservoirs, river diversion weirs and 
pumping stations), related catchment management 
interventions, and three to five irrigation systems 
(including main canal and drainage system, cross 
structures, on-farm works, and operation and 
maintenance (O&M) facilities), associated 
resettlement and environmental management costs. 
These activities may trigger land acquisition and 
involuntary resettlement as land requirements for 
purposes of construction of any of these facilities may 
permanently or temporarily limit access to both public 
or private land and other assets by local communities. 
The areas envisaged to be used as reservoirs for both 
priority schemes are currently used by a few PAPs for 
residence and farming while the rest is utilized by 
community members for growing perennial crops, 
hunting, gathering, apiary and fishing. 
 
Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) are being prepared 
for the two priority schemes and will be disclosed by 
project appraisal. For those where the scope and other 
details of works, including the exact locations of the 
infrastructure within each project site are not yet 
determined, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) 
will be prepared and disclosed both in country and on 
the World Bank’s external website before project 
appraisal. 
 
In addition, some land consolidation might be required 
for some of the irrigation schemes and particular 
attention will be given to the process through 
extensive and inclusive consultations with affected 
communities to ensure that potential changes in 
ownership and land tenure are adequately addressed;  
All RAPs will be required to explicitly describe the 
modalities of these processes. 



Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 Yes 

The policy is triggered because of the project will 
finance construction of dams. In compliance with the 
triggered OP 4.37, a Dam safety panel is being 
constituted to provide the necessary oversight. The 
irrigation dams will be designed by qualified 
engineers, and dam safety measures will be 
incorporated in dam operations. Dam Safety plans for 
the proposed large dams (including an Emergency 
Preparedness Plan (EPP)) will be drafted, reviewed, 
endorsed and disclosed. For small dam construction, 
rehabilitation, and maintenance relevant oversight 
procedures will be included in the Project 
Implementation Manual. Kabuyanda scheme will 
iinclude construction of a 25m high dam, while the 
total number of dams to be constructed under each 
phase of the Program is not yet known at this stage. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

Yes 

This policy is triggered by the Project as it will 
contribute to building infrastructure and enhancing 
the environment for irrigated agriculture in selected 
high potential sites across the country during project 
implementation that may have an impact on riparian 
water sources. Irrigation schemes under the proposed 
project may be located on rivers which are tributaries 
to international waterways such as the River Nile. The 
relevant notifications per the requirements will be 
sent to Riparian countries before appraisal. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
All of the territory within the program undisputedly 
falls within Ugandan territory. Therefore this policy is 
not triggered. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Jan 31, 2019 
 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Safeguards related studies (ESIAs, RAPs, and PMPs) for two priority schemes (Kabuyanda and Possibly Nyimur schemes) 

and the safeguards policy framework (ESMF and RPF) will be completed by Project Appraisal in August, 2018; Other 
scheme-specific ESIAs, RAPs, PMPs and the Cumulative Impact Assesment will be completed during early stage of project 
implementation. 
 
 



 
























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Livestock and Fisheries Sector Development Project (P159382) 

 
 


Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 30-Oct-2016 | Report No: PIDISDSC19772 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Ethiopia P159382  Livestock and Fisheries 
Sector Development 
Project (P159382) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA Apr 24, 2017 Sep 05, 2017 Agriculture 

Lending Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Federal Ministry of Finance 
and Economic Development, 
Federal Democratic Republic 
of Ethiopia 

Ministry of Livestock and 
Fisheries 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
Increase livestock and fisheries productivity , commercialization and market access of targeted smallholders in Ethiopia. 

 

 Financing (in USD Million) 

 

Financing Source Amount  

International Development Association (IDA)  150.00  

Total Project Cost  150.00  

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B-Partial Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

 
SAFEGUARDS_TABLE_OPS Have the Safeguards oversight and clearance functions been transferred to the Practice Manager? (Will not be 
disclosed) 
No    
 
 

 
 
Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
 
1. Ethiopia is a large, landlocked, and diverse country. It is the 11th poorest country in the world by 
income per person, and home to Sub-Saharan Africa’s second largest population of about 92 million people, the 

vast majority of which are rural dwellers. The natural resources base remains the foundation for most 

livelihoods, and is subject to considerable climate risks. Despite past progress, a historic legacy of 

underinvestment still bears its mark as more than half of the adult population is illiterate and the country’s 

infrastructure deficits remains one of the largest in the world. Ethiopia is undergoing a faster demographic 

transition than the rest of Africa and the rapidly rising working-age population presents opportunities as well as 

challenges. 

 

2. Ethiopia has experienced a sustained period of rapid economic growth and progress towards the 
achievement of Millennium Development Goals (MDG), however it retains a very high poverty rate, high levels 

of chronic under-nutrition and continued vulnerability of households and communities.  The “development 

state” model, put in place following the overthrow of the repressive military regime in the early 1990s, has seen 

high levels of government-led investment in infrastructure, a commitment to decentralization of service delivery 

and devolution of authority and some liberalization of the economy.  While these reforms have progressed to 

different degrees, the impacts on the economy have been broadly positive, with strong and generally broad-

based economic growth averaging around 10 percent over the past 10 years.  

 

3. The services and agricultural based economy is relatively stable, but the private sector remains nascent. 
Agriculture accounts for most jobs and about 40 percent of output and exports. Services accounts for close to 

half of output and half of exports. Manufacturing shares of output, jobs and exports have remained stagnant at 

around five percent, but the sector holds the promise of a takeoff. The economy is relative stable though high 

inflation presents occasional challenges. Substantial external deficits arise largely as a result of very low exports 

and high public capital imports. Supported by a system of financial repression and other heterodox macro-

financial policies, Ethiopia has the third highest public investment rate in the world, but the sixth lowest private 

investment rate. This reflects a fledgling private sector with state owned enterprises dominating several key 

services sectors. 

 

4. Albeit from a low base, the country has seen solid progress on a range of human development 
indicators. Poverty in both rural and urban areas has been reduced substantially though remains high by 

international standards, with 78 percent of the population living below US$2 per day. Despite high levels of 

public resources channeled to the sector, the MDG targets for universal primary education would likely not be 

met, though gender parity is on course. With respect to health and nutrition, Ethiopia is on track to reach the 

child mortality, HIV-AIDS and malaria MDGs as a result of the expansion of health infrastructure and service 

delivery systems.  Under-nutrition remains a major challenge: despite reductions, levels of underweight and 

stunted children remain very high, and is prevalent in both food secure and food insecure districts and within all 

but the highest wealth quintile.  

 

5. The vision of the country, as expressed in the Growth and Transformation Plan (GTP, 2009/10 to 
2014/15), and in tvhe Second Growth and Transformation Plan (GTPII, 2015 to 2020) is to reach the level of a 

middle-income economy by 2025.  This is an ambitious goal, and would require the country to move to a higher 


 

growth trajectory and address persistent challenges including ensuring macro-economic stability, the lagging 

quality of social services, the weak capacity of the public sector and encouraging a higher level of private 

investment. Further opening of the economy would be vital to achieve increased productivity and 

competitiveness in the industrial and services sector and to achieve the government’s ambitious plans for 

agricultural transformation.  

 

6. The challenges of moving to higher growth need also to be set in the context of significant external and 
internal risks that may need to be addressed. External economic shocks could impact on growth, including the 

decline in prices for export commodities, while issues with neighboring countries could increase domestic 

instability, including tensions with Eritrea, instability in Somalia and South Sudan, and the on-going water 

related dispute with Egypt.  Internally, vulnerability to natural disasters, mainly drought, would continue to 

undermine development efforts, with trends suggesting an increase in rainfall variability. 
 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
7. The agricultural sector remains a dominant sector in Ethiopia and contributes significantly to economic 
growth. Although the Ethiopian economy is undergoing a structural transformation, (from agriculture to 

services), agriculture comprises 45 percent of total output and employs 78 percent of its labor force. In addition, 

the sector is a major contributor to export earnings, with over 80 percent of goods exports (including coffee). 

Despite its declining share in the economy, the agriculture sector is growing rapidly. Based on official statistics, 

the sector grew on average by 7 percent per year over the past 15 years. Although there is debate about the 

reliability of these figures, with some studies showing a slower growth rate, there is consensus that the sector 

grew at fast pace over the past decade. The key sources of growth include: (1) increased area under cultivation; 

(2) increased productivity, largely driven by large public investments in agricultural extension and rural roads 

among others, and (3) some advances in public policy including improvements in land tenure security. In 

addition to contributing to economic output and exports, agricultural growth correlates with poverty reduction 

through positive impacts on farming and non-farm rural economies.  

 

8. Livestock (including fisheries) is emerging as a priority focus area for the Government. It is as part of its 
ambitious plans under the GTP2, which would support the country to move towards middle-income status by 

2025. Despite the neglect and lack of attention to date, the livestock sector is seen as significant in achieving 

multiple goals of the government including: (i) contribution to overall economic growth, including an increase 

in the volume and value of exports; (ii) contributing to poverty reduction in both highland and lowland areas; 

(iii) contributing to improved food security and nutritional outcomes for rural and urban households; and 

(iv) supporting the country’s green growth priorities. In this context, the Government has laid the institutional 

and analytical basis for the sector with the creation of the new Ministry of Livestock and Fisheries (MoLF) in 

October 2015, and the recent approval of the Livestock Master Plan (LMP) based on a rigorous Livestock 

Sector Analysis.  

 

9. Ethiopia has 55 million head of cattle, 78 million goats and sheep, 28 million chickens and 5 million 
beehives. It has the largest livestock population in Africa and ranks fifth in the world

1
. In addition, there is 

potential to better utilize water resources to develop the fisheries and aquaculture sector. In spite of this 

potential, food, nutrition and livelihood securities remain a challenge for many households. Approximately 44 

      

10. Spurred by population growth, increasing urbanization and incomes, domestic demand for meat and 
dairy products continues to grow. The meat and dairy markets present huge opportunities for business, and 

increasing the availability of animal sourced products can address food and nutrition security challenges in 

Ethiopia. However, key challenges continue to undermine the performance and potential of the livestock sector. 

The sector as a whole is characterized by low production and productivity levels. For example, the average milk 

yield of Ethiopian cows is 1.5 kg per day, which is lower compared to other countries in the region such as 

Kenya (3.6 kg per day) and Rwanda (3.6 kg per day), and significantly lower compared to major milk producing 

countries such as China (7.8 kg per day) and the US (25 kg per day)
3
. Several factors undermine livestock 

productivity and production. Inadequate feeds, poor animal health due to disease prevalence, low livestock 

genetic make-up, weak adoption of improved livestock practices and weak livestock support services are major 

sources of low productivity levels. The public sector dominates livestock support service delivery, and service 

delivery systems for animal health, breeding, feed, finance and extension are weak.   

 

11. Livestock disease incidence is high and to limit its impact, especially economic losses for producers, 
animal health and veterinary services need to work more effectively both in terms of quality of service and 

institutional management. Often rural farmers are underserved -- one health post covers three Kebeles – and 

complain that service provided do not meet their needs. There are over 5000 health staff in the public sector and 

the private sector engagement is limited to urban and peri-urban areas.
4
 There is also dissatisfaction with the 

quality of drugs and vaccines available. The National Veterinary Institute produces 12-17 vaccines for 

transboundary and for some endemic animal diseases. Other vaccines are imported.  Counterfeit and 

substandard drugs are sold next to quality drugs and over 90 percent of animal drugs are imported.
5
 VDFACA is 

responsible for regulation and control of veterinarian vaccines and drugs but is a new agency and building 

capacity.     

 

12. Poor animal nutrition due to feed scarcity, quality and affordability is another key challenge to livestock 
productivity in Ethiopia.  In dairy, only 0.2 percent of cattle holders use improved feed

6
. Limited use of 

improved fodder production and underdeveloped feed preservation practices result in feed shortages in the 

highland mixed crop livestock system, while bush encroachment and rangeland deterioration due to lack of 

sustainable resource management  limit feed availability in pastoral and agro-pastoral areas. Overall, grassland 

coverage of Ethiopian land has been reduced from 30 percent (1980) to 12 percent (2000)
7
. This has 

significantly reduced the amount of roughage available for livestock feed. Extension work in feed has not paid 

significant attention to improved conservation and use of crop residue and by products. In addition, the 

imposition of a 60 percent VAT tax on imported feed pre-mix, concentrates and other inputs combined with 

high custom duties (53 percent) on feed mill ingredients significantly raises the cost of production
8
. These 

factors hinder the use of improved feed and fodder, limiting nutritional health and productivity of livestock.    

 

13. Over 90 percent of Ethiopia’s livestock population is of indigenous breeds (cattle 98 percent and poultry 
95 percent) with low productivity levels. For an average laying period, indigenous chickens lay on average 12 

                                            
2

eggs per hen compared to 107 eggs for exotic breeds
9
. Improving the genetic potential through crossbreeding 

and improving indigenous breeds is paramount in raising livestock productivity. The National Artificial 

Insemination Center (NAIC) produces and distributes semen at heavily subsidized cost ($0.23 cents per 

insemination)
10

. However, conception rates remain very low (less than 40 percent on average). AI service 

delivery is weak: producers often do not obtain the service at the right time and the NAIC collects and processes 

inadequate semen. There is a need for policy to encourage competition among alternatives AI service providers, 

while the national breeding policy focuses on guiding the choice of breeds and monitor breeding materials.  

 

14. Markets of livestock products are largely unorganized and fragmented. In dairy, only 2 percent of 
marketed milk supplied from the highlands is handled by the organized sector concentrated in urban areas. The 

rest is sold through informal channels, which are characterized by no licensing requirements, limited 

compliance with safety standards and high risks of contamination. For meats, there is inadequate control and 

inspection of abattoirs. Backyard production characterizes the poultry sector, yet the potential of backyard 

poultry remains untapped. Per capita consumption of milk and poultry in Ethiopia are low, compared to those in 

other East African markets
11

. However, Ethiopians regularly consume dairy products
12

, and the projected 

increase in demand in response to population growth, urbanization presents business opportunities in milk and 

meat markets
13

, especially opportunities that can include more women (e.g. milk and poultry).  

 

15. To increase the potential of the livestock product markets, including export of livestock products, 
several improvements are needed including, strengthening market linkages, increasing per capita consumption 

and greater awareness of the nutritional value of milk and livestock products, increasing value addition, and 

improving food safety and quality measures. Most of all, there is a need to rethink the roles of the public and 

private sectors: there is considerable scope to increase private sector investment in production, processing and 

service provision, while strengthening national programs’ capacity and government’s regulatory roles.   

 

16. The main elements justifying increased investment in the sector are as follows: (i) Ethiopia has the 
largest livestock population in Africa, which can be a major asset for economic growth, poverty reduction, 

improved food security and nutritional outcomes; (ii) the livestock sector is underperforming despite its 

enormous potential; (iii) public services to the agriculture sector have prioritized the crop sector over livestock. 

The main service delivery with respect to the feed, animal health and animal breeding has faced systemic and 

operational challenges limiting the sector to develop; (iv) low participation of the private sector in livestock 

sector limits private investments and opportunities for intensification and commercialization. Weak market 

linkages and high cost of basic inputs and low access to appropriate financial products are major features of the 

smallholder livestock systems; and (v) weak institutional capacity throughout the sector, including in private 

and public organizations is a further hindrance to the growth of the sector.  

17. It is in this context that the Government is now giving greater attention to the sector. The  Government 
of Ethiopia has recently completed the LMP, which provides an ambitious vision for the transformation of the 

sector. In view of this, there is a clear and strong rationale to design a livestock project to address the challenges 

of overall weak performance of the sector, limited access to quality livestock services and markets, limited 

participation of the private sector and institutional and policy gaps and challenges existing in the sector.   

                                            
9

18. Key guiding principles underpinning preparation of the proposed project include: 

a. The needs are long term and require policy and institutional reforms, coupled with public and 
private sector investments. The requested IDA support would therefore need to be positioned in a 

broader, longer term support to the sector. The proposed project, likely to have a six year timeframe, 

would aim to invest in addressing some immediate needs in the sector, while supporting key 

institutional building blocks for the longer term development of the sector. 

b. The team would aim to bring in leading global technical knowledge to the preparation process, 
including a close collaboration with the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 

(FAO), the International Livestock Research Institute (ILRI) and the World Organization for Animal 

Health (OIE). In this regard, it has been agreed with FAO that its staff would join the preparation 

team and provide substantive inputs for the project design process. 

c. The preparation process would seek to collaborate with IFC, IFAD and on-going WB-financed 
projects to ensure alignment and where appropriate to seek opportunities for more formal 

collaboration and/or co-financing. 

The project would engage with multiple stakeholders in the sector. From the Government side, this would 

stretch beyond the MoLF, and include further relevant Ministries and Agencies, including the Ministry of 

Natural Resource Management (MoNRM), Ministry of Trade, Ministry of Industry, the Agricultural 

Transformation Agency (ATA), etc., at both Federal and Regional levels. It would also include private sector 

participants and associations, and farmer/herder/professional representatives. 
 
Relationship to CPF 
 

19. The Ethiopia Country Partnership Strategy dated August 29, 2012 was completed at the end of FY16 
and the new Country Partnership Framework (CPF) is under preparation. It will be based on the Systematic 

Country Diagnostic (SCD), which was completed in March 2016. The SCD identifies the most critical 

constraints and opportunities facing Ethiopia to accelerate progress towards the WBG twin goals. It emphasizes 

the leading role that agricultural growth (including livestock) has had in driving the reduction of poverty. The 

predominance of agriculture as a source of income for the poorer households in Ethiopia suggests that growth in 

the sector will remain important for poverty reduction in the coming years. The SCD identifies eight binding 

constraints to the achievement of the twin goals, including poor market access for farmers and an uncompetitive 

private sector. These resonate with the aims of the LMP, which emphasizes the need for private sector 

investment with approaches that link livestock producers better to markets. Although still in draft, the new CPF 

will likely include objectives to develop the institutions, services and infrastructure to increase private sector 

engagement in the economy, and to increase agricultural and livestock productivity and commercialization. The 

project would be closely aligned to these goals, as it would aim to increase smallholder productivity and for 

selected products to improve the linkages for smallholders to value chains, and would support the improved 

functioning of these value chains. 

 




C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 

 
 
Increase livestock and fisheries productivity , commercialization and market access of targeted smallholders in 
Ethiopia. 

 

20. Strategic approach. The principal aim of the project is to support the government’s strategy for livestock 
growth and transformation as articulated in its GTP2 and LMP in adding value to the existing investments in 

support to the sector. It also supports the fisheries sector, not included on the LMP but newly added by the 

government as a clear priority. The proposed project would follow a dual approach of: (i) supporting immediate 

and long-term capacity building of the newly established MoLF and its strategic national programs; and (ii) 

targeting strategic commodity value chains through a comprehensive support to smallholder producers, in line 

with the government cluster approach.   

 
21. Direct beneficiaries. The primary beneficiaries of the project would include smallholder farmers 
inclusive of family, traditional and small-scale producers; smallholder farmers with improved husbandry 

practices; and producer organizations. Smallholder producers are being considered around four different levels 

of advancement (para. 23). Other direct beneficiaries would be: (i) livestock farmer’s organizations and their 

apex institutions; (ii) small and medium scale private livestock operators and enterprises; (iii) vulnerable groups, 

particularly women and youths; and (iv) livestock support services institutions, including public livestock 

research and extension services, NGOs, and service providers involved in the targeted livestock value chains in 

the project areas.  

22. Indirect beneficiaries. Secondary beneficiaries would include other livestock producers not directly 
involved with the project activities who would indirectly benefit from the national programs (e.g. improved 

animal diseases service delivery). Value chain actors (buyers, processors, and exporters) would benefit from 

increased provision of livestock products. On the consumption side, consumers in Ethiopia would benefit from 

increased and better quality of national animal sourced products supply. Other indirect beneficiaries would be 

livestock service providers, including private veterinarians, and inputs providers, including feed, veterinary 

medicines, and genetic material suppliers. 

23. Transformation pathway. In order to address the actors in holistic and systematic manner, the 
identification mission developed a transformation pathway for improved livestock productivity and 

commercialization. In this pathway, the project envisions the smallholder farmers to move through stages (Stage 

1: Smallholder farmer, Stage 2: stage 1 with improved husbandry practices, Stage 3: stage 2 organized into 

producer organizations and Stage 4: stage 3 in productive partnerships along the value chain) for them to 

achieve the goals of increased productivity, commercialization, and market access, in an inclusive and 

sustainable manner. Each stage requires a specific set of interventions tailored to the beneficiary present status 

in the transformation pathway. Therefore, the project would simultaneously intervene in all four stages of the 

transformation pathway, but with a differentiated focus: stage 1 and stage 2, where most of the Ethiopian 

smallholders are present, would require fundamental access to quality services, inputs and organization and 

management skills; stage 3 and stage 4, where fewer actors are currently present, would require more 

specialized support. Figure 1 below elaborates about the transformation pathway in more detail.  

24. Target Value Chains. The project would target three priority value chains considered strategic both for 
food security/national supply and for their potential for growth and innovation. The primary target value chains 

are: (i) dairy with small-scale mixed crop-livestock systems in wet highlands and dairy belts, including peri-

urban areas; (ii) poultry with small-scale broilers and layers systems in all highlands, urban and peri-urban 

production zones; and (iii) fish with improved inland fisheries and aquaculture in selected suitable areas. In 

addition, the project would support the red meat value chain nation-wide through its support to the strategic 

national programs on animal health, access to feed and traceability system, as well as through its direct support 

to the dairy value chain in small-scale mixed crop-livestock systems through specific income generating 

activities such as fattening. The latter would be supported through the capacity building of national programs.  

There is a strong rationale for the selection of the dairy, poultry, and fisheries and aquaculture value chains for 

the project. These commodities are important for the food and nutritional security of the country. Milk is a 

remunerative commodity which can have a significant impact on poverty alleviation efforts for the estimated 8 

million households in Mixed Rainfall Sufficient (MRS) and Mixed Rainfall Deficient (MRD) regions that have 

dairy cattle as primary livestock. In addition, improving the productivity of the dairy sector would have positive 

effect in reducing GHG emission intensity and climatic sustainability. Poultry meat and eggs are important 

sources of protein. Successful poultry interventions would enable the sub-sector to move to improved and more 

organized family poultry with semi-scavenging crossbreds, better access to services, inputs and markets, and 

expand its scale of more specialized dual purposes breeds, and layer and broiler operations. Such a 

transformation would contribute considerably to reducing poverty and increase national income. In addition, 

improving the productivity of the poultry sector would have positive effect on the feed conversion ratio (kg feed 

per kg product), and help meet the Climate Resilience Growth Economy target of increasing the share of 

chicken meat to total meat consumption from the current 5% to 27% by 2030, by substituting red meat with the 

chicken meat. This substitution can have environmental benefits as red meat comes from larger high-emitting 

ruminant. Fisheries and aquaculture are important to address the food and nutrition security. Fish is a 

remunerative commodity and can play a significant role in poverty alleviation efforts for the 100,000 

households who largely depend on fishing, with the potential to increase the number of households to half a 




million. Sustainable investment in fisheries would enable Ethiopia to exploit the ample potential of its 

renewable fisheries resources found in many lakes, reservoirs and rivers. Investors are eager to enter the 

aquaculture sub-sector. But some major hurdles including high quality fingerling and fish-feed production, need 

to be removed for such investment to actualize. 

 

25. Geographical targeting: The primary geographic focus area of the project would be the rural and peri-
urban areas of the highland regions where the dairy, poultry, fisheries and aquaculture value chains dominate. 

Furthermore, the project would follow the Government cluster approach and intervene in the existing or planned 

clusters of dairy, poultry and fisheries and aquaculture. This would enable the project to benefit from synergistic 

gains which might arise from other investment (infrastructure, private sector, etc.) coming in these clusters. 

Tentatively, the project might be implemented in the following regions/places in Ethiopia: Amhara, Addis 

Ababa, Oromiya, SNNR, Tigray, Harari, Benishangul Gumuz, Dire Dawa and Gambella. 

 
Key Results (From PCN) 

 
26. The following PDO level results indicators have been identified : 

(i) Number of direct project beneficiaries reached, disaggregated by gender (core indicator) and age 
group (18-35 yrs., representing the youth); 

(ii) Percentage increase of productivity of targeted small-scale productions (by selected commodity);  

(iii) Percentage increase in the sales of targeted small scale production (by selected commodity); and 

(iv) Beneficiary satisfaction rate with livestock services delivery systems supported by the project 
(disaggregated by gender and age group). 

 
D. Concept Description 

 

27. The project would be structured as an Investment Project Financing (IPF), funded by an IDA credit for 
US$150 million over six years (to be confirmed). At this stage, it was agreed with the Government to consider 

structuring the project around the following four components: (A) Strengthening National Programs; (B) 

Farmer’s Access to Productive Services, Inputs and Assets; (C) Farmer’s Access to Output Markets; and 

(D) Project management, coordination and monitoring and evaluation. This structure would be further reviewed 

and revised if necessary during the preparation period.    

28. The first component is crosscutting and designed to build immediate and long term human and 
institutional capacity of the key actors in the livestock and fisheries sector, as well as support key Strategic 

National Programs (SNPs), notably on animal health, feed and genetic [in order to improve the delivery of 

livestock services to small scale livestock producers]. The second component is designed to support sustainable 

productivity increase in the selected commodity value chains, through improved smallholders’ access to 

effective livestock and fisheries services, inputs and productive assets. The third component is designed to 

allow better access to markets for smallholders, through collective actions and productive partnerships, by 

supporting business linkages between livestock producer organizations and/or cooperatives, buyers and 

financial institutions and value addition at producer organizations/cooperatives levels where business 


 

opportunities exist. The fourth component would support implementation of the first three components and 

inform the project execution and performance monitoring, reporting and knowledge management. 

 

Component A: Strengthening National Programs.  The first component of the project would be designed to 

building immediate and long-term human and institutional capacity of the livestock and fisheries sector key 

actors, as well as supporting key selected strategic national programs (SNPs). In addition, this component 

could support the development of a contingency emergency response plan, to increase preparedness in the 

event of a crisis affecting the livestock sector (subcomponent A4). 

 

This component would have the following four sub-components:  

 

29. Sub-component A1. Policy development, investment planning and sector coordination. This sub-
component would strengthen staff capacity in the MoLF to carry out its core responsibilities of sector analysis, 

policy preparation and implementation, and sector monitoring and evaluation, and coordination. Activities 

could include: identification of short-and long-term training and education needs, improvement of the MoLF 

information system, development of a communication strategy and implementation plan to improve the relation 

between the ministry and key stakeholders involved in the targeted value chains, including private investors and 

financial institutions, supporting ongoing modernization and implementation of the sector legislation including 

the development of norms, quality and safety standards of inputs and animal sourced products.  

 

30. Sub-component A2. Sustainable animal health and advisory services. Strengthening Veterinary 
Services (VS) would enhance the government long-term capacity to detect and respond quickly to major disease 

outbreaks (PPR, CBPP, FMD, HPAI and NCD to name a few). It would further contribute to the control of 

‘diseases of production’ (parasitic, vector-born or bacteriological diseases) that negatively affect animal 

productivity. This component would build on the recent results from the OIE Performance of Veterinary 

Services pathway. In conjunction with the SNP2, it aims to promote partnership between the public authorities, 

the private veterinarians, and the associative actors, especially through: (1) re-focusing the official VS towards 

its core public functions, (2) scaling up of the sanitary mandate approach (delegating, under the oversight of the 

official VS, public tasks to private veterinarians), (3) progressive transfer of private tasks to the private and 

associative actors, and (4) supporting the veterinary statutory body (auto-control of the veterinary profession).  

 

31.  Strengthening Extension Services (ES), especially animal husbandry management practices, would 
require a transition from a public system of technical subjects delivery to a public-private system of 

comprehensive and adapted (basic or specialized) advisory services. In conjunction with the SNPs, the specific 

path for such a transformation would be defined during project preparation.  

 

32. Strengthening Producer Cooperatives (PCs), would be the necessary complement to the VS and ES, to 
improve the capacity of the smallholders in formulating their needs and evaluate the services they receive. 

Ultimately, the growth and transformation of the livestock and fisheries sector would require a strong and well-

balanced institutional tripartite: the Public, Private, and Cooperative sectors working together to deliver the 

fundamental functions of the sector. Support to the VS, ES and PCs would have a national coverage, although 

specific activities would be targeted towards the selected commodity value chains, in conjunction with 

subcomponent B2.  

   

33. Sub-component A3. Strategic national programs (SNP). Five major national programs were 
considered during identification. They would be further developed during project preparation.  

a. Animal identification, traceability and performance recording (SNP1) 
b. Animal health program

14
 (SNP2) 

c. National forage development (SNP3) 
d. Dairy-meat and poultry breeding program (SNP4) 
e. Sustainable fisheries management and biodiversity conservation (SNP5)  

 

The World Bank Group is supporting b) Animal health and d) Dairy/poultry breeding policy in the L-MIRE 

project. The proposed project will build on this work.   

 

34. Sub-component A4. Contingency emergency response (US$0 million). Following an adverse natural 
event that results in a major natural disaster, the government of Ethiopia may request the Bank to reallocate 

project funds to support response and reconstruction. This component would draw resources from the 

unallocated expenditure category and /or allow the government to request the Bank to re-categorize and 

reallocate financing from other Project components to partially cover emergency response and costs. This 

component could also channel additional funds should they become available as a result of an eligible 

emergency. Detailed operational guidelines acceptable to the bank for their implementation of the Contingency 

Emergency Response Plan, would be prepared during the first year of project implementation. Should this 

component be triggered, all expenditures would be made in accordance with paragraph 11 of OP 10.00 and 

would be reviewed and accepted by the Bank before any disbursement is made. In accordance with paragraphs 

11 and 12 of OP 10.00, this component would provide immediate, rapidly disbursing support to finance goods 

(positive list agreed with governments), works, and services needed for response, mitigation, and recovery and 

reconstruction.  

 

Component B: Farmer’s Access to Services, Inputs and Assets. The project would support smallholders’ 

access to critical knowledge and information, services and inputs, and investments (technologies and 

equipment) focusing on the three targeted commodity value chains of (1) dairy (dairy-meat in mixed crop-

livestock systems), (2) poultry (broilers and layers) and (3) fisheries (cultured-based fisheries and aquaculture). 

The project would link and work with Federal and Regional Agriculture Research Institutes to facilitate access 

to new technologies, innovations and management practices. 

 

This component would have the following three sub-components: 

 

35. Sub-component B1. Access to knowledge and information. This component would support capacity-
building activities of smallholders and their organizations on good management practices tailored to each 

selected commodity value chain, as well as on organizational skills towards the establishment of future and 

strengthening of existing producer organizations. It would design and pilot an information system accessible by 

smallholders and their organizations for the selected commodity value chain, in conjunction with SNP1.  

 

36. Sub-component B2. Access to services and inputs. This component aims to improve smallholders’ 

                                            
14

 During identification, the following five building blocks were discussed: (i) Creating a conducive and coherent policy environment; (ii) Strengthening diseases 

surveillance capacity; (iii) Strengthening diagnostic capacities and laboratories; (iv) Supporting diseases prevention and control programs; and (v) Including one health 

and food safety considerations. 

access to advisory services, animal health services, Animal Genetic Resources (AnGR) and quality forage and 

feed. While it complements sub-component A2, it focuses on each selected commodity value chain and would 

support the establishment of a public-private collaboration to develop a comprehensive (inclusive of all 

services) and differentiated (tailored to the level of advancement of the smallholder or his/her organization) 

system of service, input and advice delivery.     

     

37. Sub-component B3. Access to productive investments. This component aims to improve the 
smallholders’ access to investments linking smallholders and/or their organizations to public and private 

providers of basic equipment and new technologies, and to financial institutions. Production-oriented 

investments could include: feed production and processing, improved animal husbandry techniques, small-scale 

products’ collection or processing units/equipment, waste management systems to minimize greenhouse gas 

emissions, pollution and dissemination of pathogens, renewable energy (bio and solar energy) supply. To 

minimize a farmer’s risk of accessing improved technologies, the component would establish a matching grant 

mechanism to co-finance strategic investments, i.e. investment linked with the adoption of new technologies 

and practices associated with the SNP or investments aimed at increasing the participation of women and youth 

in the selected value chains.   

 

Component C: Farmers’ Access to Output Markets.  The project would support smallholders and their 

organizations to improve their access to output markets with a broader engagement of local entrepreneurs in the 

three priority commodity value chains. Depending on the beneficiary level of advancement in the 

transformation pathway, several options for project support would be explored further during preparation. 

Lessons from recent experiences in similar conditions would be considered. These include the existing USAID-

parallel financed AMDe and Livestock Market Development projects, which support improved market linkages, 

and regional initiatives such as the Hub Approach in Milk Collection Centers. The component would establish 

“Productive Partnerships” (PPs) between livestock and fisheries Producer Cooperatives (PC) and buyers (Agri-

Businesses: agro-industries, small and medium enterprises, etc.). These PPs would be supported through the 

provision of matching grants, contingent upon contractual arrangement between producers and buyers, and 

would facilitate access to rural financing for investing in various PC Sub-Projects (SPs). The selection criteria 

and mechanisms for PPs and SPs would be detailed during project preparation. The overall aim of this 

component is to create an enabling environment for direct and sustainable commercial relations between 

producers and buyers of products in the targeted value chains, and with Financial Institutions (FIs). 

 

This component would have the following three sub-components: 

 

38. Sub-component C1. Support to Producer Cooperatives (PCs). The sub-component would support the 
establishment of sustainable business relations between targeted PCs and Financial Institutions (FIs). To 

facilitate the involvement of FIs and the provision of adapted financial services, the subcomponent would 

support capacity building of PCs in the area of preparation of viable Sub-Projects (SPs). Capacity-building 

activities related to PCs’ business and administrative skills could be conducted in partnership with IFC through 

its Business Edge 
TM

 training system. Additional 

activities in support to PCs could include: (i) supporting market studies and surveys to characterize market 

opportunities and product requirements, organizing communication and dissemination campaigns to inform 

stakeholders about the project, and creating an online-based market information system; (ii) the establishment 

of a dialog platform between the government and key stakeholders, and (iii) mobilizing financial institutions 

(FIs) by negotiating a co-financing agreement for the SPs, and providing technical assistance on the design of 



tailored financial services and products to meet the financing needs of eligible SPs.  

 

39. Sub-component C2. Establishment of Productive Partnerships (PPs). This sub-component would 
promote partnerships between PCs and buyers of selected commodities (milk, poultry meat and eggs, fish). 

Financial Institutions (FIs) would be included in the PPs as they are expected to co-finance the sub-projects to 

be developed by the PCs. The partnerships would be based on the following principles: (a) agreement on 

product quality and characteristics; (b) quantity to be produced and bought; (c) modalities of delivery; (d) 

payment modalities and price; and (e) buyer’s contribution, such as Technical Assistance (TA), specific inputs, 

and arrangements for input reimbursement. 

 

40. Sub-component C3. Access to Financial Institutions (FIs). This sub-component would finance SPs, 
which have been developed by PCs under the Productive Partnerships established under sub-component C2. 

Based on a PC’s business plan, investment would cover collective investments through a Matching Grant aimed 

at improving the market reliability (commercial and safety standards) of the selected commodities. Collective 

investments would include post-productive investments (including processing technologies and facilities), as 

well as the associated technical assistance and training. A conditionality mechanism would be built into the 

Matching Grant to ensure that the Sub-Projects promote health and environmental services or at least do not 

generate negative externalities, and would be screened for potential adverse effects on the environment and 

public health. Selected SPs could be financed through a combination of an IDA-financing, a contribution from 

PCs, and short to medium-term credit provided by participating FIs. 

 

Component D: Project Management, Coordination, and Monitoring and Evaluation. The component 

would support project management at federal, regional, zonal and woreda level. In addition to routine 

functions, emphasis would be placed on a number of critical cross-cutting issues: 

 

41. Gender. The project would support the Government’s policy to mainstream the participation of women 
(both female headed households and women in male headed households) and youth into the livestock and 

fisheries sectors. This would include both targeted interventions (including support to women groups for 

appropriate enterprises) and ensuring inclusion in all project activities, backed up with an M&E system with 

disaggregated data.  

 

42. Nutrition. Although improved nutrition is not an explicit or measurable outcome of the proposed 
project, there would be many activities that would support aspects of the National Nutrition Program. For 

example, the support to the three selected commodity value chains would be coupled with extension/advisory 

services to increase households understanding of the high nutritional value and best uses of animal sourced 

foods (milk, meat, eggs and fish).  

 

43. Greenhouse gas emissions / Climate smart livestock (CSL). Livestock production critically 
contributes to the 3 outcomes of CSL: (i) it contributes directly and indirectly to food production and food 

security, (ii) it offers adaptation strategies, through assets diversification, coping mechanisms and water 

management, and (iii) it offers great potential for GHG emission intensity reduction and carbon sequestration. 

In terms of livestock production systems, Climate Smart Agriculture (CSA) translates into four essential 

objectives: resource use efficiency, reduced conversion of natural habitats into agriculture, buffering and 


 

connection to markets. Most technical and institutional interventions would have effects on more than one of 

the CSA outcomes. 

44. Capacity building. The design of the proposed project would include capacity building for a range of 
actors and organizations and through a number of approaches, including training. In a recent project (e.g. AGP 

1), the effectiveness of training was found to be relatively weak. A more focused and structured approach to 

capacity building would be developed for the project, drawing upon both good experience in Ethiopia (such as 

under the Productive Safety Nets Program or the Farmer’s Filed School in the Integrated Pest Management and 

forage development Programs) and international experience. This would emphasize strengthening core skills for 

delivering training and stronger processes for training needs assessment, continual training where appropriate 

and adequate follow up.  

 

45. Linkages and Coordination. The project would be one of the primary government program to support 
investments to achieve the strategic goals set out by the LMP. However, it would not function in isolation and 

coordination and complementarity with other initiatives would provide opportunities for increased impact. This 

is particularly important because Ethiopia is hosting a number of active projects in the sector –implemented by 

various ministries- that the new MoLF would have to monitor. Coordination mechanisms would need to be 

strengthened with a number of other on-going and planned programs, including the following IDA-financed 

projects and programs: Agriculture Growth Project 2, Productive Safety Net Program, Sustainable Land 

Management Program, and Regional Pastoral Livelihoods Resilience Project (RPLRP) and the WBG’s Ethiopia 

Livestock-MIRA project. 
 

 
 
    

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
Tentatively, the project might be implemented in the following regions/places in Ethiopia: Amhara, Addis Ababa, 

Oromiya, SNNR, Tigray, Harari, Benishangul Gumuz, Dire Dawa and Gambella 
 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
The MoLF is a new ministry with a significant capacity weakness. Therefore, efforts would be required throughout the 

project, in particular in the areas of safeguards due diligence. Given the institutional and management innovations that is 
expected from the project, three distinct value chains are targeted, including the newly supported fisheries sector, and 
the multiplicity of actors involved from the public, private and associative sectors, capacity constraints are likely to 
represent the biggest challenge of the project. To address these gaps, it has been proposed to formulate a capacity 
building strategy for the MoLF during the preparation phase. The Bank would undertake a safeguards capacity 
assessment as part of the project preparation, which would outline the detailed risks and mitigating measures. The 
project would further explore to provide systematic and regular training to targeted the Regions and Woredas as well as 
undertake regular supervision to ensure that challenges with regards to environmental and social safeguards are 
identified and addressed in a timely manner. Overall, the project will avoid where possible adverse impacts on people, 
land and other economic resources and on livelihoods; will prepare both a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and 

Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) to address potential scope of impacts, since the project sites 
are not known. The ESMF and RPF will be reviewed and cleared by the World Bank before it is disclosed publicly in 
Ethiopia and the Bank’s Info shop prior to project appraisal. Site specific Resettlement Action Plan and ESMPs, will be 
prepared, reviewed and cleared by the World Bank, as needed based on the guidance and standards set forth in the RPF, 
prior to implementation of any compensation actions or civil works. 
 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 
Chukwudi H. Okafor, Yacob Wondimkun Endaylalu 

 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The project is proposed as a Category B project, given 
that it would finance activities, especially those related 
to veterinary services to detect and respond quickly to 
major disease outbreaks, improved animal health 
services, production of quality forage and feed, 
including feed production and processing, small scale- 
products’ collection/ processing units, waste 
management systems to minimize greenhouse gas 
emissions, pollution and dissemination of pathogens. 
Since the scope and nature of the sub-projects and 
their site-specific locations are not known at this time 
of preparation, the specific instrument proposed for 
analyzing potential environmental risks is an ESMF. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 TBD 
 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 TBD 
 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

Project funds may be used to purchase and distribute 
pesticides for control of vectors of livestock /animal 
diseases and agrochemicals for improved production 
of forage and feed, and it is likely that more generally 
support through the Project will encourage small 
holder farmers, and veterinary service providers to use 
more pesticides and chemicals. The ESMF will contain 
a section on PMP/IPMP that would elaborate on what 
actions need to be undertaken to minimize 
environmental, health and safety impacts. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No 
 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 Yes 

The Project triggers OP 4.10 as the vast majority of 
people in the lowland area of the project area meet 
the criteria for the Indigenous People or underserved 
groups.  The project will conduct Social Assessment 
and enhanced public Consultation with the affected 


persons and communities to reflect the policy 
requirements. The key findings of the social 
assessment including the process used to foster free, 
prior, and informed consultations and broad 
community support for the project, including the 
provision of grievance redress, and benefit sharing 
issues; and the identified mitigating measures will be 
incorporated in the design of the project and 
summarized in the PAD. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

Since the project sites are not known, therefore, to 
address potential scope of impacts on loss of 
economic activities, land acquisition and/or relocation, 
the project will avoid adverse impacts on people, land 
and other economic resources and on livelihoods by 
preparing a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). The 
RPF will be consulted upon and reviewed and cleared 
by the World Bank before it is disclosed publicly in 
Ethiopia and the Bank’s Info shop prior to project 
appraisal. In cases where impacts are known, the 
project will Resettlement Action Plan, based on the 
guidance and standards set forth in the RPF, and the 
RAP will also be reviewed and cleared by the World 
Bank prior to implementation of any compensation 
actions or civil works. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 
 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Apr 24, 2017 
 

Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Project’s safeguards instruments (ESMF, PMP, and RPF) will be prepared, reviewed and approved by the World Bank and 

disclosed in Ethiopia by the GoE and sent to the Bank for disclosure at the Info Shop 
 
 

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Lake Chad Region Recovery and Development Project (P161706) 

 
 

  
Oct 12, 2018 Page 1 of 22  

     

 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 06-Nov-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSC19997 


BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Africa P161706  Lake Chad Region 
Recovery and 
Development Project 
(P161706) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA Oct 21, 2019 Dec 17, 2019 Social, Urban, Rural and 
Resilience Global 
Practice 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Republic of Cameroon - 
Ministry of Economy, 
Planning and Regional 
Development,Republic of 
Chad - Ministry of Economy 
and Planning,Republic of 
Niger - Ministry of Economy 
and Planning 

(TBC) Republic of Cameroon 
- Ministry of Economy, 
Planning and Regional 
Development, (TBC) 
Republic of Niger - Executive 
Secretariat for the SDS Sahel 
Niger (SE/SDS Sahel-Niger) 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
To contribute to the recovery of the Lake Chad Region through supporting regional coordination and crisis monitoring, 
connectivity and agricultural livelihoods in selected provinces of Cameroon, Chad and Niger. 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 165.00 

Total Financing 165.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 165.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 165.00 

          IDA Credit 60.00 

          IDA Grant 105.00 

   
 

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B - Partial Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Regional and Country Context           
                            Figure 1: The Lake Chad 

1. Lake Chad is a large transboundary lake located in the Sahel as well 
as in the West and the Central Africa sub-regions. The Lake Chad is shared 

between Cameroon, Chad, Niger and Nigeria1 and a total of 49 million people 

live from the exploitation of its rich natural resources (fishing, livestock 

farming, flood-recession agriculture, hunting and gathering). A net exporter of 

food and a provider of seasonal jobs, it also contributed to the food and job 

security of people in its hinterlands2, including two regional metropolises, 

Ndjamena and Maidiguri, as well as the impoverished regions of the lake’s 

Sahelian hinterlands (Borno in Nigeria; Diffa in Niger, the Far North Province 

in Cameroon and the regions of the Lake, Lac, Kanem, Hadjer Lamis, and Chari 

Baguirmi in Chad). If the lake area represents such a food production hub, it is 

because it offers, all year long, a relative secure source of water, fodder and 

fertile land. Moreover, those mostly family fishing and farming systems are labor intensive and generate 

significant indirect employment (processing, trade, crafts, and transport). Finally, the ecological value of Lake 

Chad has been recognized by the Ramsar convention and the Lake is being classified a World Natural Heritage 

Site by UNESCO. 

2. Despite its potential of being a driver for development in West Africa, however, development in the 
Lake Chad area is challenged by multiple and interrelated drivers of conflict and fragility. Most recently, 

the Boko Haram regional insurgency has affected over 23 million civilians around the four countries (Cameroon, 

Chad, Niger and Nigeria). Violent acts caused by Boko Haram include coercion, abduction, forced recruitment, 

                                            
1 This project includes the three countries Cameroon, Chad and Niger. While the World Bank’s broader Lake Chad Program includes Nigeria, Nigeria 

is not participating in this concrete project. This project, however, is processed as a Series of Projects, and will thus allow for the participation of 

Nigeria to opt into the program at a later date and according to the country’s needs and specific requirements. 
2 The lake hinterlands, or its area of influence through trade and seasonal migration, extends-up to 300 km around the Lake and represents an area of 

about 250,000 km2. 

indoctrination, human rights abrogation, violent extremism, etc. and besides causing immense psychological 

trauma and weakening social networks, these acts have also disrupted livelihoods and destroyed assets. The 

conflict has exacerbated pre-existing challenges and caused extensive damage. As a consequence of the Boko 

Haram conflict, the Lake Chad Region is also Africa’s largest forced displacement crisis. Latest estimates show 

2.3 million individuals (half of them are children) are now displaced in the Region, both internally and across 

borders as refugees.3 These significant numbers of refugees and IDPs have added pressure on host communities 

that are already food insecure. 

 

3. Vulnerable groups, in particular women and youth have been mostly affected by the consequences 
of the Boko Haram crisis. While youth account for most of the population in the countries around the lake and 

could be a potential driver for economic growth, they are faced with the highest rates of unemployment and the 

lowest levels of formal education and vocational training in the respective countries. Facing limited opportunity, 

youth are easily susceptible to recruitment into criminal activity or armed violence. Young women and men who 

have been recruited and used by armed groups are especially vulnerable as they are marginalized and stigmatized 

by their communities (when and if they return), thus facing many barriers to their reintegration.4 Gender-based 

violence (GBV) and violence against children, already widespread in the Lake Chad Region before the outbreak 

of the Boko Haram conflict has also increased since the crisis (reported acts include abduction, detention, rape or 

forced marriages, and the forced use of children as kamikazes). In addition, common to many young women in 

the Region is the experience of early marriage and childbirth and resultant health risks. 

 

4. The underlying causes of the Boko Haram crisis include high inequality, perceived social injustice, 

a lack of social service provision, historic marginalization, inadequate economic opportunities, high levels 

of poverty, rapid demographic growth and the impacts of climate change and land degradation. The conflict 

can be traced back to a range of fragility drivers and historical underinvestment in remote areas. Fragility drivers 

include i) lack of public services; ii) the pressure on the already fragile ecosystem which is significantly increasing 

due to a high population growth5, iii) poor natural resource management, and climate and disaster risks in the 

Region6; iv) weak governance and weak presence of state institutions; v) weak agriculture performance vi) poor 

connectivity around the lake and rural access roads which are old and not regularly maintained, and vii) missing 

international road corridor and energy transmission linkages. The lack of public services, basic infrastructure and 

social services within the areas surrounding the Lake Chad reflect systemic national development problems and 

are a result of many years of neglect by central authorities. Grievances of the populations living in the Lake Chad 

Region are further deepened by repeated unfulfilled promises of development and many have lost their trust in 

the government. As one of the results, the areas surrounding the Lake Chad represent the poorest, most 

                                            
3 Plan International, Lake Chad Snapshot, 15 Feb 2018. 
4 Young women have especially been negatively impacted as they have been facing the additional stigma of being survivors of sexual violence. 
5 The population of the four countries around the Lake Chad (Cameroon, Chad, Niger and Nigeria; entire territory of the countries, not vicinities of the 

Lake Chad) has more than quadrupled in the last 50 years – from 60 million in 1960 to more than 243 million inhabitants in 2017. See UNFPA: From 

crisis to development around Lake Chad, Strategy for an Integrated, Holistic and Sustainable Response, 2018. 
6 The project has been screened for climate and disaster risks. The exposure of the project locations and the impacts on the project’s physical 

infrastructure and assets have been rated as High. Extreme temperature, extreme precipitation, flooding and drought are projected to increase in all 

three participating countries of this regional project (Cameroon, Chad and Niger) and in particular in the Lake Chad Region. Future projections show 

that mean annual temperature is projected to increase between 1.0-3.4°C by 2060. Annual number of ‘warm’ days and nights are also projected to 

increase. Projected increase in inter-annual rainfall variability is likely to exacerbate drought risk in the future. Projected increases in seasonal rainfall, 

total runoff, and the proportion of rainfall in heavy events will have profound implications for flooding. These extreme climate and hazard events affect 

marginalized groups more severely. 



marginalized and neglected part of each respective country and have been left susceptible to crime and violence 

and promises from radical Islamists. In Cameroon, for example, poverty is increasingly concentrated in the 

northern parts of the country – the Far North and the North present a poverty rate of 74.3% and 67.9% respectively, 

and the literacy rate is almost half in the North (43%) compared to the rest of the country (72% nationally). While 

the regions bordering the Lake Chad in Chad and Niger have been less marginalized and less excluded from 

development planning compared to equivalent regions in Cameroon and Nigeria, development indicators remain 

worse than the national averages.7 

 

5. As a result, a military victory and humanitarian assistance alone are not enough to create peace and 

stability in the Lake Chad Region and a focus on restoring and enhancing resilience is needed, even as 

humanitarian activities and security operations continue. As outlined in the joint World Bank Group’s (WBG) 

and United Nations “Pathways for Peace Study” (2018), conflict stems from the mobilization of people’s 

perception of exclusion and injustice, which are rooted in inequalities, and tackling these issues should be a 

priority to prevent further escalation of conflict. While military and security agencies have made some progress 

in limiting the activities of extremist groups, their own practices have, at times, been heavy-handed and have 

included violations of human rights, adding to the sense of insecurity and alienation which increase divisions 

among displaced persons and communities. Furthermore, social inclusion will also be key for a long-term 

stabilization and prevention of future conflicts. In this regard, preventive action needs to adopt a more people-

centered approach that includes mainstreaming citizen engagement. Enhancing the participation of women and 

youth in decision making, as well as long-term policies to address the aspirations of women and young people, 

will also be fundamental to sustaining peace. 

 

6. The conflict has significantly impacted livelihoods and economic productivity in the Lake Chad 

Region, which are largely based on farming, pastoralism and fishing. The main impacts of the conflict include 

inaccessibility and a loss of productive assets and inputs due to human displacement and the disruption of markets 

due to physical destruction of facilities, and the enforcement of security-related measures such as restrictions of 

movement and the prohibition to farm or trade in certain areas.8 As a result, agricultural production and access to 

land have declined sharply, resulting in a widespread loss of livelihoods and employment. In addition to direct 

losses in productive assets, agricultural trade has also been significantly impaired by damages to the road network 

and the closure of borders. The recent AFD/IRD study “Crisis and Development – the Lake Chad Region and 

Boko Haram” shows that the Lake Chad Region was a highly complex and interlinked regional system prior to 

2013, where the country’s borders did not represent real boundaries. Acts of violence by Boko Haram have 

destabilized the former regional system and have compromised productive activities in the rural areas around the 

Lake Chad. A growth of rural income and livelihood opportunities combined with connectivity improvements 

would build the resilience of the population around the Lake Chad and thus help to (i) give the population, and in 

particular those who are at-risk a viable livelihood option besides joining Boko Haram, (ii) restore the 

communities’ trust in the government and the prospect for development in the region, and (iii) reestablish 

community ties. 

     

7. A regional and geospatial targeted approach will help to chart a path that promotes growth and 
economic clustering, while at the same time efficiently promoting inclusion, equal opportunities, and 

security. The contextual rationale for a regional response is three-fold9: (i) The Boko Haram insurgency is a 

regional crisis with significant cross-border spill-over effects; (ii) the Region is characterized by a web of 

economic, trade, historical, political, cultural, ethnic and religious ties, which makes its populations linked and 

interdependent across borders. Events in one country affect others, and the problems of weak community 

institutions, livelihoods and connectivity can only be solved through a broader regional response; and (iii) the 

Lake Chad area is a fragile and vulnerable socio-ecosystem and regional in nature. Furthermore, the “Lagging 

Lands, Violent Lands”10 framework for action suggests a combined spatial and social lens for such areas and 

around country borders where interventions as well as violence can have impacts that spill beyond national 

boundaries. In the Lake Chad Region, where violence is recurrent, and divisions are entrenched, area-based 

interventions that are spatially targeted at places with development deficiencies and socially targeted at factors 

that elevate the risk of violence are required in order to create areas which can become socially, politically and 

economically stable. Coordination between administrative areas at national and regional levels will also be key 

to ensure regional stability and exploit possible positive economic and social externalities, such as those achieved 

by public productive investments, livelihoods, value chain development and transport infrastructure investments. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 

 
8. The current security crisis has forced countries of the region to coordinate and collaborate more 
extensively on security issues, though on development there is a general lack of regional leadership and 

collaboration on common problems. These issues surfaced during the Oslo Consultative Group meeting in 

Berlin (September 2017). The lack of collaboration between regional economic communities of the Economic 

Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the Economic Community of Central African States 

(ECCAS-CEEAC), and the weakness of the Lake Chad Basin Commission, means that a coherent regional 

response to the deeply-rooted drivers of fragility will remain challenging. While putting in place a sustainable 

platform for programmatic prioritization and coordination, regional dialogue, exchange of ideas and policy 

harmonization will take time and will require sustained support over many years, it will be an important and 

necessary early step for the long-term sustainable development of the Region and will help to restore citizens’ 

trust in government interventions. 

 

9. The Sahel Alliance has opened a window of opportunity for stabilization and recovery in the Lake 
Chad Region. Informed and sustained high-level dialogue and diplomacy in coordination with strong 

international commitment are the prerequisites to help build trust between neighboring governments in areas 

beyond security cooperation. During the International High-Level Conference on the Sahel in Brussels, Belgium 

on February 23, 2018, France, Germany, the EU, the African Development Bank, UNDP and the World Bank 

(the six founding members), joined by Italy, Spain and the UK, officially launched the Sahel Alliance, which 

paved the way for international cooperation following the guiding principles of (a) governance; (b) gender; (c) 

youth and (d) donor coordination. The AFD, EU/DEVCO, AfDB, Germany, the UK and USAID, amongst others, 

have already made allocations for stabilization and development activities in the Lake Chad Basin in parallel to 

humanitarian funding. This proposed Lake Chad Region Recovery and Development Project (i) builds upon the 

                                            
9 The IEG found that a regional approach is relevant if i) program objectives require cooperation among neighboring countries to address regional 

externalities, ii) program objectives align with country and regional development priorities, and iii) the program adheres to the principle of subsidiarity. 

These three conditions are fulfilled in the case of this proposed engagement. 
10 World Bank: Lagging Lands, Violent Lands, A framework for Action, 2017. 


momentum created by the launching of the Sahel Alliance, and (ii) constitutes the World Bank’s commitment to 

the Sahel Alliance by focusing on the stabilization of a main sub-region – the Lake Chad Region. The project 

aligns with the specific objectives of the Sahel Alliance by ensuring a strong coordination with the members of 

the Sahel Alliance, promoting multilateralism and better coordination and collaboration with humanitarian and 

development partners and security actors, in particular through the proposed Component 1, and by putting special 

emphasis on the development of rural areas and infrastructure development through the proposed Component 2 

and 3. 

 

10. The project contributes and will be guided by the World Bank’s Regional Recovery and 
Development Strategy for the Lake Chad Region (Lake Chad Region Business Plan) which is currently 

being developed. A first mapping of WBG responses in the Lake Chad Region has showed that the total amount 

of current World Bank activities in the Region is an estimated USD 470 million11 and that more than 10 million 

beneficiaries benefit from these activities. There is thus a considerable scope for the WBG to scale up its 

development support to the Lake Chad Region, though particularly in Chad and Niger. To this end, the World 

Bank is currently developing its longer-term strategy for the Lake Chad Region of which this project is an integral 

part of. In this context, a grant of the State and Peace-building Fund has been approved in September 2018 for 

the Cross-border collaboration in the Lake Chad Region Project to build the foundations of this Regional 

Recovery and Development Strategy for the Lake Chad region by enhancing cross-collaboration between the four 

countries around the Lake (the three countries participating in this proposed project and also Nigeria)12. 
 

Map 1: World Bank activities in the Lake Chad Region               

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

11. The project is part of the World Bank’s Lake Chad Region Program. The project constitutes the 
second phase (“Stabilization and early recovery) of the World Bank’s three-phased Lake Chad Region Program 

and prepares the transition from a national post-crisis response (Phase 1) to a long-term resilience and sustainable 

development response (Phase 3) in the Lake Chad Region. The World Bank’s broader Lake Chad Region Program 

                                            
11 USD 140 million have recently been spent on activities and USD 330 million are currently in progress. The national breakdown is the following: 

Nigeria: USD 230 million; Chad: USD 75 million; Cameroon: USD 150 million and Niger: USD 15 million. 
12 The expected outputs of the cross-border collaboration in the Lake Chad Region Project are: (i) Support to the Lake Chad Basin Governors’ Forum 

organization including an early 2019 meeting in Niger; (ii)  Citizen engagement consultation/awareness workshop; (iii) Establishment of a knowledge 

and monitoring platform for the Lake Chad; (iv) Establishment of a data center; (v) Study on multi-dimensional risks around the Lake Chad; and (vi) 

Stakeholder engagement including quarterly multi-partner meetings and support to key conferences (briefs, presentations and participation). 


     

aims to address regional, national and sub-national drivers of fragility through a programmatic, coordinated and 

holistic approach. It is guided by the following five key principles of engagement: (i) a multi-phased and multi-

sector approach to increase the resilience of populations; (ii) flexibility for both riparian client countries and 

stakeholders in their degree of engagement; (iii) flexibility in resource allocation across project components and 

geographic locations; (iv) convergence of efforts with other donors and initiatives along the humanitarian-

development-security nexus; and (v) use of innovative project preparation and M&E mechanisms, such as third-

party execution or monitoring, on an as-needed basis. 

 

12. The World Bank’s Lake Chad Region Program was confirmed at the High-Level Conference on the 
Lake Chad Region in Berlin 2018. On September 3-4, 17 UN Member States, the European Commission, the 

World Bank and the African Development Bank combined announced US$2.17 billion and US$ 467 million in 

concessional loans to support a comprehensive response to the crisis in the Lake Chad Region. The conference 

also highlighted the regional dimension of the Lake Chad crisis, the crucial role of local actors, cross-border 

cooperation and ownership at all levels. Furthermore, stakeholders committed to address the immediate and 

longer-term needs and help build the resilience of crisis-affected people in the Lake Chad region – thus strongly 

endorsing the work along the humanitarian-development-security nexus.13 

 
Figure 2: Supporting the transition from a humanitarian to a development response and cooperation with partners 

 

 
 
 

13. The project is aligned with the WBG’s priorities and UN Strategies in the Lake Chad Region. The 
WBG’s engagement in the Lake Chad Region is aligned with the two interrelated pillars of its Africa Strategy: 

(i) vulnerability and resilience; and (ii) economic opportunity and integration, the Bank’s corporate priority under 

IDA 18, aimed at scaling up its response to issues of fragility, conflict and violence, as well as the Lake Chad 

Development and Climate Resilience Action Plan and the Africa Climate Business Plan. The proposed project 

will be aligned with the International Finance Corporation’s (IFC) Sectorial Strategy and Operations in the three 

countries. Furthermore, the project is aligned and reinforces UNDP’s and UNOCHA’s “Resilience for Sustainable 

Development in the Lake Chad Basin”, UNFPA’s “From Crisis to development around Lake Chad – Strategy for 

                                            
13 Most activities in the region are almost entirely focused on a humanitarian response with very little development programming, in particular on the 
Chadian and Nigerien side. While humanitarian actors have begun incorporating resilience programming and small development interventions, there 

is an identified need for development actors to engage at scale and support the development of the regions adjoining the Lake Chad. 




an Integrated, Holistic and Sustainable Response” and the “UN Support Plan for the Sahel – Working together 

for a prosperous and peaceful Sahel”. This will be done by supporting the transition from a medium-term response 

focusing on resilience and recovery to a longer-term response that will strengthen transformation and 

development. The project will adapt a comprehensive people-centered approach and will, as highlighted in various 

UN Strategy Documents, strengthen resilience of communities in the Lake Chad Region that improves coping 

capacity and reduces vulnerabilities. 

 

14. The project is also in strong alignment with existing regional and national strategies and plans. The 
project is in line with the recommendations of Cameroon’s RPBA to focus all efforts on achieving concrete results 

around the following objectives: (i) putting in place durable solutions for forced displacement; (ii) improving 

local development/decentralization processes and the functioning of local governance; (iii) improving the 

provision of basic social services; (iv) promoting the recovery of the economy and improvement of economic 

opportunities; and (v) improving individual and territorial security. Furthermore, the proposed project is aligned 

with the nine pillars of the “Regional Strategy for the Stabilization, Recovery and Resilience of the Boko-Haram 

affected areas of the Lake Chad Basin” which has been adopted by the Lake Chad Basin Ministers on August 31, 

2018. The nine pillars of the strategy are: (i) Political cooperation; (ii) security and human rights; (iii) 

disarmament, demobilization, rehabilitation, reinsertion and reintegration of Persons Associated with Boko 

Haram; (iv) humanitarian assistance; (v) governance and social contract; (vi) socio-economic recovery and 

environmental sustainability; (vii) education and vocational training; (viii) prevention of violent extremism and 

peacebuilding; and (ix) empowerment and inclusion of women and youth, respond to the multilayered challenges 

in the Lake Chad Basin region. 
 

Relationship to CPF and other strategies 
 

15. The project’s objectives are fully aligned with the Country Partnership Frameworks (CPF) for Chad, Cameroon and 
Niger: 

 Chad: The three identified themes of engagement for FY16-20 are: (i) Strengthening management of public 
resources; (ii) improving returns to agriculture and building value chains; and (iii) building human capital and 

reducing vulnerability. The proposed project addresses the second and third themes of the CPF by supporting 

public productive investments and development along the agricultural value chain, enhancing sustainable 

livelihoods of local communities, strengthening social accountability mechanisms, and improving rural transport 

linkages. 

 Cameroon: The three focus areas for FY17-21 are: (i) Addressing multiple poverty traps in rural areas (with a 
focus on northern regions); (ii) fostering infrastructure and private sector development; and (iii) improving 

governance. The proposed project will address the first focus area by supporting public productive investments, 

improving access to livelihoods and rural transport linkages in the Far North Region of Cameroon. 

 Niger: The three focus areas for FY18-21 are: (i) Rural productivity and incomes; (ii) human capital and social 
protection; and (iii) governance for jobs and growth. The proposed project focuses mainly on the first focus area 

of the CPF ‘Rural Productivity and Incomes’ by directly improving rural livelihoods (in particular the agricultural 

value chain), rural connectivity and public productive investments. 

 

16. Relationship to Africa’s Regional Integration and Cooperation Assistance. The project’s objectives are aligned 
with the “Supporting Africa’s Transformation: Regional Integration and Cooperation Assistance Strategy (FY18-FY23)” 

and in particular its strategic priority 4 “promote collective action to address risks of regional economic contagion, fragility, 

epidemic and climate hot spots”. Sub-objective 4.2 refers to support to sustainable management and financing of 


     

transboundary waters and 4.3 to provide support to communities affected by regional forced displacement and help countries 

to deal with underlying conflict prevention measures. 

 
 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 

17. The proposed project development objective for the Lake Chad Region Recovery and Development 
Project-SOP1 is the following: to contribute to the recovery of the Lake Chad Region through supporting regional 

coordination and crisis monitoring, connectivity and agricultural livelihoods in selected provinces of Cameroon, 

Chad and Niger. 

 

18. The proposed program development objective is the following: to contribute to the recovery of the Lake 
Chad Region through enhanced regional coordination and crisis monitoring, socio-economic development and 

the strengthening of local level institutions in the Lake Chad Region. 

  

19. Project beneficiaries will be vulnerable populations in selected intervention areas in the three countries. 
This includes, for instance, youth at risk and women. While not specifically targeted, project beneficiaries could 

also include displaced and ex-combatants. While the project intends to include activities which also support the 

R (“Reintegration”) of ex-Boko Haram combatants, this project does not specifically target ex-Boko Haram 

combatants so as to avoid any possible stigmatization that would exacerbate an already very difficult social 

cohesion effort between and within communities. 
 
Key Results (From PCN) 
 

20. The following PDO indicators will be considered and refined during project preparation: 
- Establishment of a functioning knowledge and monitoring platform endorsed by the participating 

countries. 

- Increased regional dialogue and coordination on conflict and climate and disaster risk management among 
the three countries (Cameroon, Chad and Niger).14 

- Number of direct project beneficiaries in the three countries (number), of which percent of female and 
youth. 

- Beneficiaries in the three countries that feel project investments reflected their needs (percentage), of 
which percent of female and youth. 

- Beneficiaries in the three countries that feel that project investments have positively contributed to the 
community’s social well-being and have helped to restore trust. 

- Beneficiaries of regional economic development activities that report an increase in income 
(disaggregated by type of service, gender and target group). 

- Improvement of Rural Access Index (RAI; number of index points improvement). 

 

Figure 3: The Project’s Theory of Change 

                                            
14 As reported by the participating project countries. 

 
 

 

D. Concept Description 
 
                                 Figure 4: The Project’s Intervention Rationale 
21. To restore and enhance resilience in the 
Lake Chad Region, this project will work along the 

humanitarian-development-security nexus to (i) 

address some of the existing drivers of fragility in 

the Lake Chad Region, in particular poor regional 

crisis preparedness and management, poor 

connectivity around and on the Lake, poor local 

governance and unemployment (especially youth 

unemployment), and (ii) mitigate some 

consequences of the crisis, in particular destroyed 

public productive investments, poor livelihood 

opportunities and a weakened agriculture value 

chain. More concretely, this project will bridge the gap between humanitarian and development assistance and 

support its transition. Investments will be made complementary to humanitarian activities and collaboration and 

coordination with security actors will allow the project to operate in an insecure environment and support the 

recovery of provinces where security interventions have achieved to bring peace back to the communities. By 

showing an immediate positive development impact through quick-win interventions, peace and stability brought 

back by security actors can be sustained and can make a transition from a humanitarian to a development response 

possible. This project’s specific added value lies in (a) strengthening crisis and conflict preparedness, response 

and coordination at the regional level to better prevent and mitigate regional fragility, and (b) addressing a set of 

priority activities which are expected to have a high development impact; are in areas where security allows for 

an intervention; and are complementary with other programs (clusters). 

 

22. Following a contextual regional rationale as outlined in the context section above, the project will translate 
this into a technical regional rationale and thus prioritize activities which are trans-border in nature and will 



therefore help to restore and strengthen the regional system which has been negatively impacted by the Boko 

Haram crisis. The regional activities will be the following: (i) restoration of rural mobility and cross-border 

connectivity through the rehabilitation of critical rural roads and infrastructure (on the Lake Chad and around the 

Lake, and other intervention areas which are of regional importance), which will help to connect communities of 

all the participating three countries, and (ii) agriculture value chain development with a regional aspect combined 

with public productive investments which will facilitate and reinforce cross-border trade.15 In addition, the project 

will support a coordination and monitoring platform to reinforce regional dialogue and institutional capacity. 

 

23. The proposed financing instrument for this project is an Investment Project Financing (IPF) with total 
proposed IDA funds of US$225 million to be disbursed as grant and credit16. Following a pre-identification 

mission and the readiness of all three participating countries, the IDA funds are likely to be allocated as follows: 

US$60 million for Cameroon; US$45 million for Chad; and US$60 million for Niger. The proposed project is 

being processed as a Series of Projects (SOP) given that the three proposed project countries all deal with the 

same negative impacts of the Boko Haram crisis, similar underlying drivers of fragility and regional 

underdevelopment. The SOP approach will also allow for the participation of the Republic of Nigeria to opt into 

the program at a later date and according to the country’s needs and specific requirements. This project is the first 

proposed project of the SOP, and will focus on regional coordination and monitoring, rural connectivity and a 

few agricultural livelihood restoration priority activities. In addition, this first SOP will pilot social community 

engagement activities to support the process of restoring trust between and within communities. The second 

project in this SOP Series would build upon first achievements, expand livelihoods support and community 

engagement activities and also provide direct support to the beneficiaries’ access to basic socio-economic services 

in the Lake Chad Region. 

 

24. The project will embed essential features of ensuring citizen participation in prioritizing developmental 
needs including livelihoods opportunities to improve self-reliance of communities and social cohesion and greater 

demand for social accountability. Citizen Engagement mechanisms will be built into the project through (i) setting 

up effective grievance redress and beneficiary feedback mechanism, (ii) ensuring an intensive program of 

engagement with project stakeholders, (iii) deploying effective strategic communications and public education, 

and (iv) monitoring social impacts through annual stakeholder surveys. In addition, the project will identify local 

conflict and help set up conflict resolution mechanisms with the aim to restore trust among the community 

members and promote inclusion. The project will also use a targeted geographical development approach which 

combines a spatial and social lens. Targeted social inclusion will be ensured by using specific community-led 

processes to identify and reach vulnerable and systematically excluded people17, including young women, women 

from poorer households (including widows), and women with disabilities; and youth in general, at risk youth and 

youth affected by radicalization, involved in criminal networks, etc. Innovative citizen engagement approaches 

already tested in the region, mobilizing third party monitoring, ICT and CSOs will be explored.18 In addition, the 

concept for the operationalization of gender mainstreaming, in particular multi-sectoral prevention and response 

                                            
15 The component description provides examples of activities with a regional rationale which will be supported under this project; a detailed list of 
activities under Component 2 and 3 that have a regional public goods nature will be defined during project preparation. 
16 See a detailed overview of the project’s financing in the table on p. 13. 
17 The reasons for systematic exclusion from programs and economic participation are for a range of reasons, including social norms, lack of 

information, and inability to meet costs of participation in community institutions, including cost for transport. 
18 In Cameroon, for example, a successful Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) has been included in the context of the CEMAC Transport and Transit 

Facilitation Project. Important lessons learned from this project and other projects in the Region will be included in the design of this proposed Lake 

Chad Region Recovery and Development Project.  

to gender-based violence (GBV) will, amongst others, be guided by a joint French Development Agency 

(AFD)/World Bank study which is currently being conducted.19 

 

25. Investments will be integrated and complemented by investments of the AFD’s Lake Chad Inclusive 
Economic and Social Recovery Program (RESILAC)20, initiatives on polder rehabilitation close to the Lake Chad, 

key WBG’s operations such as the CEMAC - Transport-Transit Facilitation Project in Cameroon, the Niger Rural 

Mobility and Connectivity Project, and the Refugees and Host Communities Support Projects in Chad and Niger, 

and interventions of humanitarian and development partners, and will be in alignment with the UN strategies for 

the Lake Chad Region21 and the Sahel Alliance. The following areas have been pre-identified as potential areas 

of intervention: (a) In Niger: Clusters of pepper productions along the main corridor of the national road from 

N’Guimi via Diffa to Zinder, two fishing communities and one cattle area in the North of the Lake Chad22; (b) in 

Cameroon: communes along the CEMAC corridor in Maroua and Septentrion and communes in the close vicinity 

to the Lake Chad (here, in particular fisheries), and (c) in Chad: a transport corridor connecting N’Djamena to the 

South of Cameroon and West via Bol and Baga Sol and polder areas in Tangal and Gueni. 

 

26. Security will be monitored closely and will inform project implementation. The project design will allow 
for flexibility in resource allocation across project components and geographic locations. Such flexibility is 

necessary to operate in a highly volatile environment with ongoing security concerns and people’s movements. 

A careful targeting of selected provinces and the use of a carefully chosen mix of activities combined with robust 

monitoring will help to reduce the risk that communities could become a target of violence as a consequence of 

investments made under this project.  
 

Component 1: Regional and national coordination platform and local capacity building 

 

27. This component will aim at reinforcing regional dialogue and institutional capacity by putting in place an 
analytical and monitoring platform of key vulnerability factors of the Region. It will also provide targeted capacity 

building of selected institutions at the regional, national and local levels to reinforce the regional cooperation and 

governance. This component will finance the following activities: 

 Sub-Component 1.1: Knowledge and Monitoring platform: An analytical and monitoring platform will be set 
up to foster knowledge exchange, collaboration and partnerships and to strengthen conflict and disaster early 

warning systems. This platform will be used for programmatic prioritization and coordination, policy 

harmonization23, regional dialogue at technical and strategic levels; as well as consolidate and strengthen 

already existing early warning systems (as e.g., the Continental Early Warning System (CEWS) established 

by the AU), provide capacity building to monitoring institutions and connect the systems across the three 

countries. Integrated and coordinated conflict and disaster early warning systems will allow stakeholders to 

anticipate disaster and conflict trends and better understand the rapidly changing dynamics of situations. Other 

topics that the platform could address and promote are citizen engagement, social inclusion and gender, 

                                            
19 The name of the study is Opportunity study: Strengthening the consideration of gender dynamics in the response to the Lake Chad crisis. 
20 This project aims at boosting the local economy by creating jobs for young people in rural areas and diversifying family-based production systems, 

strengthening social cohesion through psychosocial support for communities affected by Boko Haram's violence and providing institutional support 

for local authorities and civil society organizations. 



including strategies to prevent GBV. The platform will build on existing initiatives (in particular AFD and 

UN) and will engage researchers from the countries bordering Lake Chad and other key stakeholders, i.e. 

humanitarian workers, diplomats, international actors and national development programs. Data collected 

from monitoring will be confirmed based on the existing research data gaps24. The knowledge platform will 

have strong linkages with universities25 in each country bordering the Lake Chad. The platform will also 

conduct a review of the existing ICT services and the demand from users; and will use and test innovative 

technology, such as satellite images, geo-enabled data and other ICT tools to generate knowledge about the 

Lake Chad Region and its ecosystem, and to ensure monitoring in a challenging environment with many 

security constraints. Information and data gathered under this component will directly feed into the monitoring 

of the results of Component 2 and 3. 

 

 Sub-Component 1.2: Institutional capacity building to strengthen regional cooperation and local governance: 
The project will reinforce institutional capacity at regional, national and local levels and coordination of 

institutional stakeholders to strengthen regional dialogue on conflict prevention and local development in the 

Lake Chad Basin. This will be by supporting existing regional dialogue initiatives (such as the Lake Chad 

Basin Governors forum and other cross-border initiatives in the Lake Chad Region). Moreover, the project 

will support innovative citizen engagement mechanisms (access to information, participatory planning and 

budget, Grievance Redress Mechanisms) aimed at improving participatory planning and monitoring of 

investments around local plans and better institutional governance thus rebuilding trust between local 

populations and institutions. 

 

Component 2: Restoring Rural Mobility and Connectivity 

 

28. The component consists of civil works for rehabilitation of rural roads which are of regional importance, 
focusing on small-scale infrastructure provision to address immediate priority gaps in rural road connectivity in 

selected areas of the Lake Chad. The aim of this component is to improve access of communities to markets, 

especially regional markets, and to provide beneficiaries with an opportunity for short-term employment. 

Selection of the investments will be aligned with the activities of Component 3, in particular with regards to 

enhancing the logistics performance of the selected value chains on the infrastructure side and addressing the lack 

of mobility services or equipment, such as IMT (Intermediate Means of Transport). Road rehabilitation and 

maintenance sites will be assessed by considering the accessibility to basic services and a rapid mobility 

diagnostic based on (i) the calculation of RAI (rural access index), (ii) the accessibility by road to markets and 

health facilities such as centers offering emergency obstetrical services, and (iii) mobility needs and constraints 

of the population (through e.g. conducting some focus group discussions with selected communities). The civil 

works will be performed by using the Labor Intensive Public Works (LIPW) method for rural roads rehabilitation. 

This approach will contribute to promoting social cohesion while improving local governance and supporting 

economic recovery through wage jobs, community engagement (collective decision-making, collaborative 

behaviors, and community ownership, etc.) and improved regional road infrastructure. As part of the technical 

approach and to maximize cost efficiency and economic benefits, the use of a combination of regular full all 

weather standard rehabilitation/construction and environmental Oriented Spot Improvement Design to restore 

basic connectivity integrating duration of execution as a factor will be explored during project preparation. This 

component will consist of two sub-components: 

 

                                            
24 See the recent AFD and IRD study Crise et développement – La région du lac Tchad à l’épreuve de Boko Haram. 
25 Potential identified universities are: University of Diffa in Niger, University of N’Djamena, University of Maroua and University of Maiduguri. 


 Sub-Component 2.1: Rural Roads Rehabilitation Preparatory and Technical Studies and Community 
Maintenance System: This sub-component will finance preparatory and other technical studies to be 

conducted during project preparation and implementation including preliminary conditions surveys, bills 

of quantities and cost calculations and support for environmental and social assessments. Gender specifics 

needs will be identified by the LDP and a mobility assessment (e.g., such needs could include dedicated 

sanitation facilities, street lighting, GBV, etc. at important logistical hubs or market areas). In addition, 

this component will support the development of a community maintenance system to promote the 

sustainability of investments, in terms of both jobs and roads. This could include the development of a 

small association or micro enterprise at community level for road maintenance. 

 

 Sub-Component 2.2: Rural Roads Rehabilitation Works: This sub-component will finance all civil works-
related expenses to beneficiaries for the preparation, execution, and supervision of works which aim at 

restoring rural mobility and connectivity on the Lake Chad and around the Lake. This component will 

complement productive investment activities under Sub-Component 3.1. This includes civil works to 

rehabilitate existing rural roads to obtain all-season road upgraded to respect defined technical standards, 

in particular targeted small rural roads to improve access of communities to regional markets.26 The 

financing of targeted dredging of navigation channels and construction/rehabilitation and maintenance of 

river docking piers infrastructure will also be explored.  

 

Component 3: Agriculture Investments and Value-Chain Development 

 

29. This component will promote public productive investments, value-chain development and citizen 
engagement and community participation activities in underserved communities in targeted areas. It has three 

sub-components: 

 

 Sub-Component 3.1: Public Productive Agriculture Investments: This sub-component will provide 
investment funds to communities through local planning processes to finance small investments for 

agriculture activities with a regional link. Activities that could be supported under this component are as 

follows: (i) Participatory local development needs assessments and local development plans, including the 

identification of areas of the agricultural value-chain that can be strengthened; and (ii) economic or 

productive investments, the construction/rehabilitation of rural markets, landing platforms for boats, small 

bridges and culverts, cleaning of channels, platforms (small commercial/logistics/processing platforms27), 

community storage facilities, the restoration of land quality through watershed management, irrigation 

perimeters, enclosures and waterpoints for agriculture and livestock use.28 

 Sub-Component 3.2: Livelihood Support and Value Chain Development: The project will provide targeted 
support for agriculture value chain development, including targeted support to agriculture production, pre- 

and post-harvest and marketing for selected products along the agriculture value chain (in particular red 

pepper, livestock and fish)29. The supported activities will have a cross-border potential, as for example 

                                            
26 The design of the civil works for rehabilitation of rural roads will take in mind potential risks due to extreme temperature, extreme precipitation, 

flooding and drought – risks to which the project locations are being exposed. 
27 This could, for example, include improved technologies for irrigation and fish processing. 
28 The design of the small-scale infrastructure work under this component will take in mind above identified climate and disaster risks to which the 

project locations are being exposed. 
29 Due to the importance of multiple livelihood strategies in the Region, the project will also focus on the interaction of livelihood with agricultural and 

fishery activities. 



activities which support the production of trading goods will be prioritized, such as the red pepper road in 

Niger (which is then exported to Nigeria), livestock/fish support in Niger and Chad which would be traded 

to Cameroon and Nigeria, and products along the agriculture value chain that have a regional rational. 

Activities under this component could include: (i) strengthening areas of production and livelihood 

opportunities (irrigation, material, rehabilitation and development of selected polders and horticulture 

perimeters); (ii) provision of assets to enhance the production of sorghum, horticulture, rice, cattle, 

fisheries, etc. to increase the productivity of these sub-sectors;30 and (iii) targeted support aimed at 

facilitating and reinforcing selected trans-border trade for selected areas of value chain development (such 

as markets, storage facilities, etc.). Technical assistance on trans-border trade will also be explored. 

Innovative approaches for improving the agricultural value chain development will be identified during 

project preparation31. Activities of this component will particularly target women and female-headed 

households and youth and will thus serve both as a means of prevention (i.e. reducing women’s and 

youth’s vulnerability) and as a means of longer-term support for those affected by violence. Activities will 

also be chosen following a careful assessment of their level of positive impact on women and youth, and 

if these activities are accessible for women and youth. Furthermore, the negative impacts of post-harvest 

processing which address in particular women and children will also be reduced.32 Given the large youth 

population among the beneficiaries, targeted skills trainings to include life and entrepreneurship skills will 

also be explored based on needs. The approach for identifying, prioritizing, implementing and monitoring 
these activities will be participatory, therefore done in collaboration with local institutions and beneficiary 

communities to mitigate risks of conflicts between communities and contribute to reducing Gender Based 

Violence (GBV), including sexual violence.  

 

 Sub-component 3.3.: Citizen engagement and community participation activities: The project will provide 
targeted support to citizen engagement and community participation activities, such as psychosocial 

support and mentoring, flexible and adaptable community reintegration programs, sports and cultural 

community activities, and different campaigns, such as GBV prevention, de-stigmatization campaigns and 

the engagement of youth and women as conflict and climate and disaster risk management champions will 

also be supported during the planning and implementation processes. These activities will help to restore 

trust among the population and will reduce the risk of further stigmatization, exclusion, radicalization and 

violence, including GBV, etc. These activities would also be complementarity to UNDP’s support to the 

DDR process in the Lake Chad Region, and in particular to the activities of a DD facility which UNDP is 

currently assisting to establish. 
 

 

 

Component 4: Project Management 

 

30. This component will finance the planning, implementation, and technical oversight of program activities; 
and effective social and environmental safeguards management, financial management, and procurement. The 

arrangements for project coordination will be determined at preparation stage. Relevant government agencies at 

                                            
30 The activities will complement the activities under the sub-component 2.1. and especially with regards to the provision of small scale post-harvest 

infrastructure which strengthens the agriculture value chain. 
31 The project may also include support for diversification out of climate-sensitive livelihoods; this will be identified during project preparation. 
32 See Central Africa Coastal Fisheries report (P165882). Fish smoking is done with basic ovens that have negative impacts on the products themselves 

and on the health of the processors mainly women and their children. The FAO, for example, has recently developed a new type of smoking oven that 

reduces the exposure to toxic smoke and chemicals, while also reducing the amount of fuel needed for smoking.  



the regional, national, sub-national and local levels will be involved in the implementation process with adequate 

capacity building support. The following activities will be included: Communication, Monitoring and Evaluation 

(M&E) arrangements, including the set-up of a Management Information System (MIS), outcome/impact 

evaluations at mid-term and end-of-project; and measures for enhanced transparency and accountability. 

Innovative implementation mechanisms (use of Third Party Monitoring, digital monitoring/supervision tools, 

such as satellite data) will be considered given the specific security challenges. Data produced with the help of 

the Knowledge and Monitoring platform as outlined in Sub-Component 1.1. will feed directly into project 

supervision and oversight. Project Management will be undertaken in close coordination and collaboration with 

security and justice forces and mechanisms for identifying risk of violence at various stage of project 

implementation will be established so as to allow the project to operate in such an insecure environment. 
 
  

Component 5: Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC) 

 

31. The project will operate in a highly complex and volatile environment. This zero-funded component will 
allow the governments to quickly mobilize funds in the event of an emergency that will require immediate 

recovery and reconstruction response. The detailed design of this component will be developed during project 

preparation. 
 

Figure 5: Overview of Project Components 
 

 
  



 
The World Bank  
Lake Chad Region Recovery and Development Project (P161706) 

 
 

  
Oct 12, 2018 Page 18 of 22  

     

   

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
The project will be implemented in several areas that border Lake Chad, initially in Niger, Cameroon and Chad. The 

following areas have been pre-identified as potential areas of intervention: (a) In Niger: Clusters of pepper productions 
along the main corridor of the national road from N’Guimi via Diffa to Zinder, two fishing communities and one cattle 
area in the North of the Lake Chad ; (b) in Cameroon: communes along the CEMAC corridor in Maroua and Septentrion 
and communes in the close vicinity to the Lake Chad (here, in particular fisheries), and (c) in Chad: a transport corridor 
connecting N’Djamena to the South of Cameroon and West via Bol and Baga Sol and polder areas in Tangal and Gueni. 
These are low density areas in terms of population but represent important transport corridors for goods and produce for 
the region. 
 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
Cameroon: The country has a comprehensive environmental and social legal framework, including the 1996 

Environmental Law and its implementation decrees including a decree on ESIA.  The Ministry of Environment, Protection 
of Nature and Sustainable Development (MINEPDED) is responsible for approval of ESIAs/ESMPs/RAPs and ESMPs/RAPs 
compliance monitoring. The Ministries has divisional entities that ensure local ESMPs monitoring compliance. The Order 
No 0010/MINEP of April 3, 2013 requires to set up in each Division of the country, a Committee for the technical and 
administrative supervision of ESMP. However, only one Divisional committee has not been set up in the Project. The 
decentralized entities remain weak and have limited human and logistic capacities.  The country has experience in 
monitoring environmental and social safeguards policies of World Bank financed projects. 
 
Chad: The country has an environmental and social legal framework that includes the legislative framework includes Law 

n ° 14/PR/98 of August 17, 1998 defining the general principles of environment protection. The Country published also on 
August 4, 2010 decree n °630 regulating the Environmental Impact Assessment and on November 29, 2012, the EIA 
preparation general guide. The Ministry in charge of Environment is responsible for approval of ESIAs/ESMPs through 
DEELCPN. This Department remains very poorly staffed and staffs that are there are poorly equipped. The country has 
experience in monitoring the implementation of World Bank financed projects.  The  capacity to deal with environmental 
and social safeguards remains very weak.  
 
Niger:  The country has a comprehensive environmental and social legal framework that includes the Law n ° 2018-28 of 

May 14, 2018 determining the fundamental principles on Environmental Assessments. The Bureau Environmental 
Assessments and Impact Studies (BEEEI), under the Ministry of the Environment and Sustainable Development 
responsible for approval of ESIAs/ESMPs and ESMPs compliance monitoring. In practice, BEEEI lacks decentralized 
entities. BEEEI has some skilled staffs but the number of staff remains limited with regards of the workload and 
responsibilities to be undertaken. BEEEI has very limited logistic  capacities. BEEEI has experience in monitoring World 
Bank safeguards. 
 
During the project preparation, an in-depth assessment of the three borrower's institutional capacities will be 

undertaken and relevant mitigation measures will be proposed. 
 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The proposed project is categorized as category B 
project under this policy, because activities under 
Component 2 and 3 are expected to generate 
potential adverse social and environmental risks and 
impacts that will be limited in scale. Most of them will 
be site specific within the target area, few if any of 
them will be irreversible and in most cases, mitigation 
measures can be designed. As the identification of 
sites and works is not yet finalized, an ESMF will be 
prepared for each country, consulted upon, and 
disclosed both in-country and at the World Bank 
website prior to appraisal. In addition, a GBV risk 
assessment for each country will be undertaken in 
order to provide recommendations for how to 
mainstream mitigation measures appropriate for each 
context into the country components. 

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No 
This policy is not triggered as the activities do not 
intend to use private sectors activities as described 
under this policy. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

OP 4.04 is triggered as the Lake Chad has been 
recognized by the Ramsar Convention on Wetlands of 
International Importance (i.e. the Lake Chad is a 
"Ramsar site"). While specific project sites are 
currently not known, it is likely that some project 
activities might take place in the vicinity of the Lake 
Chad. Provisions and further information on 
appropriate risk mitigation strategies and measures in 
relation to the site(s) will be included in each of the 
country specific ESMFs. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No 

This policy is not triggered as the project activities do 
not expect to affect negatively on the health and 
quality of forests and/or finance activities that would 
do so. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

Although procurement of pesticides is not envisaged 
under the project, it is possible that the activities with 
regards to the strengthening of agriculture production 
will lead to an increased use of pesticides. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 
The Physical Cultural Resources Policy (OP 4.11) is 
triggered because Cameroon, Chad and Niger are 
viewed as rich cultural heritage area. The Lake Chad is 



also classified as a World Natural Heritage Site by 
UNESCO. Though it is unknown at this time which sites 
may contain such resources, due to the lack of 
specifics on the locations, size, scale of planned 
investments under the project, it was judged prudent 
to use caution when implementing the productive 
investments, especially the civil works. During the 
development of the country specific ESMFs, physical 
cultural resources will be taken into consideration and 
a baseline will be defined. The ESMFs will include clear 
procedures that will be required for identification, 
protection of cultural property from death and 
treatment of discovered artefacts, and which will be 
included in standards bidding documents. The ESMFs 
will also provide procedures for handling chance finds 
(during implementation of the project's activities). 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 TBD 

A social assessment to determine if there are 
Indigenous peoples in the project area or that will be 
impacted by project activities will be undertaken. If 
there are Indigenous peoples, an IPPF or IPP will be 
prepared for the specific country to provide guidance 
during implementation. The IPPFs or IPPs will be 
disclosed in country and on the World Bank website 
prior to appraisal. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

OP 4.12 is triggered due to the potential impacts 
related to civil works under Components 2 & 3, which 
may lead to minor land acquisition, loss of assets 
and/or access to resources. A Resettlement Policy 
Framework for each country will be prepared or 
updated, consulted upon, approved and disclosed 
both in-country and at the World Bank website prior 
to appraisal. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 
The policy is not triggered as the project activities will 
not involve the construction of a dam or being 
dependent upon an existing dam. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

Yes 

The policy is triggered because some of the proposed 
investments under component 2.2. (e.g. targeted 
dredging/navigation channels/rehabilitation and 
construction of docking pier infrastructure) and 
possibly also 3.1. (e.g. landing platforms for boats, 
small bridges and culverts, cleaning of channels) will 
take place on an international waterway (Lake Chad), 
as per OP 7.50. As a consequence, other riparian 
countries will be notified of the proposed project and 
the Lake Chad Basin Commission will be involved as 
appropriate and as according to Bank procedures. 


     

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
The policy is not triggered as the project does not 
anticipate any disputes in the targeted area. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Apr 25, 2019 
 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
RPFs will be simultaneously prepared (or updated in the case of PNDP in Cameroon) for each country prior to appraisal. 

The information obtained during the preparation will be used to prepare the Appraisal stage ISDS. 
 
 

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Khyber Pakhthunkhwa Irrigated Agriculture Improvement Project (P163474) 

 
 

  
Jul 31, 2017 Page 1 of 21  

     

 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 30-Apr-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSC21925 


BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Pakistan P163474  Khyber Pakhthunkhwa 
Irrigated Agriculture 
Improvement Project 
(P163474) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

SOUTH ASIA Oct 31, 2018 Feb 20, 2019 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing The Islamic Republic of 
Pakistan 

Department of Agriculture, 
Government of Khyber 
Pukhthukhwa, Department 
of Irrigation, Government of 
Khyber Pukhthunkhwa 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
To enhance water management, productivity and climate resilience of irrigated agriculture in project areas 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-NewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 183.00 

Total Financing 183.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 165.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 165.00 

          IDA Credit 165.00 

Non-World Bank Group Financing 

     Counterpart Funding 18.00 



 
The World Bank  
Khyber Pakhthunkhwa Irrigated Agriculture Improvement Project (P163474) 

 
 

  
Jul 31, 2017 Page 3 of 21  

     

          LOCAL: BENEFICIARIES 18.00 

   
 

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

A - Full Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 
 

  Other Decision (as needed) 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

1. Pakistan, the world’s sixth most populous country, is a lower-middle-income country 
which has made significant progress towards macroeconomic and financial stability. Pakistan’s 
per capita income has almost doubled and the share of the population living in poverty has 
decreased by two-thirds over the last decade. Gross domestic product (GDP) growth reached 4.7 
percent in 2016 and is expected to reach 5 percent in 2017, supported by construction and 
manufacturing activities, increased private sector credit growth, increased reserves, low 
inflation, continuing strong remittances, and an upturn in foreign direct investment related to 
the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor.  

2. Nevertheless, Pakistan faces serious development challenges, mostly in rural areas. 
GDP growth has been slower than needed to provide for the level of jobs required for a young 
and growing population. Inadequacy in the private sector environment, public sector 
management, and implementation capacity will continue to hamper service delivery 
performance. Thus, human development indicators continue to lag. In fact, Pakistan did not meet 
the targets of most of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) by 2015. Rural poverty remains 
about double the urban poverty (35 percent versus 18 percent in 2014) and decreases less 
rapidly, given low growth of the agriculture sector, inadequate rural infrastructure and 
connectivity to markets, weak governance and institutions, and limited access to finance. 

3. Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KP) has faced a number of crises in the past decade. With 
geographical proximity and community-level ties to Afghanistan, KP has suffered from the fallout 
of the conflict in Afghanistan, which has given rise to a precarious security situation as well as 
prolonged political and social instability. Related hostilities and extremist violence have caused 
far-reaching disruption to economic activity and inflicted extensive damage on private property, 
livelihoods, and public infrastructure.  


4. KP is also one of Pakistan’s less developed regions, with some economic and social 
development indicators lagging behind the national averages. The province of KP accounts for 
an estimated 10.5 percent of the country’s GDP and about 14.6 percent of the population 
(approximately 30.5 million). The per capita income in KP is estimated to be 33 percent below 
the national average, and despite a sharp and consistent decline in poverty, 27 percent of 
households are estimated to be living below the national poverty line. Another relevant indicator 
is the household size, which is strongly correlated with poverty in Pakistan. KP households 
comprise 7.2 members on average, well above the national average of 6.3 members. Most of 
KP’s population (85 percent) also lives in rural areas, where access to public services and income 
generation opportunities is lower than in urban centers. 

5. Climate change is expected to exacerbate extreme weather events in KP, thereby 
increasing the vulnerability of people and assets to climate induced disasters. Since 2010 
extreme events such as cloudburst over the catchment areas of Indus and its tributaries, have 
frequently occurred during the annual monsoon season. This often leads to flash floods and 
landslides, causing damages across several sectors, including agriculture, livelihoods, 
infrastructure, transport and communications, and housing. Since 2010, KP has been facing 
extreme precipitation events, in the Indus catchment areas, particularly during the annual 
monsoon season. This results in swelling of rivers, causing localized and major floods in low-lying 
areas. KP is also facing an increased number of glacial lake outburst floods (GLOF) due to 
increased temperatures and intense precipitation. Being an upper riparian province in Pakistan, 
KP receives the shortest lead times for early warnings on climate induced hydro-meteorological 
disasters. As a result of the 2010 floods, KP suffered US$ 1.1 billion in damages, which included 
damages and losses of US$ 96 million1 to the agriculture sector in the province. 

B. Sectoral and Institutional Context 

6. Agriculture is important for Pakistan and the Government has placed agriculture 
development and water efficiency at the forefront of its development agenda. Agriculture2 
remains the second largest economic sector in Pakistan, contributing about 21 percent to the 
national GDP and employing approximately 42 percent of the labor force. The sector is also the 
largest contributor to export revenues with about 75 percent share from exports of primary and 
processed (mostly cotton textile) goods. The Government acknowledges that sustaining an 
annual GDP growth rate of 6 percent or more will require greater focus on agriculture and 
improved water resources planning, governance, and resilience. The Government is pursuing 
multiple initiatives to boost efforts to increase agricultural and water productivity, promote 
efficient use of its scarce water and precious land resources, and incentivize private sector 
investment in these areas for economic growth and shared prosperity.  

7. The contribution of agriculture in the KP economy, however, is less prominent, although 
it employs a high percentage of its labor force. KP’s contribution to the country agriculture GDP 

 

is the smallest of all provinces at 7 percent, compared to its share in total GDP of 11 percent. Also 
within KP, agriculture accounts for only 14 percent of the provincial GDP, representing the 
smallest share of all provinces. The sector accounts for 37 percent of labor force employment3 
and 11 percent of the total household income. The total cultivated area of the province is 1.6 
million ha (7 percent of the country’s total), half of which is rain fed. It produces about 5 percent 
of the country’s total wheat, 2 percent of rice, 17 percent of maize, 8 percent of sugarcane, 16 
percent of barley, 4 percent of gram, 3 percent of rapeseed and mustard, and 75 percent of 
tobacco. Its share in the country’s total livestock population is about 6 percent in cattle, 2.5 
percent in buffalo, 2 percent in sheep, and 8 percent in goats. KP is currently facing a food deficit 
and depends heavily on imports from other provinces, especially from Punjab, for important 
commodities like wheat (64 percent), rice (74 percent), milk, meat, sugar (80 percent), and 
vegetables (90 percent) to complement its production. The answer to this conundrum of 
agriculture may lie in the under exploitation of its natural resources, as the sector grew at a 
decent rate of 3.1 percent to 7.3 percent in the 2010–2015 five-year period, especially after the 
active insurgency period ended. 

8. KP’s land and water resources are under exploited. Of the total culturable4 land of 2 m 
ha., 1/3rd is irrigated, 1/3rd is rainfed and 1/3rd is culturable waste. Water allocated to KP under 
the National Water Apportionment Accord (WAA) of 1991 is 8.78 million acre feet (MAF) but due 
to current carrying capacity of the aging infrastructure and lack of new infrastructure the 
province is only able to withdraw about 68 percent (5.97 MAF) of its share. Also, 14 percent in 
floodwater, under the accord, is not fully used. Additionally, all water resources freed up from 
the WAA’s ambit, for the province, are not yet fully used. These include waters from schemes not 
exceeding 5,000 acres above elevation of 1200 ft. (Survey of Pakistan Datum [SPD]) and waters 
from Kurum/Gomal/kohat basins located in the highly-underserved areas of Kohat, Hangu, Karak, 
Bannu, Lakki Marwat, and D.I. Khan Districts. Thus, one-third of KP’s arable land depends on 
rainfall in a climate that is semiarid to arid. Another one-third (1.08 million ha) of KP’s arable 
land, called culturable waste land, is out of cultivation due either to water logging, non-
availability of irrigation water, salinity, unlevel land, lack of manpower, funds shortages, and so 
on. Thus, more land and water resource development is desperately needed for KP’s food 
security, import substitution, and economic development especially of the lagging areas. That’s 
why feasibility studies are included in the project design to prepare future investments in water 
resources development. 

9. The irrigation infrastructure in KP suffers from deferred maintenance5. KP canals are 
aging. Some are older than 100 years. As an upper riparian province with hilly terrains and steep 
slopes, KP’s canals suffer from frequent bank breaches, bed erosion and scouring due to floods, 

 
3 28 percent of male and 77 percent of female (mostly rural); 44 percent of rural and 6 percent of urban labor force is engaged 
in agriculture. The labor force participation is 80 percent male and 20 percent female (21 percent in rural and 12 percent in 
urban areas). 
4 According to bureau of statistics-Pakistan, culturable land includes cultivated and culturable waste lands and 

cultivated area includes rainfed and irrigated lands. 
5 De-siltation; oiling & greasing; repairing leakages, damaged sections of canal prism, cross drainage structure and outlets 



sliding and high velocities in addition to the normal wear and tear of a canal. Due to the poor 
condition of the canals, the system’s delivery performance is poor and the leakages/wastages 
(estimated at 25%) are causing water logging. Unlike Punjab, the reliance on ground water is 
minimal in irrigated areas, therefore water lost would be wasted and even would cause water 
logging and salinity. The silt deposition raises the level of the command area for which canal bed 
needs to be raised to continue providing the required volumes of water. 

Besides the canals, there are some 4,000-km long surface and subsurface drainage system in KP 
that was built to flush out the excess water to keep the fertile land in production in the central 
districts. However due to lack of funds, this infrastructure is also suffering and, the carrying 
capacity of the drainage system has diminished and large tracts of precious fertile lands are 
becoming water logged and saline again.  

To keep pace with the exceptional level of O & M needs of the KP irrigation and drainage system, 
larger amounts of funds are needed. However, according to the KP Irrigation Department, only 
1/3rd (PkR 500 m vs PkR. 12,00 m for the last 10 years) of the needs are provided. Water charges 
(Abiana) collections in the province has been low at 30% of the total assessed, mainly because of 
the limited paying capacity of the large number of small landholders and low flat rates - PKR 
300/year/acre. Besides, its own system, the department also must, at times, shoulder the 
rehabilitation of civil canals which are community owned and do not pay any water charges. 

This practice of ‘build neglect rebuild’ costs the exchequer dearly6 which are oftentimes met from 
the development budget. 

Removing this backlog of rehabilitation as well as modernization is important to improve the 
system service capability, reduce water wastages/leakages and water logging and safeguard the 
system sustainability.  

10. In KP, as reported by the Irrigation Department, 10-15 percent of the canal outlets are 
tampered and /or illegal. This creates in-equity among growers in the system and affects the 
productivity of the farmers mainly at the tail end. An understanding has been reached with the 
Department to resolve such in-equities during the rehabilitation of the system. 

11. Historically, the collaboration between Irrigation and Agriculture Departments, in KP, is 
weak. Irrigation Department is responsible for development of dams, canals and drains, its 
functionality and O&M; delivering water to farmers at the outlet/farmgate (in watercourses); and 
assessment and collections of water charges. The Agriculture Department is responsible for 
development and rehabilitation of watercourses, promoting water conservation technologies 
and training farmers in good agriculture practices. Due to poor coordination, the benefits of up 
and down stream investment do not consolidate at the farm level. The Baizai Irrigation scheme 
is a good example. The Irrigation Department constructed the upstream delivery system with 
capacity for 25,000 acres but since no provision was made in the scheme budget for the 

 
6 According to a global estimate, a dollar deferred maintenance costs US$7 in repair/rehabilitation 


construction of watercourses, the agriculture department could not do so and after more than 2 
years the farmers are unable to utilize the water fully. This collaboration has started to improve 
in some very new schemes and this project will contribute to improving this collaboration further. 

12. In KP, as in the rest of the country, O & M of the watercourses, that brings water from 
canals to the farms, is a challenge on the daily basis. These are earthen structures owned and 
managed by farmers. The average length of a watercourse (including branches) is about 3 km, 
serving an average area of 150 acres with an average number of 75 shareholder farmers. Every 
farmer has a turn, once a week, to take his share in proportion to his landholding from the 
watercourse. Every time a farmer diverts his/her share, loose earth/mud and stone mixture are 
gathered from the surrounding fields to plug and unplug the farm gate and watercourse at the 
turnouts. Preventing leakage from these structure is a continuous battle for the farmer. Since 
this channel must pass near each farm, there are many turns and branches through which water 
passes. This is an important cause of spillage and leakage for water. Being earthen, many 
different weeds/shrubs/trees start growing on the banks of the watercourse. These often 
become a source of blockage due to its own biomass and capturing silt load causing the water to 
overflow and causing ponding near the watercourse-sometimes becoming mosquito breading 
points. Another source of damage are rodents and grazing animals. This necessitates recurrent 
seasonal cleaning by farmers. Since farmers are poor and cannot afford to hire labour, they do it 
mostly themselves. This O & M of the watercourse draws heavily on the farmers’ time and labour 
-and also cause wastage of his precious water estimated up to 40%. Being earthen, it is easier to 
cut and steal other farmer’s share that can become source of heavy rifts in relations. Therefore, 
it is important to support farmer with watercourse improvement i.e. lining of 507% length, 
installing all turnout structures, construction of crossing culverts, washing pads, and animal 
drinking wallows. It is estimated that this investment helps the farmer save 75% labour time, 15 
percentage point of water wastage, water travel time by 50%, in-equity, theft control which 
results in 15-20% crop yield increase, 30% cropping intensity and ultimately increased net 
incomes. In addition to these benefits it also helps in saving energy costs and precious ground 
water on tube-well water courses. 

13. Field application of water is highly in-efficient in KP as in other parts of the country. Due 
to the widespread practice of flood irrigation and insufficient knowledge of good irrigation 
agronomy practices, water losses are highest at the field level where application efficiency is as 
low as 65–70 percent. Resultantly, crop yields and cropping intensities are low. Investments to 
promote water conservation technologies such as high-efficiency irrigation systems (HEIS) and 
laser-based precision land leveling (PLL) on-farm are of paramount importance for saving losses 
on-farm. HEIS is estimated to increase field application efficiency by 25 percentage points to 95% 
and PLL helps save water by about 30% resulting in increased yields and incomes. 

14. In KP, farmers’ productivity is generally low. Most crop yields in KP are low compared to 
other provinces and progressive growers. This could be attributed to large number of (80%) small 

 
7 So far the department lined 30% but the new findings and demand from the farmers suggest to increase it to 50% 



landholdings lacking scale and purchasing power; labour shortage due to out migration to cities 
and abroad and insufficient mechanization to off-set this shortage; shortage of skilled labour; 
insufficient private sector participation and services; lack of financial services; weak public sector 
research and extension services. 

15. KP has pockets with unique agro-climatic conditions, ideal for horticulture production. 
These include, among others, citrus, dates, pome fruits, potato, tomato, and onions. However, 
the current share of the subsector in the total cropped area is only 6 percent. With improved 
access roads to the main domestic markets and neighboring Afghanistan and air links to the Gulf 
and Central Asian countries, KP could potentially further capitalize on this comparative 
advantage.  

16. Postharvest losses are high. Lack of postharvest technology and management and 
modern cool chain infrastructure and inappropriate storage, packaging, and transportation 
facilities are major bottlenecks specially for perishable commodities in KP. Postharvest losses of 
35 percent to 40 percent for fruits and vegetables remain one of the most pressing problems, 
mostly given the lack of farmer’s awareness about scientific handling of farm produce. 
Inappropriate storage facilities, both in the public and private sector, register the highest losses 
during handling operations. Horticulture products are mostly stored in shallow pits covered with 
farm wastes without ventilation, without proper sanitation, and without preventive measures for 
insect and disease control. The concept of a cool chain network is in its infancy and integrated 
cool chain networks are mostly lacking. The existing cold storage facilities are unevenly 
distributed across the country with Punjab dominating with 512 units, while KP only had 16 units 
in 2009 (Planning Commission 2009). The cold storage facilities are based on old technology that 
do not differentiate for unique temperature requirements of crop species. Moreover, most of 
the existing packing facilities do not measure up to international standards. The types of 
containers used for transporting and storing products vary from place to place, but a common 
practice is to use whatever container is available. This causes the produce to be pressed hard in 
the crates or carried in oversized containers, causing huge loss.  

17. In addition, the agricultural marketing infrastructure and system is inadequate and 
lacks market responsiveness. Many wholesale markets (mandis) were built years ago, and are 
unable to cope efficiently with increased transactions. Serious traffic congestion, insufficient 
space for efficient movement of products in and out, inadequate storage, and improper 
management are some of the major factors for increased marketing costs and physical losses of 
farm products. Hygiene conditions, particularly in the case of fruits, vegetables, and livestock, are 
quite dismal. Excessive domination of commission agents, lack of physical and allied facilities, 
non-involvement of growers and consumers in market committees, and an ineffective market 
information system are some of the inherent problems of these markets and are putting farmers 
at a disadvantageous situation while selling their produce. In addition, the lack of planning and 
communication between demand and supply result in gluts at one time and shortages at other 
times, causing severe price fluctuations and loss of farmer incomes.  



18. The level of processing and value addition of agricultural products is very low in 
Pakistan. Only 3 percent of the total production of fruits and vegetable and less than 10 percent 
of milk are processed in the country (Planning Commission 2009). There exists enormous 
potential of adding value to various fruits and vegetable, such as freezing, drying, dehydrating, 
or crushing into powder, juice, pulp, oil, paste, sauce, chips, pickles, chutney, and jam. The culture 
of value addition through processing and diversification is still at infant stages in Pakistan. This 
small amount of processing leaves large opportunities and could also absorb some of the 
seasonal glut and extend the life of the raw material. 

19. The new government has increased the budget allocation to the sector and shifted its 
policy from higher productivity to higher profitability for smallholder farmers. The KP 
Government increased the budget for its annual development plans to US$62 million for 
agriculture and US$71 million for irrigation in FY17, which is still well below the needs. Key 
priority areas of the new government, as highlighted in the KP Integrated Development Strategy 
of 2014–18 and the KP Agriculture Policy and Strategy—a ten-year perspective (2014–24), are 
improving, among others, production, processing, and marketing, thus improving extension 
services; diversification into high-value agriculture (horticulture, livestock, dairy, and 
aquaculture); adaptation to climate change; on-farm water management (OFWM); development 
of new water resources; rehabilitation/modernization of the existing irrigation and drainage 
infrastructure; and governance. 

20. The World Bank’s last engagement with KP in the sector was for about six years from 
2001 to 2007 for a total of US$21 million made mainly in restoration/rehabilitation of the 
irrigation network from the secondary to the tertiary level. Major efforts were also made, in 
support of the national drainage program (NDP), in devolving the management to farmers, with 
powers to collect water charges and keep 40 percent for managing the operation and 
maintenance of the system from the secondary level downward. However, this outcome could 
not be sustained for long and has been rolled back by the Government. 

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

21. To enhance water management, productivity and climate resilience of irrigated 
agriculture in project areas. 

Key Results (From PCN) 

22. The project outcomes will be measured with the following indicators: 

a) Area provided with improved irrigation and drainage services; 

b) Increase in agriculture productivity (yield); 

c) Increase in areas cultivated for High-Value Agriculture; 

d) Area under climate-resilient technologies and practices (resilience); 

e) Total number of project beneficiaries (including number of female beneficiaries) 


D. Concept Description 

23. The project will contribute to the development of the agriculture sector by working on (a) 
water as an important input and limiting factor to productivity and overall production (b) training 
and technology for improving productivity, post-harvest management and value addition. More 
specifically, it will support six key priority areas of the government strategy for the sector, that 
is, improving performance/functionality of the delivery system and reducing water wastages; 
making water allocation/distribution equitable; increasing financial sustainability of the irrigation 
system management; increasing climate resilience; increasing productivity and promoting high 
value agriculture (production, processing and marketing); and strengthening the department for 
improved service delivery and governance.  

24. To consolidate the benefits of the project, priority will be given to schemes where all the 
three components’ interventions can happen together. In this way, the two departments of 
agriculture and irrigation will work in close collaboration, hitherto weak.  

25. The project will provide climate change co-benefits derived from: (a) adaptation, by changing 
irrigation management systems and practices to reduce vulnerability to climate change, by 
reducing water wastages and its negative externalities during delivery and by reducing losses 
during field application and crop growth stages; and by promoting innovative resource 
management practices to increase resilience, expanding the use of crops and crop 
mixes/rotations less vulnerable to climate variability, and expanding the use of protected 
agriculture and drought/heat resistant varieties; and (b) mitigation, by promoting sustainable 
water management practices that promote water use efficiency and by promoting agricultural 
intensification using higher yielding varieties, carbon sequestration species and cropping 
patterns, and replacing traditional sources of energy. 

26. Woman will be particularly encouraged and targeted to derive maximum benefits of the 
project and play role in the implementation of the project. The project will also ensure to 
safeguard the interest and needs of woman and marginalized groups e.g. providing for protected 
washing pads and animal drinking willows, and avoiding technologies and practices that increases 
drudgery for woman. Further, contractors, consulting firms and implementing partners of the 
project will be sensitized on gender issues and encouraged to achieve gender balance in their 
teams. The operational manual will spell out gender aspects and protocols for mainstreaming 
gender within project interventions.  

27. The project will be open to the entire province and will be completed in six years. The 
project will have the following components: 

Component A: Irrigation System Management (IDA $52 m US) 

This component will have the following three sub-components. 



28. Sub-compoenent-A1: Rehabilitation and reduction in in-equities: This sub-component 
would support the Irrigation Department to overcome the backlog of rehabilitation to fully 
restore the functionality/performance of the irrigation system; reduce the excessive and wasteful 
losses estimated at 25% by 7 percentage points; and increase economic/service life by at least 
10-15 years. This will include support to both the government and civil (community owned) 
canals systems. The government has prepared a prioritized list of 22 schemes, costing about 
USD140 million, for rehabilitation. The project, during the preparation, will conduct a diagnosis 
of the KP irrigation system, including the list provided by the government to, identify the schemes 
to be support by the project. The criteria for selection would include: vulnerability to climate 
change impacts; acreage and number of beneficiaries; potential for high value agriculture; 
poverty levels in the area served; and cost effectiveness (cost per unit area served). A Project 
Preparation Facility (PPF) has been discussed with the client for preparing detail designs and 
bidding documents for the selected schemes. The rehabilitation works would, usually, include 
flood eroded beds and banks; sunken earth filled sections; and damaged hydraulic structures like 
100ft up and down stream of the fall structures, off-taking points of minors and sub-minors, 
footings of overhead bridges; passages through settlements and deep cut areas; and catchwater 
drains for flushing flood water. Before rehabilitation work begins, any outlets tampered and/or 
illegally installed will be removed. 

29. Sub-component-A2: Institutional strengthening & Reform: To avoid buildup of further 
backlog, an understanding with the GoKP will be developed to increase allocation of recurrent 
budget for the O&M of the system by lifting the current cap that is in place for the last 10 years. 
This could be informed by conducting a study on the cost of neglecting (under funding) the O&M 
of the system. However, to make it sustainable in the long run, support will be provided to the 
department to improve its revenue generation capacity by improving collection of the water 
charges. The investments of component C, should help increase the farmers’ capacity to pay 
water charges by improving their crop productivity and switching to high value crops.  

Further support will be provided for training of staff; developing asset management plan; and 
developing water budgets and water balances estimates for the six-major government canal 
systems.  

The KP government has planned to develop the Provincial Integrated Water Resources 
Management Policy with support from the Bank managed MDTF funded Governance and Policy 
Support project. Support under this sub-component will be re-aligned with the directives of this 
policy.  

30. Sub-compoenent-A3: Future investments preparation: To increase availability of water for 
irrigation, households and livestock; support ground water recharge; reduce intensity of floods, 
siltation downstream by tapping hill torrents and splash floods in the rainfed areas, the project 
will finance preparation of feasibilities, detailed designs, and bidding documents for selected 
dams and irrigation schemes. The scheme selection will be based on criteria of number of farmers 
and acreage benefiting and cost effectiveness and poverty levels in the area served. 


Component B: On-farm Water Management (IDA $51 m US) 
This component will enable the Agriculture Department to support farmers including woman, to 
rehabilitate/improve existing and construct new watercourses; adopt water conservation 
technologies on their farms; and in training its staff. The component design benefits from lessons 
drawn from Sindh and Punjab Irrigated Agriculture Improvement projects. These include a) 
developing good database of watercourses with information for length, no. of shareholders, legal 
status; inclusion of tube-well watercourse; lining 50% length and all turnouts; seasonal work 
windows; monitoring dashboards; estimation of average costs; openness to the entire province 
b) empowerment of the farmers to select and negotiate price of the HEIS and PLL equipements 
with suppliers; training of farmers in crop agronomy; fixing maximum cap on project support per 
unit, c) ensuring geographical spread for laser land leveling promotion etc. The component will 
also finance the extended presence of consultants/firm for engineering supervision of activities 
to be implemented by the field teams of the Department. This component will have the four sub-
components, as follows; 
31. Sub-component-B1: Rehabilitation of existing watercourses: The rehabilitation/improvement 
works will be done on existing watercourses on government and civil canals; springs and tube-
well irrigated areas. This work will include lining of 50% length from the offtake point including 
selected critical sections; alignment; desilting; re-sectioning; installing all turn out structures; 
crossing culverts, washing pads and animal drinking willows. Farmers will contribute 20% of the 
total cost in the shape of skilled and unskilled labour and form themselves into water users’ 
associations with at least 70% farmers’ representation.  

32. Sub-component-B2: Construction of watercourses network: Construction of new 
watercourses network will be done in some new schemes areas where the Irrigation Department 
has already completed the upstream irrigation infrastructure but not the watercourses due to 
which farmers are unable to utilize water. The project support will include farmer’s mobilization 
and their formation of WUAs; engineering design, BOQ & cost estimates for construction of the 
full length of earthen watercourse; lining of 50% length preferably from the off-taking point and 
other critical sections; construction of all turn out structures, crossing culverts, washing pads and 
animal drinking points. Here again farmers will contribute 20% of the total cost in the shape of 
skilled and unskilled labour and form themselves into a water users’ association where at least 
70% farmers become members. 

33. Sub-component-B3: Promote water conservation technologies: To promote on-farm 
water conservation, technologies like HEIS and precision laser land leveling (PLL) will be 
supported on a cost sharing basis. These technologies will particularly suit at the tail end and 
tube-well irrigated areas. Farmers will be trained in growing high value crops under HEIS to make 
the use of technology economically viable. 

34. Sub-component-B4: Capacity building & institutional strengthening: The project will 
finance training of staff in new improved methods of on-farm water management and data and 
studies on the watercourses network. 


Component C: Agriculture Productivity Enhancement and Value-Addition (IDA 
$50 m US)  
The objective of this component is to improve the productivity, diversification, harvest and post- 
harvest management and processing & value addition in agriculture (crops, horticulture, fisheries 
and livestock sub-sectors). This objective will be achieved by i) strengthening public sector 
institutions (e.g., research and extension institutions) to solidify the foundation for sustained 
sectoral growth; i) investing in capacity building and iii) introducing modern technologies to 
farmers; and iv) support agribusinesses/ag-entrepreneurs for higher value addition through agro-
processing and commercialization services. This component addresses the climate change 
vulnerabilities to the agriculture sector, as set out in the project’s vulnerability context. All the 
activities under the Component will adequately reflect important CSA areas of productivity, 
adaptation and mitigation as highlighted in Pakistan CSA profile important for agriculture in 
Northern Pakistan. Considering that more than 70% of Pakistan’s female workforce is employed 
in agriculture, there is a special need to ensure all services provided by the Component will be 
more gender sensitive. The lessons drawn from similar projects, for example, the Sindh 
Agriculture Growth Project, have been incorporated to the Component design. The component 
will also finance the extended presence of technical consultants/firm to assist with planning and 
management of the Component. 

35. Subcomponent C.1: Modernizing public extension service and agricultural research (US$14 m). 
The sub-component will finance modernizing and rehabilitating extension and research facilities 
which have been identified as critical for the KP agriculture sector, such as the agricultural 
research centers, training centers and laboratory facilities etc. The subcomponent will also 
finance information and communication (ICT)-based technologies and services for delivery of 
agricultural extension and marketing for farmers and value chains, such as developing mobile 
phone APPs and other ICT tools (e.g., 24/7 call center, interactive websites, mobile training and 
demonstration centers etc.). The subcomponent will also support studies and data on the sector 
and training of staff. 

36. Subcomponent C.2: Capacity building of farmers (US$6 million).  The project will finance 
training and capacity building for famers, which will be based on training needs assessment 
carried out by the departments and their technical assistance providers. Training topics will 
include, but not limited to, good agricultural practices (including those specifically related to 
CSA), agribusiness management, negotiating in the market, basic accounting, and business plan 
development skills, etc. This will be done through demonstration plots, public information 
campaign, face-to-face training (farmers field school), domestic study tours and exposure visits 
etc.  Special attention will be given to climate smart agriculture related knowledge.    

37. Subcomponent C.3: Introducing modern technologies to farmers (US$20 million).  The project 
will finance investments to increase productivity, climate resilience and on-farm pre-and post-
harvest management of crops, horticulture, fisheries and livestock sub-sectors through 
technology (e.g., farm machinery, equipements, seeds, breeds, and infrastructure etc.).  This 



support will be provided on a cost sharing basis with 70% paid by the Project and 30% by 
beneficiaries on a first come first serve basis, with ensuring regional equity. 

38. Subcomponent C.4: Support agribusinesses (US$10 million). This sub-component will support 
agribusinesses (SMEs)/agro-entrepreneurs for improved services, commercialization and 
processing & value addition. This will include businesses like seed companies, nursery growers, 
fish hatcheries, animal semen producers, farm machinery & equipements providers; reefer 
transporters, chillers, ventilated & cold storages, pack-houses including graders, sorter; slaughter 
houses, pulpers, oil extractors, de-hydrators, tanners; trading centers like rehabilitation of fruit, 
vegetable, livestock and grain wholesale markets; introducing digital trading platforms and 
contract growing etc. The project will provide a competitive grant program with a transparent 
and efficient review and selection process. The grant size will be up to US$100,000, with 30% 
matching fund from applicants. The grant will be released in three tranches based on verified 
progress of proposal implementation. 

39. The component will provide climate change co-benefits derived from: (a) adaptation, by 
promoting innovative resource management practices to increase resilience, expanding the use 
of crops and crop mixes/rotations less vulnerable to climate variability, and expanding the use of 
protected agriculture and drought/heat resistant varieties; and (b) mitigation, by promoting 
agricultural intensification using higher yielding varieties, carbon sequestration species and 
cropping patterns, and replacing traditional sources of energy.. 

Component D: Project Management and Implementation Support (IDA US$12 
million) 

40. This component will support the establishment of the project management structure. This 
will include project administration, human resources including woman staff, procurement, and 
financial management; monitoring and evaluation (M&E); communications management; social 
and environmental safeguards management; and grievance redress and community feedback 
mechanisms particularly channeling the voices of woman beneficiaries.  

41. Citizen Engagement (CE): The populations targeted in the citizen engagement mechanism 
of the proposed project will be farmers and agribusiness owners receiving support to increase 
their yield/productivity and the commercialization of their products. The CE mechanism will 
assist the extension service and government officials in making more informed decisions about 
resource allocations, training and technology needs of farmers and agribusiness owners. Overall, 
the CE mechanism will enhance the successful implementation of the project, and guide the 
government in preparing better programs for farmers. A detailed citizen engagement mechanism 
and grievance redressal mechanism will be elaborated during the preparation phase of the 
project, and will be included in the project implementation manual. 

42. Gender. The project design and approach will reflect the need for taking account of the 
gender dimension and risks associated with knowledge and technology transfer. Project will be 
designed to ensure that it provides equal opportunities for women to participate in project 



activities. Climate-resilient agricultural technologies will be screened to ensure that they are 
gender-neutral. A comprehensive social assessment has been initiated as part of project 
preparation and is expected to result, among others, in a Gender Action Plan. 

   

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
The project will be implemented in various districts of KP. The land cover of KP changes from north to south. The 

Province sits primarily on the Iranian plateau and comprises the junction where the slopes of the Hindu Kush mountains 
on the Eurasian plate give way to the Indus-watered hills approaching South Asia. Geographically, the province could be 
divided into four agro-ecological zones on the basis climatic conditions covering temperature, rainfall, altitude and 
topography as developed by Environmental Protection Agency of KP:  
(a) Zone A – Northern Mountains covering districts of Buner, Shangla, Upper and Lower Dir, Swat and Chitral.  
(b) Zone B – Sub Humid Mountain covering districts of Haripur, Batagram, Mansehra, Abbottabad, Kohistan and 

Torghar.    
(c) Zone C – Central Valley Plains covering districts of Peshawar, Mardan, Charshada and Nowshera. 
(d) Zone D – Piedmont Plains (including Suleiman) covering districts of Bannu, karak, Lakki Marwat, Tank and DI Khan.  
The snowcapped mountains of Chitral and Swat have low vegetative cover above 4,000 meters. Mountains having 

altitude less than 4,000 meters have alpine forests (up to 3,300 meters). Altitudes between 3,000 meters to 1,500 meters 
have conifer and between 1,500 up to 900 meters have sub-tropical forests. These forests and plains provide habitat to 
98 species of mammals and birds including endangered species of snow leopard, brown bear, ibex, etc. The protected 
areas notified in KP includes 6 national parks, three wildlife sanctuaries, 38 game reserves, 90 community game reserves, 
16 private game reserves, 2 wildlife refuges and 8 wildlife parks. The combined area of all protected areas is 666,340 ha. 
The project activities are located in parts of Zone C valley plains and Zone D piedmont plains, which are are mostly used 

for agriculture and livestock grazing. Indus River and its tributaries are the main source of water for agriculture in the 
Province. Other major rivers that crisscross the province are  Kabul, Swat, Kunar, Siran, Panjkora, Bara, Kurram, Dor, Haro, 
Gomal and Zhob. 
 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
The KP Government will be the implementing agency. The last time these two departments, Agriculture Department and 

Irrigation Department  implemented a World Bank project was in 2001-2007, and there the Irrigation Department had a 
secondary role. This leaves much desire for familiarity with and improvement in the understanding of the Bank safeguard 
policies. Therefore, safeguards capacity support, handholding and training will be provided throughout the project 
implementation to ensure that they have adequate capacity to respond to project safeguard issues. 
 
A Project Coordination & Management Unit (PCMU)—led by the Agriculture Department, will be established to manage 

implementation and coordination. Project Implementation Units one each in Agriculture (or two in its sub departments) 
and Irrigation Departments will be established to supervise technical implementation in the field. The PCMU will have a 
senior Safeguards Specialist as part of the PCMU Team. PIUs  at the two departments level will be supported by individual 
environment & social safeguards consultants. These consultants will work closely with the engineering supervision 
consultants, and will provide input into the project design as per safeguards instruments (such as ESMF, RPF, RAP, etc.). 
The senior Safeguards Specialist at the PCMU level will be responsible for the overall implementation and performance of 
the safeguards documents, while the day-to-day screening, monitoring and implementation will be the responsibility of 

d specialists at the PIU levels. The project will have a Project Implementation Committee (PIC) co-chaired by 
Secretary Agriculture and Secretary Irrigation and membered by heads of the PIUs, Chiefs of Water, Agriculture & 
Livestock from P & D, to review the progress of project components. The senior Safeguards Specialist at the PCMU level 
will be a part of the PIC. All project implementation and supervision consultant firms will be required to have adequate 
social and environmental safeguards specialists. The contractors for civil works will implement Contractor ESMP, including 
all necessary guidelines on labor health, safety and environment.  
 
Project launch workshop will be organized by the task team once the project becomes effective and will include a 

detailed session on safeguard implementation arrangements. 
 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The project activities involve irrigation infrastructure 
improvement, on farm water management schemes 
and production and post-production support to 
farmers and market actors. These activities are 
expected to cause some adverse environmental and 
social impacts. Overall, most of the impacts are 
expected to be during the construction phase and are 
likely to be temporary and reversible. Consequently, 
the policy has been triggered. Since project will also 
finance feasibility studies for dams, the scale and 
capacity of which is currently unknown. Based on 
existing information, the project has been categorized 
as Category A.   
 
The irrigation infrastructure improvement will overall 
improve irrigation efficiencies and help in ensuring 
availability of designed water flows at the tail-end of 
watercourses. However, improved infrastructure will 
not change the designed water allocations.Typical 
negative impacts associated with civil works financed 
by the project include land acquisition and 
resettlement; noise, air, soil and water pollution due 
to dust and exhaust emission and other wastes; 
vegetation clearance; damage to the existing 
infrastructures such as rural road, temporary water 
stoppages for irrigation, community and worker health 
and safety risks, etc. During operation, some potential 



 
The World Bank  
Khyber Pakhthunkhwa Irrigated Agriculture Improvement Project (P163474) 

 
 

  
Jul 31, 2017 Page 17 of 21  

     

adverse impacts are forecasted such as water 
pollution and spreading diseases by human and animal 
wastes, pesticides use potentially causing water and 
soil pollution, excessive application of irrigation water 
causing leaching of soil nutrients and changes in soil 
characteristics, etc.  
Since the exact location of subprojects are not known 
at present and will be identified during project 
preparation and implementation, framework 
approach has been adopted.  Environmental and 
Social Management Framework (ESMF) along with 
Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) 
for the known priority projects will be developed by 
project appraisal. The ESMF will also include 
assessment of regional impacts on water quality, 
analysis of any possible changes in groundwater and 
downstream surface water availability. The ESMF will 
also include Terms of Reference for environmental 
and social impact assessment (ESIA) for the feasibility 
studies of small dams and environmental and social 
screening checklists/procedures for competitive grant 
program (project component C). 

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No  

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 No 

Most of physical infrastructure investments financed 
by the project are rehabilitation and improvement of 
the existing infrastructures. Some new construction 
activities such as construction of watercourses in new 
command areas and small-water storage tanks will 
take place on the existing agricultural lands. These 
activities are not expected to convert or degrade 
natural habitat. Therefore, the policy is not triggered.   
It is important to mention here that the project is 
supporting preparation of feasibility studies for 5 small 
dams or irrigation schemes. The studies will include 
EIAs. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No 
The project is not expected to impact forests and 
associated ecosystems as envisaged in the policy. 
Therefore, the policy is not triggered. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The project will not support purchase of pesticides. 
However, the policy is triggered because the project 
interventions may lead to substantially increased use 
of pesticides and subsequent environmental 
problems. Thus, to mitigate this impact the project will 
apply an IPM approach with an IPMP prepared. 


     

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 TBD 

At this stage, it is not possible to identify potential 
impacts on physical cultural resources (PCRs). 
However, final determination would be made by QER.  
Chance find procedures will be included in ESMF. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 Yes 

The project area extends across KP, including Chitral 
district which is home to the Kalash who are 
recognized as Indigenous People (IP); hence, OP 4.10 is 
triggered. An Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework 
(IPPF) for interventions in Chitral district will be 
prepared, consulted upon, and disclosed publicly on 
the client’s website (in-country) and by the Bank prior 
to appraisal. Indigenous Peoples Plans (IPPs), if 
required, will be prepared for specific project 
locations. 
Given the cultural sensitivity and tribal nature of the 
area, the social assessment will carefully assess 
potential project impacts on IPs and mitigation 
measures including grievance redress mechanism will 
be developed through free prior and informed 
consultation as required under OP4.10. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

Small parcels of land will be required for project 
interventions. In most cases land needs will be met 
through Community or Voluntary Land Donations 
(VLD), the procedures for which will be laid out in the 
ESMF. In few cases small parcels may need to be 
acquired e.g. watercourses construction in new 
command areas (e.g. Bazai etc.). Certain interventions 
e.g. rehabilitation of existing water courses, may 
involve minor temporary impacts on livelihoods (due 
to restricted access; temporary dislocation) which 
could require small scale compensation. However, the 
impacts are not expected to be large scale. Hence OP 
4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement has been triggered. 
A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), and 
Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) for actual sites that 
may have been identified, will be prepared, consulted 
upon, and disclosed publicly on the client’s website 
(in-country) and by the Bank prior to appraisal. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 Yes 

The project will not directly finance rehabilitation of 
existing dams or construction of new dams. The 
project activities especially investments for 
improvements in irrigation infrastructure may rely on 
performance of the existing dams such as Warsak Dam 
on Kabul River or Munda dam on Swat River. However, 
the exact location of schemes are not known at 
present. The project will also finance feasibility studies 



     

for dams, scale and capacity of which is currently 
unknown. The policy is therefore triggered to ensure 
due diligence and for adequate coverage of 
environmental and social aspects/impacts. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

Yes 

The proposed project activities are located in the 
command area of tributaries of Indus river, which is an 
international water way (river). The proposed project 
activities under component 1 and 2 qualify to trigger 
this policy. The task team will consult LEGEN to 
determine whether waiver to notification to riparian is 
applicable. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
There are no disputed areas as defined in the Policy 
where project interventions are to be undertaken and 
therefore this policy is not triggered. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Sep 17, 2018 
 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
1. ESMF by 30 August, 2018 
2. ESMP for first year schemes by 30 August, 2018 
3. IPMP by 30 August, 2018 
4. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be prepared to provide guidelines for project interventions that could 

require land acquisition, and which may lead to resettlement and impact on livelihood. RPF will be completed by 30 
August, 2018. 
5. RAP for first year schemes by 30 August, 2018 
6. Ingenious Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) will be prepared by 30 August, 2018. IPPs (Indigenous Peoples Plans) for 

the first year schemes will be prepared by 30 August, 2018, where required.  
7. Assessment of regional impacts on water quality, groundwater availability and downstream water availability will be a 

part of the overall ESMF, as well as the social assessment. Moreover, given the cultural sensitivity and tribal nature of the 
area, all assessments will carefully assess consultations/GRM/FPIC requirements.  
8. All feasibility studies will include a TOR on E&S screening and social and environmental impacts analyses.   
 
 
 
























































World Bank Document


 

The World Bank  
AP Integrated Irrigation& Agriculture Transformation Project (P160463) 

 

 

  
Feb14, 2017 Page 1 of 17 

 

Project Information Document/ 
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 11-Nov-2016 | Report No: PIDISDSC19733 


  BASIC INFORMATION 
   

  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

India P160463  AP Integrated Irrigation 
& Agriculture 
Transformation Project 
(P160463) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

SOUTH ASIA March 1, 2018 Jul 26, 2018 Agriculture 

Lending Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Department of Economic 
Affairs 

Government of Andhra 
Pradesh 

 

 

 Financing (in USD Million) 

 

Financing Source Amount  

Borrower   68.08  

International Bank for Reconstruction and Development  170.00  

Total Project Cost  238.08  

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B-Partial Assessment  
  

Have the Safeguards oversight and clearance functions been transferred to the Practice Manager? (Will not be 
disclosed) 
No 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 

Type here to enter text 
 
B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
 
1. India has sustained economic growth during last decade: India’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP) for 2016-17 is 
estimated at 7.6 percent, higher than the 7.2 percent for the preceding year, but lower than the projected 8.1-8.5 
percent for this year

1
. Sustained economic growth during the last decade, however, has contributed to annual decline in 

poverty by 1.5 percent, but income inequality has continued to persist. Emerging as one of the fastest growing 
economies, there has been significant upturn in key development indicators. Life expectancy at birth increased to 68 

                                            
1
Economic Survey 2016-17 



 
Years in 2014 from a low of 54 in 1980. India's per capita gross national income increased by about 338 percent between 
1980 and 2014, from $1,255 in 1980 to $5,497 in 2014. As a result, India has climbed five notches to 130th rank in 
Human Development Index among 188 countries in 2014

2
.  

2. Reducing poverty and creating jobs can fuel economy: Sustained economic growth notwithstanding, India 
remains home to 263 million poor people (80% of whom reside in rural areas) living on less than US$1.90/day. Expansion 
of the economy in recent decades has largely resulted in jobless growth. For addressing these issues, Govt. of A.P has set 
an ambitious goal of achieving an annual growth rate of 8.2 percent, reducing poverty by 10 percent (poverty in the 
State is on a decline and currently stands at 9.2%, as per Socio-Economic Survey 2016-17), and creating 50 million new 
jobs.. It has been argued that adequate attention to agriculture could fuel growth, create  jobs and reduce poverty. In 
the wake of consecutive low monsoon rainfall and consequent decline in farm productivity, agriculture has served a 
wake-up call, demanding attention from policy makers. 

3. Agriculture sector continues to lag behind: The issues of inclusive growth and gainful employment are major 
challenges in rural areas where two-thirds of the workforce resides. About 66 percent of the labor force is employed in 
agriculture sector which accounts for 14 percent of GDP, and is saddled with problems of uncertain growth. Per capita 
land and water availability is decreasing while high intensity rainfall events and dry spells are increasing. Land and labor 
productivity continues to be low. 

4. Agriculture growth is essential in achieving India’s development goals: During the last 25 years, agriculture 
sector has not achieved the envisaged growth targets. In 1990s and 2000s, the annual agriculture growth rate was 
around 3-3.5 percent and declined to less than 1 percent in the last two years (2014-16) due to technology fatigue, 
degradation of land and water resources, growing water scarcity, exacerbated by two consecutive droughts, floods, 
cyclones, heat waves, and declining international commodity prices. The growth in agriculture sector in 2015-16 has 
continued to be lower than the average of the last decade, mainly due to a second successive year of lower-than-normal 
monsoon. Report from the Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare for 2015-16 indicates that the 
production of food-grains and oil-seeds is likely to decrease by 0.5 and 4.1 percent respectively, while that of fruits and 
vegetables is likely to witness a marginal increase. 

5. To fuel the agrarian economy, strategic shifts in agriculture would  be aimed  (based on the Socio-economic 
Survey 2016-17 projections) at: (i) towards high value vegetables, fruits, livestock and fish products; (ii) towards value 
addition in post-harvest segments; (iii) towards diversification and resilience of farming systems to address climate 
change effects; (iv) towards nutrition sensitive agriculture; and (v) finally a shift towards improved water use efficiency. 

6. Many new schemes have been launched to effect the proposed shifts in agriculture: Pradhan Mantri Krishi 
Sinchai Yojana will fast track irrigation coverage and improve water use efficiency in rural areas; Parmparagat Krishi 
Vikas Yojana aims to reduce input costs by promoting organic farming; Pashudhan Sanjivani, Nakul Swasthya Patra, and 
E-Pashudhan Haat have been proposed to improve livestock productivity. There is an enormous potential for harvesting 
gains from transformation of irrigated agriculture as production, consumption and agribusiness shift from traditional 
cereal crops to horticulture, livestock and fish production. India has a comparative advantage in having a very large and 
largely untapped domestic market, which reduces reliance on exports as the principal driver and consumer of agriculture 
growth. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
7. Andhra Pradesh is a leading reforming economy: Bifurcated on June 2, 2014, the present state of Andhra 
Pradesh (AP) is a middle income state with an average per capita annual income of INR 107,532 which is 15 percent 
higher than the national average. The state accounts for 4.95 percent of India’s land mass, 4.09 percent of its population 
and 4.44 percent of its GDP. AP is predominantly a rural state with 70.4 percent population living in villages and 
dependent on agriculture as the main source of livelihood. Despite severe challenges following the division of AP into 
two states in 2014 (AP and Telangana), the state has recorded appreciable progress in terms of the objective of 
achieving inclusive growth with noteworthy performance in both development and welfare sectors. In 2015-16, the 
Gross State Domestic Product (GSDP) grew at the rate of 10.99 percent, compared to corresponding growth rate of 7.2 
percent for the country. 

8. The sector-wise growth rate is equally impressive. At 2011-12 constant prices, agriculture grew by 8.4 percent, 
compared to industry by 11.13 percent and services sector by 11.39 percent. The per capita income of AP at current 
prices registered a growth of 12.38 percent over 2014-15. This has led to decline in the incidence of poverty from 45 
percent in 1993-94 to 9.2 percent in 2015-16

3
. AP is recognized as one of India’s leading reforming states and in the last 

two decades has achieved significant development outcomes through sustained policy and institutional reform 
programs in which the World Bank has been an important development partner. Rich in natural and human resources, 
the state is keen to leverage its strengths through specific growth strategies tailored to achieve double digit growth. 

9. Agriculture sector has performed below capacity: The performance of the state agriculture sector, which 
accounts for 27.6 percent of the state GDP and employs 62 percent of the work force, has been a cause of concern. 
Between 1999-00 and 2013-14 agriculture grew at around 2.1 percent per annum with most of this growth coming from 
livestock, horticulture and fisheries sub-sectors. In 2015-16 these sub-sectors respectively contributed 26, 25 and 15 
percent to the Agriculture State Domestic Product (AgSDP). Land use pattern is critical for agriculture growth, only 38.31 
percent of the state’s geographical area is net sown (6.23 million hectares). Majority of the farmers are small and 
marginal with average landholdings of 1.06 hectare (ha). The main crops are rice, groundnut, sugarcane, cotton, maize 
and Bengal gram. Due to seasonality and scarcity of water supply, cultivation is mostly limited to only one crop per plot 
per year, with a cropping intensity of 126 percent.  

10. The productivity of major crops has remained largely stagnant: The reason for low productivity is because AP is 
one of the severely water stressed states of India with an average annual rainfall of 966 millimeters, and a coastline of 
974 kilometers that is vulnerable to cyclones. Agriculture in AP is highly exposed to extreme weather events like 
droughts, untimely and high intensity rains, floods, cyclones and hailstorms. Increasing erratic weather aberrations and 
climate change are likely to exacerbate vulnerability of agricultural sector. Of the net sown area of 6.23 million ha in the 
state, 3.15 million ha is presently irrigated through a combination of canals, wells, tanks, ponds and other sources. 
Although 40,817 tanks cover a command area of 2.56 million ha, the actual area irrigated by tanks has declined 
significantly from about 1 million ha in 1990 (24% of irrigated area at that time) to 0.26 million ha in 2015 (8.4% of 
irrigated area).  

11. Irrigation is the key to revival of the agriculture sector: Due to deficient maintenance and management of the 
tank systems, as a result of which most tanks are performing well below the capacity, the actual area irrigated to 
potential created varies between 35-55 percent depending on rainfall. Some 35,376 tanks having a command area of 
0.32 million ha have been transferred from Panchayat Raj Department to Minor Irrigation Department. The rapid spread 
of groundwater irrigation has been an additional contributing factor to the decline in tank irrigation, and has also led to 
a serious depletion of groundwater resources across large parts of the state. Since most of the tanks are in rainfed areas 

                                        
 

with limited possibilities of providing other systems of surface irrigation, their decline poses a serious threat to the 
fragile agricultural economy of these areas.  

12. Poorer farmers, often found at the tail-end of dilapidated tank/pond systems (Small Scale Community Based 
Irrigation Systems- SSCBI Systems) and lacking resources to access groundwater irrigation amidst low and falling water 
tables, are particularly affected. In response to the difficulties being faced by the agriculture sector, the State 
Government has substantially expanded capital investments for modernizing irrigation infrastructure since 2006-07.  The 
Government has also taken steps to strengthen participatory irrigation management and AP was the first state in the 
country to adopt participatory irrigation management (PIM) following enactment of the Andhra Pradesh Farmers 
Management of Irrigation Systems (APFMIS) Act in 1997.  About 6,400 Water User Associations (WUAs) were formed 
which collect water taxes for meeting operation and maintenance (O&M) costs of tanks.  

13. Institutional development through capacity building has contributed to the success of PIM, a process that has 
been significantly supported by externally funded projects. The Bank-supported AP Community Based Tank 
Management Project (APCBTMP), which concluded in July 2016, has made significant development impacts in the state 
by rehabilitating 2,157 tanks, which resulted in 32 percent increase in tank command area and contributed to increase in 
paddy, maize and groundnut productivity by 36, 72 and 97 percent, respectively. In addition, tank rehabilitation resulted 
in 388 percent increase in fish productivity. 

14. Agriculture sector is in need of a paradigm shift: The negative consequences of low agriculture yields extend 
from precarious incomes of farmers to large tracts of land locked in low value agriculture, despite growing demands for 
high value products such as fruits, vegetables, and livestock products. According to NSS data4, the average annual 
income of the median farmer net of production costs (of 1 hectare) from cultivation is less than INR 20,000 in 17 states, 
including Andhra Pradesh. Add high cost of cultivation, growing indebtedness, climate uncertainty, ineffective 
procurement, insufficient storage space and market linkages, and it makes agriculture an increasingly uneconomical 
activity.5 The crisis in agriculture sector is evidenced by the ‘Crop holiday’ (farmers abstained from farming) observed by 
farmers of East Godavari district in an area of 85,050 acres in Kharif 2011, which is further reflected in continuing 
suicides by farmers in the state. During 2015, 516 suicides by farmers were recorded in AP

6
. 

15. Primary Sector Mission seeks institutional convergence for maximizing profitability: To pull agriculture from its 
current abysmal condition, AP requires a new paradigm with the following components: increasing productivity by 
getting “more from less” especially in relation to water; prioritizing the cultivation of less water-intensive crops, 
especially pulses and oil-seeds, supported by a favorable price regime that incorporates the full social benefits of 
producing such crops, and backed by a market-linked value chain. To effect a paradigm shift, GoAP has proposed the 
Primary Sector Mission to converge independently operating sub-sectors viz., agriculture, horticulture, fishery, and 
agribusiness into an integrated farming system for maximizing profitability of small and marginal farmers from a unit of 
arable land. The proposed project will showcase an alternate approach for leveraging capacities of relevant departments 
to improve farm incomes, and make agriculture resilient to climate change.  For a clear understanding at the highest 
level of authority in the state to prevent further deterioration of the socio-economic fabric in rural areas (exodus, farmer 
suicides), a more comprehensive, longer term approach based around adaptive management in agriculture is required – 
particularly given the climate projections and their impact on the agriculture and water sectors in AP. The GoAP has 
evaluated the results of different initiatives taken during the previous years to develop a comprehensive long term 
strategy aimed at making agriculture in the state productive, profitable, sustainable and climate resilient. The state has 

also realized that a mono-cropping production system based on capital intensive irrigation infrastructure and 
technologies has its limitations under the present circumstances with climate variables.    

16. To unlock the full potential of agriculture sector growth, AP has stressed a strong need for policies and programs 
to focus on: (i) improvement of water use efficiency; (ii) intensification of cropping systems and diversification to high 
value crops and commodities; (iii) enhancement of post-harvest management and value addition; and (iv) improvement 
of the resilience of agriculture system in order to deal with increasing threats of climate change. By reorganizing PIM 
with regular administrative systems, AP envisions realizing the full potential of its water sector reforms by achieving a 20 
percent increase in water use efficiency over the next five years. 

Relationship to CPF 
 
17. The proposed project is fully consistent with the India Country Partnership Strategy (CPS): The proposed 
project is fully consistent with the India Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for FY 2013–17 to support poverty reduction 
and shared prosperity in India. The proposed project is aligned with two key pillars of CPS – ‘transformation’ and 
‘inclusion’. In line with ‘transformation’, the project aims to promote inclusive rural growth, development and 
dissemination of new agricultural and water management technologies, climate-resilient agriculture, enhanced market 
linkages for small and marginal farmers, and improved water and natural resource management (CPS Outcome 2.4). The 
proposed project will have positive impact in terms of environmental protection, and reduced greenhouse gas emissions 
by disseminating high efficiency irrigation systems, and promoting diversification to pulses and high value crops, which 
significantly reduce water and carbon footprint of agriculture (CPS Outcomes 2.5/2.6). 

18. The project is aligned with the Bank’s transformative and inclusive criteria:  With respect to ‘inclusion’, the 
project aims to enhance the livelihoods of small and marginal farmers through crop diversification, enhanced market 
access (CPS Outcome 3.6), and also by improving disaster management abilities of GoAP and local communities through 
enhanced design and restoration of smallholder irrigation infrastructure with better drought proofing and flood 
protection features (CPS Outcome 3.8).  

19. The proposed project will directly contribute to the achievement of 5 out of 17 United Nations’ Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDG), namely:  

Goal 2 – End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition and ote sustainable agriculture, by enhancing 
income, food security, and nutrition of large number of rural population, where majority of AP’s poor reside. 

Goal 6 – Ensure availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all by investing in irrigation 
infrastructure, promoting a whole range of water saving technologies for irrigated agriculture, which uses 
about 75 percent of all water in the state. 

Goal 8 – Promote sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic growth, full and productive employment and decent 
work for all by promoting a broad-based agriculture growth and employment in rural areas, where more than 
two-third of country’s population are employed. 

Goal 9 – Build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization and foster innovation by 
rehabilitating and modernizing irrigation infrastructure (supply canals, water tanks) with enhanced resilience 
features of flood protection in about 1,211 tanks. 

Goal 13 – Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts and reduce GHG effects of agriculture production 
by promoting a wide range of water saving technologies and agricultural practices (SRI, micro-irrigation), 
expanding areas under pulses and high value crops, which consume less water, and also by enhancing 
awareness-raising, human and institutional capacity on climate change mitigation, adaptation, and impact 
reduction. 

 
20. The project will also coordinate with other Bank-supported projects in Andhra Pradesh and at national level 
including Assam Agriculture project, Maharashtra Agricultural Competitiveness Project, Andhra Pradesh-Telangana 
Water Sector Improvement Project, National Hydrology Project, and National Groundwater Improvement Project to 
ensure synergy and enhance long-term project impact. 

 

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)     
 

The Project Development Objective is to enhance agricultural productivity, profitability and resilience of Small Scale 
Community Based Irrigation Systems (SSCBI Systems)

7
in selected districts of Andhra Pradesh.  

 
21. The project beneficiaries will include small and marginal farmers, water users associations, farmer producer 
organizations, and other agro-entrepreneurs. During project preparation, specific target areas will be identified and 
specific interventions will be designed to benefit women and other vulnerable groups.  

 
 

Key Results (From PCN) 
 

22.  The following 5 Key Performance Indicators (KPI) are proposed to measure key outcomes of the project: 

(i) KP#1: Number of Farmers / farmer groups adopting resilient technologies and practices –(such as  Agriculture Technology,  

water  productivity/efficiency)  (Corporate Result Indicator) 

(ii) KP#2: Percentage increase in irrigation supply in the project area / selected tank command area  

(iii) KP#3: Percentage increase in productivity (for selected crops, vegetables and fisheries), and  percentage increase in 

returns from two selected agriculture commodities over the baseline value through development of supply chain 

(iv) KP#4: Number of farmers benefitted through increased access to agricultural assets and services – disaggregated by 

gender   

(v) KP#5: GHG: Change in incremental value to various Carbon stock assessments in selected plots (Corporate Result 

Indicator) 

D. Concept Description 
 

. Description 
 
23. Project Rationale: The proposed project is seized of GoAP initiatives in ameliorating the current distress in the 
state farm sector. The biggest challenge for the state is to pull farmers out of the current crises. To achieve food and 
nutritional security, the issues related to growing water scarcity, degrading land resources, high cost of cultivation, 
stagnant farm productivity, and the impacts of climate change need to be systematically addressed. AP with 13 districts 
and 6 agro-climate zones has great potential for growth and profitability in agriculture and allied sectors (fisheries & 
horticulture). This is what the project seeks to realize by providing transformative direction to the agriculture sector by 
packaging and up-scaling relevant technologies and appropriate practices, and by supporting reforms (Primary Sector 
Mission) that could support more effective policies and management practices to improve the productivity of 
agriculture, animal husbandry, and fisheries to increase net benefits, and improve equity and livelihoods 

24. Alternative considered:  

25. In line with the Government of India’s policy imperative on getting ‘more from less’, especially in relation to 
water, the project proposes to improve SSCBI for realizing underutilized potential of decentralised irrigation system for 
benefitting small and marginal farmers for producing less water-intensive crops, especially pulses and oil-seeds, and 
creating a favorable procurement ecosystem towards improved profitability under emerging specter of climate change. 
 

 
 

 
26. Innovative design: The project design is consequently built on the key lessons learnt from the APCBTMP 
and from similar projects in other States (Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Maharashtra), clubbed with the emerging need of 
integrating with climate variables, and value addition to the SSCBI Systems for reducing farm-level water footprints, 
and for enhancing carbon stock in farmers’ fields in providing a strategic direction to develop climate-resilient 
sustainable production systems. The innovative aspects will include improved designs of smallholder irrigation 
infrastructure for efficient capture, storage and delivery of rain water, strong focus on improving water-use 
efficiency, recent advances in intensification and diversification of agriculture, agri-entrepreneurship, and 
movement toward climate resilient agriculture with relevant agriculture-water related investments and substantial 
improvements of participatory irrigation management practices.  
 
27. Improved resilience of agriculture production systems is expected to be achieved under the project 
through improving soil organic carbon, higher water use efficiency, reducing crop water footprints through 
diversification, and increased adoption of technologies and practices for optimizing and sustaining productivity. 
Project activities will be complimented by the use of innovative information and communication technology (ICT) for 
enhanced efficiencies and faster turnaround time for delivering services to project beneficiaries, and new media 
technologies for real time reporting and data sharing among project teams working at different levels. 
 
28. The total project cost is expected to be around US$ 238 million, of which the World Bank will finance US$ 
170 million (70 percent of total project cost) and the GoAP will finance US$ 68 million (30 percent of total project 
cost). The project activities will cover the entire state of Andhra Pradesh (its individual components will cover 
different geographic areas) and will be implemented over a six-year period. The project activities would be grouped 
into four main components: (i) Improving Irrigated Agriculture Efficiency at Farm Level; (ii) Promoting Adaptive 
Sustainable Agriculture Practices; (iii) Post-harvest Management, Market and Agribusiness Promotion; and (iv) 
Project Management and Capacity Building. The individual components have been detailed below.  

 
Component A: Improving Irrigated Agriculture Efficiency at Farm level  (approx. US$ 110 million) 

 
29. This component would improve SSCBI systems to strengthen the integrated farming system (in which 
growing crops, agro-forestry and rearing of livestock co-exist) with reduced water footprints. It will consist of four 
inter-related sub-components: (i) institutional strengthening and capacity building (ii) improving Small Scale 
Community Based Irrigation System (SSCBI System) performance and resilience; (iii) improving water productivity 
and efficiency; and (iv) building synergy with the Primary Sector Mission (on agriculture, fishery, horticulture, 
livestock and irrigation). 

 
Sub-component A.1: Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building 

 
30. The sub-component would focus on engaging communities through water users’ associations (WUAs) in 
social engineering of project interventions. The Participatory Irrigation Management (PIM) will follow a distinct 
approach where better operation and maintenance (O&M) of rehabilitated smallholder tank systems will be 
dovetailed with irrigation outreach based on reduced water footprints through adaptive agriculture practices 
(Component B) at the farm level.This sub-component will also sensitize water users and ensure that a desired level 
of greenhouse gas (GHG) emission is managed at the tank level. Water use efficiency will be the leitmotif for 
creating a culture for ‘more crops, per drop’ through community based institutions for assuming greater 
responsibility towards making water-conserving crop choices for water conservation and management. The sub-
component will support in strengthening the existing WUAs and establish new WUAs for effectively developing all 
aspects related to efficient in situ water conservation and management practices. The component would enhance 

WUA capacity in grounding the concept at the farm level. 
 
31. In addition, the sub-component would relate to mobilizing water users for collective action through the 
vehicle of WUAs for ensuring local level participation in planning, implementing and managing the SSCBI facilities as 
well as establishing backward and forward farm-linkages with the external government, private sector and non-
government agencies. The proposed project would expand the scope of ‘SSCBI” beyond the ‘crop irrigation’ into 
others - fisheries, animal husbandry and domestic users. The spheres of intervention would include: (i) Policy and 
Governance - educating and enabling enactment of the existing legislative provisions and  exploring new vistas for 
establishing relation between different sets of water users; (ii) Physical and Engineering- creation of assets, 
including capacity building support for designing and implementing construction, as well as managing procurement, 
finance and quality control; (iii) Operation and Maintenance (O&M) involving physical sustainability and improved 
irrigation performance leading to enhanced production/productivity, incomes and food security; (iv) Social 
mobilisation - local level organizational development including leadership building and problem solving approaches, 
empowerment of poor and vulnerable sections such as women, Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes etc., and 
provision of capacity support and capacity building including observation and study tours; and (v) Economic - fixing 
and collection of water tariff and building of a corpus to enable further modernization and diversification, market 
penetration to enable establishing backward and forward linkages; and the related book keeping.  

 
Sub-component A.2: Improving  Small Scale Community Based Irrigation (SSCBI) System Performance and 
Resilience 

 
32. This sub-component will modernize irrigation infrastructure, including SSCBI systems and irrigation canals 
within a defined catchment and also use a cascading management approach. The modernization of irrigation 
infrastructure will focus on improving the bulk water delivery to irrigation systems through rehabilitation and 
modernization of approximately 1,211 smallholder irrigation structures. The expected works will include 
modernization of control structures (diversion weirs), supply channels, cross-masonry structures, de-silting

8
 of 

feeder and supply channels, construction of recharge well structures and strengthening and up-gradation of tank 
bunds, installation of flow measurement devices, up-gradation of distribution systems, improvements of irrigation 
and drainage canals, and introduction of modern quality testing devices to determine soil compaction parameters, 
as well as modern quality testing devices for meticulously maintaining specified cover to reinforcement steel in the 
construction of reinforced concrete structures for long term durability.In addition, relevant catchment treatment 
approaches will be considered for reduced siltation, reliable and dependable flow to cascade SSCBI systems. 

 
Sub-component A.3: Improving Water Productivity and Efficiency 
 
33. The objective of this sub-component will be to promote water saving technologies such as drip and 
sprinkler systems, and for implementing Participatory Groundwater Management (PGM) at assessment unit level. 
The investments will include catchment and command area treatment of SSCBI systems, including construction of 
group based mini-irrigation schemes (dug wells, shallow tube wells, water harvesting and groundwater recharging 
systems).For drought proofing and capturing flood waters, cascades will be linked. Robust automation systems will 
be demonstrated, which will enable spatial homogeneity in water delivery in these systems.  
34. Conjunctive use of surface and groundwater will be coordinated with crop planning and water budgeting. 

                                            
8
Considering economic and environmental perspectives, desilting of the tank will be limited only to remove silt from the tank bed to 

use for raising and strengthening tank bund during the rehabilitation of tank bund in such a way that sufficient area upstream of 

sluices is de-silted on priority to ensure free flow of water towards the sluices. 


Water sharing by groundwater users (with surplus water) with those without irrigation source will be promoted; and 
pipelines provided for efficient water distribution (as implemented in APCBTMP). Consolidation and linking of 
groundwater sources piloted in Anantapur district under the World Bank supported AP Drought Adaptation 
Initiative will be encouraged. All development and improvement activities will be included in an Integrated Water 
Resource Conservation and Management Plan (IWRCMP). A basin level ridge to valley treatment for water 
conservation and management in convergence with the activities of all the primary stakeholders and implementing 
departments will be undertaken. 

 
Sub-component A.4: Building Synergy with Primary Sector Mission 

 
35. For effective service delivery to farmers, various departments and entities involved in water, agriculture 
and related sub-sectors need to collaborate. For achieving this GoAP is working towards forming a consortium of 
knowledge stakeholders, including relevant state line departments, knowledge institutions, civil society 
organizations and other relevant national and international organizations to support planning, implementation and 
monitoring the activities of the Primary Sector Mission. The project will provide support to policy and institutional 
reforms for enhancing institutional capacities of relevant departments. The sub-component will provide incentives 
for capital investments, including through unlocking opportunities for crowding-in private sector investments. 
Support will also be provided for guiding, designing and implementing holistic strategy for the Primary Sector 
Mission.  
 

36. As an innovative design feature, the project will use information and communication technology (ICT) 
tools, sensors and remote sensing in two ways – (i) leveraging Internet of Things (IoT) technologies combined with 
sensors to remotely capture data and information on various aspects pertaining to minor irrigation systems such as 
water flows, water quality and (ii) use ICT and remote sensing products for monitoring and evaluation (M&E). 
 
Component B: Promoting Adaptive Sustainable Agriculture Practices (approx. US$ 79 million) 
 
37. This component aims to improve productivity of the tank systems and enhance resilience of agriculture 
production systems for increasing production and managing risks associated with climate variables. This would be 
achieved by diversification of farm production, introduction of climate resilient solutions, improving value 
realization at the farm level through improved post-harvest management, and strengthening farmer-market 
linkages. The component will provide incentives for capital investments by unlocking opportunities for crowding-in 
private sector investments. This component will have three sub-components: (i) Promoting climate smart 
diversified agriculture production systems; (ii) Innovation and technology transfer for fishery production; and (iii) 
Post-harvest management, marketing and agribusiness promotion.  
 
Subcomponent B.1: Climate Smart Diversified Agriculture Production Systems  
 
38. Sustainable intensification and diversification of crop and horticulture production systems will be achieved 
by awareness creation, on-farm demonstrations on new seeds and promising technologies, capacity building and 
training activities; and by leveraging private sector investments in water management and farm mechanization. 
Climate risk resilience will be built in agriculture production systems by promoting crop diversification from rice to 
low water requiring pulses, maize, oilseeds, millets, vegetables and fruits; cultivation of high yielding, short 
duration, drought-, pest- and disease-tolerant crop varieties/hybrids; complementary agronomic practices; and 
building ability to withstand biotic and abiotic stress through a large scale program of demonstrations, and training 
activities as well as investments in farm implements and resource saving technologies like micro irrigation systems 



to enhance water use efficiency and land productivity.  Component interventions will focus on irrigated command 
areas of the project, and   will also cover the rain fed areas in the project villages and cascades. The project will 
support operationalization of web-based integrated weather forecasting and water management system to 
provide real time crop advisories, including water, pest and disease stress, and implementation of mitigation 
measures and contingency plans. A baseline of Green House Gas (GHG) emissions from agriculture production 
systems will be established and would be regularly monitored for changes during the project period.  
 
39. The project will focus on increasing farm productivity by reducing ‘input’ costs and enhancing ‘output’ 
from farming systems on a sustainable basis. This will be achieved by (a) adopting diversified cropping system on 
‘navdanya’

9
 pattern to buffer weather anomalies; (b) promoting comprehensive, crop specific sustainable 

agricultural package of practices; (c) installation of integrated weather forecasting systems to provide weather-
based crop advisories in selected smallholder irrigation cluster areas; and (d) developing a mechanism to quantify 
crop resilience to climate variability, and creating a baseline for quantifying soil organic carbon and GHG emission 
from crop production systems. 
  
Subcomponent B.2: Innovation and Technology Transfer for Fishery Production 
 
40. Fish production has registered an average annual growth rate of 9.92 per cent in AP. Building on this, the 
component aims at improving fish productivity and profitability in the project tanks and ponds which offer high 
economic opportunities and benefits. The GoAP accords top priority to fisheries development in the state, and has 
released the Fisheries Policy and Plan for 2015-2020. Under this policy, the government has approved the fiscal 
benefits covering several sections of the industry, including production, processing, marketing and disease 
management for stimulating development of the fishery sector. 
 
41. The subcomponent will focus on strengthening research-extension linkages in order to improve farmers’ 
access to technology, and support participation of fish farmers in value chains. Project aims to promote innovative, 
climate resilient, and modern technology packages in production, post-harvest management and marketing. The 
project will (i) support multiplication of improved germplasm for quality seed production, (ii) introduce suitably 
formulated fish feed using locally available ingredients; (iii) demonstrate semi-intensive and intensive production 
models at appropriate locations in ponds; (iv) promote improved fish production techniques in irrigation tanks 
including innovative technologies such as cage culture in an environmentally sustainable manner; and build 
institutional capacity of the fishery sector. The project will facilitate suitable linkages for better access to markets, 
and support measures for maintaining hygienic conditions throughout the fish value chain. 
 
Component C: Post-harvest Management, Market and Agribusiness Promotion (approx. US$ 32 million) 
 
42. This subcomponent will enhance farmers’ linkages to markets by providing alternate marketing channels 
and promoting farm level aggregation, post-harvest management and value addition. The project will support 
organizing producers into farmer producer organizations (FPOs) and companies (FPCs); develop their capacity and 
skills for accessing wider input and output markets; and investment support to the FPOs for establishing common 
service centers for aggregating grains and horticulture produce. The expected benefits to the FPO members are 
higher prices through a combination of larger critical mass of saleable produce, thereby providing economies of 
scale, savings in transaction costs, and strengthened negotiation positions, coupled with the added value achieved 

                                            
9
‘Navdanya’ means nine seeds (a traditional diversified cropping system which includes cereals, millets, and pulses), a system of 

farming that produces food while enhancing biodiversity, building soil fertility and conserving water. 



through primary grading and packing. The project will support integration of producer organizations in commercial 
value chains of agricultural commodities, and facilitate public-private partnerships to enable direct buying 
arrangements.  Key strategy will be market oriented agricultural production through collective marketing by 
farmer producer organizations. 
 
43. For mitigating price risks the project will support operationalization of Negotiable Warehouse Receipts in 
AP. For promoting agri-business ecosystem in the state, an Agri-Business Promotion Facility (ABPF) will be 
established. The ABPF activities will include conducting market and value chain studies on the identified 
commodities; establishing and operating mentorship programs; scouting new technologies (including climate 
resilient technologies); assisting small and medium private entrepreneurs to prepare business and financial 
proposals; and providing business planning and incubation services to emerging agri-entrepreneurs.  
 
44. The value chain for selected commodities will help to increase the share of farmers in wholesale and retail 
prices of the commodity. Some of the measures to achieve this include farmers’ participation in commodity 
exchanges, establishing storage infrastructure starting from primary, intermediate and transit warehouses for 
value addition. For high value crops, emphasis would be laid on demand based production, post-harvest 
processing, and creating forward linkages for direct marketing. Such a production and marketing system would be 
aimed at encouraging farmers to diversify into high value crops for additional income. 
 

Component D: Project Management and Capacity Building (approx. US$ 16 million) 
 
45. The objective of this component is to ensure smooth implementation of project activities, as well as 
monitoring of, and learning from project processes and outputs. Activities to be financed include: (i) setting up, 
supporting and capacity building of project management unit (PMU) to align with the project components at the 
state and district level; (ii) project monitoring, evaluation and promotion of learning culture at the PMU level; (iii) 
documentation of project processes and experience on a rolling basis, and its dissemination to the wider 
development community for cross-learning and sharing; (iv) hiring services of an external M&E agency as 
consultants for the duration of the project for creating a feed-back loop for improving project thrust and 
implementation; and (v) providing support for emerging needs and innovations during implementation; and 
networking with partner organizations, external professional agencies and the World Bank. 
 

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)     

 
Andhra Pradesh is located on the east coast in peninsular India facing the Bay of Bengal. The State has three 
physiographic zones, the hilly region (having Nallamalai, Erramalai hills and the Eastern Ghats having an altitude of 500 
to 1400 m); the plateau (having an altitude of 100 m to 1000 m) and the deltas of rivers (between the Eastern Ghats 
and the Sea Coast).  It has a coast line of 974 km and its major rivers are   Krishna, Godavari, Tungabhadra. It has about 
21% of the geographical area under forest cover with 6 National Parks and 21 Wildlife Sanctuaries. It has an ancient 
religious/cultural heritage and Tirupati is one of the most popular temples in the country. 
 
The state is drained by three major perennial rivers viz. Godavari, Krishna and Pennar, several other medium and small 
rivers. In total 40 rivers drain into the sea. Rainfall varies from 560 mm in the Rayalaseema region to about 1200 mm in 
the northeastern coastal part of the state. The State receives about 66% of rainfall from south-west monsoon (June-


\and about 25% from north-east monsoon (October-December). The stage of ground water development is 
around 70%. Six Agro-Climatic Zones are recognized – Scarce Rainfall Zone, Southern Zone, North Coastal Zone, 
Godavari Zone, Krishna Zone and High Altitude Zone. The state experiences frequent storms, floods particularly in 
coastal areas and drought in the Rayalseema region 
 
The project activities will involve investing on repair and rehabilitation of about   1200 tanks spread across the  state.  
The interventions will include: improving water assets, modernizing irrigation infrastructure, improving water 
productivity, promoting adaptive sustainable agricultural practices, enhancing fisheries production and climate friendly 
agri business promotion.  Andhra Pradesh (erstwhile undivided) is known to be a leading consumer of agrochemicals in 
the country with 24% share and 21% share in pesticides alone. 

 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies     

 
Safeguard issues revolve around augmenting and/ or re-engineering the existing minor irrigation tanks along with 
water conveyance system and other associated activities related to enhancing production, productivity and incomes in 
the spheres of agriculture and fisheries.  The key intervention relates ensuring bridging of the gaps between designed 
and actual irrigable area with participation by the local water using communities.  Major challenge thus lies in 
mobilizing the local tank based community towards group action and establishing linkages with other public and 
private sector institutions. This has been addressed successfully under the first project (Andhra Pradesh Community 
Managed Tank Project) with the help of an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF). The proposed 
project would build on the same, but taking into account the latest legislative developments and expanded scope of 
the interventions, into agriculture and fisheries. Environment Management Plans (EMP) will be prepared for tanks that 
are known to be rehabilitated by appraisal. In addition, the project will develop a Pest Management Plan (PMP). All this 
points to adequate capacity for safeguards management with the borrower.  
 
The previous project has put in place a robust systems   in place and capacities are developed for managing the social 
and environmental impacts. Adequate number of experienced professionals too have been deployed for managing the 
ESMF.  However, as the follow on project’s scope is enhanced both in terms of the number of tanks and the 
interventions, GOAP has already initiated efforts towards re-visiting the ESMF. The learnings drawn the 
implementation experiences of the first project will be fed into this revision.  

 
D. Policies that might apply     

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The physical investments under the project would be 
largely on rehabilitation of existing water assets 
where improper construction could result in adverse 
impacts. The investments under productivity 
enhancement through sustainable agriculture 
practices could result in positive impacts with 
effective planning an implementation. 


An Environmental and Social Assessment will be 
undertaken and a Social and Environmental 
Management Framework will be developed for 
managing risks and maximizing the environmental 
and social opportunities. These will take into account 
experiences and learnings from the previous phase.  
 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 TBD 
The rehabilitation of tanks may impact natural 
habitats such wetlands, which will be determined 
during EA. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No 
The project interventions are not expected to impact 
the forest areas. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The project will not directly finance pesticides but the 
improved irrigation and crop diversification may 
result in increased use of pesticides. The project will 
work in synergy with the state primary sector mission 
and focus on climate smart agriculture production 
system which will promote the non-chemical package 
of practices. A Pest Management Plan (PMP) will be 
prepared for the project. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No 

No significant adverse impacts on cultural property 
expected, but this issue will be examined during the 
ESA and appropriate measures will be put in place to 
deal with any chance findings. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 Yes 

AP state has a tribal population of 2.7 million 
amounting to 5.5% of the total population. A few 
pockets in three districts are predominantly inhabited 
by tribals and are covered under the Fifth Schedule of 
the Indian Constitution. So, project areas is likely to 
have tribal population. However,   investment plans 
are currently not known. Hence, to address such 
situations wherein the project is likely to be taken up 
in tribal areas, a Tribal Peoples Planning Framework 
(TPPF) will be prepared. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

The project will not and need not resort to 
involuntary acquisition of lands as the existing 
irrigation tanks will focus of repair and rehabilitation. 
However, cases of encroachers on /within the Tanks 
cannot be ruled out. To address this, a Resettlement 
Policy Framework will be prepared. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 Yes 

Some of the tanks could be large with high 
embankments above 10 m. The heights of the 
embankments will be known by appraisal for 
ensuring that appropriate mitigation measures are 
put in place for addressing any potential adverse 
environmental impact. This policy was also triggered 



 

during the previous phase and arrangements were 
put in place.  Already, a robust mechanism exist in 
the state, which will be further strengthened. Three 
region-wise Dam Safety Panels (DSPs) were 
constituted by the Government to function with 
technical guidance from the Chief Engineer, Central 
Designs Organization. 
The project will seek better coordination with the 
Dam Safety Panel and processes. The project will also 
support safety enhancement of tank systems as part 
of tank rehabilitation. 
 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
The project does not fall on any international 
waterways. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No The project is not in any disputed areas. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan      

 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 

May 31, 2017 
 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
GoAP will undertake social and environmental assessment so as to revise the existing environmental and social 
management frameworks (ESMF), in conformity with applicable Bank policies as well as the national and state legal 
stipulations. EMPs will be prepared for tanks that are known to be rehabilitated by appraisal. Apart from the 
comprehensive ESMF, the following independent documents-- Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and Tribal People 
Plan Framework (TPPF) – will also be prepared. These are expected to be completed by end August 2017. 

 

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Additional Financing for MCRP (P173104) 

 
 

  
Jan 30, 2020 Page 1 of 16  

     

 

 
 
      

 

Combined Project Information Documents /  
Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (PID/ISDS) 

 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 22-Apr-2020 | Report No: PIDISDSA28417 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Nigeria P173104 Additional Financing for 
MCRP 

P157891 

Parent Project Name Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date 

Multi-Sectoral Crisis Recovery 
Project for North Eastern Nigeria 

AFRICA 22-Apr-2020 26-May-2020 

Practice Area (Lead) Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency 

Urban, Resilience and Land Investment Project 
Financing 

Federal Ministry of 
Finance 

State Governments of 
Borno, Adamawa and 
Yobe, North East 
Development Commission 
(NEDC) 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) Parent 
 
The objectives of the Project are to: (a) support the Government of Nigeria towards rehabilitating and improving 
critical service delivery infrastructure, improve the livelihood opportunities of conflict and displacement-affected 
communities, and strengthen social cohesion in the North East Participating States of Borno, Yobe and Adamawa; and 
(b) in the event of an Eligible Crisis or Emergency, to provide immediate and effective response to said Eligible Crisis or 
Emergency 
 
Proposed Development Objective(s) Additional Financing 
 
To improve access to basic services and  livelihood opportunities for the crisis-affected communities of Adamawa, 
Borno, and Yobe States, and enhance coordination among these States and other Lake Chad countries 

 
Components 

Peace Building and Strengthening Social Cohesion and Livelihoods 
Infrastructure Rehabilitation and Service Delivery Restoration & Improvement 
Technical Assistance and Program Management Support 
Contingent Emergency Response 

 

PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
  

SUMMARY-NewFin1  
 

Total Project Cost 176.00 

Total Financing 176.00 



of which IBRD/IDA 176.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
  
DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 176.00 

          IDA Credit 176.00 

    

Environmental Assessment Category 

B-Partial Assessment 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate     
 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
B. Introduction and Context 

 
Country Context 

The complex challenges in the North-East (NE) and the broader Lake Chad region are among the most 

pressing issues facing the Federal and NE State administrations in Nigeria.   

Recent resurgence in conflict exacerbates the humanitarian crisis 

1. Following the election of President Buhari in 2015, the Nigerian Government took steps to address 
the insurgency in the NE, with support from neighboring countries and the African Union through 
the Multinational Joint Task Force (MNJTF). They appointed new military leadership, created a 
Theatre Headquarters in Maiduguri and increased resources committed to NE activities. Significant 
territory formerly controlled by Boko Haram (BH) was reclaimed and relative peace restored, allowing 
for the return of at least 1.6 million internally displaced people (IDPs) to their homes or nearby, more 
than 750,000 of these in Adamawa State and over 650,000 in Borno. Large-scale international 
humanitarian aid averted famine in 2017.   

2. However, security in the NE has deteriorated sharply since 2018. Attacks have increased in Borno 
State, as well as nearby areas of Adamawa and Yobe (together the ‘BAY’ states). Islamic State West 
Africa Province (ISWAP), which split from BH in 2016, has developed into the more potent threat, 
employing more sophisticated military tactics and dominating swathes of northern Borno around its 
strongholds on Lake Chad. Major attacks, including those on Baga, Monguno and Rann in December 
2018 and January 2019, have triggered renewed large-scale displacement of people. Meanwhile, BH 
continues attacks on the population in south-east Borno and northern Adamawa, absorbing military 
attention and preventing a stronger response further north. 



 

The World Bank  
Additional Financing for MCRP (P173104) 

 

 

  
Jan 30, 2020 Page 4 of 16  

 

3. Around 7.1 million of the BAY states’ total population of 13.4 million need humanitarian assistance 
in 2019, according to the 2019-21 Nigeria Humanitarian Response Strategyi, which seeks to reach 
6.2 million people. Around 1.7 million face food insecurity (CH3-5). Some two million people are 
internally displaced across the BAY states, a net increase of more than 100,000 since December 2018. 
Around 230,000 Nigerian refugees are in neighboring Cameroon, Chad and Niger. Within Nigeria, 
around one million people are now estimated to live in areas, mainly in the far north of Borno, that 
are inaccessible to humanitarian actors. Approximately 60 percent of the total number of IDPs live in 
host communities, while 20 percent reside in camps.  

4. The conflict has intensified the historical social, economic and development disadvantages of the 
NE. The NE poverty rate was the second highest in the country in 2013, after only the North-West, at 
nearly 48 percent against 33 percent nationallyii. The NE literacy rate in 2013 stood at just 22 percent 
for women and 40 percent for men. The NE has long suffered from poor access to health care and 
sanitation services, with under-five mortality of 160 per 1,000 live births, against 90 in South-West, 
the best performing region. The proportion of children age 12-23 months received all basic 
vaccinations was only 14 percent in the NE, compared with 52 percent for South-South.  

 

Government and partners have responded strongly, but unmet needs remain considerable 

5. The 2016 Recovery and Peace Building Assessment (RPBA) for NE Nigeriaiii estimated the economic 
impact of the crisis at nearly US$9 bn across the six affected states: Borno, Yobe, Adamawa, Taraba, 
Gombe and Bauchi. It put recovery and peacebuilding needs at US$6.7 bn, covering three strategic 
areas of intervention: US$150.5 m for peacebuilding, stability, and social cohesion; US$6.0 bn for 
rebuilding infrastructure and restoring social services; and US$473.5 m for economic recovery. The 
RPBA was prepared by the Federal Government, led by the Vice President’s Office, and the 
governments of the six affected states, with support from the European Union, the United Nations 
and the World Bank.  

6. In June 2016, the Federal Government released the Buhari Plan as the blueprint for humanitarian 
relief and socioeconomic stabilization of the NE, as well as durable solutions for displaced persons. 
The Buhari Plan incorporated the RPBA’s assessment of needs and established the scope and 
framework for targeted interventions, as well as defining the national vision and objectives for long-
term stability and economic redevelopment of the region. The Plan is built around 10 pillars, 
comprising safety and security, good governance, infrastructure, agriculture, health, education, 
entrepreneurship, women and youth empowerment, regional planning and strategic growth, 
environment, border security and international trade development, and solid minerals. 

7. Major programs are underway, but the considerable needs identified by the RPBA are far from 
being met, and much of the Buhari Plan remains to be implemented. NE recovery and peacebuilding 
efforts supported by the African Development Bank, the European Union, Germany, the United 
Kingdom, the United Nations system, the United States, the World Bank and other international 
partners total around US$1.6 bn. However, reliable data on total government or partner expenditures 
in the NE and overall implementation progress is not available. For the broader region, donors pledged 
US$ 2.13 bn for humanitarian and recovery activities for 2018 and beyond at the High-Level 
Conference on the Lake Chad Region in September 2018,iv of which US$985.5 m was for humanitarian 
activities. For NE Nigeria, the Humanitarian Response Plan seeks US$ 848 million, while the 2019-2020 
Nigeria Regional Refugee Response Planv aims to raise a further $135 million for 2019.  




8. In support of the RPBA and the Buhari Plan, the World Bank has approved US$775 million in IDA 
financing for the six NE States since 2016, the largest commitment among international 
development partners. The program addresses urgent needs, restores basic services and livelihoods 
and rebuilds infrastructure.  It has included additional financing for six existing projects for health, 
education, social protection and agriculture/food security, as well as a US$200 million Multi-Sectoral 
Crisis Recovery Project (MCRP) for North-East Nigeria.  

 
9. The MCRP has been effective since February 16, 2018 and has recently undergone its Mid-Term 

Review (MTR) in November 2019. Despite a 10-month gap from Board-approval to effectiveness, the 

Project has picked up significant pace over the last 18 months and its current implementation progress 

has been satisfactory, based on its financial progress and the current status of results achievement on 

the ground. The likelihood of achievement of the Project Development Objective (PDO) of the 

intended project outcomes and results is now rated as high. As at the Mid-Term, total project 

disbursements from the World Bank to the Government of Nigeria were at USD 95 million (of the 

USD200 million IDA Credit), representing 46% of the total project allocation amount. 

 
Rational for Additional Financing  

10. The Federal Government of Nigeria has requested that the country be included in the regional 
program supported by the proposed IDA Lake Chad Region Recovery and Development Project 
(PROLAC, P161706). PROLAC ($170 million) has been in preparation since FY18 for three of the four 
countries that border the Lake: Cameroon, Chad and Niger, slated for FY20 Board consideration. The 
participation of Nigeria, the fourth country, is important for the PROLAC program to have complete 
regional coverage, and because Nigeria is the largest country by far and the epicenter of the Boko 
Haram conflict, the impacts and drivers of which PROLAC seeks to address.  

 
11. PROLAC’s proposed development objective is to contribute to the recovery of the Lake Chad Region 

through supporting regional coordination and crisis monitoring, connectivity and agricultural 
livelihoods in selected provinces of the participating countries. It includes three main components: 
Component 1: Regional and National Coordination Platform and Local Capacity Building ($20 m) - This 
aims to reinforce regional dialogue and data collection and dissemination, institutional capacity 
building and knowledge sharing, including a Lake Chad Data and Knowledge Platform. Component 2: 
Restoring Rural Mobility and Connectivity ($75 m) aims to improve access of communities to markets, 
especially regional markets, and to provide beneficiaries with an opportunity for short-term 
employment, through civil works for rehabilitation of rural roads of regional importance. Component 
3: Agriculture Investments and Value-Chain Development ($60m) will promote public productive 
investments, value-chain development, citizen engagement and community participation activities in 
project areas.  

 
Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance 

12. An ‘Additional Financing for Restructuring’ is proposed for MCRP in the amount of $176 million, 
with the main purposes: (a) addressing the huge unmet needs of the three most affected states of 
Borno, Yobe and Adamawa (the originally estimated needs for NE recovery and stabilization were to 
the tune of US$6 billion, of which only about 1/3rds are estimated to have been financed through 



various government and development partner programs, and which will require the redesign of, and 
the addition of supplementary activities within, the existing project components ; (b) the MCRP 
implementation model has proven successful in putting the State Governments firmly in the 
leadership and implementation role for recovery and peace building, thus helping restore state-citizen 
trust, the erosion of which was a key structural driver of crisis; (c) the additional financing will serve 
the objective of bringing Nigeria into the Lake Chad regional program, which will also entail bringing 
in new components on agricultural value chain, rural access and regional connectivity. Given the 
consistency and complementarity of MCRP and PROLAC objectives and activities, and the need to 
bring Nigeria into the regional program quickly, the Country Management Unit and task teams 
consider that an Additional financing operation for MCRP, prepared in parallel with the finalization of 
PROLAC and presented to the Board as a single package with PROLAC, is the best mechanism for doing 
this. In the main PROLAC project, adjustments will be made to the regional elements, to promote the 
full inclusion of Nigeria. In addition to a regional focus, adapting MCRP to bring it into the program 
supported by PROLAC, will bring a more strategic focus on agricultural livelihoods and value chains 
and economic recovery, a natural evolution for MCRP.  

 
13. The restructuring will also be used to lay the groundwork for adapting MCRP to become an 

integrated central platform for the channeling of broader World Bank assistance to Borno, 
Adamawa and Yobe, the three states most affected by the Boko Haram crisis. Five additional 
financing operations, which were part of the Bank’s 2016-2017 $775 million Boko Haram response 
package along with MCRP, are set to close before the end of FY20. The restructuring will be used to 
further develop MCRP’s multi-sectoral approach, to allow it to absorb activities, and potentially 
unspent IDA funding from these five operations, which cover health and education service delivery, 
agriculture and food security, social protection and community development. This approach is also in 
line with the need for spatial sector consolidation of Bank projects towards increased impact and 
implementation arrangements streamlining. 

 

Sectoral and Institutional Context 
14. As foreseen in the MCRP PAD, the Presidential Committee for the Northeast Initiative (PCNI) has 

been replaced as federal apex institution for recovery in the northeast of Nigeria by the Northeast 
Development Commission (NEDC). As part of this, the NEDC has taken over from the PCNI as the main 
Federal counterpart for MCRP with responsibility for overall coordination. The NEDC is anchored in 
the newly created Ministry of Humanitarian Affairs, Disaster Management and Social Development, 
while PCNI had come under the Office of the Vice President. The NEDC is a statutory body (unlike the 
PCNI, which was mandated through a time-bound Presidential executive order) and is responsible for 
the oversight and coordination of all humanitarian, recovery and development work in the six states 
of northeast Nigeria.  In addition to the coordination of multilateral development bank programs, at 
the federal level it is expected to lead program coordination among federal government MDAs and 
development partners, and vertical coordination between regional, federal and state level institutions 
and planning processes. 

 

Each of the BAY States has developed different coordination arrangements. In Borno, the Ministry 
of Reconstruction, Rehabilitation and Resettlement (MRRR) has overall responsibility for recovery 
planning and coordination. In addition, a statutory coordination agency has been created, under the 
auspices of the MRRR; Adamawa has created its own MRRR and a multilateral coordination office has 



been formed within the State Government Secretariat. Meanwhile, Yobe has recently set up a state 
level Ministry of Humanitarian Affairs and Disaster Management.  

 
 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
Original PDO  
The objectives of the Project are to: (a) support the Government of Nigeria towards rehabilitating and improving critical 
service delivery infrastructure, improve the livelihood opportunities of conflict and displacement-affected communities, 
and strengthen social cohesion in the North East Participating States of Borno, Yobe and Adamawa; and (b) in the event 
of an Eligible Crisis or Emergency, to provide immediate and effective response to said Eligible Crisis or Emergency 
 
Current PDO  
To improve access to basic services and livelihood opportunities for the crisis-affected communities of Adamawa, Borno, 
and Yobe States, and enhance coordination among these States and other Lake Chad countries. 
 
Changes to the PDO are made to reflect the project’s regional dimension and removal of the aim to “strengthen social 
cohesion”. Selected targets have also been revised upwards, to accommodate some over-shooting to-date, with costs in 
some areas having proved lower than estimated originally. Additional sectoral indicators have been absorbed from the 
sectoral programs (AF operations) phasing out, while the indicators related to regional coordination are the same as the 
one under PROLAC.   
 

Key Results 
Achievement of the intended PDO will continue to be monitored by the following indicators: 
 

• Number of direct project beneficiaries (percentage of which are women) 

• Percentage of direct project beneficiaries who are female  

• Number of beneficiaries that have improved livelihood opportunities with project support (o/w 
female) 

• Number of beneficiaries with additional or improved access to service delivery infrastructure 
 
New PDO-level indicators include: 

• Increase in yield among farmers benefiting from agricultural benefits (percentage increase from 

baseline)   

• Number of peace groups that promote collective action  

• Number of government officials adopting new skills of peace building, conflict sensitivity and 
crisis recovery management 

• Number of school children benefiting from rehabilitated and re-equipped schools (o/w IDP 
children) 

• Number of women benefiting from improved health facilities 

• Joint statement and action plan agreed during an annual coordination meeting with 
participation of the four countries (two measurements: yes or no – measure every year; and 
from year two: % of agreed actions implemented) 

D. Project Description  
 

1. Strategic Shifts: From a broader strategic perspective, the AF is a natural evolution of MCRP from a 
program focused on urgent needs, early recovery interventions and reconstruction, to one that looks toward 
long-term recovery and development of livelihoods and the economy. Going forward, the expanded MCRP will 
have (a) a stronger focus on basic services, with the addition of health and education service provision activities; 
(b) greater emphasis on livelihoods and employment generation; (c) a new lens for transport support on 
enhancing connectivity, on the Lake Chad region, as well as locally, linking farms to markets and people to 
sources of employment; (d) continued strong support for peacebuilding and the strengthening of social 
cohesion; and (e) the fostering of regional stabilization  as a main priority.  

 

• Component 1:  
o The component name will be changed to: Peace building and strengthening social cohesion and 

livelihoods, to reflect a stronger emphasis on – and a more strategic approach to - supporting 
livelihoods, as well as a move from an emphasis on shorter term stability to longer term 
development  

o Consistent with this, a more strategic approach to support for livelihoods, including agricultural 
ones. For agricultural, this will involve moving on from MCRP’s current emphasis on distribution 
of seeds, small ruminants and basic tools to subsistence farmers, to a broader range of support 
with greater emphasis on sustainability.  

o A deepening of community engagement on planning, prioritization and oversight, through 
stronger community structures, potentially absorbing some of those created through the 
Community and Social Development (CSDP, P157898) and FADAMA (P131075) projects.  

o Inclusion of labor-intensive works (cash for work) activities, to be funded by community grants. 

• Component 2:  
o Complementary to the direct livelihoods support under Component 1, the inclusion of new 

activities for the restoration and strengthening of infrastructure and services related to 
agriculture, livestock and fisheries, including support for key stages of priority value chains and 
the development of Agricultural Clusters.  

o The inclusion of new activities for enhancing rural access/mobility and markets  
o Consolidation on Citizen’s engagements, Community Participation and Ownership Structures 

established by the  Community and Social Development Project (CSDP - P157898) 
o Addition of activities to strengthen service provision for health and education, absorbing 

activities underway through the Nigeria States Health Investment Project (NSHIP -P120798) and 
State Education Program Investment Project (SEPIP – P122124), possibly including  grants to 
school management committees and incentive payments to teachers - or introducing alternative 
mechanisms for improving service delivery that are closer to the original design of MCRP and 
achieve the same objectives of activities now under NSHIP and SEPIP.   

o Improving Operations and Maintenance (O&M) for existing and planned infrastructure 
subprojects under MCRP and the MCRP AF to enhance the sustainability of investments, such as 
for the water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) and transport sector, by introducing a system of 
performance-based grants or central resource pools in each state for O&M. 
 

2. Cross-cutting priorities of climate change adaptation and mitigation and labor-intensive public works: 
Where appropriate, project activities under both Component 1 & 2 will, from both a design and resource 


allocation perspective aim to increase climate sensitivity. Labor-intensive public works (LIPW/cash for work 
(CfW) will be used as a means of both delivering project outputs and creating local employment (with an 
emphasis on women and youth), through dedicated programs under Component 1 and as an approach that can 
be included in the design – and particularly in the maintenance strategies – for the larger infrastructure works 
included in Component Two. 

3. Component 3: Technical assistance and programme management support that focuses on the 
strengthening of institutional capacities for the coordination of recovery programming in the NE, and of MCRP 
implementation capacities. 

Proposed Changes:  

o Build capacity of Nigeria NE actors (including State governments, academia and teachers and 
students from research institutes other relevant stakeholders) to engage regionally through 
coordination, knowledge management, collaboration with the Lake Chad Basin Commission 
knowledge platform being supported under PROLAC.  

o Host thematic dialogues with academic and research institutions on the Lake Chad Region. 

 

E. Implementation 
 

Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 
4. Implementation of Components 1 and 2 remains broadly as described in the MCRP PAD. That is, Component 1 is 
implemented directly by the State PCUs through service delivery contractors with technical oversight from relevant 
MDAs, while Component 2 is implemented by state MDAs with PCU oversight. However, the North East Development 
Commission (NEDC) has provided a jointly agreed proposal on implementation arrangements with States, that 
maximizes flexibility that may need to be made across the States. The proposal provides a roadmap for the gradual 
transfer, harmonization and ultimate integration of existing institutional capacities into the implementation 
arrangements of the MCRP-AF. Further refining of the plan will be reflected in the Project Implementation Manual (PIM). 
Relevant capacities of the existing PCUs of the soon closing additional financing projects will be either merged or 
otherwise connected to the MCRP implementation arrangements.  
 

 
 .    
F. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 

Borno, Adamawa, Yobe 

 
 
G. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 
 

Amos Abu, Environmental Specialist 
Michael Gboyega Ilesanmi, Social Specialist 

 

SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 
SAFEGUARD_TBL 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes  

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No  

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes  

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No  

Pest Management OP 4.09 No  

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes  

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No  

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes  

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No  

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No  

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No  

 
 

KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 OPS_SAFEGUARD_SUMMARY_TBL 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The parent project  has recorded some implementation challenges and the task team has worked with the client to  
usually addresses as they arise. The following are the achievements recorded in the implementation of the safeguards 
instruments that have been cleared and disclosed: 1ESIA, 15 ESMPs have so far been prepared under the parent 
project and are at different stages of implementation. Also about 114 grievances have so far been recorded and 
satisfactorily  resolved across participating states under the parent project.  
 
Environmental and Social Safeguards Policies were strictly adhered to as at mid-term of the parent project. Safeguard 
Action plan was prepared and disclosed prior to implementation. The investment plan was screened and site-specific 
safeguards instruments were prepared, cleared and disclosed through the appropriate channels. A number of 
trainings were conducted to improve the capacity of ESSU (environmental and social safeguards units) of the PCUs. 
Several supervision missions were conducted to ensure implementation of the cleared and disclosed safeguards 
instruments.  
 
It is clarified by the task team that there are no new institutional arrangements per se, as per the transition plan 
proposed by the government for the “integration” of parts of existing staff resources and assets of NSHIP, SEPIP, CSDP 



and FADAMA into the MCRP institutional arrangements. The existing PCUs/PIUs of these projects will cease to exist 
and only relevant staff will be transferred to boost the capacity of MCRP. In addition, the reference projects were 
implemented in geographical zones that included that of MCRP and the envisaged risks of MCRP AF, are materially 
consistent with the risk ratings of the original projects (NSHIP, SEPIP, CSDP and FADAMA). Further, the letter and spirit 
of the proposed integration is that existing activities of these projects will be adjusted, molded and assimilated into 
the design and implementation arrangements of the MCRP, rather than their continuation in the present form, and 
hence such transition and eventual integration will be organic in nature and scope, rather than a simultaneous 
continuation of the existing projects parallel to MCRP. Where new activities are added on MCRP on account of such 
integration, these activities will be fine-tuned to fall within the objectives and implementation modus operandi of the 
MCRP, and such that these activities would be screened to ensure that they are of similar environmental and social 
risk.  The task team does agree that such new activities should continue to be governed by the safeguards instruments 
of their parent projects. 
 
In the above vein, it is submitted that new policies are not expected to be triggered on account of the integration of 
these projects into the MCRP, as the activities if redesigned will fall within the safeguards instruments of the MCRP, or 
if continued in their original form, will fall within the safeguards instruments of the parent projects. A clause could be 
included in the Financing Agreement to ensure that the continuation of the use of safeguards instruments of the 
parent projects for MCRP is given legal effect. To this end, the task team will remove any references in the Project 
Paper to triggering of new Safeguards policies. 
 
However, the key environmental and social risk management concerns of the ongoing project that might be relevant 
to the MCRP-AF include: (i) possible soil, water and air contamination, loss of vegetation,  and noise nuisance, 
vibration, traffic congestion due to the planned construction and rehabilitation activities, possible exposure to health 
care wastes, potential injuries from accidents, incidents and near misses, poor management of sludge; and (ii) 
potential adverse social impacts that might result from the need for land acquisition and/or the loss of access to 
economic assets and livelihoods due to planned rehabilitation and investment activities as well as GBV risks.  As part 
of the project preparation, the team has updated the Safeguards Action Plan for the Project. Immediately after Board 
Approval , the client will prepare ESMF and RPF which will outline steps to be  followed in preparing site specific 
safeguards instruments (ESIA, ESMP, RAP) when the locations of the project activities are determined during 
implementation, including mechanism for GBV prevention and response when necessary. 
 
In summary, there are no long-term impacts anticipated. The environmental and social impacts are expected to be 
site-specific and can be managed to an acceptable level. 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
Activities being planned under this project will have limited social and environmental impacts. In principle, MCRP does 
not envision to fund large-scale new infrastructure development projects (e.g. dams or power stations), but rather 
small to medium size rural infrastructural rehabilitation and reconstruction works in localized sites across the BAY 
areas. Much of the Project will focus on medium size rehabilitation and re-construction projects of schools, health 
centers, public buildings, water sources, roads and bridges. The anticipated scale of potential adverse environmental 
or social impacts on human populations are site-specific, few if any of them are irreversible and in most cases, 
mitigation measures could be designed to address the impacts. 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. 
The MCRP, in view of the fact that it is responding to an emergency situation, will not in principle fund large-scale new 
infrastructure development projects that could potentially have long-term and irreversible impacts. Instead, the 


proposed project focuses on small to medium size rehabilitation and re-construction projects that can be easily 
managed at the community level. A flexible and programmatic approach is being taken and will adapt to the evolving 
context and environment on the ground. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower 
capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Specifically, the project will be processed through IPF Policy paragraph 12 (a) that allows for the deferral of the 
preparation of social and environmental assessment documents till implementation. Immediately after Board 
Approval , the client will prepare ESMF and RPF which will outline steps to be  followed in preparing site specific 
safeguards instruments (ESIA, ESMP, PMP, RAP) when the locations of the project activities are determined during 
implementation. The instruments would be consulted upon and publicly disclosed. The Project, including the ESAP 
have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities for the implementation of measures related 
to safeguard policies. In addition, costs related to safeguard policy measures are being included in the project cost 
tables. 
 
Each site approved for support by the project will be eligible for financing only when an Environmental and Social 
Management Plan (ESMP) and RAP (if required) satisfactory to the Bank have been completed and disclosed. Under 
the parent project, the client has so far prepared and disclosed 1ESIA, 15 ESMPs have so far been prepared under the 
parent project and are at different stages of implementation 
 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, 
with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders include beneficiaries and local communities in the project’s areas, local NGOs working in the 
project area, the respective State Governments of Borno Adamawa and Yobe (BAY), and participating Ministries, 
Departments and Agencies (MDAs). 
 
Environmental and Social Safeguards preparation, review and approval procedure to be followed under this project 
shall be consistent with the requirements from the Federal Ministry of Environment of Nigeria as specified in the 
Environmental Assessment Act (Decree No. 86 of 1992, hereinafter the EIA Act), the World Bank’s OP 4.01.  
Compliance with this procedure will constitute part of the evaluation methodology for proposed subprojects prior to 
approval for MCRP support.  The steps in the process are project screening, environmental and social assessment and 
instrument preparation, EIA review and approval, and oversight of implementation.  Stakeholder consultation is an 
integral part of the preparation process, and public disclosure and comment are necessary prior to the decision to 
accept or reject a proposed subproject on the basis of environmental and social information. The procedure for 
consultations on subprojects should conform to OP 4.01 and the EIA Act.  OP 4.01 requires consultation with 
stakeholders. For MCRP, safeguards work on subprojects entails an initial consultation of affected populations and 
interested NGOs as well as relevant agencies of federal, state and local governments, to inform them about the 
proposed activity and solicit recommendations, questions and concerns to be addressed in environmental and social 
assessment.  Once drafts of safeguards documents are completed by the client, they must be cleared by the Bank and 
disclosed. Both Nigeria and the Bank require public disclosure of the safeguard instruments (ESIAs, ESMPs, PMPs, RAPs 
and Audits-as the case may be).  The Bank’s requirements are the most detailed and, to comply with them, safeguards 
documents for MCRP subprojects will be disclosed, at public locations in the area affected by the project as well as in 
appropriate State and Federal agencies, and on the Bank’s external website.  Following a time period adequate for the 
review of those documents, which for MCRP is defined as 30 calendar days for Category B.  It is a policy of the Bank 
that consultations and disclosure should be in form and language accessible to the stakeholders, and that consultation 
 

should continue throughout project implementation. This consultation that has started during project preparation will 
be continued during implementation. In addition, the MCRP has a robust Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) that 
enables project beneficiaries to log in complaints and receive swift and fair resolution in real time. 
 
Under the parent project, consultations have been held with stakeholders at different levels: (a) As part of 
environmental and social screening for sub projects; and (b) During the preparation of site-specific safeguards 
instruments. So far 16 safeguards instruments 1ESIA and 15 ESMPs have been prepared and disclosed by the project. 
 
 
  OPS_SAFEGUARD_DISCLOSURE_TBL 

B. Disclosure Requirements (N.B. The sections below appear only if corresponding safeguard policy is triggered) 

 
OPS_EA_DISCLOSURE_TABLE Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other  
OPS_EA_SG_DEFERRED_FCC_TABLE 

The review of this Safeguards has been Deferred.  
 
Comments 
The proposed project activities include the rehabilitation of existing infrastructure which could result in adverse 
environmental and social impacts thereby triggering OP/BP 4.01. However, considering the limited scale and 
magnitude of rehabilitation and improvement works as well as the confinement of activities to existing footprints, the 
proposed operation is classified as category ‘B’. At this point in time, the locations of the activities that will be financed 
by the project is not known in sufficient details. Site specific safeguards instruments such as ESIAs, stand-alone ESMPs, 
RAPs and Audits (when necessary) will be prepared, consulted upon and disclosed by the proponents prior to the 
commencement of civil works, and the relevant measures including E&S clauses clearly incorporated in contracts.   

OPS_RA_D ISCL OSURE_T ABLE  

 

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process  
OPS_RA_SG _DEFER RED_FC C_TAB LE  

 
The review of this Safeguards has been Deferred.  
 
Comments 
The need for involuntary resettlement or land acquisition in specific subproject areas will only be known during project 
implementation, when site-specific plans are available. Therefore, subprojects will be screened for applicability of the 
resettlement policy and in case any activity or subproject involves land acquisition, a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) or 
Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan (ARAP) will be prepared in compliance with the Bank policy and Nigerian laws 
prior to actual implementation of the activity or subproject. Several issues will increase the complexity of land 
acquisition. For example, the lack of reliable land record systems, and the inability of people losing land to either 
document ownership or be physically present to make their claims for eligibility. Such situations can increase due to 
the situation of forced displacement in the North East as well as the weakened local authorities who can mediate in 
land ownership conflicts Site- specific Resettlement Plans will, therefore, include procedures for identifying eligible 
project-affected people, calculating and delivering compensation, and mechanisms for land dispute grievance redress. 
 
        



OPS_COMPLIANCE_INDICATOR_TBL 

C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project 
decision meeting) (N.B. The sections below appear only if corresponding safeguard policy is triggered) 

 



















































PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
CONCEPT STAGE

Report No.: PIDC11855

Project Name Bangladesh NATP-2: National Agricultural Technology Program - Phase II 
(P149553)

Region SOUTH ASIA
Country Bangladesh
Sector(s) Agricultural extension and research (50%), Animal production (20%), 

Crops (20%), Information technology (10%)
Theme(s) Rural services and infrastructure (50%), Technology diffusion (25%), 

Rural markets (25%)
Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P149553
Borrower(s) Economic Relations Division, Ministry of Finance
Implementing Agency Ministry of Agriculture (MOA)
Environmental 
Category

B-Partial Assessment

Date PID Prepared/
Updated

04-Sep-2014

Date PID Approved/
Disclosed

09-Sep-2014

Estimated Date of 
Appraisal Completion

05-Nov-2014

Estimated Date of 
Board Approval

26-Feb-2015

Concept Review 
Decision

I. Introduction and Context
Country Context
Building on its remarkable social and economic performance over the last 20 years, Bangladesh 
aims to become a middle income country by 2021; to achieve this will require among other that the 
GoB overcomes considerable challenges in agricultural development and rural economic growth. 
The country’s GDP growth averaged 5.8 percent between 2000 and 2010, accompanied by a decline 
in the national poverty headcount rate from 48.9 percent to 31.5 percent over the same period, 
effectively lifting some 16 million people out of poverty. Bangladesh, a country of over 160 million 
inhabitants, has also made noteworthy gains in education and health, and is well set to achieve most 
of the MDGs.  
Bangladesh remains a predominantly agricultural country and growth and development 
achievements in rural areas must be brought on par with those in urban areas. Agriculture occupies 


some three-quarters of the scarce land space of the country and supports the livelihoods of the 
majority of the population. While overall poverty has significantly declined over the 2000 to 2010 
period, the poverty headcount in rural areas (still 35.2 percent) has not declined as fast as in urban 
settings; moreover, the proportion of people living in extreme poverty in rural areas is still three 
times higher than in urban areas. The contribution of agriculture to the country’s economic output 
has declined over the past decade, but crops, livestock, forestry, fisheries still combine for almost 
one-fifth of GDP. Moreover, with some 70 percent of the population living in rural areas and over 
43 percent of the country's total labor force engaged in agriculture, achieving further economically, 
socially and environmentally sustainable economic growth and poverty reduction will require 
policies and investments conducive of lasting transformational changes in rural areas – including 
through technological innovations in agriculture.

Sectoral and Institutional Context
To eliminate the country’s extreme poverty by the year 2030 and to promote shared prosperity for 
the poorest 40 percent, agriculture  must continue to grow (in ways that are sustainable and adapted 
to climate change) and rely on a more diversified production base. Poverty reduction in rural areas 
depends crucially on growth in agricultural productivity, which is driven by investment in 
infrastructure, generation of new or improved technologies adapted to changing climate, and their 
adoption by farmers and other value chains actors (e.g. processors). Sustainable intensification and 
diversification of agriculture through technological change requires an efficient and productive 
national agricultural technology system, comprising agricultural research (technology development 
and refinement) and agricultural extension (technology dissemination and adoption). This needs to 
be supported by appropriate value addition and market linkages through smallholder participation in 
emerging/established supply chains for higher value agriculture. To achieve these strategic goals, 
the GoB has been seeking the support of development partners such as the Bank, to develop and 
finance activities aimed at boosting agricultural production through productivity enhancement, and 
increasing smallholders’ income.   
In Bangladesh, while the performance of the NARS has been impressive in contributing to food 
security (in particular with rice), research in some key sub sectors (e.g. livestock, fisheries) has yet 
to reach its potential productivity in terms of releasing a sufficient stream of useful innovations 
(including a range of new climate smart technologies for production and post-harvesting). The 
extension system has still extremely limited reach into the myriad communities of the nation (in 
particular for the fisheries and livestock subsectors were local level public extension workers are 
absent), and worse, hardly communicates with the NARS, or the relevant private and non-
government entities also engaged in technological advance. In short, the national agricultural 
innovation system is far from exploiting the systemic interactions that should drive it to success, and 
the insufficiencies pervade the system both within the subsystems, the all-too disconnected and in 
some instances less than strong elements of the NARS: public-private links are disturbingly absent, 
and links between research entities public and private with the higher education sector are sparse 
and severely underexploited. To enable agriculture and stakeholders to adapt readily when 
challenges occur and to respond readily when opportunities arise, the proposed project will seek to 
overcome some of the key constraints to increasing the efficiency and performance of the national 
agricultural innovation system. 
The National Agricultural Extension Policy (NAEP, 2012) and the Bangladesh Agricultural 
Research Council Act (BARC, 2011) provide the sector policy framework for the proposed 
NATP-2. NAEP advocates inter alia the development of decentralized, integrated, demand-driven 
agricultural research and extension services. Support is now required for the Department of 
Agricultural Extension (MoA) towards achieving the strategic objectives of the NAEP and as well 

as technical assistance for the Department of Livestock Services and the Department of Fisheries 
(both MFL) for the completion of their respective sector extension strategy/policy. The 2012 BARC 
Act aims at fostering the coordination of research activities conducted by the twelve NARS 
institutes, making BARC responsible for the allocation of resources among the NARS institutes and 
for the approval of the institutes’ research programs; it is among other things expected to reduce 
duplication of research efforts and enhance accountability. Implementation of the BARC Act 
remains a challenging process and requires additional financial and technical assistance. Further, 
there are some significant differences in the institutional capacity and performance among the 
various NARS institutes (with livestock and fisheries lagging behind), and the project is expected to 
strengthen the research agenda and outcomes for livestock and fisheries given the importance of 
these sub sectors for rural economic growth and rural livelihoods.

Relationship to CAS
Agriculture has long occupied a central place in the Bangladesh development agenda and in the 
CPSs of the WBG. In the CPS for FY11-14 (subsequently extended to FY15), agriculture is 
highlighted in Pillar 3, Vulnerability, Adaptation and Inclusion, although the sector surely 
contributes to the growth Pillar 2, and benefits from initiatives under the 4th Pillar of Governance. 
As the CASPR (Report No. 73983-BD) of November 20, 2013 notes concerning Pillar 3 Outcome 
3.1 on Agriculture and Food Security, program implementation has been ramping-up and is showing 
significant improvements in agricultural productivity as measured in crops and livestock 
performance. Recurrent natural disasters and deficiencies in technology remain the basic threats to 
improvements in agricultural production, and are therefore the focus of Bank interventions in the 
sector. IFC, with financing from the Pilot Program for Climate Resilience, is also assisting by 
supporting the climate resilience of agribusiness companies and their supply chains, and is 
exploring availability of low-cost housing and livestock protection structures in flood-prone coastal 
areas. Furthermore, IFC’s investment climate and advisory services include activities in agriculture 
that are complementary to NATP-2 (e.g. development of Seed Act and National Seed Policy, 
strengthening of sanitary and phyto-sanitory registration and certification system, development of 
the dairy value chain). The proposed follow-up to NATP Phase 1 was retained in the revised CAS 
for FY15 implementation.

II. Proposed Development Objective(s)
Proposed Development Objective(s) (From PCN)
6. The proposed project development objective (PDO) for NATP-2 is to enhance the 
agricultural productivity of smallholders through better research and extension and improve their 
market access through better integration in selected value chains. To that effect, NATP-2 will 
support a decentralized, demand-driven agricultural research and extension services, and promote 
market-oriented smallholder production. NATP-2 will also support access to markets for 
smallholder farmers by facilitating their linkages with selected value chains, contributing in turn to 
increased farm income and to the sustainability of farmer groups and producer organizations formed 
by the project. The following project design emerged as an outcome of the Identification mission: 
Comp.1: Promoting Agricultural Innovation, Comp.2: Supporting Crops Development; Comp.3: 
Supporting Livestock Development; Comp.4: Supporting Fisheries Development; and Comp.5: 
Project Management and Coordination. 
7. NATP-2 will achieve the PDO: (i) by strengthening the capacity of the NARS and the 
extension services to generate and diffuse agricultural technologies aimed at increasing farm 
productivity; and (ii) by promoting the sustainability of existing and newly created farmer groups 

and producer organizations by strengthening their linkages with markets. Sustainable intensification 
and diversification of agriculture through technological change requires an efficient and productive 
national agricultural technology system, comprising agricultural research (technology development 
and refinement) and agricultural extension (technology dissemination). This needs to be supported 
by appropriate value addition and market linkages through the strengthening of supply chains for 
high value agriculture. To that effect, while NATP-2 will continue supporting agricultural research 
and extension, it will need to have a stronger focus on market-oriented production, on value chains 
and on the participation of smallholders in those emerging market opportunities, than under 
NATP-1.

Key Results (From PCN)
(i) Client satisfaction (including for female-led households) with the agricultural extension and 
advisory services provided by the agricultural innovation system has increased  
(ii) New technologies generated by the agricultural innovation system have been adopted by 
producers (including by female-led households) and other value chain actors targeted by the project  
(iii) The increase achieved in agricultural productivity (for crops, fisheries and livestock) is 
larger for farmers supported by the project  
(iv) The proportion of smallholder agricultural production marketed relative to total smallholder 
farm output has increased 
(v) The women-led Common Interest Groups for homestead gardening are making a significant 
contribution to improving nutrition in participating households

III. Preliminary Description
Concept Description
NATP-2 will achieve the PDO by: (i) continuing to strengthen the capacity of the NARS and 
extension services to generate and disseminate agricultural technologies aimed at increasing farm 
productivity; and (ii) promoting the sustainability of existing and new farmer groups and producer 
organizations by strengthening their linkages with markets. Sustainable intensification and 
diversification of agriculture through technological change requires an efficient and productive 
national agricultural technology system, comprising agricultural research (technology development 
and refinement) and agricultural extension (technology dissemination). This needs to be supported 
by appropriate value addition and market linkages through the development of supply chains for 
high value agriculture. To that effect, while NATP-2 will continue supporting agricultural research 
and extension, it will need to have a much stronger focus on market-oriented production, on value 
chains and on the participation of smallholders in those emerging market opportunities, than under 
NATP-1. A differentiated approach will be required for project activities at field level to account for 
the vertical and horizontal scaling up efforts under NATP-2. The new project will deepen the 
interventions in existing upazillas (vertical scaling up) while expanding the geographic coverage to 
include new districts and upazillas (horizontal scaling up) . 
The project design for NATP-2 takes into account some of the shortcomings identified under 
NATP-1 and reflects the integrated approach required to achieve the PDO. NATP-2 includes a 
broader component that addresses the multiple dimensions required for decentralized, demand-
driven agricultural research as a core pillar of an agricultural innovation system in the country 
context. The project further includes three sub sector components, each tackling specific constraints 
to the development of selected commodities from technology generation to transfer and adoption at 
farm level, to market-oriented production and agro processing. This value chain approach is 
expected to lead to a better integration of research and extension, which was regularly reported in 

NATP-1 as an area requiring further improvement. Finally, the project includes a component that 
covers most cross-cutting activities as well as regular project management tasks. Project 
components, their objectives and contribution to the PDO, as well as the core activities covered, are 
described below. 
 
Component 1: Enhancing the Agricultural Innovation System 
This component, led by the Project Management and Coordination Unit with implementation 
support from other agencies, will support the development of decentralized, demand-driven and 
integrated agricultural research. This component will likely include investments, capacity 
enhancement and technical assistance in areas launched under NATP-1 (such as sustainability of 
Common Interest Groups (CIGs) and emerging Producer Organizations (POs), rehabilitation of 
rural markets, technical advisory services), strengthening National Agricultural Research Institutes  
(NARI) (including investments in physical infrastructure), developing one-stop farmer advisory 
service centers. The component will also include the window for competitive research and matching 
grants under the Agricultural Innovation Fund.   
 
Component 2: Supporting crop development  
This component, coordinated by the Department of Agricultural Extension, will support the 
development of decentralized extension services and demand-driven research for crop production 
(including horticulture), post-harvest management and processing, and facilitate the integration of 
smallholder farmers in selected crop-based value chains (bananas, vegetables, and aromatic rice). 
This component would include investments, capacity enhancement and technical assistance in e.g. 
smallholder farm mechanization, seed testing facilities (with IFC), an electronic phytosanitary 
certification system (with IFC), food safety, agricultural commercialization, and promotion of 
smallholder-based commodity value chains. Financial incentives to smallholder farmers for the 
adoption of productivity enhancing and post-harvest loss reducing technologies, as well as support 
to private small and medium agro entrepreneurs in the selected value chains (e.g. food processing) 
will be secured through the corresponding AIF window.  
 
Component 3: Supporting fisheries development  
This component, coordinated by the Department of Fisheries, will support the development of 
decentralized extension services and demand-driven research for fish and aquaculture, and facilitate 
the integration of smallholder fish farmers in selected commodity value chains (tilapia, major carps, 
and shrimps). This component would include investments, capacity enhancement and technical 
assistance in e.g. the rehabilitation of fish ponds, food safety, quality improvement of fish feed and 
fingerlings, fish commercialization and the promotion of aquaculture-based commodity value 
chains. Financial incentives to smallholder farmers for the adoption of productivity enhancing and 
post-harvest loss reducing technologies, as well as support to private small and medium agro 
entrepreneurs in the selected value chains (e.g. food processing) will be secured through the 
corresponding AIF window. 
 
Component 4: Supporting livestock development  
This component, coordinated by the Department of Livestock Services, will support the 
development of decentralized extension services and demand-driven research for livestock products, 
and facilitate the integration of smallholder farmers in selected commodity value chains (dairy, goat 
meat). This component would include investments, capacity enhancement and technical assistance 
in e.g.: laboratory infrastructure and equipment (including at the regional level), artificial 
insemination, fodder production and conservation, efficient biogas production, farm mechanization, 




food safety, and the promotion of livestock-based commodity value chains. Financial incentives to 
smallholder farmers for the adoption of productivity enhancing and post-harvest loss reducing 
technologies, as well as support to private small and medium agro entrepreneurs in the selected 
value chains (e.g. food processing) will be secured through the corresponding AIF window. 
 
Component 5: Project Management and Coordination 
Under this component a Project Management and Coordination Unit will be in charge of overall 
day-to-day project management and implementation, as well as coordination among the project 
PIUs from the Ministry of Agriculture and Ministry of Food. The PCMU will have the operational, 
safeguards and fiduciary responsibility and be accountable for overall project performance. The 
PCMU will carry out procurement and financial management activities. Other specific PMU-led 
activities under this component will include among others: (i) the support to the development of a 
national agricultural atlas, (ii) the coordination of third-party project monitoring and impact 
evaluation (with baseline, midline, endline surveys), (iii) the coordination of analytical studies and 
dissemination of findings, (iv) the support to short- and longer term assistance to the project 
management team and other agencies involved in component implementation, (v) the coordination 
of all staff training and (vii) preparation studies for a potential follow-up operation (phase III of 
NATP).

IV. Safeguard Policies that might apply
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No TBD
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖

V. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 200.00 Total Bank Financing: 150.00
Financing Gap: 0.00
Financing Source Amount
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 3.00
 International Development Association (IDA) 150.00
 US  Agency for International Development (USAID) 25.00
 Bangladesh MDTF for Climate Change 0.00
 International Fund for Agriculture Development 22.00
 Total 200.00


























































World Bank Document


PROGRAM INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
CONCEPT STAGE 

April 11, 2018 
Report No.: 125612 

 

Operation Name BJ - Second Fiscal Reform and Growth DPF 

Region AFRICA 

Country Benin 

Sector Central government administration (30%); General energy sector 
(20%); General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (20%); 
Primary Education (15%); Health (15%). 

Operation ID P166115 (DPF Loan) and P167278 (PBG) 

Lending Instrument Development Policy Lending and Policy Based Guarantee 

Borrower(s) Government of Benin 

Implementing Agency Ministry of Economy and Finance 

Date PID Prepared March 30, 2018 

Estimated Date of Appraisal July 11, 2018 

Estimated Date of Board Approval August 28, 2018 

Corporate Review Decision Following the corporate review, the decision was taken to 
proceed with the preparation of the operation. 

 

I. Key development issues and rationale for Bank involvement  
 
1. Benin is one of the world’s least-developed countries, with an annual per capita income of 
approximately US$830 in 2017. Poverty remains widespread, with a poverty rate estimated at about 48 
percent ($1.90 a day poverty line – 2011 PPP) in 2017.  With an average per capita GDP growth rate of 1.3 
percent (2005-2015) driven primarily by the services sector, poverty reduction has been limited, 
highlighting the need to ensure a broad-based and stronger growth. There are significant regional 
disparities in poverty rates and rural poverty rates are higher than those in urban areas. Fewer female-
headed households fall below the national poverty line than male-headed households.  
 
2. The country’s economic performance has been hampered by low competitiveness and high 
informality.  Following the temporary slowdown experienced in 2015, economy activity rebounded driven 
by the recovery of private consumption and supported by increased cotton production, strong activity at 
the Port of Cotonou, and rising telecommunications and transport sector activity. However, economic 
performance in Benin remains hampered by a weak business enabling environment. The high cost and 
unpredictable supply of electricity is a key constraint for private sector development. Agriculture’s export 
is concentrated in the cotton sector, and agriculture suffers from supply chain deficiencies, including in 
the provision and distribution of inputs as well as on the marketing side. Approximately 90 percent of the 
labor force is engaged in the informal sector – agriculture, informal commerce and other services 
activities. 
 
3. The first pillar of the Fiscal Reform and Growth series on fiscal consolidation is justified given the 
Government’s effort to create fiscal space and improve the efficiency of public spending. In the run-up 
to 2016 Presidential elections, increases in the wage bill and out-of-budget expenses led to significant 
increases in public debt (up by almost 20 percent of GDP) and in the fiscal deficit (up from 2.1 percent of 
GDP in 2014 to 8 percent in 2015). The Government contained expenditures in 2016 to face the drop of 

tax revenues and managed to reduce the fiscal deficit from 8 percent of GDP in 2015 to 6 percent of GDP 
in 2016.  In 2017, several measures were implemented to boost domestic revenues and reduce primary 
current spending and the fiscal deficit remained stable despite a surge in public investment spending. The 
DPO series supports the authorities’ effort to create fiscal space by improving revenue collection and 
managing more efficiently public expenditure, with an emphasis on wages and transfers.  In addition to 
the DPOs, the Government program is supported by an ECF program with the IMF approved by the IMF 
Board on April 7, 2017, providing macroeconomic and fiscal anchors that will support the implementation 
of the reforms. The first review of the Program, carried out in September 2017, confirmed that the 
authorities are committed to responsible fiscal management. This was also confirmed (at the staff level) 
by the preliminary results of the second review of the Program, which is currently under way. 

 
4. The second pillar aims at promoting agricultural productivity and strengthening the power sector 
which is a Government’s priority to create productive formal jobs and support inclusive growth. 
Agriculture employs over 50 percent of the population and is the economy’s leading formal sector foreign 
exchange earner. The country has a large endowment of arable and fertile land and adequate water 
resources. However, Benin’s comparative advantage in agriculture remains largely unexploited as the 
governance structure and relatively low food-safety standards had a negative impact on the sector’s 
competitiveness. Also, the inconsistent supply of electricity is frequently noted as a leading constraint to 
private sector growth, particularly in the light manufacturing and agricultural processing sectors. 
Strengthening the financial viability of the power sector and promote private sector participation is 
essential to increase electricity production capacity in a sustainable way. Focusing on these important real 
sectors will help improve productivity, create higher paying jobs and livelihoods, and enhance the 
country’s effort to reach the World Bank’s twin goals of poverty reduction and shared prosperity. 
 
5. The third pillar supports the Government’s efforts to improve the delivery of social services, 
both in terms of equity and quality.  Although Benin has recorded some progress in terms of access to 
education and health services over the past decade, significant variations persist depending on the income 
groups and locations. The reforms supported in this pillar will help addressing this issue. In addition, the 
recent SCD, and other studies, has identified that one major constraint in the delivery of better social 
services lies in the excessive concentration of responsibilities at the central level.  The Government has 
launched a series of initiatives aimed at increasing the role of local government and communities and at 
improving the allocation of public resources across regions. The proposed operation will support these 
initiatives. 
 

II. Proposed Objective(s) 
 
5. The overarching goal of the proposed FRGC series is to boost real economic growth, reduce poverty 
and increase opportunities for the poorest in the population. The program development objectives of 
this FRGC series are to: a) support macroeconomic stability by strengthening fiscal management; b) 
promote economic growth by increasing the productivity and competitiveness of the agricultural sector 
and strengthening the power sector’s financial viability and production capacity; and c) improve social 
service delivery.  
 

III. Preliminary Description 
 
6. The first pillar of the DPO series will focus on supporting macroeconomic stability by strengthening 
fiscal management. Not only is adequacy of the macroeconomic and fiscal framework a prerequisite for 
sustainable economic growth but budgetary and debt sustainability is necessary to the delivery of 



effective public services that maximize the impact of available revenues on beneficiaries, including the 
poorest segments of the populations. In addition, increasing fiscal space will help relax fiscal constraints 
to accommodate the financing of needed infrastructure projects.  
 
7. The second pillar will seek to promote economic growth by increasing the productivity of the 
agricultural sector and strengthening the power sector’s financial viability and production capacity. This 
series focuses on measures aimed at increasing the productivity of the agricultural sector by supporting a 
policy, regulatory, and institutional framework that strengthens agriculture value chains and enhances 
diversification, promotes higher quality standards for agricultural products and supports greater access 
to credit in the primary sector. Moreover, the measures supported by the operation strengthen the 
financial viability of the power sector that is necessary to attract private sector participation and, thus, 
increase electricity production capacity, including in renewables, and access to electricity in a sustainable 
way. 
 
8. The third pillar contributes to addressing the key constraints to a more sustainable, efficient 
and equitable allocation of resources to build and maintain the human capital of Beninese adults and 
children. The measures supported under this pillar address two main issues: (i) the geographically uneven 
deployment of qualified primary teachers and health workers, and (ii) the limited and unpredictable 
resources allocated by the central government to communities to finance non-salary inputs and 
investments necessary to maintain quality service delivery. In particular, the proposed pillar supports the 
Government’s efforts to deploy teachers and health workers to underserved communities and ensure 
that local governments receive a sufficient and regular flow of funds to meet priority social sector needs, 
particularly those for the poorest members of communities served.  
 

 

IV. Poverty and Social Impacts and Environment Aspects 
 
Poverty and Social Impacts 
 
9. The FRG series is expected to have a positive impact on poverty reduction through different 
channels. This impact has been strengthened by the inclusion of the third pillar on human capital 
development that could have both a direct and indirect influence on the level and distribution of poverty.  
 
10.  Prior Actions 1 to 3 support measures to create fiscal space and are expected to facilitate the 
delivery of essential public services and to contribute to a macroeconomic environment conducive to 
economic growth and private sector employment creation. A stable and predictable macroeconomic 
environment is necessary to limit uncertainty, to attract and sustain both domestic and foreign 
investment, to grow the formal economy and to generate increasingly productive employment 
opportunities. Furthermore, the creation of fiscal space allows for an increased allocation of fiscal 
resources to the delivery of essential social services, a direct contribution to poverty reduction and 
improved quality of life. Increased fiscal space also allows for implementation of the Government’s public 
investment plans, which is conducive to the crowding-in of increased levels of private investment. As 
noted, the failure of growth to lead to poverty reduction in Benin largely reflects the highly informal 
nature of the economy and the lack of high productivity, high wage and secure employment opportunities. 
Fiscal and debt sustainability, and the macroeconomic certainty it engenders, along with better 
infrastructure and improved delivery of essential services will encourage and foster economic growth that 
is more formal in nature and thus more effective in reducing poverty.  
 



11. Prior Action 2 provides a potential exception, as the recommendations of the tax expenditure 
analysis have not been finalized yet and could entail removing exemptions that benefit the poor. 
Eighteen percent of taxes expenditure on VAT are related to basic foods; removing these exemptions 
could possibly have negative distributional impact on the poor. However, this scenario is unlikely given 
that tax exemptions on basic foods are regulated by a regional policy. In case some recommendations of 
the tax expenditure analysis suggest removing exemptions that potentially benefit the poor, a 
distributional impact analysis will be carried out to inform the Poverty and Social Impact Assessment 
(PSIA).  
 
12. Prior action 4, 5, and 6 focus on increasing agricultural productivity and competitiveness and 
contribute to the Government’s poverty reduction goals. In 2015, 60 percent of the rural population lived 
below the US$1.90 per day poverty line. As the rural population share is greater than the urban share, 65 
percent of the poor reside in rural areas. As noted previously, limited agricultural growth (around 3.5 
percent per year, which is approximately the rate of population growth in the country) has contributed to 
overall growth, but the impact on poverty reduction has been limited. Diversifying production into more 
valuable crops, and raising productivity should boost incomes among those involved in agriculture. 
 
13. Prior actions supported in the power sector pillar promote reliable access to electricity and a 
more cost-effective electricity provision and should have a direct and positive impact on the poor. As 
discussed above, only 29 percent of Benin’s households have access to electricity, and due to the 
significant disparities between urban and rural areas, only 6 percent of the rural population has access to 
electricity. The measures supported under this series will support the financial viability of the power 
sector which is a necessary condition to attract private investments, increase power production, improve 
power transmission and distribution, and ultimately improve access to electricity in Benin. Increased 
access to electricity is strongly correlated with improved education and health outcomes and associated 
increases in human capital and earning potential. Furthermore, access to electricity liberates non-paid 
family time demands, particularly for women and girls, and further increases quality of life and 
opportunities for investment in human capital, including in girls and women. Increased and more reliable 
access at affordable prices should also have a significant impact on firm creation, firm growth and 
resultant employment opportunities, particularly in the higher productivity formal sector. 
 
14. A full-fledged PSIA has been carried out to assess the potential impact of electricity pricing 
reforms in Benin. The PSIA concluded that improving the financial situation of the SBEE and thus reducing 
the gap between SBEE’s service unit cost and revenues per kWh are prerequisites for the expansion of 
SBEE operations throughout the country and greater access for poor households to electricity. The PSIA 
study also concluded that the current social policy of subsidizing the tariff for the poor is not effective and 
suggested some possible options to strengthen the policy including adopting a tariff policy based on usage 
and eliminating fixed costs for small customers. 

 
15. Prior action 9 provides measures to improve education service delivery is expected to have 
indirect positive effects on poverty reduction. Schools quality play a determinant role in education 
outcomes. The 2017 SCD concluded that low human capital contributes to income inequality, undermines 
long term economic growth and the prospects of the poor to realize shared prosperity. Improving school 
quality (through the pupil to teacher ratio) is likely to improve learning outcomes and increases grade 
attainment. As education outcomes improve for the poor, their will have better job opportunities that 
offer higher earnings and security.  

 



16. Prior action 10 supports the improvement of health services in rural areas through the 
recruitment of new health workers. Providing affordable health care service to the poor remains a 
challenge in Benin particularly in the rural areas.  Addressing health care needs of the poor requires a 
multidimensional strategy integrating availability of health services, their quality, geographic and financial 
accessibility. While the provision of new health workers will improve availability of health services in rural 
areas, we do not expect this measure alone to improve significantly health outcomes for the poor. 
 
17. Prior action 11 aims at strengthening social safety net programs through the promotion cash 
transfer which is expected to have substantial positive impact on poverty reduction in the short term. 
There is a body of evidence around the world that well-designed cash transfers program substantially 
improves lives of the poor including higher levels of asset holdings, consumption, food security, 
employment, income and saving. However recent studies show the impacts of conditional or 
unconditional cash transfers on living standard are transitory and fade away in the long run.   
 
Environment Aspects  
 
13. The policies supported by the proposed DPF are not likely to have negative impacts on the country’s 
natural assets. All the actions supported throughout the first operation are policy-oriented; they do not 
support environmentally impactful investments or involve policy actions with significant environmental 
consequences.  The measures supporting domestic resource mobilization and efficient management of 
public expenditure pose no risk to the environment. Measures designed to strengthen economic 
competitiveness are also largely environmentally neutral.  
 
14. Strengthening the financial viability of the power sector will support increased access to electricity 
and is expected to have a positive environmental impact. Households in Benin, particularly rural 
households, are highly dependent on biomass for their daily energy requirements. The reform program 
supported under the energy sector is likely to have positive environmental impacts and would help in the 
reduction of greenhouse gases occasioned by the predominance of fuel biomass (fuelwood, charcoal and 
plant wastes). Strengthening the financial viability of the power sector is likely to produce climate change 
mitigation co-benefit, since strengthening the financial viability of the sector is likely to promote the 
development of new energy efficient production capacities.  In the agricultural sector, measures intended 
to diversify agriculture away from a reliance on cotton could have a potentially positive environmental 
effect as agriculture becomes less mono-culture based and increasingly diversified. 
 
15. Over the last 20 years, the Government has made significant strides in mainstreaming 
environmental sustainability in projects. EIA is a legal requirement and it is widely applied to all 
developmental projects.  Environmental assessment is a necessary condition to obtain the approval to 
implement any development project. It has been set up in the Law N° 98-30 relating to the environmental 
framework and in the Decree N° 2001-235 relating to the environmental assessment procedures. The 
national environmental protection agency (ABE) has the capacity to implement, monitor, and report on 
mitigating measures and/or environmental and social management plans; and have been working in 
direct collaborations with the environmental and social specialists of the Bank funded projects. 
 
 
 
 
 
 



V. Tentative financing 
 

Source: ($m.) 
BORROWER/RECIPIENT 0.00 
International Development Association (IDA) 60.00 
Borrower/Recipient  
IBRD 
Others (specify) 

 

 Total 60.00 
 


























































World Bank Document


PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
CONCEPT STAGE

Report No.: PIDC18818

Project Name National Agricultural and Rural Inclusive Growth Project (P153349)
Region AFRICA
Country Kenya
Sector(s) General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (60%), Sub-national 

government administration (20%), Agro-industry, marketing, and trade 
(10%), Public administration- Other social services (10%)

Theme(s) Rural services and infrastructure (40%), Social Inclusion (30%), Micro, 
Small and Medium Enterprise support (30%)

Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P153349
Borrower(s) Ministry of Finance
Implementing Agency Ministry of Devolution and Planning
Environmental 
Category

B-Partial Assessment

Date PID Prepared/
Updated

02-Mar-2015

Date PID Approved/
Disclosed

04-Mar-2015

Estimated Date of 
Appraisal Completion

10-Nov-2015

Estimated Date of 
Board Approval

20-Jan-2016

Concept Review 
Decision

Track II - The review did authorize the preparation to continue

I. Introduction and Context
Country Context
Although poverty rates in Kenya seem to have fallen, formidable challenges at reducing poverty, in 
particular in rural areas, remain.  Kenya’s poverty reduction from 47 percent in 2005/6 to about 39 
percent based on best estimates in 2012/13 , has been driven by solid growth across most of the 
economy, but improvements in income are not evenly shared amongst people but also amongst 
regions and inequality appears to be rising .  The scale of consumption poverty in Kenya is 
staggering, and is concentrated in rural areas.  Based on the last national household budget survey, 
close to half of the population (nearly 17 million Kenyans) was poor in 2005, the vast majority of 
the poor lived in rural areas, and were more likely to depend on income and consumption from 
crops and livestock, as a source of livelihood. Revised poverty estimates indicate that nearly 4 in 10 
Kenyans continue to live in extreme poverty. Poverty levels are highest in arid and semi-arid areas, 

with roughly 70 percent the population living in the “small share” (about 12 percent) of the more 
agriculturally productive regions of the country (source: CPS FY2014-18). Tackling poverty must 
address the difficulties of low-income rural communities as well as the distinct problems of urban 
poverty that also encompass secondary cities.  
 
Income inequality levels are not likely to have decreased in recent years, and achieving inclusive 
growth remains Kenya’s key development objective. Kenya’s Gini coefficient of 47.7 is above that 
of neighboring comparators, including Ethiopia, Tanzania, and Uganda. The richest 10 percent of 
the population garner 40 percent of the nation’s income, whereas the poorest 10 percent receive 
only 2 percent of national income. While fostering income growth of the bottom 40 is not currently 
a target set explicitly by the national authorities, in practice it is currently equivalent to fostering 
income growth of the extreme poor. Significant investment and economic reform must be part of the 
effort to cut the poverty rate by 2 percentage points each year from now to 2030 if extreme poverty 
is to be ended in that timeframe (source: CPS, FY2014-18).

Sectoral and Institutional Context
Agriculture is the mainstay of Kenya’s economy, but is not reaching its potential to fully contribute 
to poverty reduction and shared prosperity. The sector directly accounts for 25 percent of GDP, and 
provides 62 percent of formal employment, and 45 percent of government revenue.  However, 
although specific high-value sub-sectors like horticulture and tea have performed well, small-scale 
agriculture – the main livelihood for most of Kenya’s poor – has performed very poorly.  Despite 
demographic changes and urbanization, the majority of the rural population still derives their 
livelihoods from agricultural and related activities, at low levels of productivity. There is therefore a 
very strong linkage between agriculture and the overall performance of the economy as well as the 
wellbeing of the Kenyans (both rural and urban). 
 
Vulnerable groups in rural areas bear the highest incidence of poverty depending on how well they 
have been prepositioned to face shocks.  Social exclusion creates vulnerability particularly among 
women and youth.  Lack of stable income, secure shelter, isolation from markets, jobs scarcity, lack 
of access to information and technologies and knowledge, education etc. all act as drivers to social 
exclusion and lack of prosperity that is being experienced by rural families. In agriculture, women 
comprise more than 70 percent of the labor force, yet they own only 1-5 percent of agricultural land 
titles. In terms of non-agricultural employment, only 29 percent of those earning a formal wage are 
women and female youths are twice as likely to be unemployed as adult females. 
 
Management of natural resources and water catchments is critical to the well-being of the most 
vulnerable and to improving prosperity of rural communities. Kenya's growth prospects and main 
economic activities, especially agriculture, hydro-power generation and water supply are strongly 
linked to the country's environment and natural resource base.  However, such catchment areas in 
Kenya have undergone intensive environmental degradation resulting in the siltation of rivers, 
reservoirs and irrigation canals, which in turn exacerbates flooding and vulnerability.  Kenya 
already is one of the most degraded areas in the region with about 70 percent of the population 
living in the 12 percent of total land area that is classified as being of medium to high potential for 
agriculture and livestock production. Further, Kenya is highly vulnerable to the impacts of climate 
change. Many of the economic activities and livelihoods rely on natural resources will be impacted 
by climate change related occurences, such erratic weather patterns, floods and droughts. Proper 
management and conservation of key catchment areas, as well as actions to respond to climate 
change (such as the adoption of climate-smart agriculture practices, or strengthening the adaptive 


capacity of communities through improved access to information and services) are key strategic 
requirements for increasing for increasing agricultural productivity, poverty reduction and economic 
growth. 
   
The 2010 Constitution gives hope in addressing some of the exclusion witnessed in the past.  
Devolution to 47 Counties paves way for a more equal distribution of resources and better service 
delivery. The Constitution Bill of Rights emphasizes the need to protect the vulnerable and 
marginalized members of Kenyan communities. Much needs to be done in practice to ensure that it 
rectifies the unequal distribution of investments and services and does not instead cause service 
delivery to deteriorate. The Constitution also recognizes improved governance, transparency and 
citizen participation as essential to realize Kenyan aspirations.  
 
The Constitution and the Government’s ambitious devolution process bring major new 
opportunities, as well as near-term challenges, for enhancing poverty reduction, citizen 
participation, agricultural productivity, as well as governance. Counties now play the primary on-
the-ground role in delivering agriculture services that previously were managed by the national 
government.  Key functions related to these services were transferred to the Counties in August 
2013, and the “Equitable Share” includes significant resources that had formerly been allocated to 
national ministries to carry out these services, with national government retaining a policy making 
role. There is a major need, and window of opportunity, to support Counties to put in place 
institutional structures, mechanisms and staffing to deliver on their mandates. Many Counties are 
looking for mechanisms, such as community-led development programs, that can help to mobilize 
their citizens to take an active role in delivery of services.  
 
Kenya has significant experience supporting community-led development, agriculture and citizen-
centered governance, specifically gained from the Western Kenya Community-Driven Development 
and Flood Mitigation (WKCDD/FM) Project and the Kenya Agricultural Productivity and 
Agribusiness Project (KAPAP) .  Both projects are delivering on their development objectives and 
have demonstrated new approaches to mobilizing communities and small-scale agriculturalists, 
while facing implementation and governance challenges that have afflicted multiple projects in the 
Bank’s Kenya portfolio. These types of operations have demonstrated results in mobilizing poor 
communities to undertake initiatives that improve local livelihoods, and have progressively sought 
to incorporate lessons learned from similar community-led initiatives in South Asia and other 
regions. Experience thus far suggests that unlike top-down approaches, effective community-level 
planning and execution encourages innovative development solutions that reflect local priorities.   
 
Rural transformation in an inclusive and sustainable manner is the long-term vision of the 
Government of Kenya (GoK).  To achieve this inclusive transformation, a series of multi-sector 
programs will be required over the next 5 to 15 years. The Bank, in response to the GoK’s request to 
scale up community-led and market-driven approaches in the agricultural sector as the first program 
in the series, proposes a Kenya National Agricultural and Rural Inclusive Growth Project (P153349) 
to be implemented over five years with an approximate IDA envelope of US$200 million.

Relationship to CAS
The Government, as well as the World Bank’s new Kenya Country Partnership Strategy (CPS/
FY2014-18), places a strong priority on supporting agriculture and the devolution process to 
enhance poverty reduction and shared prosperity. Enhancing the role of agriculture in generating 
shared prosperity and poverty reduction, as well as in supporting national and County governments 


to provide effective decentralized service delivery are key priorities.  The agricultural sector is 
identified as one of the key sectors of the economic pillar in the “Kenya Vision 2030” which is 
operationalized by the Second Medium Term Plan (2013-2017), as well as other key policies such 
as the Agriculture Sector Development Policy aiming to achieve 5 – 7 percent annual agriculture 
sector growth. The CPS identifies agriculture as the sector with the most potential to make a 
significant difference to Kenya’s rural poor, including women, who make up 70 percent of the rural 
labor force; and to deliver on national objectives for shared prosperity.   
 
Alignment with Country Partnership Strategy. The proposed program is fully aligned with the focus 
areas of the CPS and will contribute to its objectives through the Bank’s three key domains of 
engagement in Kenya.  First, under Domain 1 – “Competitiveness and sustainability: growth to 
eradicate poverty”, the proposed project would help achieve the high level objective of improving 
agriculture productivity and sustainability . Second, the proposed project would directly contribute 
to Domain 2 – “Protection and potential: delivering shared prosperity”, where the focus is to protect 
the vulnerable and help them develop their potential. The CPS recognizes that agriculture is one of 
the high priority areas interventions to target support for the poor that directly links with helping 
farmers in rural areas. Engaging communities and supporting especially women and youth are also 
recognized to be important. Third, the proposed project would also assist in achieving the two high 
level objectives of operationalizing the devolution framework for local decision making and smooth 
delivery of decentralized services under Domain 3 – “Consistency and equity: delivering a 
devolution dividend”.

II. Proposed Development Objective(s)
Proposed Development Objective(s) (From PCN)
The proposed development objective is to reduce vulnerabilities and promote inclusive agricultural 
and other livelihoods of the small-scale and marginal farmers in the targeted communities.

Key Results (From PCN)
Achievement of the PDO and key results are proposed to be measured by the following  indicators: 
(a) Direct project beneficiaries (number) of which female (percentage)- this core indicator will 
essentially measure the number of vulnerable and poor/small and marginal farmers (bottom 40 
percent, disaggregated by gender) benefitting from project interventions both in terms of 
infrastructure and livelihoods; (b) Communities and Counties, through their own institutions, 
implementing, operating, and managing their development activities (number); and (c) Increase of 
household incomes and assets of small and marginal farmers (less than 2 acres) (percentage).  A 
detailed results monitoring framework and indicators will be developed during the project 
preparation.

III. Preliminary Description
Concept Description
Project Approach and Scope: To promote inclusive and sustainable agricultural and livelihood 
development, the proposed project interventions will use a three-pronged approach along the key 
guiding principles of: participation, inclusion, poverty targeting, transparency, accountability, value-
for-money, and self-help. First, to address key aspects of rural development that cut across cultural, 
ecological, and socioeconomic areas , the project design will use a holistic, integrated landscape 
approach that looks at all resources (natural capital (land, water, and other natural resources), 
physical capital (infrastructure, etc.) and social capital (communities, institutions, etc.) to develop 


strong horizontal and vertical collaboration with stakeholders to managing competing demands. 
Second, to effectively identify and address distinct local needs, the project will use a community-led 
approach that has been successfully providing services to rural populations in Kenya. Participation 
of the beneficiary population and County governments in all stages of the process would be 
essential for ensuring ownership and sustainability of the investments. Third, the project will adopt 
a market-driven approach to ensure that agricultural development and livelihood promotion are 
linked to markets/private sector thereby contributing to increased economic transformation and 
improved livelihoods of the target population. With focused support, a sizeable group of small 
farmers and other vulnerable groups can be a source of much needed employment and growth in the 
rural areas. The project will also place a strong emphasis on sustainability – how to build and 
sustain community-led institutions and farmer-led market associations that can raise adequate 
revenues to sustain and expand operations, and are incentivized to deliver tangible benefits for poor 
and vulnerable populations.  
 
Project Area.  Selection of the proposed project area will be defined during preparation recognizing 
that some degree of geographical concentration will be needed in order to provide widely shared 
benefits.  Roughly, the project will cover about 10 to 15 counties, benefitting about 500,000 farm-
families, about 2. 5 million population . Selection of the project area will be in done following an 
overall holistic/landscape approach, ensuring close collaboration and coordination with proposed 
IDA-supported rural roads, rural energy and devolution projects currently under preparation. The 
selection criteria could include: (i) agricultural and livestock potential areas; (ii) number of poor 
people living in rural areas; (iii) human development indicators such as malnutrition, food 
insecurity, sanitation coverage, etc.; (iv) willingness of County governments and communities to 
commit to the program’s objectives/principles and provide cash/labore or in-kind support, and; (v) 
clustering approach – in terms of both physical/biological clustering as in case of watershed, and 
economic clustering.  
 
Project Components: The project will comprise 4 components:  
 
Component 1: Support to Farmer/Community Institutions and Agricultural/Rural Livelihoods 
(roughly US$100 million of IDA Credit): This component will provide support and resources to 
communities for building and strengthening their institutions (farmer/producer groups, cooperatives, 
etc), improving agriculture and rural livelihoods (extension, technology, irrigation, natural resource 
management, finance, etc), reducing vulnerabilities such as unemployment (especially youth), 
disability, food insecurity and malnutrition, and improving quality of life (small access roads/
bridges, water, etc). This component could provide support through two windows aimed at: (a) 
providing financing for public goods, and; (b) promoting agricultural and rural livelihoods as 
private goods. The funds will be released directly to the communities in tranches based on their 
performance, and will be managed at the community level. Investments would need to be made in 
land rehabilitation and land conservation measures also to arrest erosion-induced declining land 
productivity, and connecting the farmers as well as community to roads and markets.   
 
Component 2: Strengthening Inter-community/Producer Cooperatives and Investments for 
Agricultural Value Chains (roughly US$60 million of IDA Credit): This component will support the 
strengthening of higher level farmer institutions (cooperatives, producer federations, natural 
resource users associations, etc) that help farmers and communities work together to improve 
productivity and value-addition, and to achieve efficiency and economies of scale of local activities. 
The component will also support activities that require cooperation within and across multiple 


communities. Key activities proposed under this component include: (i) strengthening producer 
federations and cooperatives; (ii) developing value-chains and commercial agriculture; (iii) 
improving catchment management practices; (iv) promoting innovative technology, farming 
methods, and good agricultural practices that help target beneficiaries to improve efficiency and 
quality of their production; and (v) complementing existing subsistence strategies that promote 
climate resilience with new measures such as efficient irrigation, new crop varieties (e.g., drought 
and disease tolerant, quicker-growing), and erosion controls. These climate smart techniques and 
dissemination of climate information (e.g., seasonal forecasts and long-term trends) can address 
more intense rainfall events and water conservation measures. Component 2 will build synergies 
with other initiatives at the national level and in the project area such as feeder roads development, 
rural electrification and devolution, etc., in order to have a multiplier effect on achieving sustainable 
results.   
 
Component 3: Building Capacity of County Governments and Other Partners to Support 
Community-Led Development (roughly US$30 million of IDA Credit): This component will 
support County governments and other partners (including communities) to strengthen their roles 
and capacity as enablers of community-led initiatives for farmers and vulnerable populations. 
Proposed activities to be supported will include: (i) integrating community-led initiatives in County 
Integrated Development Planning and Budgeting processes; (ii) building County capacity including 
policies, staff, processes/systems, and monitoring; (iii) identifying and monitoring progress and 
needs of poor and marginalized communities, and; (iv) developing platforms to share information 
on ongoing initiatives, identifying and disseminating good practices, and enhancing coordination 
among different actors.   
 
Component 4: Coordination, Facilitation and Monitoring (roughly US$10 million of IDA Credit): 
This component will support overall national level coordination, facilitation, management, technical 
support, and monitoring, learning and evaluation.

IV. Safeguard Policies that might apply
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No TBD
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖

V. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 200.00 Total Bank Financing: 200.00
Financing Gap: 0.00



















































COMBINED PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENTS / INTEGRATED 
SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET (PID/ISDS)  

CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: PIDISDSC15495

Date Prepared/Updated: 28-Dec-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION

  A.  Basic Project Data

Country: India Project ID: P155617
Parent 
Project ID 
(if any):

Project Name: Assam Agribusiness and Rural Transformation Project (P155617)
Region: SOUTH ASIA
Estimated 
Appraisal Date:

05-Sep-2016 Estimated 
Board Date:

22-Dec-2016

Practice Area
(Lead):

Agriculture Lending 
Instrument:

Investment Project Financing

Sector(s): Agricultural extension and research (20%), Agro-industry, marketing, and trade 
(30%), Crops (20%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (20%), 
Animal production (10%)

Theme(s): Rural markets (40%), Rural services and infrastructure (40%), Trade facilitation 
and market access (20%)

Borrower(s): Republic of India
Implementing 
Agency:

Assam Rural Infrastructure and Agricultural Services (ARIAS) Society

Financing (in USD Million)
Financing Source Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT 50.00
International Development Association (IDA) 200.00
Total Project Cost 250.00

Environmental 
Category:

B - Partial Assessment

Concept 
Review 
Decision:

Track II - The review did authorize the preparation to continue

Is this a 
Repeater 
project?

No

Other Decision 



(as needed):

B. Introduction and Context

Country Context
1.      During the last decade, India’s economy expanded at an average annual rate of 7.6 percent, 
and projections are for the high growth rate to continue.  Despite the headline figures on growth, 
concerns linger about the pattern of growth. India continues to face daunting challenges in 
reducing the number of poor, creating jobs, and achieving shared prosperity. Long term 
agricultural growth remains volatile, fluctuating around 3 percent per year.  With India’s labor 
force predominantly in rural areas, and about 68 percent employed in agriculture, the political, 
social and economic importance of agriculture continues. 
 
2.      The Government of India (GoI) recognizes the important role of agriculture in the ongoing 
rural-urban transformation process and the potential it represents as an important source of growth 
and job creation.  The GoI also recognizes the necessity of strategic shifts for structural 
transformation of Indian agriculture to tap into this potential of growth and job creation.  These 
shifts reflect underlying trends in demand for food and factors affecting the supply of agriculture 
produce, and include:  (i) a shift away from a focus on foodgrain production towards 
diversification into high value agriculture production of fruits, vegetables, dairy, etc.; (ii) a shift 
away from a focus on on-farm production towards value addition in the post-harvest segments of 
agriculture value chains; (iii) a shift away from a focus on productivity towards resilience of 
agriculture production systems for addressing the effects of climate change; and (iv) a shift away 
from a focus on agriculture production towards nutrition sensitive agriculture. 
 
3.       To facilitate these four shifts, GoI has launched a number of policies and initiatives since 
2014. These include, among others, a technology driven second green revolution with a focus on 
higher productivity and diversification; a “National Adaptation Fund” to meet the challenges on 
climate change; a nationwide District Level Incubation and Accelerator Programme” focusing on 
micro, small and medium enterprise (MSME) sector; and a scheme for promotion of a National 
Agricultural Market to accelerate the integrated development of agriculture marketing and trade. 
 
4. Consumer demand for food commodities in India is rapidly changing, fueled by strong 
economic growth.  The structural shift in consumption pattern away from cereals to high value 
agricultural commodities is seen both in rural and urban areas.  This in turn is generating growing 
domestic demand for higher quality/value agricultural commodities (including animal proteins) as 
the share of cereals and staples in food expenditure declines, whilst that of animal proteins, fruits 
and vegetables increases.  This provides opportunities for farmers to obtain higher incomes from 
increasingly smaller holdings. 
 
5. Signaled by changes in consumers’ food baskets, India’s agriculture and agri-food marketing 
system is poised for a profound transformation.  The agri-food marketing system is changing from 
ad hoc transactions towards coordinated systems like cooperatives, producers’ associations and 
contract farming.  Public policy has been proactive in facilitating this transformation.  The central 
and state governments have taken important policy initiatives, such as de-regulation of food 
industry, enactment of an integrated food law, de-monopolization of agricultural markets, 
reduction in excise duties on manufactured food products, and priority sector lending to food 
industry to strengthen agriculture-industry linkages. 

Food processing is a “sunrise sector” and its share in GDP is on a continuous rise, with a 
compound annual growth rate of 8.4 percent. According to the Annual Survey of Industries 
2012-13 the food processing sector ranks first amongst all industry groups, both in terms of total 
number of factories (16%) and  number of factories in operation (16%), and third in terms of total 
output (12%), next only to ‘coke and refined petroleum products’ and ‘basic metals’.  More 
importantly, this sector is the largest employer amongst all industry groups, accounting for 11.59 
per cent of industry employment in India.  Its employment intensity can be seen by the fact that 
for every INR 1 million invested, 18 direct jobs and 64 indirect jobs are created in organized food 
processing industry.  Furthermore, food in India has an economic multiplier of 2-2.5, thus 
implying that not only the food products industry can be the antidote for India’s jobless growth, 
but that such a scenario may come at a relatively low (fixed capital) cost. 
 
7. Transition to high value commodities and opportunities in agro-food processing underscores 
the enormous potential for commercialization and income growth in agriculture (including small 
holder) as production, consumption and trade shift from traditional food crops to horticulture and 
other non-traditional (high value) commodities.  Moreover, relative to other countries, India has 
considerable comparative advantages in having a very large (growing and largely un-tapped) 
domestic market, which reduces reliance on exports as the principal driver for near term 
agriculture growth.  Nonetheless, beyond the domestic market there are also strong comparative 
and competitive advantages in developing high value agricultural trade, which is currently 
negligible.
Sectoral and Institutional Context
8. In Assam, agriculture and related sectors are the principal occupation of the vast majority of 
rural population in terms of employment and livelihood. About 90 percent of state’s population 
lives in rural areas and is mostly dependent on agriculture for their livelihoods.  Agriculture and 
the allied sectors directly or indirectly support more than 75 percent of the population, providing 
employment to about 50 percent of the total workforce.  While the average operational holding in 
India is 1.10 hectare, Assam’s farmer families are predominantly small and marginal (85%) with 
an average land holding of only 0.63 hectare. 
 
9.      The recently concluded the Assam Agricultural Competitiveness Project (AACP) was 
instrumental in increasing cropping intensity, on-farm productivity and diversification of 
agriculture in the state. Supported by AACP and other Government of Assam (GoA) initiatives, 
high value horticulture has seen a significant growth in production - the annual growth rate of 
production of fruits, spices and vegetables was 19.2, 6.4 and 72.2 percent respectively in the last 
decade, with Assam contributing significantly to national production in commodities like ginger, 
banana, pineapple, litchi, etc. As such AACP has laid the foundations for long term agriculture 
transformation in the state by shifting the focus from rice production towards diversification into 
high value agriculture production (vegetables, spices, fish, dairy etc.).  This move towards higher 
value products offers opportunities to increase contribution of agriculture to Assam’s growth. 
 
10. Diversification to higher value commodities and opportunities in specialized commodities 
reflect significant opportunities and challenges for farming communities in Assam:  growing 
specialized commodities would need adoption of rapidly changing technologies and quality 
standards.  Smallholder farmers face significant challenges in learning about and adopting rapidly 
changing agriculture technologies.  The Bank supported AACP has successfully introduced the 
Agricultural Technology Management Agency (ATMA) model, a participatory, decentralized 



planning, funding and implementation of technology dissemination to district, block and village 
levels in partnerships with farmer groups, and different line departments.  While the ATMA 
platform has introduced improvements in technology transfer and demand driven extension, the 
current approach focuses mainly on production related issues.  Its capacity needs to be 
strengthened to enhance the ability of farmers to adopt efficient and market led production and 
post-harvest practices for meeting the volume, timing and quality requirements of different 
markets. 
 
11. The key constraints in structural transformation of agriculture in Assam are limited market 
access, poor post-harvest handling infrastructure and fragmented supply chains:  agriculture 
marketing in Assam is characterized by a multiplicity of regulatory authorities in the state (viz., 
local panchayats, municipalities and state agriculture marketing board).  Reforms would be 
needed not only to harmonize the regulatory regime in the state, but also for the development of 
alternative marketing options for farmers.  The supply chain is characterized by the dominance of 
middlemen at different levels, involving pre-harvest contractors, forwarding agents, commission 
agents, wholesalers, sub-wholesalers and retailers.  The existence of multiple intermediaries 
causes prices to snowball with each transaction.  Despite the comparative production advantage in 
agriculture and allied commodities, and emerging marketing opportunities, conversion of this 
advantage into competitive food processing industries has proved to be a challenge in the state.  
There is low investment in assets and limited technology penetration across the food processing 
sector in the state, even though this sector contributes about 22 percent of the industrial output 
and represents 26 percent of gross value add of the state.  The food processing sector is largely 
unorganized and operates on a small scale.  Facilitating the development of organized Micro, 
Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME) both for value addition and job creation, would require 
handholding, business facilitation services, and facilitation of access to financing, along with 
critical regulatory changes for agro and allied MSMEs to flourish in the state. 
 
12.     GoA recognizes that creating conditions for agriculture based rural transformation in the 
long term would require:  (i) a shift away from a focus on on-farm production towards value 
addition in the post-harvest segments of agriculture value-chains; (ii) a focus on productivity 
towards resilience of agriculture production systems in order to deal with the effects of climate 
change; and (iii) creating the necessary conditions for the emergence of a dynamic agri-business 
and enterprise sector in Assam.  Furthermore, GoA at the highest level is committed to 
transforming the agriculture and allied sector to a more commercial and market oriented 
production; promoting MSMEs and implementing necessary reforms for realizing the project 
goals. GoA has also stated its intention that this project will form the nucleus of a much larger 
government agribusiness and rural transformation program. Fundamentally this will involve 
mainstreaming of project’s initiatives in government programs and policies as well as 
convergence of various public programs to deliver along the objectives enshrined in this project. 
Especially the government will oversee the refocusing and strengthening of training and human 
resources program to support (agriculture) enterprise development activities in Assam.
Relationship to CAS/CPS/CPF
13.   The proposed World Bank support to this project is consistent with the current Country 
Partnership Strategy (CPS) for India (2013-2017). The CPS outlines Bank support to India under 
the three pillars of integration, transformation and inclusion with a cross-cutting focus on 
improving governance, environmental sustainability and gender equality.  The proposed project is 
aligned along at least two of these three pillars – transformation, and integration.  Under 
transformation, the project will directly help achieve one of the intended outcomes of the CPS, 



which is increase investor confidence and inward financial flows into the agriculture sector (CPS 
para 43).  The broader objective would be to instill a collective entrepreneurial spirit where 
producers shift from being “price takers” of primary produce, with no or very little influence over 
the market to being more business and value focused.  A key project thrust will be on enhancing 
agglomeration of producers to improve economies of scale in producing, processing and 
marketing.  In parallel with this, the project will support agriculture and livestock productivity 
(including value and incomes) through essential technology transfer in production and improved 
post-harvest and market operations, and also explore and pilot possible financing modalities to 
support entrepreneurship and agri-business (CPS outcome 2.4 para 86 and 89).  Overall, the 
support of the project to the development of higher value commodities and more efficient supply 
chains will underpin ongoing structural transformation of the economy (CPS para 34).  Under 
integration, the project offers the opportunity to increase gross state domestic product (GSDP) 
growth by stimulating private sector investment and agri-enterprise development in Assam, a 
special category state. (CPS, Outcome 1.4).  
 
14.   The project will also leverage the pent-up demand and natural resource advantages of the 
state as well as improve the investment climate (CPS para 72).  In particular, the focus will be on 
processed food, agribusiness, logistics and infrastructure, and MSME finance and insurance. The 
project will establish a new standard of excellence for entrepreneurship and business skills 
training by improving skills and knowledge transfer from trainers to MSMEs (CPS, Outcome 
1.3). Furthermore, the proposed project is aligned with the WBG’s goal of promoting shared 
prosperity.

C.  Proposed Development Objective(s)

Proposed Development Objective(s) (From PCN)
15. The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to “increase value-added and 
improve resilience in the production and processing of selected agriculture commodities, focusing 
on small farmers and agro-entrepreneurs in targeted districts”.  
 
16. Project beneficiaries will include farmers and entrepreneurs especially in the MSME 
segment.  Others would include farmer producer organizations, sector management companies, 
and other value chain participants.  During preparation, specific attention would be given to 
gender inclusion in project design and implementation arrangements. The methodology followed 
to identify targeted districts is elaborated in the Annex 3, attached to the PCN.

Key Results (From PCN)
17. The Key Project Indicators (KPI) will be:  
 
a) Increase in value addition by agri-enterprises; 
b) New agri-enterprises established in the targeted districts; 
c) Number of jobs created, including for women (percent); 
d) Increase in value of agricultural marketed output per farm (in formal partnership);  
e) Increase in market oriented production – (% of farmer and area under cultivation); and  
f) Direct project beneficiaries (number), of which female (percentage).

D.  Concept Description

18.   The proposed project would support, value addition in the production and post-harvest 
segments of selected agriculture value-chains; facilitate agribusiness investments through 


inclusive business models that provide opportunities to small farmers as well as stimulate the 
establishment of new small and medium agribusiness enterprises; and support resilience of 
agriculture production systems in order to better manage increasing production and commercial 
risks associated with climate change, in the targeted districts . The project would adopt a cluster 
strategy within the targeted districts to generate economies of scale; promote vertical and 
horizontal links between local agricultural enterprises; enable diffusion of innovations; leverage 
network externalities; and channel public support for services and infrastructure. By adopting a 
cluster approach, the project would enable all the value chain participants to develop competitive 
and innovative products that meet market demands rapidly and successfully. 
 
19.    The project would achieve the PDO by:  (i) promoting investments in agri-enterprises, 
reducing the business and transaction costs, facilitating access to finance for agribusiness 
entrepreneurs, and, where appropriate, push for process, regulatory and/or policy change; (ii) 
supporting the development of a modern supply chain; improved information communication 
technologies (ICT) based farm information and intelligence services, and alternative marketing 
channels; and (iii) improving producer’s access to knowledge, technologies and infrastructure so 
that they are able to respond to market opportunities and climate variability. 
 
20.    By simultaneously intervening along multiple dimensions of the growth nexus (business 
environment, key infrastructure, access to basic services, local governance), the proposed project 
aims to remove key constraints to business development and strengthen the platform for growth in 
agriculture and allied sectors within targeted districts.  By doing so, it will contribute to the key 
aspects of the GoI, GoA and the Bank’s CPS strategic objectives related to faster and broader 
agriculture sector growth and inclusive development. In line with the PDO, the project will have 
the following components. 
 
Component A: Support to Agri Enterprise Development 
 
21. The focus of this component to enhance the pace of agricultural enterprise growth and 
employment in the targeted districts.  This would be done by establishing a cohesive institutional 
platform, and securing increased private sector investment in the development of value chains, 
processing and marketing in the targeted districts. 
 
Component B: Farm - Market Infrastructure Development 
 
22. The focus of this component is to establish a modern supply chain from farm to market that 
would enable farmers and other value chain participants to access new markets. This would be 
done by enabling secondary and tertiary processing that creates higher value for the produce; 
improving value realization at the farm level through improved sorting, grading and packing of 
produce that enhances the average price realized; supporting a supply chain infrastructure that 
prevents wastage and value erosion in transportation, and allows access to more distant markets; 
and supporting the development and up-gradation of basic and agriculture-specific infrastructure, 
including transportation linkages, warehousing capacity and wholesale market facilities. 
 
Component C: Market-led Production and Resilience Enhancement 
 
23.  The focus of this component is to enable farmers in the targeted districts to take advantage of 
the rapidly changing consumer demand and ensuring resilience of agriculture production systems 


in order to better manage increasing production and risks associated with climate change.  This 
would be done by diversification of their farm production; and introduction of climate resilient 
solutions. 
 
Component D: Project Management, Monitoring and Learning 
 
24. This component will ensure effective implementation of the project activities and monitor and 
evaluate project implementation progress, outputs and outcomes, building on implementation 
experience of AACP.  The component will support: (i) establishment and operations of a Project 
Coordination Unit (PCU), which will oversee and coordinate activities of the implementing 
agencies of the project; (ii) establishment and operations of Project Implementation Units in the 
respective implementing agencies; and (iii) setting up of a monitoring and evaluation (M&E) 
system for the project, including a project management information system, and contracting an 
external M&E agency to monitor project activities and impact. This component will also finance 
dedicated staffing for the project activities, consultancies, training and related material, office 
equipment, and incremental operational costs. The Project will provide investment and technical 
support for the establishment of a sound management information system and information and 
communication technology (ICT) systems and accompanying capacity strengthening of key 
personnel. 
 
25.      Green House Gas (GHG) Accounting: In accordance with guidelines for IDA 17 projects, 
GHG accounting for the proposed Project will be undertaken during the preparation phase. This 
analysis will help to measure the impact of the project on the GHG footprint and also guide 
investments that contribute to climate mitigation, given that world-over agriculture investments 
account of 25% of the GHG emissions. The conceptual framework of the proposed project 
indicates there could be reduced GHG emissions and carbon sequestration benefits as a result of 
interventions such as adoption of improved cropland management, plant nutrient management and 
conservation farming practices, soil health/fertility enhancement, whereas increased emissions 
and decreased carbon stocks could result from cropland expansion and increased electricity and 
fuel consumption during past harvest management, processing and transportation.  There is a 
paucity of specific carbon accounting data for the agri-horticulture sector.  The implementing 
agency will coordinate with the relevant departments to collect the relevant data for these 
analyses.  Furthermore, the recently concluded AACP and other government and donor-aided 
projects will provide a basis for developing carbon balance estimates for the proposed project.  
This accounting exercise will be undertaken using established methodologies that are consistent 
with the international best practice to measure GHG emissions in the proposed project.  The ex-
ante carbon balance tool developed by FAO has been selected as the primary tool for GHG 
accounting in agriculture. The analysis will be carried out by a World Bank team during the 
project preparation phase in close collaboration with state government counterparts and will be 
finalized by project appraisal.

II. SAFEGUARDS
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis (if known)
Though the project location and boundaries are yet to be established, it is expected to cover most of 
the state, and would comprise of critical landscape features, ranging from hills and mountains on the 
one hand and floodplains and wetlands on the other. Water quality in Assam has often come under 
scrutiny for presence of natural fluorides, iron and arsenic. Assam is also endowed with a good forest 


cover and rich biodiversity that is well protected with several designated Protected Areas. The 
project will support small infrastructure development including rural roads that may require land and 
leading to minimal adverse impact on people including those who belong to Schedule Tribe, 
Schedule Caste and other vulnerable groups. Proposed agri-infrastructure development under the 
project could have adverse impacts on natural features, such as, wetlands, if not sited and built 
appropriately. Disposal of construction waste would require monitoring, as it could block natural 
drainage channels if dumped casually. Such impacts would necessitate an Environmental and Social 
Assessment (ESA) and management plans and/or framework for managing adverse environmental 
and social impacts and risks.

B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The state is well versed with the Bank’s safeguard policies, as it has, over the past several years, 
implemented the World Bank funded projects including the recently concluded Assam Agricultural 
Competitiveness Project (AACP) wherein the safeguards have been rated as Highly Satisfactory in 
the Implementation Completion and Results Report. The ARIAS society, earlier supported under 
AACP would be responsible for implementing the project’s environmental and social safeguards. 
ARIAS Society would be suitably staffed for this purpose. An ESA will be undertaken that would 
identify the potential adverse environmental and social impacts and risks. The ESA would develop 
and include an Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) that would have 
appropriate mitigation guidance for complying with the Bank’s safeguard polices. The proposed 
ESMF would draw from the experience of implementing the existing one for AACP and build upon 
new activities that would be supported under this project, including wider dissemination and use of 
the Integrated Pest Management Plan developed under AACP. A good reporting mechanism on 
safeguards already exists in AACP and will be continued. At present all project locations are not 
known, therefore the use of framework is proposed. The ESA would be undertaken based on a 
sample of locations covering most of the proposed investment activities under the project. Therefore, 
even though the nature and scope of investment activities would be known, it may so happen that 
actual physical locations may not be known until an advanced stage of preparation. Therefore, an 
ESA will be done during preparation but an ESMF would be used during implementation. As far as 
possible and as the project design evolves, the borrower would ensure that some of the sampling 
locations and sites for the ESA are actual locations/sites proposed for project interventions. In 
addition, the proposed ESMF would include a screening mechanism that would allow for preparation 
of specific EMPs to mitigate adverse impacts of infrastructure investments, once exact location and 
design of infrastructure activities are identified. These would be particularly required for rural feeder 
roads, rural markets and supply chain infrastructure. At this stage, neither the scope and nature of 
infrastructure investments nor the locations are known. By appraisal, the borrower will develop site-
specific EMPs for infrastructure whose locations have been determined and detailed technical 
designs completed.

C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Anupam Joshi (GEN06)
Mridula Singh (GSU06)

D. POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment Yes An ESA is required as the project is likely to support 

new activities that were not included in the recently 



OP/BP 4.01 completed AACP.

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes The State has a widespread network of naturally 
occurring wetlands (beels) and would require 
mapping of potential impacts through project 
supported infrastructure and other agricultural 
investments.

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No The project is unlikely to bring any management 
changes to the State’s forest resources that are 
governed under a robust national law.

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes There is likelihood of use of pesticides and other 
agrochemicals once project investments are realized. 
The project would promote the wider use of the Pest 
Management Plan and Integrated Pest Management 
Plan that was developed under AACP.

Physical Cultural Resources 
OP/BP 4.11

No The project will not impact any physical, cultural 
and/or religious sites and will be implemented in 
areas where agriculture is already practiced.

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 
4.10

Yes The policy is triggered, accordingly a Tribal 
Development Framework will be prepared to address 
impact. It will also include an action plan to ensure 
that equal opportunities are provided to access 
benefits.

Involuntary Resettlement OP/
BP 4.12

Yes The policy is triggered as land may be required for 
the small infrastructure and rural roads. Resettlement 
Policy Framework including Social Management 
Framework will be prepared.

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No The project will not support construction, 
refurbishment and replacement of equipment etc. of 
any dams. It also does not support rehabilitation of 
existing or building any new irrigation schemes 
originating from existing dams in the State.

Projects on International 
Waterways OP/BP 7.50

TBD During project preparation applicability of this policy 
would be determined based on a technical analysis.

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/
BP 7.60

No Project activities do not fall in any disputed areas.

E. Safeguard Preparation Plan
1. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS
01-Sep-2016
2. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be 
needed. The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage 
ISDS.
The safeguards documentation would require four to six months for completion from the time it is 
started. We expect it to be ready by September 2016.



























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Cashew Value-Chain Competitiveness Project (P158810) 

 
 
 

Project Information Document/ 
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 09-Sep-2016 | Report No: PIDISDSC18646 

  BASIC INFORMATION 
     

  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Cote d'Ivoire P158810  Cashew Value-Chain 
Competitiveness 
Project (P158810) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA Mar 01, 2017 Jun 22, 2017 Agriculture 

Lending Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Economy and 
Finance 

Ministry of 
Agriculture,Ministry of 
Mines and Industry 

 

 

 Financing (in USD Million) 

 

Financing Source Amount  

International Bank for Reconstruction and Development  175.00  

Total Project Cost  175.00  

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

A-Full Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

  

Other Decision (as needed) 
 

Type here to enter text 
 
B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
 

Following its independence, Côte d’Ivoire occupied a unique place in Africa. For two decades, the country experienced political stability, high 

growth and sustained poverty reduction.  Ample natural resources and favorable terms of trade for its main agricultural exports helped the 

country achieve a strong economic performance which, by the end of the 1970s made Côte d’Ivoire the major player of the West African 

Monetary and Economic Union. By 1980 the country was the world's leading exporter of cocoa and Africa's leading exporter of pineapples, 

palm oil, rubber and bananas. Gross Domestic Product (GDP) grew steadily during that period at average 6 percent per year. The surpluses 

generated by agriculture alone have enabled the country to have a relatively large industry, whose contribution to GDP reached 23 percent in 

1982. It is also principally due to agriculture that Ivoirians enjoyed the highest annual per capita income in the West African sub-region, 

including Nigeria. A sharp reversal began in 1980 as terms of trade deteriorated precipitously and the CFAF became increasingly overvalued. 

From 1981 to 1992, annual GDP growth averaged -0.2 percent and Côte d’Ivoire slipped from the rank of middle income countries into the low 



income group. The devaluation of the CFAF in 1994 triggered an economic rebound, but this was soon undermined by the political crisis which 

began in 1999
1
. During this period which lasted until 2011, the increase in the depth and severity of poverty was dramatic all over the country. 

Côte d’Ivoire’s economic performance over the past four years has been impressive. Renewed political stability, concurrently with structural 

reforms
2
 to improve the business climate

3
 and supportive fiscal policy enabled a strong pickup in economic activity. Over the last 4 years, 

economic activity expanded by 9 percent a year on average translating, into an increase in real per capita income of more than 20 percent. In 

2015, real GDP grew by 8.6 percent driven by strong investment and private consumption. Inflation remained subdued, reflecting ample 

domestic food production and imported consumer products. In response to the rebound of economic growth, the poverty incidence in the 
country slightly diminished from an estimated 51 percent in 2011 to 46 percent in 2015

4
, but other human development indicators have been 

slow to improve. Efforts were made during the period 2012–15 to make growth more inclusive by increasing the farm price for coffee and 

cocoa and other agriculture products and improving basic infrastructure in rural areas. Nevertheless, the country is still facing several 

challenges, including significant disparities across the country in terms of education attainment, heath services, employment, and income.  

Challenges ahead – poverty and inequality. Poverty continues to be overwhelmingly rural with disparities in access to basic services, and 

gender disparities across wealth and urban-rural groups. People living below the poverty line tend to be unemployed and are from large 

households, the agricultural sector, and weak educational background. Poverty is also found to be more common among the young: 51.4 

percent of Ivoirians younger than 25 years are classified as poor, while poverty rates in other age groups vary from 35 to 39 percent. The 

recently concluded Bank Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) shows that poverty is significantly concentrated in rural areas and in the 

Northern parts of the country (where the potential for agriculture has not yet been realized), while greater Abidjan is becoming ever more 

dominant in the country’s economy. Poverty rates are 69 percent in North versus 25 percent in the South (within the southern regions, poverty 

rates tend to increase from East to West). While spatial inequality worsened during most of the crisis period, the rural-urban divide continued 

to grow even during the recent recovery. Such unbalanced - mostly Abidjan centric - development is unsustainable; both economically, because 

it relies on too few sectoral and regional drivers and socially, because it does not tackle the roots of fragility in the cou ntry. The 2015 Human 

Development Report ranked Côte d’Ivoire at 172 out of 188 countries (far below neighboring Ghana in 140
th

 place), with an overall Human 

Development Index below the average for sub-Saharan Africa. 

Côte d’Ivoire ambitious development agenda - making the country an emerging market economy. Following last October’s peaceful 

presidential elections, political uncertainties have diminished, paving the way for continued economic progress. The medium-term outlook is 

favorable. Economic activity is projected to remain strong at 8.5 percent in 2016, and 7.4 percent per year on average in 2017–20. The 

Government has recently adopted a new 2016–20 National Development Plan (NDP)
5
 aimed at achieving strong and inclusive growth - halving 

poverty and fostering structural transformation. To support the structural transformation foreseen under the NDP, the Government intends to 

pursue further reforms to improve the business climate and strengthen the private sector contribution in the economy, including in the form of 

a public-private partnership. This will involve creating new opportunities for diversification based on the country’s comparative advantages and 

fostering sustainable integration into regional and global value chains. A greater impetus will be given to stimulating industrial production - 

moving to higher domestic value-added products through the local transformation of a larger share of agricultural products (especially cocoa 

and cashew). The Government has set a target of at least fifty percent of cacao beans domestically processed and eventually more for cashew 

nuts by 2020. In attaining this targeted, the Government is also seeking to increase the participation of nationally domiciled entities in cacao 

and cashew processing, and is assessing options regarding policies that could encourage growth of small- and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) 

in both sectors. Successful NDP implementation will depend on the pace at which the main structural barriers are removed and productivity-

enhancing reforms are carried out, as well as on financing conditions and how domestic and external risks are addressed.  The authorities have 

expressed an interest in a new Fund arrangement to support the NDP objectives, including the IBRD-Enclave financing mechanism.  

 

                                            
1
 Between 1985 and 2008, the estimated share of the population living below the poverty line increased from around 10 percent to about 49 percent. 

2
 The Government has undertaken a number of important economic reforms and reached the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries completion point in June 2012. 

3
 According to the World Bank “Doing Business Index”, Cote d’Ivoire has gained some 25 places in the world ranking, from 2011 to 2016 and ranked among the 10 best 

reformers in 2014 and 2015. Côte d’Ivoire was also ranked among the fastest improving countries on Transparency International’s Corruption Perception Index, rising 
from 154

th
 in 2011 to 115

th
 in 2014. Comparing the Mo Ibrahim Index of African Governance, the country has shown the largest improvements in overall governance 

on the continent over the last four years. 
4
 2015 Living Standards Monitoring Survey (LSMS – ENV2015). 

5
 The NDP is based on four strategic pillars: (i) enhancing the quality of institutions and governance; (ii) stepping-up the development of human capital and promoting 

social well-being; (iii) speeding up structural transformation and industrialization; and (iv) strengthening the infrastructure base while preserving the environment.  




Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 

Cote d’Ivoire’s economy and growth have been driven by commodity-based exports and this will remain the key in the medium-term. The 

most important export crops – cocoa, rubber, palm oil, cotton and cashew – are also the main sources for smallholders’ income as well as the 

center-piece of the country’s major farming systems. Cocoa, rubber and oil palm are at the center of the forest zone’s diversified production 

mix with smallholders generally maintaining a wide variety of cash and food crops (rice, cassava, plantain). Cotton and cashew are the main 

cash crops and drivers of the savanna economy and farming systems (which include maize, rice and livestock), where cotton in particular has 

important spill-over effects on food crop productivity through the use of improved technology.  

The agricultural sector currently accounts for 22 percent of GDP, over three-quarters of non-oil exports, and provides employment and 

income to two-thirds of all households. Côte d’Ivoire is the world’s largest producer of cacao and has become the largest producer and 

exporter of raw cashew nuts (RCN). The country remains also the largest exporter of rubber, oil palm, bananas, pineapples and copra in Africa 

and is self-sufficient in a variety of staple foods – maize, sorghum, millet, yam, cassava, plantain banana – with some small exports to the sub-

region. The impact of production of export commodities extend to several other sectors through forward and backward linkages - inputs, 

processing, transport, financial services, taxes, energy and final consumption and therefore play a key role in the country for the creation of job 

opportunities and poverty reduction. In fact, the domestic trade and transport industry (trucking and port) depends to a large extend on 

agriculture for its business. Similarly, agro-processing industries such as cotton ginneries, rubber, palm oil and sugar factories provide the base 

for rural industry, while an important component of urban industry is made up of cocoa processing plants, textile cottonseed oil operations, 

packaging materials, second stage transformation of oil palm into soaps, cosmetics, etc.  

While significant results have been achieved in improving the agriculture sector’s performance in recent years, it is facing several constraints 

that negatively impact its sustainable development. These include a range of technical and circumstantial issues, such as limited access to 

inputs; weak extension services; considerable post-harvest handling, transportation and storage losses; inadequate exposure to modern 

farming techniques, and aging and poor maintenance of existing plantations. These limitations are compounded by structural economic factors, 

such as access to finance (in particular for SMEs), deteriorating physical infrastructure, and limited public goods, all of which have contributed 

to the long-term stagnation of productivity and low value addition. Tackling these constraints can unleash the agricultural sector potential and 

increase its participation into global value chains involving many agro-food items and agro-industries in high demand regionally and/or 

worldwide - attracting major investments which can stimulate economic growth along with creating value, scaling-up innovation, and achieving 

the country’s overarching objective to ensure the population’s wellbeing by reducing poverty and inequality, through structural transformation 

of the economy. 

THE CASHEW SECTOR: COTE D’IVOIRE – AN INCREASINGLY IMPORTANT ORIGIN FOR RCN AND PROCESSING. In 2015, Côte d’Ivoire became 

the world’s largest producer of RCN, with a production of 702,000 tons, or 21 percent of the world’s total production. The value of 2015 

cashew exports is estimated at over US$ 650 million, which makes cashew the third most important export commodity after cacao and refined 

petroleum products, but ahead of rubber, cotton and coffee
6
. The importance of cashew production is even more critical when viewed in a 

regional and poverty reduction context. It is grown by about 250,000 households (about 1.5 million persons) in the poorer, northern half of the 

country, where cashew has become the most important source of rural cash income. It is clearly an exciting source of growth with the added 

advantage of having the potential to generate better and inclusive rural employment through farming and rural industrialization. Provided that 

a comprehensive strategy addressing the Ivoirian cashew value chain competitiveness constraints is put in place, overall growth in the value of 

cashew exports by 15 percent p.a. over the next decade seems feasible
7
.  

However, the cashew value chain in Cote d’Ivoire faces several constraints hindering its development. Figure 1 below summarizes these 

constraints and their level of intensity. They concern: (i) the governance of the value-chain; (ii) the quality of the nuts that are heterogeneous in 

size and often of bad quality due to inadequate harvesting and post-harvesting methods; (iii) the high investment cost, including equipment 

and spare parts; (iv) the lack of technical and managerial skills and the low productivity of the labor force; (v) the difficulty in accessing credit, 

for both investments and working capital, and the high cost of this credit when available; (vi) the international buyers’ perceived risk of 

sourcing kernel supply from African processors; (vii) the investor’s perception of a relatively unfriendly sector policies and business 

environment; and (viii) the poorly developed rural infrastructure. 

 

                                            
6
 Gross farmer receipts in 2015 are estimated at US$ 400 million (CFAF 250 billion), now way ahead of those of cotton (US$ 180 million), the traditional cash crop of 

the north. A comparison in terms of net farmer receipts would be even more favorable, since cotton involves much higher input costs (about 1/3 of gross receipts). 
7
 World Bank, 2012. Côte d’Ivoire, The Growth Agenda: Building on Natural Resources and Exports. Report No. 62572-CI.   



The past expansion of Cote d’Ivoire cashew production has been extraordinary. Production has been growing by over 20 percent per annum 

over the last two decades (from 6000 tons in 1990 to 63,000 tons in 2000 to over 702,000 tons in 2015). However, this rapid increase in RCN 

production has been largely driven by an expansion in the planted area rather than by productivity gains. Although plantations are in general 

relatively young (66 percent less than 25 years old), they have been established with low-productivity planting material (unimproved tree 

varieties from home saved seeds) and farmers tend to apply virtually no inputs apart from family labor. Treatment for disease and insects is 

rare, harvesting practices leave much to be desired, and drying and storage are poorly done. As a result, productivity is low (300kg/ha) 

compared with other producers in South and South-East Asia (India 850kg/ha and Vietnam 1,000kg/ha) and Ivoirian cashew nuts suffer an 

average price discount of about 15 percent compared to the average price for African cashew exports to India. While this low intensity 

approach is well suited to low income, risk adverse decision making processes, there is clearly room for significant improvement in productivity 

as knowledge is shared and internal market linkages strengthen. In addition, low productivity at the production base increases aggregation 

costs over poor road networks. Low levels of pruning and tree maintenance increase harvesting time and negatively impact nut size and 

quality.  

Despite being a major producer of RCN, Cote d’Ivoire only processes around 5 to 7 percent of its production. The vast majority of RCN 

exported goes to India and Vietnam with 85 percent exported by foreign owned companies based in India, Singapore and Vietnam. The balance 

is traded by 10 domestic cooperatives/enterprises who in turn have pre-finance links with foreign companies
8
. While some competition 

between buyers may exist, there are also suspicions of anti-competitive practices, and this dependence on two countries could be a problem. 

The existing installed processing capacity of RCN in Cote d’Ivoire is estimated at 75,000Mt (with an actual use of only 50 percent). Moreover, 

nearly all processed cashew in 2015 came from two factories with a combined capacity of 42,000Mt. These numbers highlight not only the 

huge imbalance between RCN exports and processed quantities but, the socio-economic losses to the Ivorian economy. If only 50 percent of 

the harvest was processed locally, over 100,000 jobs could be created (of which at least 60 percent women), delivering more than $100 million 

                                            
8
 The dominance of foreign based companies is explained by the historical significance of India as a processor of RCN from origins worldwide. Foreign processors and 

trading companies are often multi-commodity and spread trading/market risk and overheads over a number of value chains. Larger companies have international 
credit lines that underwrite borrowing from local banks for working capital needs through the buying season. Companies trading into India have established links to 
large domestic consumer markets as well as developed trading relationships with roasters and retailers in the US and Europe.   




in wage per years to the local economy and primarily in the impoverished north
9
. Other gains will be obtained for the country in the form of 

foreign exchange value of exports
10

 and the cashew shells could be processed into biofuel and used for electricity generation in rural areas.  

It is time to move from raw cashew exports to domestic processing. Clearly there are solid socio-economic reasons for expanding the 
processing sector in Cote d’Ivoire on a number of fronts, including a vibrant market and a strategic cashew supply chain context: (i) The high 

dependence on Vietnam (70 percent) is seen as a risk factor for international buyers of cashew kernels
11

. An alternative is needed accentuated 

by the loss of supply from India (exports falling as domestic consumption grows) and Brazil (falling production); (ii) the growing weight of Cote 

d’Ivoire in the overall supply of the market and its proximity from both the European and US markets, are focusing the attention of processors 

and end-users on Ivoirian producers; (iii) the possibility to create shorter, more traceable value chains, is a very powerful incentive for 

consumers to source their kernels directly in Cote d’Ivoire. Currently, kernels processed in India and Vietnam come from a variety of sources 

and reach the European and US markets indirectly, after a long and largely untraceable chain. Local processing means a significant cut in 

transport costs by eliminating the shipping of raw cashews to Asia for processing and shipping the kernels back to the European and US market. 

The more direct route, and the sourcing from a unique producer also permit to better meet the European market’s increasing emphasis on 

traceability from farm to fork. Downstream in the supply chain, food manufacturers and retailers are generally shortening their chains as well 

(in terms of supply networks and relations), thus operating increasingly with a limited number of preferred suppliers (importers and producers) 

to which they transfer the responsibility for traceability and product safety and quality
12

. In addition, shorter transportation lines diminish the 

carbon footprint of the cashew value chain, which is an interesting environmentally-friendly proposition and a definite competitive advantage 

of Ivoirian processors; and (iv) there is yet an untapped potential opportunity in organic cashew certified production. The current lack of use of 

chemical inputs would facilitate a fast transition to organic production and make Cote d’Ivoire unique in the World with premium product at 

lower cost.  Finally, in term of RCN production, future impact of climate change on crops such as cacao is expected to lead to a reduction of the 

areas suitable for cocoa which will then become suitable for cashews as it is drought and wind resistant. 

However, even with an abundance of raw material, levels of investment in processing have been very low and existing capacity 

underutilized. The debate about the competitiveness of the processing cashew in Cote d’Ivoire has evolved over the past 10 years. The broad 

conclusion drawn by sector experts is that processing locally could be competitive provided a number of key criteria are met. These include: 

selection and use of efficient semi-mechanized processing equipment, management by experienced and specialized staff and a well-trained, 

disciplined workforce. Studies also highlight potential competitive risks to a domestic processing sector in the form of high labor costs, lower 

productivity, access to and cost of capital, food safety and traceability standards, constantly evolving improvements in technology at processing 

centers of India and Vietnam driving competitive advantage and un-hedged risks in differentials between RCN and processed kernel prices
13

. 

Promoting domestic processing will therefore require implementing a comprehensive value-chain development approach with some 

incentives, carefully managed to avoid penalizing the farmers or protecting inefficient enterprises. If an export tax is used, its proceeds should 

be channeled into a program not only to promote domestic processing, but also to raise crop yields which are far below those of competing 

Asian countries. Public research and extension should be strengthened as well as the regulatory framework which is needed to improve 

coordination without hampering the dynamism of the private sector.  

THE CASHEW WORLD MARKET CONTEXT. The international global trade in both raw and processed cashew nuts has evolved greatly over the 

last 15 years.  Trade in processed nuts (kernels) has grown from around 234,000Mt in 2000 to over 680,000Mt in 2015. This represents an 

annual growth rate of 9.3 percent over the period. The main consumption markets are India, the USA and Europe that account for 75 percent 

of total consumption.  Demand is driven by a combination income-economic growth and dietary trends related to health and lifestyle. Global 

kernel demand is predicted to increase over the following decade, albeit at lower rates than the recent past. The US and European markets 

where cashew is essentially a snack food are price sensitive and are substituted with nuts such as almonds. Indian consumption is largely as a 

cooked food ingredient where broken nuts are widely used and increasingly as a festival related gifts. Demand in East Asia is predicted to 

remain strong as a growing middle class consumes higher value food products. Raw cashew nuts are produced in four main geographical 

regions: South East Asia, West Africa, East Africa and Brazil. World production reached an estimated 3.5 million Mt in 2015 with around 45 

percent originating in Asia, 45 percent in West Africa and the balance from East Africa and Brazil. Global RCN production is estimated to grow 

                                            
9
 Calculation based on 350,000 MT of RCN. It is estimated that RCN processing creates around one full time job per 3-4Mt of nuts processed.   

10
 The raw cashew nut accounts for 34 percent of the final product value, while shelling adds another 8 percent and roasting and salting an additional 16 percent. 

11
 Today Vietnam depends on imports for 70 percent of its needs of RCN. There is a highly risky chain where the US for example buys 70 percent of its needs from 

Vietnam which in turn buys 70 percent of its needs in West Africa. The US buyer depends on the West African farmer but has no influence in that market.   
12

 Although they don’t require full traceability, EU buyers expect suppliers to know and document their own buyers and suppliers (one step forward and one step back 
in the chain), which products are used during production process, and to label final products for traceability in case of a food safety problem. 
13

 Increasing quality and traceability demands are not being met by Vietnamese processors. There are multiple quality problems and food safety issues (especially 
foreign matter) and much confidence has been lost among buyers. In addition, labor conditions in Vietnamese factories constitute a risk for buyers. 


to around 4.5 million Mt by the year 2020.  RCN production has been growing at an annual rate of around 5.7 percent per annum, noticeably 

slower than that for processed kernels.   

Future predictions of supply and demand suggest continued growth in both parameters.  However, two key factors are likely to impact 

significantly on Ivorian (and West African) growers and processors. Firstly, it is expected that demand for processed kernels will out-strip supply 

of RCN globally. This will continue to drive RCN prices higher with increased volatility as the gap widens. Secondly, production of RCN is either 

flat or declining in other origins with the result that Africa, and in particular Cote d’Ivoire, will become increasingly a dominant player in RCN 

production. West Africa RCN production is rising in response to higher prices internationally although will inevitably lag behind due to the four-

year establishment period of the crop.  

The international price for cashew kernels (quotes in USD/Lb) is a “spot price” derived through open market negotiations between buyers 

and sellers. There is no formally quoted futures market contract and there no derivative or proxy hedges available. International prices have 

been stable over extended periods but with two significant upward spikes in 2008 and 2011. The first spike was brought to an end due to the 

turmoil in financial markets worldwide and the second resulted from concern about RCN availability due to poor crops in east and west Africa. 

In 2011 prices peaked at over $4.00/Lb ($8,800 per Mt) only to fall back to the current range of $3.50-3.90/Lb or $7,700-8580 Mt for 

benchmark grade WW320. The international kernel price in processing countries is translated back to a farm gate RCN price at origin though a 

series of complex interactions. The current supply/demand situation appears to be driving up RCN prices to levels where highly efficient 

processors in India and Vietnam can make adequate profit margins. Processors at origin in West Africa operating at lower processing efficiency 

and poorly developed relationships with consuming markets, claim to be in negative gross margin territory when RCN prices reach 500 CFAF 

per kg (or $841 Mt).   

CASHEW SECTOR INSTITUTIONAL CONTEXT. The Government of Cote d’Ivoire has recognized the potential for job creation and value addition 

through expansion of domestic cashew processing. It has included the development of the cashew sector, and cashew processing in particular, 

as a national priority in its NDP 2016-20 and its National Agricultural Investment Plan (NAIP). In 2013, the authorities has adopted a reform of 

the sector and the main lines of a strategy for the promotion of domestic cashew processing (prepared jointly by the Ministry of Industry and 

Mines, the Ministry of Agriculture, the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Environment).  

The 2013 reform focuses on improving on-farm productivity, marketing of RCN and strengthening the management of the value chain. It 

includes the following main pillars: (i) The establishment of a public Agency “Council for Cotton and Cashew - CCA”
14

  in charge of coordinating 

and promoting the development of the cashew (and cotton) sector, by providing the necessary regulations of all activities in the sector, 

organizing the provision of  critical services, supporting the strengthening of producer associations and the creation of a strong 

Interprofessional body for the management of the value chain; (ii) Programs for strengthening research, the production and distribution of 

improved planting material, the improvement of advisory services for providing technical support to farmers on good agricultural practices and 

harvest/post-harvest methods to improve quality of RCN; (iii) The establishment of efficient quality control and traceability mechanisms; (iv) 

The establishment of a new producer price mechanism guaranteeing a farm-gate price of at least 60 percent of the CIF
15

 price of RCN; (v) The 

rationalization of domestic marketing through the establishment of a network of licensed warehouses; and (vi) The rehabilitation of rural roads 

in the main producing areas. Most of these activities are already under implementation, financed by the levies imposed on the value chain (and 

with the support of the IDA-financed PSAC
16

 and IFC). However, the implementation of these activities remain unfunded and should be 

accelerated to be able to respond to the Government’s objective of increasing the percentage of domestically processed RCN by 2020. 

Especially attention must also be paid to building the capacity of the CCA and improving the governance of producers’ organizations. There are 

many cooperatives and other village-level groups, but they are mainly focused on collecting the harvest. They offer few other services, have 

little knowledge of the market, and are generally poorly governed. There are also several federations of producers’ organizations but they do 

not do much better, so that producers’ interests are poorly represented in the inter-profession. A considerable effort will be needed to build a 

legitimate structure to support improved practices and to speak on behalf of farmers, starting with a census of sector. 

The Ministry of Industry and Mines is implementing a parallel set of reforms and policies aimed at developing the processing sector.  These 

include clarification of the regulatory framework, public infrastructure development, assistance in processing technology procurement and 

                                            
14

 The CCA was created in 2013 to take over the functions of two previous bodies: The Autorité de Regulation du Coton et de l’Anacarde, created in 2002 as the sector 
regulatory body, and Intercajou, the value chain Interprofessional body responsible for the management and coordination of value chain private actors.  The CCA has 
the mission of developing the productivity of the entire value chain from production to the processing sector. It plays a regulatory role in the sector, in addition to its 
development and price stabilization mandates. 
15

 CIF: Cost Insurance and Freight - Seller must pay the costs and freight includes insurance to bring the goods to the port of destination. However, risk is transferred to 
the buyer once the goods are loaded on the ship. 
16

 Agricultural Development Support Project (P119308) 

facilitating access to finance. Specific measure taken include reduction of duty on imported capital equipment and spare parts, exemption from 

“Benefice Industrial et Commercial – BCI” and land acquisition taxes, reduced costs of environmental and social impact assessment studies, 

plans for the creation of agro-industrial parks in Yamoussoukro, Bouake and other regional centers, developing a cooperative research Centre 

with FHB Technical Institute and Ho Chi Minh University for the transfer of technologies, technical staff training and technical assistance to 

private sector investors. Furthermore, CCA and the Ministry of Industry and Mines are working with commercial banks and IFC to establish a 

“Risk-Sharing” guarantee fund to provide working capital to processors primarily for RCN purchase and inventory funding. IFC and WB are also 

working with Government Agencies to finalize laws regulating the issue of warehouse receipts that will lower the cost of holding processing 

inventory.   

The need for additional incentives and reforms. The measures already taken to improve the incentives in favor of cashew processing, although 
a necessary and significant first step, may not be sufficient to mobilize the volume of private investments necessary to achieve Government’s 
very ambitious objective. At the present time, Côte d’Ivoire is not competitive with India and Vietnam in the processing of raw cashew nuts. 
Operating large processors in the country, although using the most efficient technology, are facing difficulties to make a profit at the price they 
have to pay in order to be competitive with raw nut exporters. Lack of technical and managerial skills, labor productivity, building and utility 
costs, interest rates, and taxes (official and unofficial) provide part of the explanation. But a bigger problem is the need to constitute a large 
stock of raw material, and finance it at prevailing high interest rates, in order to keep the factory running during the eight months between the 
end of one harvest and the start of the next one. Indian firms can avoid most of this expense by purchasing from different regions of the world 
at different times.  
 
Promoting more processing of raw cashew nuts in Cote d’Ivoire - the way forward. The Government has reviewed what other measures may 
be taken to spur the development of the Ivorian processing industry, on the basis of the lessons learned from other cashew processing 
countries. It is a fact that all other countries with a significant processing capacity have provided some protection in order to promote value 
addition. Brazil has adopted a ban on the export of raw cashew nuts while India, Vietnam, and Mozambique have relied on export taxes on raw 
cashew nuts in the range of 18 to 40 percent, combined with other fiscal incentives. Once such reforms and policies are in place in Cote 
d’Ivoire, a number of significant barriers to entry will be removed. However, some of the main issues causing a lack of competitiveness such as 
labor cost and productivity, technological/processing efficiency and inventory management will take time to overcome. To address these 
issues, CCA is proposing a processing subsidy on exported processed kernels of 80CFA per kg ($135 per Mt) to generate sufficient margins to 
bridge the competitiveness gap and provide a return on invested capital. This processing subsidy is to be funded from a 30 CFA per kg tax on 
RCN exports (about 4 percent of 2016 CFR prices

17
) which will be passed down the value chain to the farm gate. As a result, it will be RCN 

growers who are in effect funding the establishment of the processing sector. There are equity issues associated with this transfer of value 
between a large number of poor rural families to factory owners and their workforce that policy will need to balance. It would thus be 
necessary to use part of these proceeds for the benefit of the producers (who are financing them) to mitigate the negative impact of the levy 
on farm-gate prices and rural incomes. Factories located in the production areas may well employ family members of producing households. 
Higher disposable income from processing workers will also increase other economic activities in the immediate rural economy. But, additional 
investments in the value chain should be considered such as:  (i) boosting agricultural productivity by distributing improved planting material 
and promoting GAPs; and (ii) reducing marketing/transport costs by rehabilitating/constructing rural roads and/or financing other rural 
infrastructure (storage, access to water, etc.)

18
. These investments will increase producer’s productivity (yields and quality) and will lower 

transaction costs in aggregation. This assumes an institutional structure capable of managing significant sums in a transparent matter and 
accountable to the farmers, avoiding the neglects experienced in the coffee-cocoa sector. The industry should be also monitored closely to 
ensure that firms are becoming competitive and that the tax is not serving to protect inefficiency. Ideally, this form of infant-industry 
protection should decline over time to keep the pressure on its beneficiaries to improve their productivity. This principle should be retained, 
especially as the investment climate improves and the profitability of this activity is confirmed.  
 
Ultimately, the development of a processing industry through limited protection and support may be justified as a risk-mitigation measure 
in view of the fact that the alternative is continued dependence on two importing countries. Not to build up local processing capacity could 
mean jeopardizing the entire sector, a sector in which Côte d’Ivoire has proven its comparative advantage in producing the raw material, and 
where it should be competitive in processing under the right conditions and with appropriate incentives in place. Against this background, the 
proposed World Bank loan aims to support the Ivorian Government’s plan to expand RCN processing in Cote d’Ivoire from the current estimate 
of 5-7 percent of production to over 30 percent. Crop production estimates foresee the national crop levelling at around 1.2m Mt of RCN per 
year which implies domestic processing of 400,000 Mt RCN or about 80,000-96,000 Mt of processed kernels depending on the outturn of 
cashew nut kernels

19
.  

                                            
17

 Cost and freight (CFR) is a trade term requiring the seller to arrange for the carriage of goods by sea to a port of destination, and provide the buyer with the 
documents necessary to obtain the goods from the carrier. 
18

 This practice is already being implemented in the case in the cacao, the rubber and the oil palm sectors.  
19

 The outturn of cashew nut kernels is equal to the amount of usable kernels after shelling the cashew nuts. Generally, outturn ranges between 20 and 24%, but can 
be

Succeeding on achieving the Government objective of enhanced value-added transformation will depend not only on increased domestic 

processing, but most importantly on improving the whole cashew value-chain performance and competitiveness. This will entail priority 

setting and funding to increase on-farm yields that remain low, continued strengthening of sector institutions, modernization of marketing, and 

prepare and adapt cashew processing industries and their environment to the requirements of the international markets. Specifically, the 

following key factors will need to be taken into account: (i)  Supply of cashew nuts to processing at competitive costs and adequate quality 

which will depend on overcoming on-farm production challenges and developing basic rural and post-harvest/marketing infrastructure; (ii) For 

domestic processors (and for exporters), clarity of vision on how on-farm productivity will evolve – geographically and with what pace - impacts 

the efficiency of subsequent value chain activities and the profitability of investment decisions. Scale and location of additional processing 

facilities, and building of input supply networks, depend on whether farm production remains low productivity and dispersed, or will begin to 

concentrate geographically and amongst fewer, more professional farmers. Bringing the current spectrum of views closer together therefore 

offers the potential for lower risks and higher interest in additional processing investment, or at the least, lower risks of inefficiently placed 

investment (in space and time); (iii) Local processing industries and enterprises will require to be modernized with the aim to improve their 

competitiveness in terms of price, quality and innovation and also their ability to follow and assimilate the development of technologies and 

markets. This will involve promoting a process of upgrading, modernizing of production tools and industrial subsystems, strengthening 

managerial capacities, developing quality and adopting international standards; (iv) Support measures tailored to SMEs (including taxes and 

other policy adjustments) will have be promoted to enhance their contribution to domestic processing and to boost the creation of jobs for 

young people. Innovation and skill development will contribute significantly to this process by making the most of the demographic dividend; 

and (v) Support in the improvement of other essential infrastructure for industrial activity (access to energy, roads networks, technology 

centers, etc.) is also essential, particularly in disadvantaged regions in northern Cote d’Ivoire. 

 
Relationship to CPF 
 

The proposed Cashew Value Chain Competitiveness Project is aligned with the Country Partnership Framework for the Republic of Cote 

d’Ivoire and supports the achievement of the WBG’s twin goals of reducing extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity. Côte d’Ivoire 

wants to promote sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic growth, full and productive employment and decent work in agriculture, 

manufacturing and selected services. To help the country reach its potential as world‐class agricultural commodity producer, the CPF program 

FY16-FY19 proposes to address low productivity and jobs in the agriculture, agribusiness and manufacturing value chains, among other within 

the cashew value-chain, which offers high potentials for economic growth, jobs creation and poverty reduction.  

In this respect, the proposed project supports the CPF main Focus Area 1 “Accelerating sustainable private sector-led growth in Cote d’Ivoire” 

and its Strategic Objective 1 “Improve productivity in Agriculture/Agribusiness value chains” to achieve inclusive growth and reduce poverty. 

It supports also the Strategic Objective 3 “Improve business regulatory framework and access to finance” to promote investment in 

agriculture/agribusiness, help spur entrepreneurship and growth opportunities, especially for SMEs.  

The proposed project addresses also the World Bank Africa Region priorities of Agri-business and is well aligned with the Agriculture Global 

Practice’s key priorities areas of inclusive value chains, jobs and partnership with the private sector. It is also consistent with the IFC‐WB Joint 

Agribusiness Strategy, which supports agriculture and agri‐business competitiveness in selected value chains, by improving access to markets, 

provision of technology and training of smallholders, and sector governance reforms.  

 
 

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)        
 
To increase cashew productivity, quality and value-added focusing on small farmers and SMEs in producing areas of 
Cote d'Ivoire. 

 

Key Results (From PCN) 
 

PDO-level expected outcome indicators are: 

• Increased cashew productivity (kg per hectare) in the project area. 

• Improved storage practices and technology adopted at cooperatives and warehouses. 

• Increased volume of domestically processed raw cashew nuts (MT). 

• Direct beneficiaries reached, of which female beneficiaries (Percentage) (Core). 

• Targeted beneficiaries are satisfied with specific project intervention (desegregated by gender) 

 

Intermediate Output (results) indicators for the project include: 

 

• Number of farmers trained in GAPs, harvest and post-harvest best practices. 

• Quality criteria and standards applied in production and processing. 

• Increased quality, as measured by the price premium of RCN sold by beneficiary farmers. 

• Km of roads constructed/rehabilitated.  

• Number of loans and volume of finance to cashew industry supported by the facility. 

• Number of jobs created within the cashew processing industry. 

• Improved business environment indicators as measured by the ease of access to finance by the cashew industry (survey), percentage of 

cashew processing industries that have an internationally-recognized quality certification, and streamlining administrative procedures for SMEs 

in the value-chain (taxation, licensing and regulations). 

 
D. Concept Description 

 
Cote d’Ivoire is the largest exporter of RCN in the world but only process 5-7 percent of this volume into higher value edible nuts. The Ivorian 

processing sector has remained small in the face of intense competition for RCN supply from established processors in India and Vietnam. This 

processing competitive disadvantage is compounded by the presence of internationally financed foreign trading companies who are deeply 

integrated into to processing sector in Asia. The proposed interventions under this loan aim at reversing the current situation by achieving 

transformational changes in the whole Ivoirian cashew value chain in a manner that accelerate its development and performance with a focus 

on increased domestic processing and added-value.  

The Government of Cote d’Ivoire recognizes that expansion in processing capacity will be driven by private sector investment facilitated by a 

clearly defined enabling environment. Key steps have already been put in place to achieve this in the form of an export tax on RCN to fund 

investments in the value chain, a processing subsidy on exported processed kernels that addresses immediate factors of low competitiveness, 

laws and regulations to facilitate working capital requirements and numerous fiscal incentives to reduce investment costs – for instance, the 

WRS regulations adopted recently by the council of Ministers (decrees specifying the terms of application of Law No. 2015-538 of 20 July 2015). 

This Concept Note proposes interventions complementing existing sector policies that tends to lower the barriers to investment in new 

processing capacity and enhance the competitiveness of existing processing capacity. It supports additional investments at critical point along 

the value chain that will: (i) increase RCN productivity on-farm, improve quality and lower aggregation costs; (ii) accelerate private investment 

in new processing capacity through the provision carefully designed and located physical infrastructure that increases operational efficiency 

and significantly lowers the initial cost of investment; (iii) improve the policy and regulatory framework for the sustainable development of the 

cashew value chain in Cote d’Ivoire, including build capacity in all functions along the value chain (technical and managerial skills, knowledge 

and innovation); and (iv) facilitating market development and trade. It is taking into consideration the lessons learned from the WBG 

agriculture portfolio experience and analytical work recently completed in Cote d’Ivoire. These include: (i) learning from the PSAC/IFC and 

related analytical work; (ii) the findings of the study “Overview of the cashew sector in Cote d’Ivoire:  Current situation and development 

potential” which provided critical insights and inputs for the preparation of the proposed project; and (iii) other key analytical work carried-out 

by development partners and the Government related to the sector diagnostic, reform and development strategy (see Annex 2 of list of 

references).  

COMPONENT 1: IMPROVING THE ORGANIZATION AND GOVERNANCE OF THE CASHEW VALUE CHAIN ($14.5 MILLION). This component aims 

at improving the organization and governance of the value chain to be able to reduce costs of marketing (from producer to port and to 

consumer) and make the value chain ultimately more competitive. This also includes the strengthening of the various organizations that are 

engaged in the governance of the chain. Building on PSAC/IFC on-going program, the main investments under this component will include the 

following:  

(i) The assessment of existing capacity for public/private sector dialogue (PPD) on the cashew sector, contribution to/co-funding of 

relevant discussion fora, and capacity building of value-chain actors in advocacy for improved business environment. A particular focus will be 

on strengthening: (a) the capacities of the CCA in managing the cashew sector. This would involve measures of organizational development, 

capacity building on leading and managing stakeholder processes, lobbying for a better endowment with staff and financial resources, and 

training on quality control and marketing so staff is able to provide better services to producers, processors and traders. Emphasis should be 

less on control and regulation and more on guidance, advisory services and support; (b) the Ivoirian cashew interprofession, including the 

Union of Cashew Processors
20

. This would also engage measures of organizational development, promotion of benefits to members (e.g. 

political lobbying, service provision and sourcing of equipment in bulk), and capacity building in administration; and (c) the cashew 

cooperatives and their unions and enable them to provide more effectively services and benefits to their members. This involves capacity-

building in all aspects of technical and managerial skills - from good governance, the structure and principles of a cooperative, operational 

management, financial and auditing techniques, business development, marketing plans, and creditworthiness (so that participants can more 

easily obtain loans).  

 

(ii) Promoting an improvement of the relationships between producers/cooperatives/groups and processors/buyers through the 

introduction of more elaborated contracting. This would require sensitization of all actors about the benefits of such contracts, the 

development of contract documents fitted to the conditions in the chain, and support in monitoring compliance. 

 

(iii) Exploring options for combined finance of production and processing. This would involve setting up contractual relationships between 

producers and processors, use of the warehouse receipts as collateral, and educating bankers on the nature of the businesses in the value 

chain. 

 

(iv) Promoting the provision of value chain support services such as technical and business advice and R&D with a focus on cashew 

processing and value-added. Measures to improve such services include fostering the setting up of a network of private service providers, their 

training and their accreditation. 

 

(v) Establishing a geo-referenced information system for the sector to allow for better planning and management of the value-chain - 

collection of reliable information on the number of producers, number of trees/age, volume of production, market evolution and other socio-

economic and ecological factors to facilitate decision-making). 

The actors to be engaged in the implementation of this component include the Ministry of Agriculture, the Ministry of Industry and Mines, CCA, 

the Union of Cashew Processors, cooperatives, potential private training and advisory service providers, and the Banks. 

COMPONENT 2: PRODUCTIVITY ENHANCEMENT AND IMPROVED MARKET ACCESS TO RCN PRODUCERS (US$48.5 MILLION). This component 

intents to boost cashew farmers’ productivity on an economically and environmentally sustainable basis. Main outcomes here are in the form 

of an increase in volume and quality of marketable produce in the project areas so as to increase incomes and employment and reduce 

poverty. Direct beneficiaries of the component are 250,000 smallholder cashew producers, mainly in the northern impoverished regions of 

Cote d’Ivoire. To this end, the project will support investments focusing on: (i) support to smallholder production; and (ii) improvement of 

feeder roads and post-harvest infrastructure. Specific interventions will include the following: 

Sub-component 2.1: Support to smallholder production (US$28.5 million). This sub-component will aim at increasing the production (including 

quality) and productivity of cashew producers in the project areas. This will primarily be achieved by facilitating access to: (i) improved planting 

                                            
20

 Syndicat de transformateurs d’anacarde. 


materials, fertilizers and agro-chemicals; (ii) training in good agricultural practices; and (iii) extension services to advise on harvest and post-

harvest practices. The following major activities will be implemented: (a) providing support to the national research institutes and nurseries for 

preliminary selection of improved cashew varieties and production of new higher yielding varieties for replacement of old plantations and the 

establishment of new acreage. This will include facilitating access to equipment and inputs, and building the capacity of the national 

agronomists in preliminary selection of improved cashew varieties, handling, storage and distribution; (b) capacity building and training of 

extension staff and cashew producers on improved on-farm practices such as establishment techniques, plant nutrition, planting densities, 

ideal inter-cropping combinations, pruning plans, harvesting, post-harvest storage and quality control, pest and disease management, soil 

conservation/mulching/green residues, book keeping/farm accounts; and (c) launching a fertilizer and phytosanitary treatment program. Given 

the considerable area to be covered by the project, an efficient training scheme across a large population of farmers will need to be 

established. While emphasizing the importance of skills development and capacity building for increased agricultural productivity, the project 

will identify and strengthen potential training and advisory service providers. Capacities among trainers will be also strengthened and these will 

be motivated and equipped to reach farmers. The training content will feature good agricultural practices and environmentally safe use of 

pesticides and will be adapted to local needs, and farmers will be encouraged to organize field days and training events.  

The actors to be engaged in this sub-component include the Ministry of Agriculture, CCA, farmers, cooperatives, agricultural development 

officers on the district and village level, potential private training and advisory service providers, research institutions, seed and plant 
multipliers, and input providers.  

Sub-component 2.2: Improvement of feeder roads and post-harvest infrastructure (US$20 million). This sub-component will aim at improving 
the connection of the main cashew production areas to markets and promote forms of improved storage technology and management of 

stocks based on the Warehouse Receipt System (WRS) being implemented under the PSAC/IFC. Activities related to the feeder roads 

rehabilitation/construction will take into account the national strategy for roads maintenance which includes a partnership between the State 

and private operators (Inter-professional bodies) for the selection of priority roads for rehabilitation/maintenance or construction and the 

parallel co-financing of these activities. Following an inventory of the existing network of rural roads in project areas, a rural road improvement 

program will be developed jointly with the CCA and AGEROUTE (the roads management national agency). The Project will rehabilitate/maintain 

around 1000 km of existing feeder roads and eventually construct about 200 km of new roads. It will also rehabilitate/construct required 

infrastructure representing a critical bottleneck in selected spots (small bridges and culverts). A community-based road maintenance strategy 

will be developed and related road maintenance associations strengthened/formed at community level. In addition, low-cost hand tools and 

equipment will be provided to the community to undertake routine maintenance. The project will learn from the outcome of the joint WB-AFD 

project (PSAC) implementing similar activities in the project areas.  

Activities related to post-harvest technologies will involves an assessment of existing storage facilities
21

, identification of best practices and 

development of a store keeping manual for practitioners, and upgrading and/or developing new storage facilities. To the extent possible, the 

rehabilitation of existing “public” warehouses will reply on public-private-partnership business models. 

COMPONENT 3: SUPPORT TO PRIVATE INVESTMENT IN PROCESSING CAPACITY AND MARKET LINKAGES (US$95 MILLION). This component 

aims at increasing the volume and value-addition of RCN locally processed. Project interventions consist of an integrated mix of activities at 

four different levels: (i) improving the business environment; (ii) facilitating access to investment capital and risk management instruments to 

producers and domestic processors; (iii) supporting for the development of an adequate infrastructure for the establishment of the cashew 

industry; and (iv) market development and trade.  

Sub-component 3.1: Improving the business environment (US$10 million). The cashew industry operating in Cote d’Ivoire faces market failures 

that need to be addressed if this “nascent” industry is to develop and contribute to economic growth, jobs creation and poverty reduction. 

Cooperatives and SMEs are affected more than large firms are by regulation and transaction burdens (business environment constraints), have 

little access to credit (finance constraints), and have limited access to information, advisory services, technology, and innovation (knowledge 

constraints). Under this subcomponent, the project will:  

(i) Revise the existing regulations on cashew nut levies so that their distribution could strengthen CCA and be reinvested into the 

development of the processing sector - for example in capacity strengthening of processors and R&D on technical solutions. 

 

(ii) Assess the regulations and licenses that are required to sell, buy and trade cashew products with the objective to reduce the costs of 
marketing (from producer to port and to consumer) and make the value chain ultimately more competitive. This involves a revision of the 

                                            
21

 Updating the inventory of warehouses and of storage facilities needs which was carried-out under the PSAC/Veritas in 2015.  


current procedures in relation to other sectors and practices in other countries, the identification of opportunities for simplification, 

digitalization and streamlining and the testing and implementation of such measures. The project will also support the implementation of the 

new WRS regulations recently adopted through capacity-building benefiting the WRS Regulatory Authority.  
 

(iii) Promote other improvement in the business environment such as: (a) fiscal incentives defined in terms of duration, duty exemptions on 

processing CAPEX, and duty exemption on spare parts and consumable; (b) regional payroll tax exemptions to lower employment costs in 

production zones; (c) subsidy based on kernels produced/exported which should be clarified and defined in terms of duration (currently set by 

the CCA at 80 CFA per kg of RCN processed); and (d) a Fast-track “window” for processing investment incentives. 

 

(iv) Support the creation of new and/or improvement of existing business development services and technology centers that are targeted 

at cashew ago-enterprises for the provision of services such as technical and business advice, R&D, etc. In particular, the project will strengthen 

the Cashew Technology Center currently being established in Yamoussoukro, in partnership with the FHB Technical Institute and the Ho Chi 

Minh University, for the transfer of technologies, the training of the labor force and the provision of technical assistance to private investors. 

The actors to be engaged in this sub-component include the Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Industry and Mines, Ministry of Commerce, 

CCA, Union of cashew processors, the Warehouse Regulatory Authority and national technology centres and business development services.   

Sub-component 3.2. Facilitating access to investment capital and risk management instruments to domestic processors  (US$33 million). This 

sub-component will aim at improving access to term finance for investments as well as working capital for the cashew domestic industry and 

will consist of a Financing (line of credit) and a Risk Sharing Facility (RSF). Targeted end-beneficiaries will include new and domestic cashew 

enterprises in need of financing to upgrade/modernize their technology or establish new processing plants (including financing for capital 

investment, capacity expansion and working capital). Selection of PFIs for the line of credit and RSF would be based on clearly defined eligibility 

criteria that would ensure minimum performance and capital, profitability and portfolio quality standards of the PFIs and their ability to 

promote cashew industry development at national level. The volume, lending rates and arrangements of the line of credit and RSF will be set 

appropriately to minimize any potential market distortion, and in compliance with OP requirements for lines of credit. 

 

The project will combine the provision of appropriate financing instruments to banks (line of credit and risk sharing facility) with commitments 

from participating banks to strengthen their lending capability over time to the cashew processing industry. A technical assistance will be 

available under both facilities to support: (i) training for the banks that will benefit from the credit line or RSF, in order to help build capacity in 

lending services to the cashew industry (and agro-industry in general) and ensure that benefiting industry has sufficient capacity to effectively 

utilize loans from the banks for the growth of their businesses; and (ii) advisory services at the industry level to increase their “bankability” – 

preparation of sound business plans (including choice of technology and support for procurement) and loan applications.  

 

Based on preliminary discussions with the stakeholders (government officials, local banks and cashew industry) as well as prior studies, there is 

an acute shortage of financing availability; and the volume of the proposed line of credit as well as RSF is relatively modest yet adequate to 

have meaningful impact and create momentum for Cote d’Ivoire to move up the cashew nut value-chain.  Access, modalities and financial 

terms would include features such as competitive interest rates and maturities in line with on–going commercial practices and consistent with 

the OP10 guideline for LOCs, to ensure that no market distortions are created. The availability period of the LOC as well as RSF would be [5] 

years, and the maturity of loans would be set accordingly, based on further consultation with the stakeholders, to address the shortage of 

financing in particular for investments in the sector and the current gap in the financing offered in Cote d’Ivoire. The RSF will be used to reduce 

the banks’ risk of lending to cashew industry borrowers.  There are other past cases in the region where RSF was deployed effectively in 

agriculture sector (e.g., Mali) and the project will also draw lessons from these experiences.  

 

Sub-component 3.3. Supporting for the development of an adequate infrastructure for the cashew industry (US$42 million). This sub-

component aims at addressing important lacks of infrastructure that limit private investment and hinder the development of competitive and 

inclusive cashew processing industry in the country. It will complement on the forthcoming PIDUCAS project
22

 which plan investments in key 

economic and social infrastructure in Bouaké and San Pedro. It will particularly support the development of a concentrated agro-industrial zone 

in the main producing area of northern Cote d’Ivoire, mainly focused on value addition/agro-processing services of cashew products and by-

products (cashew nut shell liquid (CNSL)
23

, juice, biofuel, etc.). The zone will be developed based on a public-private partnership scheme aiming 

                                            
22

 Infrastructure for Urban Development and Competitiveness of Secondary Cities Project (P151324). 
23

 The cashew nut shell liquid (CNSL) has important properties which make it valuable for automobile brake linings and paint and varnishes. These by-products are fully 

used in the main processing countries (Brazil, India) and can bring as much revenue as the cashew nut itself. 



at facilitating:  (i) access to basic infrastructure; (ii) shared common services and facilities and creation of economies of scale in service 

provision, including storage facilities, transport, quality control services, waste management, etc.; (iii) improved access to technical support and 

information and management services; and (iv) a platform for business linkages between and within value-chain actors through effective 

network between primary producers, agro-processors, traders, retailers and end markets.  

 

Under this sub-component, the project will finance the agro-industrial zone site development and promotion which will include the following 

investments: (i) site identification and assessment based on specific criteria including access roads, site-specific risks, key cost factors, private 

sector interest, etc.; (ii) in-depth technical and economic feasibility studies for the zone development, including a market demand assessment, 

sizing of necessary industrial land, master planning and development, business development plan, environmental and social safeguards, etc.; 

(iii) the construction of the zone’s critical infrastructure (access and internal road network, electricity, communications, and water supply) and 

common services (such administration building, storage facilities, workshop, quality control laboratory, waste disposal, etc.); (iv) investment 

promotion campaign for the site; (v) establishment of its management structure; and (vi) a network of linked sub-regional storage and primary 

processing satellite centres feeding into the agro-industrial zone. 

 
Sub-Component 3.4. Market development and trade (US$10 million). A sustainable outlet for RCN and kernels is a prerequisite to the 
realization of growth potentials in production and processing. Therefore, this component aims at an effective development of domestic, 

regional and international markets for cashew products, particularly kernels. The following interventions are planned: (i) A study related to the 

opportunities for marketing of cashew products (and by-products) locally and internationally. This would engage in a detailed analysis of 

existing domestic and international marketing channels and a projection on most viable options for marketing cashew products with the 

associated standards and quality requirements. Quality control needs to be introduced to the purchase of processed products for local and 

international markets; (ii) Launching a branding and marketing campaign through various channels of mass media (telephone, television, radio, 

billboards, newspapers) to promote cashew consumption among consumers in Cote d’Ivoire. An Ivoirian brand of kernels, eventually to be 

issued by the CCA, will also be promoted on international trade fairs; (iii) Introducing and promoting the application of principles of quality 

control and food safety into processing and marketing of cashew nuts including Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP) and Good Hygienic 

Practices (GHP) as well as food safety standards such as Hazard Analysis Critical Control Points (HACCP). This implies promotion of and training 

in good practices in cashew nut production and processing and enforcement of application of quality criteria at the buyer’s level (warehouse 

and retailers); (iv) establishing a market information system that provides efficiently information on prices for raw and processed cashew nuts 

to all stakeholders. This will involve the collection of price data at farm gates, factory gates, warehouse gates, at ports, at major trading places 

(e.g. India), and setting up of a price information service reachable by everybody via telephone and internet, and the continuous analysis and 

publishing of market intelligence; and (v) improving the efficiency in marketing/auctioning raw cashew nuts. This would require working out 

modalities to enable producers and processors getting more direct access to international buyers for raw nuts and kernels and vice versa.  

 

COMPONENT 4: PROGRAM COORDINATION, MONITORING AND KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT (US$17.5 MILLION). This component will 

facilitate: (i) administrative, technical, and financial management of the program; (ii) coordination among all institutional partners to ensure 

efficient flow of information and support to all value chain actors, in particular the small cashew growers and the processing industry; (iii) 

effective contractual arrangements with key implementing partners (CCA, CNRA, etc.) and other private sector operators; (iv) monitoring and 

evaluation of the performance and the financial, environmental, and social impact of the project; and (v) development of communication 

activities to publicize and disseminate the project results, best practices and success stories. 

 

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)       

 
The project main interventions will be mostly located in the Northern regions of Cote d'Ivoire, where cashew has 
become the most important source of rural cash income. 

 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies       

 
The Recipient has several years of experience in applying and implementing World Bank projects. There are 
considerable legal and institutional frameworks in the country to ensure compliance with World Bank safeguards 
policies triggered by the proposed project. In Cote d’Ivoire, the Ministry of Environment, and Sustainable Development 
(MINEDD) is responsible for setting policy guidelines on environmental issues and ensuring compliance with national 
environmental standards. It has different departments among which the National Agency of Environment (ANDE, 
Agence Nationale de l’Environnement) in charge of safeguards compliance of all projects in the country. The unit is 
well staffed and its capacities are acceptable. With regard to the PCU, capacity building efforts to support project 
implementation will be done by implementing recommendations contained in the safeguards instruments prepared 
for the project. The project will also receive guidance from the Bank’s environmental and social specialists in the 
Project team. 

 
D. Policies that might apply       

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

This project is planning to finance roads 
rehabilitation/construction with the aim to establish 
the connection of the main cashew production areas 
to markets. For instance, about 200 km of new roads 
will be built and other 1000 km will be rehabilitated 
(see sub-component 2.2). Besides, the project is 
going to support the development of a concentrated 
agro-industrial zone including basic infrastructures 
and storage facilities as well as waste management 
(sub-component 3.3). Based on all potential adverse 
impacts which may be significant and irreversible, the 
project is rated as a category A project. 
 
While the exact locations of these investments are 
not yet known, the proper safeguard instrument to 
be prepared in compliance with this policy is an 
Environmental and Social Management Framework 


(ESMF). This ESMF will be reviewed, consulted upon 
and disclosed both in Cote d’Ivoire and at the 
Infoshop at least 120 days before the board 
presentation. 
 
In addition, the project aims at addressing important 
lacks of infrastructure that limit private investment 
and hinder the development of competitive and 
inclusive cashew processing industry in the country 
through the development of agro-industrial zone 
based on a public-private partnership scheme. 
Regarding potential environmental and social adverse 
impacts associated with such an investment, the 
appropriate safeguard instrument to develop is a 
sectoral Strategic Environmental and Social 
Assessment (SESA). The terms of reference for such a 
SESA will be developed, consulted upon and disclosed 
within Cote d’Ivoire and at the Infoshop at least 
120days prior to the board date. But the sectoral 
assessment itself will be carried out as part of the 
project implementation. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

The project will be implemented on areas where 
forests still exist. This kind of environment 
concentrates various insects and others types of 
animals, whose natural habitat could potentially be 
affected by the project’s activities mainly with the 
opening of new road (200 km). However, there is no 
specific safeguard instrument to be prepared. This 
issue will be taken into account by the ESMF. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes 

Areas where the project’s activities will be 
implemented comprise forested areas. That factor 
could possibly impact the health and quality of 
forests or the rights and welfare of people and their 
level of dependence upon the interaction with 
forests, and it may lead to changes in the 
management, protection or utilization of natural 
forests or plantations. So, special attention may be 
paid in order to avoid or unless minimize adverse 
impacts on forests resources. The ESMF that will be 
prepared in accordance with OP4.01 will provide 
guidance to address matters related to forests 
protection. During the implementation phase, a 
management plan will be prepared if necessary. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 
The sub-component 2.1 will aim at increasing the 
production (including quality) and productivity of 
cashew producers in the project areas. That means 



even if the project does not purchase fertilizers and 
agro-chemicals directly, It will induce the use of those 
chemical products by cashew producers for pest and 
disease management. Furthermore, the project 
intends to launch a fertilizer and phytosanitary 
treatment program. Consequently an Integrated Pest 
Management Plan (IPMP) will be prepared, reviewed, 
consulted upon, approved and disclosed in the 
targeted areas, mainly in the north of Cote d’Ivoire 
and at the Infoshop at least 120 days before board 
date. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 

Activities supported by the ongoing bank’s funded 
operation such as roads construction/rehabilitation; 
agro-industrial zone, water supply facilities will 
unquestionably involve excavations with possibilities 
to underscore Physical cultural resources. However, 
the triggering of this policy does not entail the 
preparation of a specific safeguard instrument. Only a 
specific chapter will be included in the ESMF to 
provide guidance in case physical cultural resources 
will be discovered. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 
There are no indigenous people as defined by the 
policy in the project area. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

The planned interventions such as rural roads, agro-
industrial parks, storage facilities are expected to lead 
to land acquisition or restriction of access to sources 
of livelihood. Therefore, a Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF) will be prepared for the activities 
triggered by the OP 4.12 as a due diligence given that 
the specific sites or impacts of planned physical 
investments are not known. The RPF will be prepared 
by the Borrower, reviewed and cleared by the team 
and disclosed in country and at Bank InfoShop prior 
to appraisal. The RPF will be used as a guide to 
conduct specific Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) as 
needed, as well as compensation measures to 
minimize negative impacts on Project Affected 
People (PAPs).The RAPs will be submitted to the Bank 
for approval prior to the commencement of the civil 
works. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No The project will not finance dams nor rely on dams. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
The project is not expected to affect international 
waterways. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No The project will not be located in a Disputed Area. 

 



E. Safeguard Preparation Plan        
 

Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 

Dec 30, 2016 
 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
The following safeguard instruments are expected to be prepared during the preparation phase: (i) an Environmental 
and Social Management Framework (ESMF), (ii) a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), (iii) an Integrated Pest 
Management Plan (IPMP) and (iv) a Physical Cultural Resources Management Framework (PCRMF) . All these safeguard 
documents will be reviewed consulted upon and disclosed by the Government of the Republic of Cote d’Ivoire, and by 
the World Bank’s Infoshop  at least 120 days prior to presentation of the Project to the Board. 


























































World Bank Document

PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
CONCEPT STAGE

Report No.: PIDC3519

Project Name Nigeria Staple Crop Processing Zones Support Project (P148616)
Region AFRICA
Country Nigeria
Sector(s) Crops (35%), Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (25%), Transmission 

and Distribution of Electricity (15%), Rural and Inter-Urban Ro ads and 
Highways (15%), Public administration- Agriculture, fishing and forestry 
(10%)

Theme(s) Rural services and infrastructure (40%), Rural markets (35%), Rural 
policies and institutions (25%)

Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P148616
Borrower(s) Federal Republic of Nigeria
Implementing Agency Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development
Environmental 
Category

A-Full Assessment

Date PID Prepared/
Updated

12-Jul-2014

Date PID Approved/
Disclosed

14-Jul-2014

Estimated Date of 
Appraisal Completion

08-Oct-2014

Estimated Date of 
Board Approval

18-Dec-2014

Concept Review 
Decision

Track II - The review did authorize the preparation to continue

I. Introduction and Context
Country Context
Since 2003, Nigeria has continued to record high, sustained economic growth driven by non-oil 
sector, whereas the performance of the oil sector has slowed down.  Over the last decade, reported 
GDP growth rate has consistently remained between 6 to 8 percent. Key drivers of this strong 
growth are trade (retail and wholesale), agriculture, and telecommunications sectors.  These three 
sectors alone accounted for about 80 percent of GDP growth during 2009-2012. However, annual 
GDP growth rate declined from 7 percent in 2011 to 6.6 and 6.4 percent in 2012 and in the first half 
of 2013 respectively.  Growth has slowed in oil and gas, agriculture and trade but growth in the oil 
sector is slower than in agriculture.  The slowdown in agriculture and trade is related to the impact 
of 2012 flooding which disrupted crop production calendar and growing security problems in some 

parts of the country that continues to restrict flows of trade. Oil production has stagnated or declined 
since 2010 due to increasing oil theft in the Niger Delta, and destruction of pipeline infrastructure. 
As a result, oil output in the first half of 2013 was about 10% lower than during the same period of 
2012.   
Rising oil prices ushered in surplus Balance of Payments (BoP) since 2011.  Reserves declined 
however to US$45 billion between April and early October, 2013, reflecting lower oil output,  
weaker oil prices, and more cautious attitudes of investors. While these inflows have strengthened 
Nigeria’s balance of payment and reserve position, they also pose major risk because of its 
vulnerability to shocks or swings in oil prices. Therefore, diversification of the economy is critical if 
Nigeria is to sustain a strong balance of payment position. The Nigerian Government has achieved 
significant budget consolidation since 2011, but dwindling oil production outlook presents fiscal 
uncertainties.   Government fiscal consolidation program is yielding results. Government  deficit 
reduced from an estimated 5.7 percent of GDP in 2010 to 1.9 percent in 2012.  While oil output 
appears poised to recover somewhat in the second half of 2013, Nigeria faces an important 
challenge in that oil revenues are not expected to increase in the medium term at the nearly the pace 
of GDP or the population of the country, reinforcing the need to deepen  significantly other sources 
of Government revenues. 
Nigeria needs effective institutions and good governance to achieve sustainable and inclusive 
growth.  Good governance is critical for improving the effectiveness and efficiency of public 
expenditures and services. Although, some pockets of effectiveness and capability in actually 
implementing reform have emerged, as reflected, for example, in the macroeconomic consolidation, 
consolidation of the banking sector after 2009 crisis, progress in implementing the power sector and 
the agricultural reforms. Important weaknesses and risks that still need to be addressed include the 
enforcement of regulations, inter-agency coordination and supervisory capacity.

Sectoral and Institutional Context
The competitiveness of the agriculture value chains and diversification of the productive base of the 
economy away from oil is a key pillar of the Federal Government’s Agricultural Transformation 
Agenda (ATA). The ATA represents the Government’s renewed focus on value addition to targeted 
commodities for enhanced food security, employment creation and sourcing of raw materials for 
industries and generally for agriculture to serve as engine for a broad-based economic development 
in Nigeria. The ATA is designed to focus on self-sufficiency via import substitution, lowering of 
food costs, increasing real wages and driving down inflation, engendering a rapid transition to an 
export-oriented agricultural economy. It is also to diversify the economy thereby increasing foreign 
exchange reserves, stabilizing the exchange rate and significantly increase the level of foreign direct 
investment (FDI). Key policies and institutional reforms are aimed at: (a) broadening the reach of 
the fertilizer subsidy program and making it more efficient and business oriented; (b) improving the 
investment framework through the development of Staple Crop Processing Zones (SCPZs); (c) 
improving the marketing of agricultural products; (d) promoting investment in productivity-
enhancing technologies. In parallel, the Government seeks to expand and improve large-scale dam 
and irrigation infrastructure which has significant deficiencies that negatively impact agricultural 
productivity, notably in the North where the bulk of Nigeria’s dam and irrigation infrastructure is 
located. 
The agricultural sector is considered an engine of growth capable of generating broad-based 
development outcomes needed for rapid economic transformation. The sector has been central to 
Nigeria’s poverty reduction and employment generation efforts, and retained this importance in 
recent times as the largest contributor to  non-oil growth (40.2% and 34.5%  of GDP in 2011 and in 
the first quarter of 2012 respectively) and important in overall economic growth as well. Self-



sufficiency and import substitution are explicit policy goals of agricultural development strategies in 
Nigeria, resulting from the growing and substantial food import bills  (US$ 2 billion) and policy 
responses (export bans) from a number of exporting countries witnessed during the recent global 
financial and food price crisis.    
The agriculture sector has been growing over the last decade, but not fast enough to meet the food 
security, employment and poverty challenges. Indeed, in recent years, food imports have been 
growing at a faster pace than the population growth (about 11% against,  2.8%) , and though the 
country has met the MDG1 on hunger, still 8.5% of total population were leaving below the  
minimum level of dietary energy consumption in 2011. Low productivity of major staple crops  – 
measured as average yield per hectare - as a result of  very low use of improved inputs , limited 
access to extension services by farmers) and limited investment by the private sector confine the 
sector well below its potential for growth. Power and road infrastructure, low-cost and long term 
financing, access to competitive inputs and supplies, as well as inconsistent policy environment are 
consistently identified by the private sector  as major challenges to their engagement in the sector. 
Rather than trying to drive the entire agricultural sector forward at the same time as in many past 
strategy documents, the ATA focuses on a few key first moves - priority food staples and traditional 
export crops, and intends to develop these for growth and employment creation, with the 
expectation that the rest of the sector will subsequently follow. Within agriculture, a major driver of 
growth is staple food crops, which contributed 35.8 percent to the agricultural GDP in 2011. 
Although in Asia irrigated agriculture was more prominent than in Nigeria, the ATA approach is 
similar to the Asian Green Revolution (GR) strategy, where an initial focus on import substitution 
for wheat and rice in high potential irrigated areas led the successful rural transformation that 
followed. Like the Asian model, the ATA assigns a lead role to the state in driving and orchestrating 
the strategy within each of the selected value chains, and in using financial incentives and import 
charges to encourage this growth. Unlike Asia, however, the ATA aggressively promotes private 
sector-led growth and is relying on public-priva te partnerships rather than state run marketing and 
financial institutions.

Relationship to CAS
The proposed SCPZ Support Project is fully aligned with the World Bank group Agricultural Action 
Plan 2013-2014, and features in the mix of instruments proposed under the New CPS (2014-
FY2017). Indeed the WBG new Agricultural Action identifies agricultural productivity, linking 
farmers to markets, and increasing non-farm income as key areas to put emphasis in order to help 
countries meet the MDG1, in one hand. in the other hand, the overarching objective of the Bank 
new CPS is to support the Government's Visions 20:2020 and Transformation Agenda for inclusive 
economic growth,  through a strategic focus on energy and agriculture sectors as cornerstone to help 
the country reduce poverty and increase shared prosperity. More specifically,  and under the first 
pillar (Federally led structural reforms for growth and jobs), the new CPS aims inter alia at boosting 
agricultural productivity, improving farmers' linkages with agro-processors, and scaling up Nigeria's 
resilience to current and future climate variability. 
The proposed SCPZ support project would contribute to the achievement of Pillar I of the new 
Country Partnership Strategy on growth and competitiveness. The CPS recognized that diversified 
growth and increased productivity is a prerequisite for accelerated poverty reduction and shared 
prosperity. With the dwindling fortune of the oil sector in Nigeria, agriculture offers a sure pathway 
to a diversified and sustained economic growth. However, low productivity and lack of 
competitiveness of the agriculture sector is inextricably linked to poor infrastructure and limited 
access to the market that increases transaction cost and limit margin to the farmers. This project 
would therefore contribute to laying foundation for diversified growth by providing critical public 




infrastructure necessary for improved market access and to attract private sector investment in 
agribusiness; a subsector that can offer inclusive and broad development impact. 
The Proposed SCPZ support project will be complemented by ongoing and upcoming operations in 
the World Bank portfolio such as Fadama III/Additional Financing, CADP, WAAPP, RAMP, the 
irrigation project (TRMING), the Development Financing support project, as well as non-Bank-
funded projects supporting  ATA (AfDB-ATASP2, IFAD- Cassava and Value chains support 
project). Those operations are mostly oriented toward improving productivity and ramping up 
production in the SCPZ catchment areas, critical to improving competitiveness of the processing 
segment of the value chains, recognizing that addressing the challenge of low productivity in the 
agriculture sector requires targeted investments in technology, irrigation, rural roads, market 
information, and increasing access to finance. It will also take advantage of sector reforms initiated 
under the series of DPOs; with the second operation focusing inter alia on improving the 
institutional framework and business environment for SCPZ through the preparation of SCZP 
Policy, legal and Institutional framework to foster a predictable business environment for the private 
sector. 
An effective institution is necessary for managing sustainable and inclusive growth and 
competitiveness. Governance represented by deficient institutions can explain the under-
performance of agriculture sector, and its lack of competitiveness. Governance represents the 
foundation for the two pillar of the CPS. The CPS emphasized the fact that the ways in which public 
functions are carried out, public resources are managed and regulatory powers are exercised 
strongly influence the performance of the main sector actors, the focus of sector policies and their 
concrete outcomes. The SCPZ project would support an aspect of this by providing institutional 
development as part of the project design.

II. Proposed Development Objective(s)
Proposed Development Objective(s) (From PCN)
The Project development objective (PDO) is to increase market linkages for farmers and strengthen 
the institutional framework for inclusive public and private investment in selected agribusiness 
clusters. 
 
The Project will contribute to the broader objectives of the FGN’s SCPZ Program consisting of 
‘increasing food production and reducing the demand for imports, adding value through processing, 
reducing cost of doing business for processors, and attracting new investment to create jobs, 
especially in rural areas, and to drive the economy’.  The expansion of the agribusiness- farmer 
linkage models under the SCPZ program through the right mix of public and private investments 
will ultimately, improve agricultural productivity, generate shared growth and substantially reduce 
poverty in rural areas.

Key Results (From PCN)
The mandatory corporate indicator on beneficiaries is as follow: Number of direct beneficiaries 
(directs: benefiting farmers, workers in the SCPZ processing area, and  holders of small and 
medium businesses along value chains in the SCPZ; disaggregated by gender). Indirect beneficiaries 
include family members of and beneficiaries from ancillary activities, estimated as the total 
population in hosting communities.   
PDO level results and indicators 
i. Total amount of  investment financing brought by private sector into the  SCPZ (NGN, $);  
ii. Increase in sales of agricultural products by project supported farmers within the SCPZ area 

(disaggregated by gender). 
Intermediate results and indicators (disaggregated by gender as relevant) 
i. Units measurement of infrastructure  (power generated, roads constructed, water supplied) 
constructed or rehabilitated in the SCPZ area; 
ii. Number of agricultural businesses  established and operating in with project support ; 
iii. Number of farmers groups with off-take agreement in project intervention areas; 
iv. Number of  businesses successfully implemented in the SCPZ with Project support (with 
the aim at strengthening agribusiness-farmers linkages and creating economic opportunities for the 
communities along the value chains, disaggregated by gender).

III. Preliminary Description
Concept Description
The concept of the Staple Crop Processing Zones under ATA as proposed by the Federal 
Government of Nigeria  is based on the following three guiding principles: (i) take an integrated 
approach to the value chain by addressing critical upstream and downstream bottlenecks and 
facilitating market linkages; (ii) offer a superior operating environment that reduces the cost of 
doing business, and iii) take a private sector-led approach. The Operating Principles are the 
following; (i) investment-driven strategic partnerships with the private sector; (ii) integrated value 
chain approach; (iii) Self-sustaining, government-support and private sector managed. 
  
The SCPZ program aims to channel infrastructure investments to facilitate efficient value chain 
linkages and reduce the cost of doing business, and improve the competitiveness of Nigeria’s agro-
industrial production. By creating an enabling business environment around selected value chains 
clusters, the FGN and State Governments seek to attract private sector investors to set up processing 
plants in high food production areas, in order to boost import substitution, create wealth 
opportunities for farming communities, reduce post-harvest losses, create sustainable employment 
in agro-production, processing and related activities, and drive rapid rural development.  
 
The proposed Project will support the FGN to implement the first model SCPZ and assist in 
building blocks for its sustainable expansion. The project approach to the Government's SCPZs 
Program consists of test running the concept gradually in limited number of sites, as an integrated 
agribusiness supply chain project, with strong farmers –agribusiness linkages aim to overcome the 
multiple, interlocking constraints in infrastructure provision and productivity growth along 
agricultural supply chains. Project will focus its support on Cassava supply value chain in Kogi 
State (at least 70% of project funding), with an open window for limited support in the form of 
technical assistance for up to three other sites/States with strong business case, and  based one 
following minimum criteria :  alignment with Government priority value chains and located in one 
of the SCPZ sites, existing or ready-to-implement  private investment project(s) with sizable 
financing,  high potential for improving agricultural productivity and  generating benefits for 
farmers,  strong support of state Government and local communities, existence of other Bank 
assisted project or partnership with other Donors funded project, and possible IFC intervention. 
 
Project activities will be clustered around the following areas of intervention :  
 
(a) Support to public infrastructure development for the model SCPZ in Kogi State (around 
75% of project total cost) :  consists of  support to Government to develop off-site infrastructure and 
subsequently identify and attract private sector investors willing to invest in on-site development, 




operations and maintenance of the zone. The Project is also considering  to  support part of the on-
site infrastructure to guarantee minimum utility services (internal roads, water, gas, power) for up to 
3 private investment projects (covering up to 40% of the 250 hectares of the core zones).  
 
(b) Support to farmers-agribusiness linkage and to economic opportunities along the value 
chains (around 15% of total project cost). In coordination with FADAMA III Additional Financing 
( FADAMA III AF) and other relevant operations in the portfolio, the project will provide support 
to link  farmers, SMEs and communities in the catchment areas with the processing units as  
follows: (i) Improving Farmers productivity: the project will work with agro-processors to 
develop off-take agreements with farmers , aimed at structuring their organizations, and facilitating 
their access to inputs and services, such as  financing, extension, mechanization, land clearing, 
equipment and small scale production and marketing infrastructures,  grading, quality and standards, 
as well as skills development. Project will partner with Fadama III Additional Financing which will 
provide on-farm support to assist farmers deliver on the contracts; (ii) Promotion of economic 
opportunities for the community: The Project will establish a matching grants scheme to support 
activities aim at strengthening agribusiness farmers linkages which could  create jobs and increase 
income for the communities, thus contributing to reducing poverty in the project intervention areas. 
This will include support to women and youths and their groups, promoting development of 
mechanization services, transport, application of chemicals, business planning for SMEs, training , 
financial literacy, and ancillary activities of the value chains. 
 
(c) Institutional development in SCPZ (around 10% of total project cost): (i) Structuring of PPP 
for zone development, operation and maintenance: project will provide support for the 
establishment of a Specific Purpose vehicle (SPV) with a Board inclusive of all relevant 
stakeholders (Federal Government, State Government, Local Government, Developer, and Tenants). 
It is envisioned that the PPP transactions will result in specific contracts between the SPV and 
private investors; (ii) Land and safeguards management: for appropriate management of farm land 
allocation to the nucleus farms and for coordinated implementation of the SCPZ Master Plan in the 
catchment areas, the project will assist the State Government in developing responsible land 
allocation and management procedures following World Bank and international guidelines and 
standards, as well as adequate instruments and M&E system for environmental and social 
safeguards; (iii) Technical assistance to FMARD: The proposed Project will provide institutional 
support to FMARD and the SCPZ-Authority being established to regulate the SCPZS, in terms of 
technical assistance (TA), training, and experience sharing of best practices from across the world, 
and for scaling up the program to other sites based on lessons learnt from the pilot SCPZ in Kogi 
State; (iv) Technical assistance selected States for development of agribusiness clusters: 
Specific TA might include market assessment, SCPZ detailed feasibility studies, attracting private 
investor and structuring PPP, promotion of the program within the country and abroad, etc. The 
project will also support FMARD to support selected States, and upon their request, in developing 
their SCPZ projects. 
 
(d)  Project coordination: dedicated project management and coordination structure will set up 
and early as before negotiations, to initiate the implementation of the project and until the SCPZ 
institutional framework is established and fully operational.

IV. Safeguard Policies that might apply
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No TBD



Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖

V. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 300.00 Total Bank Financing: 100.00
Financing Gap: 165.00
Financing Source Amount
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 35.00
 International Development Association (IDA) 100.00
 Total 135.00

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Myanmar National Food and Agriculture Systems Project (P164448) 

 
 

  
June 20, 2018 Page 1 of 16  

 

 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 14-Jun-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSC23462 

 
The World Bank  
Myanmar National Food and Agriculture Systems Project (P164448) 

 
 

  
June 20, 2018 Page 2 of 16  

 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Myanmar P164448  Myanmar National 
Food and Agriculture 
Systems Project 
(P164448) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC Oct 01, 2019 Apr 22, 2019 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing The Republic of the Union of 
Myanmar 

Ministry of Agriuclture, 
Livestock, and Irrigation 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to, “increase productivity of select high value commodities, enhance 
agricultural diversification and competitiveness, and diet diversity in selected agro-ecological zones of Myanmar”.  This 
will be achieved through the provision of key public goods and services that will facilitate and further enhance the 
engagement of (and with) the private sector. 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 100.00 

Total Financing 100.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 100.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 100.00 

          IDA Credit 100.00 

   
 
Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B - Partial Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
 

1. The political reforms of 2011-2015 in Myanmar and economic liberalization coincided with strong economic 
growth and macroeconomic stability, followed by a slowing of economic activity since 2015.  After reaching 8.5% annual 
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth in 2014/2015, economic activity began to slow down with growth reaching 7% and 
5.9% in 2015/2016 and 2016/2017, respectively, due to (i) a challenging macroeconomic environment characterized by 
high inflation, and a reduction in government spending; (ii) a decline in commodity exports (gas and agriculture); (iii) 
constrained private and public investments; (iv) contraction of the agriculture sector due to the extreme weather shocks 
of the 2015/2016 El Niño–Southern Oscillation (ENSO) event; and (v) a decline in industrial output.  Expectations of strong 
exports, industry and services activities contributed to a positive growth forecast for 2017/2018 at 6.4%, counterweighing 
a slow agricultural recovery1. The agriculture sector continues to be vulnerable to supply shocks and demand fluctuations 
from major trading partners (e.g., China and India) affecting the sector’s potential to significantly and sustainably 
contribute to growth and poverty reduction of Myanmar. 
 
2. Despite a decline in poverty in Myanmar over the last decade, poverty remains high and inequality is increasing.  
Nearly 70% of Myanmar’s population lives in rural areas where poverty is prevalent.  The poverty incidence fell from 48.2% 
in 2004/2005 to 42.4% in 2009/2010 to 32% in 2015, making it today one of the poorest countries in Southeast Asia 2.  The 
decline in poverty was rapid in urban than rural areas with the urban-rural gap being substantial in 2015, i.e., 38.8% of the 
rural population are found to be poor relative to 14.5% of the urban population.  In addition, one in ten households fail to 
meet their basic food needs.  In addition to the 32% of the population identified as poor, 14% are categorized as near-
poor making them vulnerable to shocks from crop failures, natural disasters, and health setbacks.  A sizable proportion of 
Myanmar’s poor rely on agricultural activities as smallholder farmers or casual employment with low income 
diversification and high reliance on paddy production.  Female headed households are not identified as being poorer than 
male headed households irrespective of level of profit making, the poor have limited dietary diversity, and have weaker 
productive and financial asset base.  Although living standards of the poorest in Myanmar improved, greater 
improvements were noted among richer households contributing to inequality increase.  There were no significant 
changes in the welfare of the poorest 10% of the population relative to the obvious welfare changes of the average 
household.  
 

        e variations in poverty incidence across the agro-ecological zones (AEZ)3 of Myanmar.  The poverty 
headcount rate in the Hills & Mountains AEZ is 40%, in the Dry AEZ the rate is 32.1%, in the Delta AEZ, the rate is 26.2%, 
and in the Coastal AEZ, the poverty headcount rate is 43.9%.  The Hills and Mountains and the Coastal AEZs have a lower 
share of the population living in them, yet they comprise 47% of the food poor, and 38% are in the bottom quintile of the 
expenditure distribution.  These two AEZs combined have 40% poverty rate and one in six will struggle to meet their basic 
food needs.  Nearly 65% of the poor reside in the densely populated Dry AEZ and Delta AEZ.  Even though the Delta AEZ 
has the lowest poverty head count rate, the number of poor in this area is significant due to its high population density 
(5.5 million poor which also includes Yangon) relative to the 2 million poor in the Coastal AEZ4. 

 
4. Myanmar’s human development faces numerous challenges.  While net primary education enrollment is high 
(93%), there is substantial student drop-out in enrollment at the secondary level resulting in net total enrollment of 55% 
in 2015.  Gender enrollment gaps have been narrowing over time.  On health outcomes, 41% of children under the age of 
five are stunted, 30% are underweight, and 11% are wasted.  In addition, 40% of the population between ages 5 and above 
are overweight or obese, and close to 1 in 7 infants are born with a low birth weight.  It was estimated that on an annual 
basis, Myanmar loses nearly US$400 million in GDP to Vitamin and mineral deficiencies.5  Overall, Myanmar’s Human 
Development Index (HDI) is 0.556, well below the average for East Asia and Pacific (0.720), ranking it 145 out of 188 
countries.  As a result, Myanmar is on a slow path towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) health 
outcomes. 
 

Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
5. Despite Myanmar experiencing rapid structural change over the last decade, it is still an “agri-based” economy.  
Agriculture’s share of GDP declined from 52% to 32% during 2000-2015, while manufacturing share increased from 11% 
to 28%.  Nevertheless, the sector shares of employment remained constant over the last decade.  Agriculture continues 
to be the largest employer with agriculture’s share of jobs registering nearly 52%.  More than one-third of workers (nearly 
8.5 million jobs) identified farming as their primary source of employment through work in own family farms, and 16% 
(equivalent to 2.6 million people) are agricultural laborers.  The employment share in services and industry were 36% and 
12%, respectively.  The formal modern sector in Myanmar contributes to only 11% of the jobs.  
 
6. Agricultural growth relative to other sectors is low and volatile in Myanmar.  In 2011/12, agriculture growth was 
-0.7%, 1.7% in 2012/13, 3.6% in 2013/14, 2.8% in 2014/15, 3.4% in 2015/2016, and 4.3% in 2016/17 respectively.  The 
average sector growth during the period 2011/2012-2016/2017 was 15%, which is substantially lower than the 55% and 
59% growth seen in the industry and services sectors, respectively6.  Hence, contribution of the agriculture sector to the 
growth of Myanmar’s economy over time has been small.   

 
7. Low agricultural growth in Myanmar is attributed to low productivity7 with varying degrees across the agro-
ecological zones.  Paddy land and labor productivities in Myanmar are among the lowest in Asia.  In 2013/2014, the 
average land productivity for paddy was 2.7 tons/ha in Myanmar, 3.9 tons/ha in the Philippines, 2.8 tons/ha in Thailand, 
6.7 tons/ha in China, and 5.8 tons/ha in Vietnam.  Within Myanmar, paddy productivity and profitability are the lowest in 
Ayeyarwady and Sagaing States, and highest in Shan State.  Average paddy yield was 2.7 tons/ha (dry paddy equivalent) 

                                            
3 There are four agro-ecological AEZs in Myanmar: (i) Hills and Mountainous AEZ (covers Chin, Kachin, Kayah, Kayin, and Shan States); (ii) Coastal AEZ 
(covering Rakhine and Taninthayi); (iii) Delta AEZ (covering Ayeyarwady, Bago, Mon, and Yangon); and (iv) Dry AEZ (covering Mandalay, Magwe, Nay 
Pyi Taw, and Sagaing).  
4 “An Analysis of Poverty in Myanmar: Part 02-Poverty Profile”. December 2017. World Bank. 
5 “Nutrition at a Glance”. World Bank. 
6 “Myanmar Agriculture Public Expenditure Review”. 2017. World Bank. 
7 Productivity estimates are derived from the “Myanmar: Analysis of Farm Production Economics”.  

or 3.5 tons/ha (wet paddy equivalent).  This puts Myanmar on the lower end of rice production relative to rice producing 
Asian countries.  Labor productivity for paddy is also low.  For example, in monsoon season, the labor return from one 
day’s work yields 23Kgs of paddy, relative to 62Kgs in Cambodia, 429Kgs in Vietnam, and 547Kgs in Thailand.  Although 
Myanmar’s labor productivity is higher during the dry season, it is still considered very low in comparison with other 
countries.  Paddy production in Myanmar is still labor intensive (farmers in Ayeyarwady spend more than 100 days/ha of 
monsoon paddy relative to 52 says in Cambodia, 22 days in Vietnam, and 11 days in Vietnam).  
 
8. Productivity of non-paddy crops are also low but generally higher than paddy productivity also with varying 
degrees across the agro-ecological areas.  Myanmar’s farming systems are diversified and produce a range of non-paddy 
crops with higher productivity than paddy.  The labor productivity (value of crop per day of labor) of black gram, green 
gram, chickpeas, groundnuts, sesame, and sunflower seeds ranged from $9.29/day to $15.92/day, while for both monsoon 
and dry season paddy labor productivity was $4.75/day and $9.20/day, respectively.  The productivity of non-rice crops 
also varied across the agro-ecological zones depending on the production potential of each area.  For example, the 
productivity of green gram in Ayeyarwady (Delta AEZ) was $13.39/day while in Sagaing (Dry AEZ) productivity was at 
$17.69/day.  
 
9. Low earnings for both paddy and non-paddy production, although earnings from the latter are higher, reflects 
on the low agricultural competitiveness of Myanmar relative to its regional neighbors.  In 2013/2014, the net margin 
($/ha) from producing monsoon paddy averaged $114/ha (ranging from $88/ha in Ayeyarwady to $337/ha in Shan State 
due to proximity to China, resulting in higher farm-gate prices and lower input prices relative to other areas in Myanmar).  
Although the profitability of the dry season paddy was higher at $246/ha, this is still considered low relative to the earning 
of farmers in neighboring Asian countries.  In addition, male-headed households accrue higher profits than female headed 
households for many crops (for few crops the gender differentials in earning is insignificant).  On the other hand, the 
profitability of non-paddy crops (black gram, green gram, chickpeas, groundnuts, sesame, and sunflower seeds) is higher 
and ranged from $141/ha to $581/ha.  The earning differentials between paddy and non-paddy is due to the higher 
production cost of the former crop.  The low earnings raise alarming concerns about the potential of agriculture at its 
current state and a primary focus on paddy alone to achieve agricultural growth and uplift rural households from poverty.   
 
10. The inferior performance of Myanmar’s agriculture sector is first a legacy of past agricultural policies and 
investments centered on rice to attain primarily food security.  This was conducted through input intensification mainly 
for rice.  Public agricultural investments neglected undertaking “Resilient”, “Inclusive”, Competitive”, and 
“Environmentally” (RICE) sustainable investments that takes advantage of Myanmar’s diverse farming systems.   
 
11. The undersupply of quality agricultural public goods plays a significant role in Myanmar’s low agricultural 
productivity and weak support for diversification.  According to the 2017 World Bank Agricultural Public Expenditure 
Review8, the most underfunded function in the sector is agricultural research while there is compelling evidence of high 
returns to investments in core public goods related to technology generation and diffusion, market linkages and 
infrastructure, especially when augmented by policy and institutional reforms.  Undersupply of public goods: first, 
agricultural extension services are limited in number and have weak capacity to provide outreach to farmers.  The ratio of 
extension staff and farm family is very low (nearly 1 to 585)9.  Given the 3,819,1925 acres covering major crops, this means 
on average 1 extension worker covers 5,081 acres.  In addition, extension outreach was geared mostly towards paddy; 
second, farm management is poor.  Farmers have weak knowledge about the appropriate application of production 
technologies such as fertilizers, seed varieties, and pesticides; and third, agricultural research is underfunded, fragmented, 
and suffers from weak human resource capacity.   

                                            
8 World Bank 2017. Myanmar Agricultural Public Expenditure Review. Increasing the impact of public spending on agricultural growth. WB/LIFT.  
9 “Current Status of Agricultural Extension in Myanmar”. 2017. MOALI 



 
12. Private sector engagement in agricultural value chains is low. In addition to the constraints mentioned above, 
several other factors are adversely affecting the private sector’s full participation in agricultural value chain development.  
Infrastructure challenges such as post-harvest storage and cold chain facilities, and testing laboratories restricts them 
from contributing to the downstream side of the value chain.  Poor accreditation of services geared towards the regional 
and global export markets is also a constraint. 
 
13. Climate variability and extreme weather events have also significantly impacted performance of the agricultural 
sector.  In 2012, Myanmar was ranked the country most at-risk to climate shocks within Asia-Pacific, due to the wide range 
of hazards including, floods, cyclones, earthquakes, landslides, and tsunamis.  In addition, it ranks 2 out of 187 countries 
in the Global Climate Risk Index.  However, there are regions and states that are more vulnerable than others.  In 2015-
2016 ENSO event and the accompanying drought in the Central Dry Area decreased production and export of traditional 
crops such as sesame, beans and pulses.  Overall the drought from El Niño affected more than 15 million people in the 
Delta and Dry areas affecting livelihood, food access, decreased productivity and farmer income. 
 
14. Improving nutritional status of Myanmar’s population remains a significant challenge.  Rice continues to be the 
key staple crop consumed in Myanmar.  However, rice lacks nutritional value in terms of the minerals and vitamins typically 
found in a meal with dietary diversity.  A 195-gram serving of long grain cooked brown rice provides 11% of the 
recommended daily calorie value and provides no vitamin A, C or D intake, has only 5% of recommended daily iron value, 
2% of daily calcium and no vitamin B12 value10.  In addition, sufficient knowledge on dietary intake is lacking, especially 
among the rural population.  One way to tackle this challenge is to promote agricultural diversification and increase the 
knowledge of rural households about dietary diversity and importance for improved health outcomes, and productivity. 
 
15. Despite the significant sector challenges, Myanmar’s agriculture has ample potential for growth and rural 
poverty reduction.  Myanmar has abundant natural resources, youthful workforce, and diverse faming systems.  Myanmar 
is the world’s second largest exporter of beans and pulses (after Canada) and the largest exporter in the ASEAN region.  
For example, in 2014, the export earnings from beans and pulses was $835 million (exported to India, Thailand, 
Bangladesh, China, and UAE) which is higher than the export value of rice valued at $630 million during the same year.  In 
addition, urbanization and income growth amongst segments of the population are translating into changing dietary 
preferences and food spending patterns.  All these developments are expected to accelerate and expose enormous 
opportunities for farmers, and private sector across all segments of the value chain, and overall sectoral growth. 
 
16. Leveraging agriculture for sector growth and rural poverty reduction is a top government priority, and this is 
recognized in the 2017 Agriculture Development Strategy (ADS).  The ADS accept limitations of past approaches to ensure 
food security for promoting agricultural transformation and rural poverty reduction.  The strategy identified three priority 
areas requiring support: (i) Governance; (ii) Productivity; and (iii) Market Linkages and Competitiveness.   
 
17. The 2018 Myanmar Sustainable Development Plan (MSDP) recognized the agriculture sector challenges and 
proposed action plans.  The MSDP recognizes the high dependence of Myanmar’s economy on agriculture and its 
significance for poverty reduction, as noted under “Pillar 2: Prosperity & Partnership”. Under this Pillar, “Strategy 3.1: 
Creating a diverse and productive economy with rural development and agriculture as the foundation” stresses on 
addressing Myanmar’s low productivity to support value chain development, increase private sector participation and 
eventually boost agricultural competitiveness.  
 

                                            
10 “Crop Diversification and Nutrition”. 2014. Partners.  



Relationship to CPF 
 
18. The proposed project is aligned to the 2015-2017 World Bank Country Partnership Framework (CPF) and the 
two years extended partnership framework. Rural poverty reduction is outlined as a focus area with several objectives, 
including increased productivity in farming and agribusiness, and addressing critical infrastructure and service gaps for the 
rural poor.  The extended CPF continues its support for rural poverty reduction through rural growth. 
 
19. Furthermore, the proposed project is aligned with the identified pathways for poverty reduction as outlined in 
the Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD).  The SCD identified improvements in agricultural productivity as necessary for 
poverty reduction and as an opportunity for short term gains.  The SCD recognizes the immense potential for 
improvement in Myanmar by addressing yield gaps, diversification, and value-addition. 

 
20. The proposed project is also aligned with the World Bank’s Twin Goals.  The proposed project activities are 
intended to increase the income of the rural poor and generate shared prosperity by building the capacity and knowledge 
of farmers to undertake enhanced farming practices that increases the resilience of their diversified farming systems as 
well as increase their agricultural competitiveness.   

 
21. This proposed project concept has benefited substantially from ongoing and completed analytical and 
investment activities.  The experience from the ongoing Agriculture Development Support Project (ADSP) in project 
management and implementation (fiduciary aspects), and monitoring and evaluation (M&E) arrangements will be used 
extensively for the proposed NAFSP.  Successful instruments of the ADSP such as Project Working committees (PWCs) 
that meets bi-monthly to improve collaboration and monitoring across participating departments and divisions and 
implementation through existing MOALI decentralized bodies such as Agricultural Consultative Committees (ACCs) at 
district and village track levels will be applied to this project.   

 
22. Insights on the status of Myanmar’s agriculture sector performance were drawn from two recent completely 

analytical activities.  The first study is “Myanmar: Analysis of Farm Production Economics”. This was funded by LIFT 

(Livelihood and Food Security Trust Fund) to address existing agriculture data constraints using a 2013/2014 Myanmar 

Agricultural Survey of 1,728 farm households in four regions/states across three Agro-ecological Zones (AEZs) in 

Myanmar: (i) Ayeyarwady and Bago (Delta AEZ), Sagaing (Dry AEZ), and Shan (Hills and Mountains AEZ).  The study did 

not cover the Coastal AEZ.  The survey covers crops produced during two main seasons i.e., monsoon and dry seasons. A 

follow-up survey is currently ongoing to assess changes in farming practices since the 2013/2014 survey.  The second 

study this concept note benefited from is the “Myanmar Agriculture Public Expenditure Review”.  Several insights on the 

status of Myanmar’s food system were highlighted during the recent “Workshop on Modern Food Systems in Myanmar” 

(February 2018).  The workshop discussions noted the ongoing challenges and opportunities for the development of 

Myanmar’s food systems, and these were captured in this concept note.   

 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
 
23. The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to, “increase productivity of select high value commodities, enhance 
agricultural diversification and competitiveness, and diet diversity in selected agro-ecological zones of Myanmar”.  This 
will be achieved through the provision of key public goods and services that will facilitate and further enhance the 
engagement of (and with) the private sector. 
 


Key Results (From PCN) 
 
24. The key results of the proposed project are: 

 
i. Increase in production volume and yields of selected commodities 

ii. Change in agricultural land productivity of targeted farmers supported by the project (percentage) 
iii. Increase in sales of farm produce as a share of production among targeted farmers supported by the project 

(percentage, disaggregated by gender male- and FHHs) 
iv. Increase in efficiency of processing facilities supported by the project (percentage) 
v. Increase in linkages between producers and buyers 

vi. Increase in dietary composition of targeted households (percentage, disaggregated by gender) 
 

 
25. The key project beneficiaries are: (i) smallholders in four agro-ecological zones (Dry, Delta, Hills and Mountains, 

and Coastal); (ii) extension workers; (iii) agricultural researchers; (iv) buyers for value chain development; (v) MOALI 

departments and units participating in the project. 

 
 
D. Concept Description 

 
1. Once the priority agro-ecological zones and high value / potential commodities and value chains are determined, 
the proposed project will adopt the “Theory of Change” and “Maximizing Finance for Development (MFD) for Agricultural 
Value-Chains” frameworks for the identification and selection of project activities within each component and 
subcomponents.   
 
2. The proposed project areas and interventions will be made with close consideration provided to the following: (i) 
promotion of improved nutritional outcomes; (ii) inclusiveness of minorities and other marginalized groups; and iii) 
implementation in conflict and non-conflict areas.   

 
3. The proposed project is envisaged to have the following three components (with interventions tailored to the 
specific context of the selected commodities / value chains): 

 
4. Component 1: Development of Value Chains (US$ 20 million) – The objective of this component will be to support 
mechanisms by which public sector services are improved in collaboration with the private sector where opportunities 
exist to promote the development of selected agricultural commodity value chains, innovative modalities to better link 
farmers to markets, and improvements in the enabling environment for agro-enterprise.  This component will explore 
opportunities (including pilots) for private sector engagement on capacity strengthening to add value for key commodities, 
provision of equipment and infrastructure using out-grower schemes, and matching funds for farmer organizations and 
commodity specific associations.  This component will also include improvements in the enabling regulatory / legal 
environment for agro-enterprise (support to farm inputs and products) including food quality and food safety.  The 
infrastructure investment needs based on business plans and cost sharing mechanisms may include, (i) product collection 
centers, (ii) drying facilities, (iii) post-harvest storage structures, (iv) micro irrigation; (v) improved information technology 
service facilities, (vi) cold chain facilities, and (vii) facilitating a conducive policy environment, among others. 

 
5. Component 2: On-farm Agricultural Investment Support (US$74 million) – This component has two sub-
components: (i) On-farm Infrastructure Investments (US$54 million) and (ii) Agricultural Support Services (US$20 million).  



The objective of the first sub-component is to improve the production volume of selected commodities and crop 
diversification by providing support for infrastructure investments in priority farming systems.  The activities may include 
upgrading/constructing of critical infrastructure for increased productivity, crop diversification and/or competitiveness 
such as in existing and new research/ experimental stations, seed multiplication farms, laboratory buildings and 
equipment, border post quarantine and testing service centers; irrigation systems on-farm/ downstream; and 
decentralized training centers / information centers.  Capacity building related to optimizing infrastructure investments 
and operation and maintenance will also be included.  This sub-component will prioritize infrastructure investments in 
high-value commodities and areas where the level of engagement of the private sector is low or nonexistent.  The 
objective of the second sub-component is to ensure and enhance the provision of key public agricultural services such as 
agricultural research and innovation, extension services, institutional development and farmer training.  This component 
will provide capacity building and policy support to the national agriculture research and extension system with the aim 
to improve service delivery in the agriculture sector.  This component will also focus on services related to on-farm 
management practices which will include the adoption of climate smart production practices, crop diversification, and 
integration of nutritional and gender-sensitive activities. 
 
6. Component 3: Project Management (US$ 6 million) - The objective of this component is to ensure effective 
project management.  This component will support carrying out of the day-to-day project management activities, including 
project administration and implementation, procurement, financial management and audit, social and environmental 
safeguards (including peace and inclusion filters, marginalized/vulnerable population groups, gender etc.), and monitoring 
and evaluation (M&E). 
 
    

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
At concept stage, location for project interventions have not been determined.  
 
Myanmar is characterized by its central lowlands along the Ayeyarwady river, which flows from north to south through 

the Central Burma Basin and ends in a wide delta. These areas are its well-established agricultural production areas, 
which the current Agricultural Development Support Project (ADSP) (P147626) supports. The Central Valley Region is 
bordered by steep, rugged highlands in the north, the Arakan Mountains in the west and the Shan Hills, Karen Hills and 
Tenasserim Hills to the east. As a result, physical characteristics vary significantly across the country, as well as ethnic, 
social and cultural characteristics. 
 
Once project locations are identified, further information will be provided. 

 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
Under the current ADSP project, the project management has hired one environmental and one social safeguards 

consultant, who have the skills and experience to manage the environmental and social risks of the project. The project 
management unit overall has been gaining knowledge and experience on World Bank safeguards policies and their 
implementation. However, without the consultants, the project management unit does not have dedicated staff who has 
backgrounds and experience in environmental and social risk management. As a part of the project’s environmental and 
social management framework (ESMF) preparation, a capacity need assessment will be conducted to identify areas for 
improvement and measures to increased capacities. 




 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 
Martin Fodor, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 
Vivianti Rambe, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 
Zeynep Durnev Darendeliler, Social Safeguards Specialist 

 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The proposed project will focus on activities that (i) 
improve farm management and value chain 
development which include upgrading testing 
laboratories and upgrading/building post-harvest 
storage and cold chain facilities; (ii) strengthening 
capacities of agricultural extension officers and 
researchers; (iii) improve farm management which 
includes support of seed multiplication and 
procurement and distribution of seeds and seedlings 
as well as supply of biological control; and (iv) ensure 
effective project management. 
 
Under Component 1, the proposed project will fund 
specific investments on infrastructure for improved 
farm management such as (i) research, ((ii) seed farms, 
(iii) national service laboratories, (iv) off-site and on-
site service and testing laboratories and centers, (v) 
border post quarantine and testing centers, and (vi) 
training centers and other high priority infrastructure 
to support improved farm management in selected 
agro-ecological zones.  
 
The project will also fund infrastructure for value chain 
development such as (i) product collection centers, (ii) 
drying facilities, (iii) post-harvest storage structures, 
(iv) improved information technology service facilities 
and (v) cold chain facilities intended to support 
downstream agricultural value chain development. 
 
Main potential environmental impacts are related to 
construction activities, maintenance and operation of 
the post-harvest storage and cold chain facilities (e.g. 
hygiene, reliable and adequate water and power 
supply). In regards to seed farms, waste management 
on the use of polythene plant bags for 
seedlings/nursery will be the main issue.  

Main potential social risks are related to land 
acquisition, contested land ownership and land 
conflict, and potential exclusion of ethnic minorities, 
landless farmers, women-headed households or other 
vulnerable groups. Any social assessment conducted 
during preparation or implementation will cover these 
social risks.  
 
Project target provinces and states are yet to be 
determined; therefore an Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared. The 
Framework will include the following: 
 
1. Guidance for screening of subprojects, 
ensuring that relevant safeguard policies (natural 
habitats, forests, and projects in disputed areas) are 
adequately addressed.  
 
2. Assessment of environmental and social 
impacts of various activities related to Component 1 
and Component 3. Component 2 of the proposed 
project will focus on capacity building. The component 
will incorporate technical inputs from the safeguards 
specialists into TA’s Terms of References to ensure 
safeguards aspects are mainstreamed. 
 
3. Details on the type, level and depth of 
environmental and social impact assessments 
(SAs/EMPs/SOPs/ECoPs) required for each of the 
investments/activities. 
 
4. Environment Health and Safety (EHS) 
Guidelines for reference as a generic environmental 
management plan, particularly for construction 
related activities. 
 
5. Environmental and Social Management Plan 
(ESMP), particularly on the following issues: 
construction related activities, maintenance and 
operation (hygiene, reliable and adequate water and 
power supply) issues related to the post-harvest 
storage and cold chain facilities (Component 1), and 
waste management on the use of polythene plant 
bags for seedlings/nursery as well as implication of the 


supply of biological control as part of the integrated 
pest and disease management (Component 3). 
 
Overall, the proposed project is expected to deliver a 
number of environmental benefits, such as improved 
soil and water management practices considering the 
agro-ecological context of the project intervention 
area. The project will also contribute to an integrated 
pest and disease management through the adoption 
of sustainable practices by supplying biological 
controls; the use of natural enemies to manage 
population of pest organisms.  
 
Considering the type of investments and activities, 
scale of the proposed project, as well as the nature 
and magnitude of its potential impacts, an 
environmental Category B operation is proposed. 
 

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No  

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

The policy is triggered to ensure that any affected 
natural habitats are adequately protected, because 
some of the project sites may take place near parks or 
protected areas. The proposed project’s ESMF will 
screen out and exclude any subprojects that would 
involve clearing of new land for agriculture. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No 
The proposed project’s ESMF will screen out and 
exclude any clearing or effects on forest lands. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The policy is triggered as a precaution, because 
pesticide use is a necessity in agricultural activities in 
the region. The ESMF will promote Integrated Pest 
Management as standard practice. A screening 
mechanism will be included in the ESMF to determine 
if there are any sub-projects or activities with 
significant pest management issues; if so, then a 
separate Pest Management Plan will be required to 
ensure that these materials are well managed for 
those subprojects and/or activities. 
 
Under Component 3, the proposed project will fund an 
integrated pest and disease management which will 
support the adoption of sustainable pest and disease 
management practices by supplying biological 
controls; the use of natural enemies to manage 
population of pest organisms. The ESMF will provide 

more detailed information on the application of this 
method. 
 
 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 

This policy is triggered to ensure that any “chance 
finds” or other physical cultural resources during 
excavation or other earth-moving activities are 
adequately protected. Project’s ESMF will consist of a 
chance find procedure which requires that should any 
areas of potential cultural importance or artefacts be 
identified, works should stop and the government 
related agencies (to be identified at appraisal stage) 
should be contacted. No work should continue until 
approval has been sought from these agencies. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 Yes 

Myanmar is one of the most ethnically diverse 
countries in Asia, and the project will likely fund sub-
projects where ethnic minorities are present. Both 
under Component 1 (rehabilitation and construction 
of infrastructure) and Component 2 (formation of 
farmer groups), there may be risks that ethnic 
minorities do not have equal and culturally 
appropriate access to benefits, and may not be 
adequately consulted in decision making. 
 
Since project sites are not known at this time, MoA 
will prepare an IPPF as part of the ESMF in order to 
ensure that in sub-projects are screened for ethnic 
minorities, and sub-project areas where ethnic 
minorities are present, MoE will conduct a social 
assessment and ensure that free, prior and informed 
consultations are held to reach broad community 
support. If target project locations are identified 
during preparation, a social assessment will be 
prepared by appraisal, and free, prior and informed 
consultations will be held. If locations and location-
specific activities are not identified during preparation 
and this is left to project implementation, the social 
assessments under the current ADSP project will be 
combined and updated as an assessment of social risks 
in the agriculture sector, specific to the new project 
activities. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

Rehabilitation and construction of test laboratories, 
post-harvest storage units and cold chain facilities are 
not expected to result in significant land acquisition 
impacts, especially since siting should be flexible for 

construction of new facilities. The impacts should be 
moderate and manageable. 
 
Since siting of sub-projects is not known at this time, 
MoA will prepare a RPF in order to ensure that sub-
projects are screened for land acquisition, and 
appropriate plans are prepared in cases where land 
acquisition is necessary. The RPF will also include 
protocols for voluntary land donation. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 TBD 

The project will not finance construction of new dams, 
however, it is yet to be determined during project 
preparation whether it will include repairs / 
maintenance / rehabilitation  of existing dams in which 
case the dam safety measures would be applied. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

TBD 

Project target provinces and states are yet to be 
determined. ESMF will cover the provision of OP/BP 
7.50 should project preparation discussions determine 
that the locations or activities subject to the policy are 
within the international waterway. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
The proposed project’s ESMF will screen out and 
exclude any projects in disputed areas. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Oct 10, 2018 
 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
MoALI- Department of Agriculture will prepare an ESMF, including a pest management plan, IPPF and RPF, before 

appraisal. If target project locations are identified during preparation, a social assessment will be prepared by appraisal, 
and free, prior and informed consultations will be held. If locations and location-specific activities are not identified 
during preparation and this is left to project implementation, the social assessments under the current ADSP project will 
be combined and updated as an assessment of social risks in the agriculture sector, specific to the new project activities. 
These will be disclosed and consulted on after being cleared by the Bank. These instruments will be informed by the 
documentation and implementation experience of the on-going Agriculture Development Support Project (ADSP). 
 
 


























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
North Cameroon Agriculture and Water Smart Landscapes Project (P166072) 

 
 

  
Jan 28, 2018 Page 1 of 25  

     

 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 25-Jan-2019 | Report No: PIDISDSC24140 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Cameroon P166072  Valorization of 
Investments in the 
Valley of the Benue 
(P166072) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA Sep 16, 2019 Dec 20, 2019 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing MINEPAT MEADEN  

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
To contribute to the Regional Climate Resilience Investment Plan by improving irrigation services and sustaining climate 
resilient agricultural productivity in the Benue River Valley. 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 200.00 

Total Financing 200.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 200.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 200.00 

          IDA Credit 200.00 

   
 

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 


A - Full Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 
 
 

B. Introduction and Context 

 
Regional Context  

The Niger Basin, located in West and Central Africa, is one of the major transboundary basins in Africa. Its 
1.5 million km2 active hydrographic basin spans over the territory of nine countries: Benin, Burkina Faso, 
Cameroon, Chad, Guinea, Ivory Coast, Mali, Niger, and Nigeria. Its population of 130 million inhabitants is 
growing rapidly, expected to reach 180 million people by 2025. Except for Nigeria, most of the population in 
the basin is rural and depends on agriculture, animal husbandry or fishing for its livelihood. 
 
The value of the Niger River System resides in its contribution to water, food, energy, and job security, to 
transport and to biodiversity. For thousands of years, the river, its tributaries and connected lakes and 
wetlands have supported local populations with diverse water-dependent livelihoods such as flood-recession 
agriculture, cattle grazing and drinking, fishing and hunting. In the Niger Basin Countries, agriculture (including 
farming, livestock husbandry and fisheries) contributes 20 to 50 per cent of GDP and roughly two-third of the 
population depends on it for its livelihood. Moreover, those mostly family fishing and agro-pastoral systems 
are labor intensive and generate significant indirect employments (processing, trade and crafts). In a region 
with a structural deficit in food production and increasing temperature and rainfall variability and uncertainty, 
the river, its tributaries and connected groundwater resources are key to increase agricultural productivity and 
resilience to climate change. In addition, the river system is important for the energy security of the region, 
with an installed, partially integrated, hydro-power capacity of 2,000MW1. Finally, the Niger hydro-system 
sustains some of the most significant biodiversity areas in the World, notably the Inner2 and Maritime Deltas 
in Mali and Nigeria respectively, both Ramsar sites. 
 
Yet the Niger hydro-system and the population, economies and biodiversity relying on it are vulnerable to 
several climate and water-related shocks and stresses, many of them transboundary in nature. Managing 
competing water demands, notably between upstream and downstream users and between different sectoral 
will be one of the basin’s main development challenges in the coming decades as intensifying water use, while 
necessary, will not be without impacts. Notably, it will be important to strike a balance between the regulation 
of river flows (i.e. reservoirs) and increased water withdrawals for irrigation, hydropower and navigation, as is 
the case of the Upper Niger, Medium Niger and the Benue (i.e. Chad, Cameroon and Nigeria) and the 
preservation of the Maritime Delta ecosystem (i.e. biodiversity and ecological services: fishing) in Nigeria. 

                                            
1 World Bank, 2006: Water Resources Management & Development Opportunities in the Niger River Basin. Policy Note. Economic 
and Sector Work. Washington, DC: World Bank. Nigeria is exporting electricity to Niger and Benin in the Niger Basin. 
2 During the rainy season, the Inner Delta forms a large flood plain of 20,000 to 30,000 km2, facilitating the cultivation of rive, cotton 
and wheat as well as cattle herding and fishing. The size of the flooded area is subject to strong annual variations, depending on the 
discharge in the Upper Basin.  

Priority should therefore be given to increasing the performance of existing infrastructure; 
reducing/postponing the need to build new dams; as well as strengthening the Niger Basin authority (NBA)’s 
capacity in its water allocation, planning and coordination of transboundary projects function.  
 
In this context, the Government of Cameroon has made a request to the Niger Basin Authority to incorporate 
the Lagdo dam into the Niger Basin Master Plan. The WB is currently supporting the master plan through a 
Niger Basin regional program using the Series of Project (SOP) instrument. Phase 1 (Building Climate Resilience 
in the Niger Basin, P161262) objective is to strengthen the Niger Basin Authority’s capacity for integrated, 
transboundary water resources management, while subsequent phases/projects, including the proposed 
operation, would be for country-level investments. Within the master plan integration, the development of 
irrigation from the Lagdo dam is indicated for Cameroun.  

Summary of regional potential water issues, per section of the Niger basin and country 

Section of the Niger Basin / countries Main transboundary issues 

Cameroon, Lower Niger and Benue (Chad, 
Nigeria)  

- Flood risk in Cameroon and Nigeria 
- Land degradation in Cameroon and Chad, 

contributing to sedimentation in 
Cameroon and Nigeria 

- Sub-optimal power generation from 
existing dams in Nigeria (i.e. Kainji and 
Jebba) and Cameroon (i.e. Lagdo) 

-  

Inner Delta (Mali): Wetland of international 
significance (RAMSAR), providing fish, 
pasture land and flood-recession agriculture 
for more than 2 million people 
 

- Vulnerable to a reduction of annual flood 
and overall yearly inflows, that could result 
from an increase in water withdrawals 
from irrigation (i.e. “offices”); river flow 
regulation from future dams (i.e. Fomi) 
or/and climate change 

Middle Niger (Mali, Niger, Benin, Burkina 
Faso) 

- Flooding particularly in Niger and Benin 
- Erosion and Sedimentation in all countries 
- Invasive Species (Water Jacinth) 

Upper Niger (Guinea, Ivory Coast, Mali) - Moderate degradation of land and forest 
cover (Guinea and Ivory Coast) 

- Contamination from informal mining 
(Guinea, Mali and Ivory Coast) 

- Low water productivity in the “Offices” of 
Mali, largest water user in the basin 

- Sub-optimal power generation from 
existing dams in Mali 

Maritime Delta (Nigeria): wetland of 
international significance, source of livelihood 
to about 1 million fishermen 

- Vulnerability to increase water 
withdrawals and regulation from upstream 
countries 

- Invasive Species (Typha, Water Jacinth) 


The proposed project is therefore proposed as the second of a Series of Projects under the Regional 
Program. Through in country investments it will contribute to the implementation of targeted, interventions 
for transboundary, integrated water resource management. 
Country Context 

 

A lower middle income country of about 24 million people, Cameroon is strategically located on the gulf of 
Guinea. It is naturally well placed to play the role of a regional hub. With its 600 kilometer coastline, Cameroon 
borders with six Central Africa countries3 which, with the exception of Nigeria, are members of the Economic 
and Monetary Community of Central Africa (CEMAC by its French acronym). Its regional port of Douala serves 
as an entry point to two strategic road corridors to Bangui and Ndjamena. Cameroon’s Far North region shares 
with Chad, Niger and Nigeria access to Lake Chad, a basin traditionally important for livelihood in the region, 
but also an area of competition for scarce resources including between farmers and pastoralists. Cameroon is 
endowed with ample arable land, water, energy, and oil and mineral resources.  
 
With a per capita Gross Domestic Product of US$1,374 (current prices) in 2017, the economy is largely driven 
by its primary sector, agriculture and mineral resources, and benefits from its location in the Congo Basin, the 
world’s second largest tropical forest zone, which provides an exceptional ecological diversity. The country’s 
mineral wealth includes deposits of oil, natural gas, gold, iron, manganese and uranium. Crude petroleum is an 
important resource accounting for 10 percent of GDP and being the main export product by value. Timber is the 
second largest export product. Imports are dominated by manufactured goods and come mainly from Europe. 
 
Despite having one of the most diversified economies in the CEMAC region, Cameroon’s economic activity 
slowed in 2016. Growth has dipped to 3.7 percent by the end of 2017, compared to 4.4 percent in 2016. This 
outcome is due to slower growth in oil production (+3 percent in 2016 against 37 percent in 2015) resulting from 
the maturity of the main oil fields, and to the avian flu epidemic that has damaged the local poultry industry, 
particularly in the West, which accounts for 80 percent of production. However, continued implementation of 
the Government’s ambitious infrastructure plan and interventions to boost the agriculture and forestry sectors 
have significantly contributed to sustained strong growth in public works and construction and services. Inflation 
rose to 1.6 percent at the end of June 2016, largely based on the increased tax rate on alcohol (7.4 percent) and 
tobacco in the 2015 budget law, and the 4.9 percent increase in prices for services, restaurants, and hotels. 
 
Cameroon’s ruling party, the Cameroon People’s Democratic Movement (CPDM), has long dominated the 
country’s political landscape and currently occupies 148 of the 180 seats in the National Assembly and 81 of 
the 100 seats in the Senate, which was created in 2013.  Presidential elections are scheduled for 2018.  While 
Cameroon has enjoyed peace for many decades in spite of its highly diverse population, it now faces an 
increasingly challenging situation in its northern regions, where Boko Haram is waging a low intensity war.  This 
has resulted in high levels of insecurity and violence, involving 2,276 fatalities in 2014-2015 alone, loss of 
livestock, and risks associated with normal economic activities such as farming. Cameroon’s northern regions 
are facing a humanitarian and economic challenge: The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs 
(OCHA) estimated the number of food insecure people in the northern regions to have increased from one 

million in 2014 to 2.4 million in August 2016, including 253,000 children suffering from severe or moderate acute 
malnutrition. The year 2017 has also been marked by high tensions in the northwest and southwest Anglophone 
regions, which feel marginalized by the rest of the country. 
 
The Government of Cameroon (GoC) long-term vision, Cameroon Vision 2035, is of an emerging, democratic 
and united country in diversity. To operationalize this Vision, the Government adopted a Growth and 
Employment Strategy (DSCE –Document de Stratégie pour la Croissance et l’Emploi) in 2009 and defined specific 
objectives to be achieved by 2020, like to reduce poverty by less than 29 percent and by 10 percent in 2035. 
The GoC has further adopted the United Nations 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. It also endorsed 
the Paris Agreement under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and published 
Cameroon’s Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC) setting out its contribution to climate change mitigation 
and priorities for adaptation.  
 
The DSCE identifies inadequate infrastructure and an unfavorable business environment as the main factors 
impeding economic growth and employment creation. The agriculture sector, which currently employs about 
70 percent of the active population in Cameroon (primarily in the informal sector), is regarded as the engine for 
economic growth and job creation if it can be transformed from traditional farming to diversified and 
commercially viable farming (see below). The DSCE recognizes the need for agricultural diversification, increased 
productivity, and large-scale public investment projects in the sector. In fact, notwithstanding Cameroon’s 
abundance of natural assets and tremendous climatic and land potential, the primary sector’s contribution to 
growth is very limited, about one percentage point of GDP p.a., and is dominated by food crops grown by 
smallholder farmers.  
 
As population growth outpaces poverty reduction, the number of poor increased between 2007 and 2014 by 
12 percent to 8.1 million people, with important regional disparities. The northern regions exhibit by far the 
highest poverty rates in Cameroon, with an estimated 56 percent of the poor living in the North and Far North 
regions alone. In these two northern regions poverty and inequality levels have steadily increased over time 
relative to the rest of the country where poverty and inequality have declined. They are subject to multiple 
poverty traps, which are documented extensively in the World Bank Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD, Report 
103098-CM)4, including low agriculture productivity, increasing vulnerability to climate change, poor 
infrastructure, and limited access to health and education services.  
 
Poverty incidence is correlated with agro-ecological zones. The northern regions of Cameroon, i.e., the four 
poorest regions (the Far-North, the North, the North-West and the Adamawa), belong to three agro-ecological 
zones – the Sudano-Sahelian, the Western Highlands, and the Guinea Savannah zones which together account 
for 80 percent of all poor (see figure below). In the largely arid Sudano-Sahelian zone, comprising the Far North 
and North regions, agricultural output (millet, maize, peanuts, and cotton) depends heavily on rainfall. Animal 
production is also vulnerable to drought. In this zone 72 percent of the population or 56 percent of all poor live 
below the poverty threshold. In the Western Highlands, comprising the North-West and West regions, there is 
a cattle and coffee based system with corn, (coco) yams, potatoes, and peanuts as the main food crops. Thirty-
nine percent of the population in this agro-ecological zone (but as much as 55 percent in the North-West region) 



live below the poverty threshold representing 18 percent of all poor. Twenty percent of the poor live in the 
remaining two agro-ecological zones. 
 
 
Figure 1: Cameroon: incidence of poverty by agro-ecological zone  

Social and economic gaps between 
regions are likely to worsen as a result of 
climate change. The Sudano-Sahelian area 
(North and Extreme North) is the most 
environmentally fragile zone in Cameroon. 
It is particularly exposed to drought and 
increased temperatures with serious 
implications for the majority of inhabitants 
who depend on agriculture and livestock 
for their livelihoods. Regional climate 
change projections suggest that an overall 
decrease in the quantity of the water 
available could exacerbate water 
shortages in many rural areas of northern 
Cameroon. The quality of water will also be 
affected. An increase in temperatures and 
greater dryness are likely to result in net 

capillary movement and the salinization of both water and soils. Rice, one of Cameroon's main food imports, 
grown in the north by both traditional and modern methods, will particularly be affected, but also other food 
crops such as millet, sorghum and maize.  
 
 

Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 

Agriculture remains the backbone of Cameroon's economy, employing 70 percent of its workforce, while 
providing 42 percent of its GDP and 30 percent of its export revenue. Blessed with fertile land and regularly 
abundant rainfall in most regions, Cameroon produces a variety of agricultural commodities both for export and 
for domestic consumption. Coffee and cocoa are grown in central and southern regions, bananas in 
southwestern areas, and cotton in several northern provinces. In addition to export commodities, Cameroonian 
farmers produce numerous subsistence crops for family consumption. Principal food crops include millet, 
sorghum, peanuts, plantains, sweet potatoes, and manioc. Animal husbandry is practiced throughout the 
country and is particularly important in northern provinces. The great majority of Cameroonian farmers are 
small-holders, generally obtaining low yields from small plots of land using traditional methods: handheld hoes 
and animals for draught power. Cash crop production is also done by small holders. Food crops contribute 64 
percent to agricultural GDP, followed by livestock (13 percent), forestry (9 percent), industrial and export crops 
(8 percent), and fisheries (6 percent). About 54 percent of all households have at least one member who owns 
a crop field of about 2.4 hectares (ha) as documented in the DSCE.  
 

Yet, a series of constraints have led Cameroon’s agriculture sector to be characterized by low productivity 
and low-production subsistence farming. Declining soil fertility, limited use of fertilizer, low adoption of high 
yielding varieties and improved farming techniques are among the core reasons for constrained yields. 
Techniques and approaches to address these constraints exist, and Cameroon is blessed with a multitude of 
high quality agricultural research institutions. Nevertheless, the adoption of improved practices remains limited, 
as no functional extension system is in place, as evidenced by the size of the yield gaps. The main constraints 
are: (i) Limited access to inputs (less than 7 kg/ha of fertilizers are used; the use of improved seeds is lower than 
30 percent); (ii) Very limited mechanization: Cameroon has a ratio of 0.1 tractor/1,000 ha and a mechanization 
ratio of only 0.1; (iii) Weak institutional capacity of Producer Organizatons (POs) associated with limited 
storage/processing capacity and marketing infrastructure; (iv) Lack of storage and marketing infrastructure, 
aggravated by the isolation of agricultural production areas because of the poor quality of rural roads, which 
comprise 80 percent of the national network (only 5.2 percent or 4,200 out of 81,000 km are in good condition); 
(vi) Limited access to credit/rural finance: POs and SMAEs have limited access to credit/ rural finance because 
of their inability to present viable projects for financing, the (perceived) high cost of financing, and the absence 
of specific financial services/instruments for their segment; and (vii) The size of traditional family farm 
enterprises, of which 63 percent are too small (less than 2 ha) to profit from non intensive agriculture.  
 
Meanwhile costly and poorly targeted subsidies do not benefit the poorest, distort the market and increase 
food dependency. In an effort to mitigate the negative effects of the 2008 rise in food and fuel prices, the 
Government launched a universal subsidy program (food and fuel), which by 2011 was costing the Government 
around 2.7 percent of GDP. In 2013 more than US$100 million was spent to subsidize fish, wheat and rice alone. 
These subsidies benefit the urban middle and upper class and only very small amounts (between 2 percent and 
27 percent depending on the food item) benefit the poorest 40 percent. These persistent subsidies and the 
attempts to stabilize the market through interventions act as a disincentive for local food production and not 
only aggravate rural poverty, they also sustain the country’s dependency on food imports. In addition, as 
Cameroon is well placed to serve a sub-region that has high purchasing power and is structurally deficient in 
food, distortionary policies impact negatively on trade competitiveness. 
 
Agriculture, livestock management and agro-forestry are not only sectors in which the majority of the poor 
are engaged, they are also sectors of competitive advantage. This is based on three observations. The first is 
that Cameroon has factor endowments rich in unskilled and semi-skilled labor and natural resources. Cameroon 
has a unique bio-diversity and is the custodian of global public goods such as the rainforest in the Congo Basin. 
Only 29 percent of arable land is cultivated, and below 3 percent of irrigable land is irrigated. It thus has a 
comparative advantage in primary products, agriculture, environment and mining. The second is that high 
indirect costs on doing business are less limiting on agriculture, pastoralism and agro-industry than they are on 
more sophisticated manufacturing or high-tech, tradeable services. The third is that Cameroon does not meet 
the internal nor regional demand for cereals, meat and animal products and the agricultural trade balance is 
negative. 
 
Improving the functioning of value chains for staple food crops is particularly important for poverty reduction. 
Poor households spend a larger share of their budget on food than non-poor households do. Moreover 
households in the two poorest wealth quintiles ‘specialize’ in the cultivation of food crops like maize, millet, 


     

sorghum, yams, banana, cassava, and beans. These crops are also the staple foods for the poorest households, 
implying that improvements in production and commercialization for these crops would have the double benefit 
of increasing farm incomes and reducing food prices for the urban poor who rely on food purchases. Many rural 
poor will benefit from lower food prices as many are net food purchasers. Good results are already being 
achieved by linking farmer cooperatives producing millet and sorghum with large industrial enterprises like 
Guiness. The value chain for milk similarly offers great opportunities, as does the value chain for poultry, meat, 
eggs or chickenfeed. 
 
The presence of significant yield gaps for the most popular crops suggests scope for productivity increases. 
Assessing actual crop yields against maximum attainable levels offers important insights into the performance 
of agriculture and the potential for yield growth and expected productivity gains from agricultural investments 
and policies, including land and water resources management. The yield gap for Cameroon is substantial. The 
largest differences are for sweet potato, rice and cassava, with yield gaps of 78, 75 and 73 percent. Sorghum, 
maize and potatoes also have sizeable yield gaps of respectively 63, 67 and 64 percent.5 
 
In a context of improved yields, there is significant potential for the (domestic and regional) markets to absorb 
increased food production. Already the demand for food in Cameroon exceeds supply as evidenced by the large 
amount of food that is imported. Also the high levels of chronic malnutrition –particularly in the north of the 
country, point in the direction of an unmet demand for food. Moreover, there is a large demand for food in the 
region. Nigeria is a huge market and rice, maize and onions already find their way to markets in Nigeria, but also 
in Gabon and the Democratic Republic of Congo. But even domestically the demand for food will rise rapidly 
due to an annual population growth rate of 2.8 percent and increased urbanization. However, the formation of 
a middle class will be accompanied by the demand for food products with a high income elasticity such as rice, 
milk and milk products, eggs and meat. 
 

On land issues, a main principle is lands belong to the State. The Government of Cameroon (GoC) has initiated 
a land reform process over 10 years ago and a draft land law is currently being reviewed at the presidency 
level. While the proposed law is not yet being shared outside the Government, preliminary analyses suggest 
that it does not contain any major innovations likely to address the dysfunctions of the land sector. It does not 
seem to be based on the definition of a fundamental land policy addressing issues across the various sectors 
(agricultural, pastoral, forestry, environmental, industrial, urban). Moreover, the proposed law barely seems to 
address the issue of recognition of customary land rights but rather there seems to be a desire to strengthen 
the role of the State in land ownership and the constitution of public land reserves. It is, however, questionable 
when the new land law would be adopted given the political sensitivity of land issues in a context of upcoming 
presidential elections in 2018 and increasing tensions and fragile situations in several regions of the country. 
 
Despite the many challenges it faces, the GoC is committed to increase investment in the agriculture sector 
for poverty reduction and economic growth. A growth strategy that focuses on products cultivated by the 
poorest has a greater likelihood of successful poverty reduction, and as the majority of the poor can be found 
in the rural areas of northern Cameroon, a poverty reducing growth strategy would focus on the value chain 
development of coarse grains (rice, maize, millet, and sorghum) but also livestock, beans and cotton, which is 

     

the main cash crop grown in the Northern regions. In this context, the GOC’s agriculture strategy is expressed 
in three key national strategy and planning documents: (i) «Vision 2035» envisages agricultural growth beyond 
5 percent by 20209; the DSCE foresees significant productivity increases in agriculture and livestock farming; (ii) 
the 2005 - 2009 Rural Development Strategy and its 2013 update (“Document de Stratégie de Développement 
du Secteur Rural,” - DSDSR) commit to a modernization of rural infrastructure and agricultural production and 
sustainable management of natural resources; and (iii) Cameroon has engaged in the African Union’s 
Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Program (CAADP), and with CAADP support, Cameroon is 
currently finalizing its 2014-2020 National Agriculture Investment Program (“Plan National d’Investissement 
Agricole,” - PNIA11).  
 

Cameroon aims to articulate and implement a more robust public expenditure program to improve sector 
performance. This would necessitate an examination of the national budget level benefiting the sector, which 
currently remains below 5 percent of the total budget (compared with the CAADP target of 10 percent), as well 
as a review of the quality of expenditure planning, allocation, and implementation. To this effect, the agriculture 
sector ministries (MINADER and the Ministry of Livestock, Fisheries, and Animal Production) with support from 
the Bank are currently finalizing an agriculture sector public expenditure review to identify bottlenecks, 
inefficiencies, and deviations from the policy goals. The review, which is expected to be completed by the 
effectiveness of the proposed project, will analyze growth of agriculture on a macroeconomic scale within the 
framework of a computable general equilibrium model. This model will analyze the role of relative prices, public 
expenditure, and exchange rates on the growth in the sector. This tool will also development partners to help 
decide how to increase the financial resources dedicated to agricultural development. 
 
Within this framework, the Government of Cameroon asked support from the World Bank to improve 
irrigation services and sustain climate resilient agricultural productivity in the Benue River Valley, in the North 
of Cameroon. One of the poorest regions in the country, highly populated, and with a history of immigration 
pressure from the extreme North, the North region is within the Sudano-Sahelian Savanah agroecological zone. 
Of the five agroecological zones of Cameroon, the Sudano-Sahelian (North and Extreme North) is the one with 
the shortest rain-fed season (March to September, Figure 2 below).  
 

     

In this zone, the potential Evapotranspiration (ETP) is never fully satisfied by the amount of monthly rainfall, 
inducing a permanent deficit (figure 3 below). This translates into water stress and reduced photosynthesis and 
therefore yields. In this zone improved water storage, water harvesting, and irrigation are critical to improving 
farm production. Improved water management also enhances the ability to withstand climatic shocks and is 
commensurate with a strategy whereby the production of staples is promoted in rain-fed systems and 
production of high value cereals (e.g.  rice), horticultural cops, and industrial crops in irrigated systems. With an 
enormous untapped potential for irrigation (a 5,900 million m3 Lagdo reservoir) the Benué Valley if correctly 
developed will have a significant impact in improving the life of hundreds of thousands of people through 
economic growth, poverty reduction, social stabilization, and reduced vulnerability. 
 

Figure 3 Thornthwaite water budget: annual data at Maroua-Salack, (1970-1985) 

 
 

 

Different groups of poor people can be expected to benefit from increases in agricultural productivity in the 
Benué Valley. Poor farmers will benefit from higher incomes brought about by productivity gains while non-
farmers in rural areas benefit from spill-over gains. When increased agricultural productivity leads to increases 
in food production, lower food prices will benefit the urban poor and net food buyers in rural areas, often the 
poorest. This is not inconsequential. High transportation costs make food an imperfectly tradeable commodity. 
An important transmission mechanism from agricultural productivity to aggregate growth is through the price 
of food, as it allows sustaining lower labor costs in the rest of the economy. 
 
The proposed project may qualify for a high adaptation and mitigation co-benefits in the form of adoption of 
Climate Smart practices, reduction in irrigation energy use, reducing emissions from deforestation and forest 
degradation and agricultural management activities that improve carbon pools. Project activities proposed 
under components 1, 2 and 3 are included on the “List of activities eligible for classification as climate mitigation 
finance” in the 2016 Joint Report on Multilateral Development Banks’ Climate Finance under category 4, sub-
     

category 4.1 and 4.2. In compliance to the corporate mandate included in the Environment Strategy endorsed 
by the board in 2012, a preliminary GHG assessment using conservative boundary values has been performed 
for this project using the Ex-Ante Carbon Balance Tool (EX-ACT).  Preliminary results show that the project 
creates a total net carbon sequestration of 337,558 tCO2-eq. Watershed management provided the largest 
potential for mitigation co-benefits. An updated GHG assessment will be performed during the appraisal stage. 
 
 

Relationship to CPF 
 

The project objective is fully consistent with the Cameroon Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for 2017-2021 
to support poverty reduction and shared prosperity in Cameroon. The FY17-FY21 CPF succeeded the Cameroon 
Country Partnership Strategy (FY10-FY13, report number - 52997), which was extended until FY14 by the 
Progress and Learning Report considered by the Executive Directors in October 2012. The CPF draws on a 
comprehensive Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD, report 103098-CM), completed during FY16, which 
identified constraints to achieving the World Bank’s Twin Goals of eliminating poverty and fostering shared 
prosperity in a socially and environmentally sustainable way. Despite more than a decade of economic growth, 
national poverty incidence has remained almost unchanged.  Poverty decreased slowly as a percentage of 
population, from 40.2 percent in 2001 to 37.5 percent in 2014, and its incidence declined in urban areas from 
17.9 percent to an estimated 8.9 percent during the same period.  In rural areas, on the other hand, the 
percentage of poor increased from 52.1 percent to 56.8 percent.  Even though urban poverty declined 
significantly in relative terms, the absolute number of urban poor declined only slightly, by 300,000, because 
the urban population increased by approximately 4.1 million since 2001. In rural areas, higher poverty incidence 
resulted in 1.1 million additional poor people. Overall, the absolute number of poor in Cameroon increased by 
approximately 800,000 since 2001. 

 
The CPF has concluded that in the short-term, the largest opportunity for increasing shared prosperity and 
reducing acute poverty in Cameroon is an improvement in rural livelihoods, largely based on agriculture.  Eighty-
five percent of all poor people live in the countryside. Of these a majority live in the Sudano-Sahelian areas of 
the North and the Far North regions. Cameroon has a strong potential to increase agriculture productivity. It 
has a comparative advantage in primary products based on a relative abundance of natural resources and 
unskilled and semi-skilled labor. There is also significant unmet internal demand for cereals, meat and animal 
products. The development of labor-intensive agro-industry could offer a path towards more diversified, 
complex and higher value forms of manufacturing. Key issues include low agricultural yields, limited 
infrastructure for transportation, delivery, and storage, as well as the need for improved irrigation and water 
harvesting to improve farm production in some areas.  
 
The proposed project addresses the key issues identified in the CPF and promotes natural resources and water 
management, irrigation, and agriculture under a participatory landscapes approach, with a specific focus on 
land tenure rights security.  Irrigation (as major investment component) will be expanded from reservoirs 
already developed on the Benue River which would provide safeguard against climate change impacts and 
increased occurrence of droughts. The supporting project components are aligned to development and 
dissemination of new agricultural technologies, climate-resilient rainfed agriculture, enhanced market linkages 
for small and marginal farmers, and improved natural resource management in the upper catchment areas of 

the Benue River. Further the project will have positive impact in terms of environmental protection, and reduced 
greenhouse emissions by disseminating high efficiency irrigation systems, particularly for high value crops, 
which significantly reduce water consumption. The proposed project would also improve the sustainability and 
reliability of rainfed agriculture and small-scale irrigated agriculture in the Benue River Valley downstream of 
the Lagdo dam with better flood protection features. Thus the proposed project will be closely aligned to the 
findings and recommendations contained in the CPF. 
 
Link with other existing projects. The proposed Project builds on previous work and results of the Flood 
Emergency Project (PULCI - P143940) for component 2 and 4, and will closely coordinate with the Agriculture 
Investment and Market Development Project (PIDMA - P143417) for component 3. PULCI, following previous 
work from PACA (P112635), is working to improve irrigation and flood protection in a sustainable manner for 
the riverine population of the Far-North. Furthermore, the Bank is currently undertaking a AAA for increasing 
climate smart agriculture in Northern Cameroon. In addition, the project will collaborate with the regional 
initiative Building Climate Resilience in the Niger Basin (P161262) whose objective is to strengthen the Niger 
Basin Authority’s capacity for integrated, transboundary water resources management, being the Benue valley 
part of the Niger basin.” 
 
 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
I. The Overall Series of Project Program  

  

The Program Development Objective is to strengthen NBA’s capacity for integrated, transboundary water 
resources management and support the implementation of the Regional Climate Resilience Investment Plan 
(CRIP).   
  
The program activities focus on two broad areas:   
  
Strengthening of ABN’s capacity for transboundary, integrated water resource management (WRM) investing 
in Planning and feasibility studies, Environmental Information System and associated decision making tools, 
Operationalization of the Water Charter, and Strengthening NBA’s operational capacity, dissemination of good 
practices and project implementation support; and  
  
Support of the implementation of the CRIP focusing on transboundary activities. Among the numerous activities 
planned in the CRIP two types of activities have been selected: activities aimed at improving the performance 
and safety of large, existing transboundary infrastructure (mostly for hydropower and irrigation) in order to 
postpone the need to develop further large dams and their potential damages on riparian countries and 
measures to manage transboundary contributions to flood and sedimentation.   
Among the potential activities are the following: (i) Improving the performance and safety of key existing 
hydropower dams, such as, for example, the Kainji and Jebba dams in Nigeria, the Sotuba and Selinge dam in 
Mali, and the Lagdo hydropower dam in Cameroon, with its interconnection to Chad; (ii) Improving water-use 
efficiency of the “Office du Niger” in Mali; and (iii) Addressing Niger River sedimentation and recurrent flooding 
in the “Moyen Niger” and “Benoué tributary” through water conservation measures in Burkina Faso, Cameroun 


and Benin among others.  
 
 

 
II.  Proposed Development Objective(s)  

  

The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve irrigation services and sustain climate resilient 
agricultural productivity in the Benue River Valley located within the administrative region of North, in 
Cameroon.   
  
This would be achieved through sustainable management of the water resources generated in the Benué River 
catchment area and flowing to the reservoir impounded behind the Lagdo dam, as well as of the regulated river 
flows downstream of the dam for irrigated agriculture. In addition, flood mitigation and protection measures 
on the Benue River system downstream of the Lagdo dam will enable sustainable rain-fed agriculture in the river 
valley. Support to livelihoods in the Lagdo reservoir and improved feed availability for livestock due to increased 
production of crops would improve off farm rural incomes resulting in shared prosperity.   
  
 
Key Results (From PCN) 

 

The Key Project Indicators (KPI) will be:  

a) Area provided with new/improved irrigation and drainage services (in Has, Core Indicator); 
b) Increase in irrigated  area (hectares) under vegetables as well as cereal crops; 
c) Increase in climate resilient agricultural productivity (yield/ha) of various crops grown in the project 

areas; 
d) Number of farmers reached with agricultural assets or services.   

 
 
 
D. Concept Description 

 

1. Description 
 
Introduction/Background: The project area covers the Benue river valley located in North Cameroon 
Administrative Region, one of the poorest regions of the country. The Lagdo multipurpose dam was 
constructed on the Benue River over the years 1978-1982. At completion, the storage volume in the reservoir 
impounded behind the dam was about 7,700 million cubic meters. A hydropower plant was established with 
72 MW installed capacity and allowance was made for provision of water for irrigation of about 11,000 ha 
(about 6,000 ha along the right bank of the river and about 5,000 ha along the left bank of the river). The 
hydropower station has been operating since 1982 but the irrigation development did not take place as 
originally envisaged. About 800 ha were developed on the right bank in 1992. The reservoir storage volume 
has been impacted over the last 30 years by sedimentation and currently the storage volume available is 



 
The World Bank  
North Cameroon Agriculture and Water Smart Landscapes Project (P166072) 

 
 

  
Jan 28, 2018 Page 15 of 25  

     

estimated to be about 5900 million cubic meters based on bathymetric surveys completed in 2005. The project 
would support the sustainable management of the Benue watershed, the development of irrigated agriculture 
on both banks of the river immediately downstream of the river as well as in the river valley below, and the 
improvement of agriculture practices in the valley, including land tenure right management. In accordance with 
World Bank OP 4.37, project financing would include aspects related to safe operation of the dam and 
appurtenances. The total project cost is expected to be about US$ 200 million for a duration of seven years. 
The project will have the following components. 
 

Component 1: Watershed Management (US$ 5M IDA, US$ 10M regional IDA, US$ 15M Total) 
 

The primary goal of this component is to reverse the process of degradation of the natural resource base and 
improve the productive potential of natural resources and incomes of the rural households in the watershed 
sustaining the Lagdo reservoir while improving the operation and safety of the dam. The secondary goal is to 
maintain the quality and quantity of water of the reservoir through sustainable operation and maintenance. It 
will finance watershed interventions, consulting services, technical assistance and equipment along the 
following.  
 

Watershed management: Prior to the construction of the dam and impoundment of the reservoir at Lagdo, the 
population farmed the reservoir area after the recession of flood flows each year. After the impoundment some 
of these farmers have moved to the periphery of the reservoir and have been cultivating there. Tillage of lands 
and cultivation induces soil erosion in these areas resulting in sediment deposition in the reservoir. In addition, 
the reservoir is an important source for fisheries development. Cutting of firewood to smoke the fish, a common 
practice in Cameroon, resulted in deforestation further contributing to erosion and sedimentation in the 
reservoir. This subcomponent will introduce sustainable practices to manage the watershed. It will mobilize 
community participation in watershed development and management aimed at integrating land-water use to 
reduce soil erosion, retain moisture and produce biomass, while enhancing incomes and livelihood options. 
Non-arable land development: interventions will be aimed at (i) ecological rehabilitation of the catchment by 
carrying out soil and water conservation measures through site specific treatment plans, and (ii) narrowing the 
gap between biomass production and consumption in degraded areas. Arable land development: This 
subcomponent will improve cropping systems through promoting adoption of new agronomic practices, and 
fisheries, crop diversification, water harvesting technologies and optimal use of natural sources. Effort for 
improving land tenure security as an incentive to use these new agronomic practices and technology will be 
included in this subcomponent. Funds would be provided to secure appropriate expertise in this regard and to 
implement the measures described above as appropriate. Funds would be provided to secure appropriate 
expertise in this regard and to implement the measures described above as appropriate. This subcomponent 
can be assigned Mitigation co-benefits as financed activities will lead to net reduction in GHG emissions. 
 
Component 2: Water Infrastructure rehabilitation, development and maintenance (US$ 45M IDA, US$ 90M 
regional IDA, US$ 135M Total) 
 
The goal of this component is to rehabilitate and develop water infrastructure that will ensure dam operation 
and safety downstream of Lagdo and allow irrigated agriculture in 11,000 ha, a potentially game changer for the 
rural economy of the North of Cameroon. It will finance studies, consulting services, works and equipment along 


     

the following three subcomponents. This component may qualify for both climate change adaptation and 
mitigation co-benefits . 
 
Subcomponent 2a:  Sustainable operation and maintenance of Lagdo Dam and Reservoir Complex: The Lagdo 
Reservoir impounded behind the Lagdo Dam provides water for power generation and irrigation of lands located 
immediately below the dam on both banks of the river, and is designed to provide flood modulation as well. The 
lake is also a resource for fisheries. Funds would be provided to improve the water inflow forecasts through 
provision of updated electronic meteorological equipment in the catchment and to improve the modeling 
capabilities of Eneo, the operator of the dam. (Eneo, the Energy Company of Cameroon, is responsible for power 
generation and distribution in the country but has also been given the overall responsibility of Lagdo dam 
operation – power generation, irrigation releases, flood releases, and safety of the dam).  The dam is owned by 
the Government of Cameroon (MEADEN) with Eneo operating under an umbrella contract for energy generation 
and distribution throughout the country with other assets as well.  Currently the dam is being inspected 
periodically by a national expert panel. Funds would be provided to set up an independent dam safety panel 
with specific Terms of Reference in accordance with Dam Safety Guidelines of the World Bank. The Dam was 
built in early eighties. The international standards for design floods and flood evacuating mechanisms have 
changed substantially during the last four decades. The Hydrologic computations for the dam/reservoir complex 
would be revisited and if required the design floods would be revised on the basis of today’s standards. Hydraulic 
computations would also be revised to ensure flood handling mechanisms are adequate to meet current 
standards. Funds would be provided to carry out the required studies and analysis using reputed firms. Funds 
would be provided to make any structural modifications required to the dam and spillway arising out of these 
studies. Improved emergency preparedness plans would be prepared using up to date maps and technology for 
a flooding early warning system. This sub-component may qualify for climate change adaptation co-benefits. 
 
Subcomponent 2b: Irrigation infrastructure to utilize direct water releases available from the Reservoir 
(11,000ha) – Provision was made in the original design of the Lagdo Dam Complex to provide irrigation water 
to irrigate lands situated on both banks of the river immediately downstream of the river. Original designs 
allowed for gravity irrigation of about 6,000 ha on the right bank and about 5,000 ha on the left bank. However, 
only limited irrigation infrastructure was built along the right bank covering about 1,000 ha and no infrastructure 
including release offtake was built on the left bank. In order to utilize the water resource asset already provided 
for in the reservoir for agriculture development, funds would be provided to update the feasibility studies 
carried out earlier covering the irrigation areas on both banks and to prepare detailed designs, cost estimates 
and bid documents for the left bank infrastructure in its entirety. Notional cropping patterns will be developed 
during project preparation on the basis of soil suitability, climate factors and irrigability. Funds would be 
provided for the construction of all requisite infrastructure for the development of the 5,000 ha on the left bank 
including the offtake at the dam.  
 
On the right bank, infrastructure developed for the 1,000 ha requires rehabilitation and modernization.  Funds 
would be provided to update the feasibility studies carried out earlier for the right bank as well as detailed 
designs and cost estimates covering the total gravity command of 6,000 ha. Funds would be provided for 
rehabilitation/modernization of irrigation infrastructure covering 1,000 ha. On the left bank the GoC intends to 
have private-sector led commercial investors. Options of IFC supporting this investment are being considered 


and will be further developed at preparation. The project will propose some legal mechanism to improve land 
tenure right security for all the stakeholders involved in the irrigation schemes. Funds would be provided for 
the construction of primary irrigation infrastructure covering the remaining 5,000 ha on the right bank.  
 
Subcomponent 2c: Technical Assistance for Irrigation Management. This Subcomponent will address the 
daunting challenge of ensuring the long-term viability of the irrigation and drainage services delivered on the 
irrigation schemes.  The approach will be to implement a progressive management transfer to users’ regulated 
bodies in the form of WUAs and to autonomous professional operators, either public or private.  The approach 
will be first piloted in the right bank, which is the ‘first mover’, starting with the areas to be rehabilitated.  The 
investments under this Subcomponent would support the development of a detailed training strategy with 
associated learning materials to re-align existing WUAs and establish new ones to achieve a transformed 
institutional structure for effective water management.  
 
Component 3: Agriculture Production (US$ 40M, IDA) 
 
The fundamental needs of Cameroon to increase production and enhance productivity in the North (especially 
with irrigation and particularly of smallholders), reduce vulnerability, boost rural employment, and provide 
environmental services come in a context where agriculture is challenged by extreme weather, increased 
market risk, too-slow progress in raising rural incomes in some regions, and too-slow progress in improving 
nutrition, especially for women and infants. Agriculture is the main activity of the households (88%) of the area. 
Globally it is extensive agriculture with low production dominated by cereals (maize and sorgho), groundnut 
and cowpea as food-crops and cotton as cash-crop. Within the riverbanks, small plots of onions, tomatoes and 
other vegetables can be found. Social studies show an abundance of labor force. The markets are in Lagdo and 
Ngong, being also intermediaries that re-sell the primary products in Garoua and Ngaoundere. This component 
will focus on production, linking farmers to markets, and support services. It will finance grants, training, works, 
equipment, workshops and studies along the following sub-components. 
 
Subcomponent 3a: Climate Smart Agriculture – Climate-Smart Agriculture (CSA) is an approach for reorienting 
agricultural systems under the new realities of climate change: (i) sustainably increasing agricultural productivity 
to support equitable increases in incomes, food security and development; (ii) adapting and building resilience 
to climate change; and (iii) developing opportunities to reduce GHG emissions from agriculture compared with 
past trends. Activities will focus essentially on enhancing climate proofing while improving water and agriculture 
productivity. Examples of these activities are the dissemination of Systems of Rice Intensification (SRI) 
techniques, water saving technologies such as low pressure irrigation, mechanization services, improved soil 
management, urea-deep placement, drought-resistant and hybrid seed varieties, Integrated Nutrient 
Management (INM), Integrated Pest Management (IPM), organic farming techniques, and diversification into 
high value crops such as pulses and millets, vegetables and other horticulture crops. The project will provide 
farmers with training and technical assistance. A grant facility will finance small equipment, inputs, services 
and/or activities to: (i) promote the adoption of priority technologies, (ii) strengthen producer-based 
organizations, transfer knowledge and technologies; (iii) improve food safety and quality standards, and (iv) 
improve handling, packaging and post-harvest management at the farm level. This sub-component may qualify 
for climate change adaptation co-benefits. 

Subcomponent 3b: Agribusiness and linking farmers to market – This subcomponent will focus on value 
addition and forward linking farmers to markets under a productive alliance approach. Productive alliances are 
collaborative arrangement between groups or producer organizations (POs) and an agribusiness within 
particular value-chains for provision in a specified quantity, quality and time.  Four elements define the nature 
of a Productive Alliance (PA), namely: a group of organized producers, a buyer, an investment in production and 
marketing, and technical assistance. The project will finance outreach and promotional activities to identify POs, 
commercial partners and private financing entities to form alliances, and formulate business proposals and 
business plans. In order to become eligible for financing under the project, a business plan will have to be 
financially feasible, and support one or more productive alliances. Grants would be that portion of the alliance’s 
business plan that would be: (i) financed with proceeds from the proposed project; (ii) implemented by POs; (iii) 
governed by agreements signed between the PO and the project; and (iv) include fixed capital (e.g., plant and 
equipment, minor infrastructure), working capital and technical assistance expenditures. Examples of business 
plans to be financed could be the following: the establishment of PO managed collection, dehusking and 
processing center for rice or cereals, a sorting, grading and packaging facility for fresh vegetables, a grading and 
processing center for cashew nuts. 
 
Subcomponent 3c: Farm Service Centers – The project will finance a TA to promote a local network of private, 
retail supply and farm service businesses Farm Service Centers (FSCs) throughout the project area. An 
enterprise-based delivery of farm supplies and services, FSCs will be one-stop-shops that provide smallholder 
farmers with agricultural and veterinary inputs, services and technologies that will help production and linkages 
to markets. This highly adaptable model, has already been proven successful in several countries worldwide and 
in the region, notably in Senegal and Ethiopia. Grants will be provided and applications reviewed and ranked on 
a competitive basis to evaluate technical capacity, proposed business plan, and potential impacts.  FSCs can be 
privately owned or owned by cooperatives or other types of producers associations. In addition, this 
subcomponent will promote mechanization providing on-demand tractor services for smallholder farmers who 
are relying on expensive and often unavailable manual labor through low-cost “Smart Tractor owners” that pairs 
better off local tractors owners with labor-constrained farmers willing to pay for tractor services (tractor 
“Uberization”). A booking system will allow farmers to request, schedule and prepay for tractor services, from 
nearby Smart Tractor owners, through SMS messaging and mobile money. The subcomponent will provide 
grants, studies and consultant services. Technical inputs and knowledge sharing for this component will be 
provided (tentatively) by the Syngenta Foundation.  
 
Component 4. Implementation (US$ 10M IDA) 
 
Subcomponent 4a: Institutional Strengthening – The primary institution responsible for water resources 
development and management in the North of Cameroon is MEADEN reporting to MINEPAT. The Government 
has constituted a multi-disciplinary team to formulate this project. In order to formulate this project well and 
implement it, MEADEN staff structure has to be modified and modernized. The current organogram of MEADEN 
is being studied in detail to identify gaps and areas for strengthening in order to develop over the coming years 
a modern up to international standards MEADEN, similar to the SAED (Société Nationale d’Aménagement et 
d’Exploitation des Terres) approach in Senegal. MEADEN presently is a state-owned entreprise in charge of 

irrigation service delivery as well as land allocation to farmers and land preparation  TORs are being prepared 
and positions will be filled based on Job Descriptions acceptable to the Bank after the approval of the PCN. 
Funds would be provided to support the training required to strengthen the skills of MEADEN staff both in the 
country, and abroad.  
The operation and maintenance of the new and rehabilitated/modernized irrigation systems would be carried 
out jointly by MEADEN and the Water Users Associations to be set up under the project. MEADEN would be 
responsible for the operation and maintenance of the primary canals and drains while the WUAs would be 
responsible for the secondary and tertiary systems. For irrigation services to be effectively delivered, WUAs will 
have to rely on a participatory design and the cooperation of all member farms, which entails paying irrigation 
and WUA membership fees, signing water contracts with WUAs and attending WUA planning meetings.  
 As several farms are headed by women, a study will be carried out during preparation to find the social 
implications for female irrigators to honor their farm’s financial obligations to WUAs, attend WUA planning 
meetings, and sign an annual contract for water delivery with the WUAs. The study will provide analyses and 
recommendations to improve land tenure rights as well for both female and male irrigators. In addition, the 
concept of WUAs is new to Cameroon. Funds would be provided to train the WUAs as well as to develop 
appropriate legislation for the creation of the WUAs (this is already on-going with the PULCI project).  
Government of Cameroon authorities undertook a study visit in January 2018 to visit the SAED  operations in 
the Senegal river’s delta, where such WUAs are operating efficiently. Following the same model, funds would 
be provided to develop similar arrangements between MEADEN and the WUAs. Irrigation infrastructure would 
be provided with required instrumentation to enable MEADEN to monitor the performance of the WUAs on a 
regular basis to ensure irrigation water is supplied to the farmers on a timely basis and agreed quantities are 
delivered. 
Subcomponent 4b: Project Implementation and M&E support – This subcomponent will set up a Project 

Management Unit (PMU) to assist MEADEN in the day-to-day implementation of the project. Proposed structure 

of the PMU with job descriptions will be developed and agreed with MEADEN before appraisal.  The core PMU 

will be set up in MEADEN soon after the PCN approval. Funds would be provided to meet salaries and allowances 

of PMU staff and to cover operation expenses. The GoC expressed interest in requesting a Project Advance. 

These funds will be used among other things to make progress in setting up and strengthen the PMU 

accordingly. In addition, baseline information will be collected before the start of the management of the 

watershed and before the starting of the production activities in the area to allow an impact evaluation at the 

end of the project life. 

 
 
    

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
The project is located in the Sudano-sahelian zone of Cameroon, it is presumably the driest zone of the country. Rainfall 

in this zone is highly variable with its onset very erratic and last for about 5 months (May-September). This zone is mostly 
affected by land degradation. Land disputes and agropastoral conflicts are of a major concern because there are no 


defined routes for cattle migration, and thus animals. Land degradation is due to pressures such as deforestation due to 
expanding agriculture, fuel wood harvesting, bush fires, semi-intensive and extensive cattle rearing and farming. National 
Park belongs to this zone and it is home to elephants, black rhinos, cheetahs, hyenas, population of hippos and other 
wildlife. Porous borders and poor park protection make Faro extremely vulnerable to poachers, livestock, and habitat 
destruction. 
 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
Cameroon has a comprehensive Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) law and regulations as well as 

occupational safety regulations. The framework law No 96/12 of 5 August 1996 on environmental management highlights 
in its article 17 the principle of environmental impact assessment. Two forms of public participation-stakeholder 
engagement are required for ESIA by law: public consultations during the assessment stage and public hearings during the 
review stage. Legal and administrative appeals are possible at all stages and for all decisions relating to ESIA. A relatively 
mature central (Ministry of environment, interministerial Committee on the Environment, CIE decentralized 
(municipalities, Divisional Committees for technical and administrative supervision of ESMP and ministry of environment 
decentralized units) ESIA authorities are in place but they are understaffed. The CIE gives an opinion on the quality of 
reports prior to their approval by the Minister. The decentralized units don’t have adequate financial provision. They lack 
adequate equipment for fieldwork, and Senior staff lack personal vehicles. In 2017, the ESIA sub-directorate and 
Environmental & Social Management Plan (ESMP) sub-directorate in the Ministry of Environment consist of six full-time 
staff and 2-4-part time staff, of whom many are knowledgeable about the national ESIA system and the World Bank 
Safeguards for which they received a substantial training. MAEDEN is not familiar with the World Bank operational 
policies as this is its first Bank financed projects. It has an institutionalized GIS unit but does not have the necessary 
technical knowledge and expertise in environmental and social issues in the region and as such has the technical capacity 
to identify and flag any safeguards related concerns to the implementation of the safeguards instruments for national-
level investments, should any arise during project implementation. To bridge this gap, the project will set up a Project 
Management Unit (PMU) to assist MEADEN in the day-to-day implementation of the project. At the early stage of 
preparation, two safeguards specialists (Social and Environmental) will be hired for the PMU. They will oversee the 
preparation of the safeguard documents, liaise with local consultants, and coordinate the organization of the necessary 
consultations with key concerned stakeholders and the in-country disclosure of the safeguards instruments. 
 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 
FNU Owono Owono, Social Specialist 
Cyrille Valence Ngouana Kengne, Environmental Specialist 

 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The Project is proposed to be classified as Category 
OP/BP 4.01 “A” due to potential downstream impacts 
and negative potential environmental and social 
impacts associated with development and/or 
rehabilitation of irrigation infrastructure. A basin level 
ESIA report that will include Cumulative Impact 
Assessment (CIA) will be prepared during 
implementation. However, a specific ESIA for the 


n irrigation scheme (11,000 ha) will  be prepared 
and disclosed before the decision meeting. The 
specific ESIA will include a Gender Based Violence 
assessment and occupational safety. These ESIAs will 
inform the notification to Nigeria Government by the 
GoC; ToRs of these studies are consulted upon in-
country and cleared by the Bank. For the subprojects 
to be implemented under the small grants of 
component 3, which are not identified before 
appraisal, an ESMF will be prepared and it shall 
describe the roadmap for preparing sites specific. 
Finally, a GRM will be prepared, consulted upon and 
disclosed before project effectiveness.  
  

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No  

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

Although the project is not expected to intervene in 
any critically important natural habitats, downstream 
impacts, development of irrigation infrastructure may 
affect areas requiring specific management 
considerations such wildlife migration corridors. In 
addition, this policy is triggered due to the presence of 
three cynegetic zones (Campement des éléphants, 97 
920 ha; ZIC 8 : Mayo Boulel, 35 040 ha ; ZIC 8 bis: 
Louga, 8 320 ha) in the project area of influence. 
Specific guidance will be provided to avoid significant 
conversion or degradation of rivers and the EA will 
identify and delineate areas of critical habitat and 
ensured application of the mitigation hierarchy in 
accordance with this policy for all project works. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes 

The project does not support commercial forest 
exploitation. However, the Massif Forest of Ouro-
Doukoudje may be affected due to the presence in the 
project area of influence. Mitigation measures are 
thus proposed as part of the ESMP. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

Major interventions are planned to enhance 
agricultural productivity and this may lead to an 
increased use of pesticides and other agrochemicals. 
An Integrated Pest Management Plan (IPMP) will be 
prepared, consulted upon and disclosed before 
appraisal. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 

Previous studies in the Region revealed local 
significant heritage places such as graveyards. 
Mitigation measures will be incorporated into the 
disclosed ESMP including provisions for a detailed 
Cultural Heritage Management Plan. A comprehensive 

chance find procedure will be prepared as part of the 
ESIA reports, embedded in the overall ESMPs, to that 
end. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 

There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project areas, 
as defined by OP/BP 4.10. 
 
  

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

The client will prepare a Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF) for all the entire project. The project 
through its component 2 is likely to involve land 
acquisition / involuntary resettlement and/or possible 
restrictions of access to resources and livelihoods.  
There are 3 clear distinct irrigation areas: (i) right bank 
rehabilitation (1,000 ha), (ii) right bank new area 
(5,000 ha) and (iii) left bank new area (5,000 ha). 
Therefore:  
(i)           a RAP will be prepared for the rehabilitation 
area prior to appraisal.  
(ii)          for the rest eventual new irrigation areas, the 
resettlement process is at an advanced stage. The list 
of people affected by the project (PAPs) already exists, 
PAPs have received pecuniary compensation, a PAP 
resettlement site is being developed and a Declaration 
of Public Utility (DUP) exists for the eventual new 
perimeters. The Government of Cameroon elaborated 
the list of PAPs in 2010, a total of 1442 household 
affected were recorded for 3093 properties (fields and 
boxes) as provided in the decree n°2010/3445/PM of 
December 15, 2010 relating to the compensation of 
the victims by incorporating to the private domain of 
the state lands downstream from the Lagdo 
perimeters. All this documentation is being reviewed 
and updated by a social audit that the client will 
present to the World Bank team for review and 
clearance prior to appraisal. In case, there will be new 
households settled after 2010 (after the DUP), PAPs 
will be compensated for those new assets (except 
land) prior to resettlement. In case there will be new 
constructions (houses, community infrastructures, 
etc.) different from those already compensated in 
2010 in the DUP area, PAPs will also be compensated 
for these assets prior to resettlement. It is highly 
expected social audit’s recommendations will propose 
specific measures related to assistance for 
resettlement (transportation costs coverage and 
livelihoods assistance) to all PAPs to be resettled. 



Upon approval, the final RAPs of these two new zones 
(right bank new area (5,000 ha) and (iii) left bank new 
area (5,000 ha)) in Lagdo will be prepared during 
project implementation and cleared by the WB prior 
to any works commence. 
In addition, a GRM document for the project will be 
prepared and disclosed before project effectiveness. 
Finally, all subprojects under component 3 will be 
submitted to an environmental and social screening 
during the implementation stage and based on results 
this would lead to Environmental and Social Impacts 
assessments (ESIAs) or Environmental and Social 
Impacts Notice (ESIN). 
  

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 Yes 

 
This policy is triggered because funds would be 
provided to make any structural modifications 
required to the dam and spillway arising out of these 
studies. In addition, the project infrastructure 
investments, including irrigation, will rely on the 
performance of this existing dam. An independent 
Panel of Experts with Dam Safety and Environmental 
and Social expertise will be hired by MEADEN in 
accordance with Dam Safety Guidelines of the World 
Bank. The panel will comprise five specialists 
(geotechnical, Hydrological, hydro-electro-mechanics, 
environmental and social). Improved Emergency 
Response Preparedness plans (ERP) would be 
prepared using up to date maps and technology.  (i) 
The draft TORs for the ERP will be ready before 
appraisal; (ii) GoC will notify Nigeria and (iii) the Bank 
will review existing dam auscultation reports, and any 
other dam safety documents including the accessible 
sections of the OM before the decision meeting. ENEO 
established in 2010 a structured CSR including 
Hygiene, safety and Environment Central Unit. It aslo 
has an environmental and social policy (ESP #42 Rev 2 
09/14) and has developed Safety and Environmental 
and social performances for its operations. However, 
the ERP and ESIA processes will assess the technical 
capacity of ENEO at Lagdo Dam and Regional levels to 
identify, flag and manage any safety, environmental 
and social related concerns to the Lagdo dam 
operation – power generation, irrigation releases, 
flood releases, and safety of the dam. 


Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

Yes 

This policy is triggered because the Benue river  flows 
over the Nigeria–Cameroon border, and the 
Government of Cameroon (GoC) will notify Nigeria 
before negotiations. There is a memorandum of 
understanding on the need to maintain water in the 
Benue Basin was signed between Cameroon and 
Nigeria in 2016. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No There are no disputed areas in the project areas. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Mar 28, 2018 
 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
In the previous stages PID/ISDS, the documents to be presented will be: 1) Resettlement Policy Framework for the whole 

project and 2) Resettlement Action Plan and list of PAPs of the area  to be rehabilitated(1000ha). The other RAPs will be 
prepared under project implementation.   
GRM document for the project need to be prepared and disclosed before project approval.  
 Consultants in charge of safeguard should be on board prior project appraisal, for insuring consultation and validation of 

safeguards instruments. 
 
 


























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Burkina Faso Agriculture Resilience and Competitiveness Project (P167945) 

 
 

  
Apr 22, 2019 Page 1 of 27  

     

 
 
 
      

 

Combined Project Information Documents /  
Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (PID/ISDS) 

 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 29-Jul-2019 | Report No: PIDISDSA26219 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Burkina Faso P167945 Burkina Faso Agriculture 
Resilience and 
Competitiveness Project 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA 30-May-2019 30-Aug-2019 Agriculture and Food 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing MInistry of Economy and 
Finance 

Ministry of Agriculture 
and Irrigation 
Development 

 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
The objective of the Project is to increase agricultural productivity and market access for small producers and small 
and medium agribusiness entrepreneurs for selected values chains in Project Areas. 

 
Components 

Enhancing Agriculture Productivity 
Improving Competitiviness and Fostering Market Access 
Promoting Private Sector-Led Agribusiness Development 
Project Coordination, Institutional Strengthening and Contigent Emergency Response Component 

 
 

PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
   

SUMMARY-NewFin1  
 

Total Project Cost 200.00 

Total Financing 200.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 200.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 

 
   
DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 


     International Development Association (IDA) 200.00 

          IDA Credit 200.00 

    

Environmental Assessment Category 

A-Full Assessment 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate     
 



 

A. Introduction and Context 
 
1. Burkina Faso (274,000 km2) is a landlocked, low-income country with high demographic growth and poverty 
levels. With a Gross National Income (GNI) per capita of US$610 in 2017, Burkina Faso is amongst the 20 poorest 
countries in the world. The population of about 19.6 million (2017) is young (46 percent under 15), with high growth 
rate (3 percent) and the majority (70 percent) lives in rural areas. Poverty continues to be overwhelmingly concentrated 
in rural areas, which are home to 90 percent of the poor. The country was ranked 185 out of 188 countries on the 2015 
overall UN Human Development Index (HDI). Non-income indicators of poverty and welfare, particularly in the areas of 
education and health, are among the lowest in the world, and most of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) 
appear out of reach.   
 
2. Economic performance has been relatively strong in the past decade; but growth has levelled off recently. 
Over the past fifteen years, economic growth has averaged about 5.5 percent per year (IMF, 2018). Burkina Faso’s 
economy is still heavily reliant on agriculture (especially cotton) and mining (especially gold), which contribute the bulk 
of its export revenues. The recent fluctuation in gold and cotton prices, combined with drops in grain production and 
political instability, have contributed to the slowdown in economic growth. The country has made progress in 
implementing structural reforms, sound economic policies, increased cotton and mining production, steady 
investments, and a stable macroeconomic environment. Monetary and exchange rate policy has been well-managed, 
and inflation has been kept at a low level (less than 3 percent over the past decade and 0.4 percent in 2017).  Burkina 
Faso has a relatively healthy banking sector. The country is also working toward an integrated and open regional 
economic space through the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU), the Economic Community of West 
African States (ECOWAS), and other African cooperation initiatives notably the Africa Food Security Leadership Dialogue 
on Adapting African Agriculture to Climate Change in support of the Comprehensive African Agriculture Development 
Program (CAADP) Food Security Commitment.  In 2017, the country was ranked 74 in the world, one of the best rankings 
in Sub-Saharan Africa, according to the Corruption Perception Index. 
 
3. The country faces many socio-political and security challenges which have impeded a full economic recovery; 
the harsh climate and environment degradation are making these challenges even more acute. Burkina Faso has 
recently experienced internal unrest fueled by the unequal distribution of resources and a perceived lack of 
accountability in the management of public resources. This situation has been exacerbated by insecurity in neighboring 
Mali, and the Sahel region in general. Burkina Faso hosts more than 25,000 Malian refugees. The security situation has 
worsened significantly since June 2018 due to an upsurge in violent attacks by terrorists and criminal groups in the 
Eastern and Northern regions. If not addressed adequately, security challenges are expected to continue to impact the 
country's socioeconomic prospects in the years to come.  The harsh climatic conditions which hinder efforts to reduce 
vulnerability and extreme poverty are compounding the security challenges. 
 
4. To confront these challenges, the Government is implementing the National Program for Economic and Social 
Development (Plan National de Développement Economique et Social – PNDES). The PNDES lays out the Government’s 
vision and action plan for the period 2016-2020. It emphasizes the structural transformation of the economy with 
agriculture playing the key role as a driver of growth. Its priority interventions are to increase productivity, improve the 
management of water resources for agriculture, develop market infrastructure and support institutional 
transformation. It also highlights the challenges related to climate change and the degradation of soils, with the 
objective to support a transition towards a green economy and the sustainable management of natural resources. 



B. Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
5. Burkina Faso’s agriculture sector is still one of the main pillars of the national economy, although its 
contribution to the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) has decreased recently. Farming and livestock activities still occupy 
about 86 percent of Burkina Faso’s workforce and constitute the main source of income for the poorest populations. 
The sector’s contribution to GDP, however, has declined from 35 percent in 1999 to 32.6 percent in 2013 (FAOSTAT, 
2014), due to the diversification of the economy into areas such as mining. Most crops including cereals (millet, 
sorghum, maize and other cereals including coarse/feed grains), and commercial crops (mainly cotton), as well as 
legumes (cowpeas, groundnuts) are produced under rainfed conditions with low yields, with high vulnerability to 
climate change. As part of the traditional Sahelian parkland landscape, those crops often are produced in systems that 
also include useful trees, such as shea, baobab, locust-bean trees and others. Other crops, including rice, onions, 
tomatoes, and other horticultural crops, are cultivated under full irrigated (full water control) or semi-irrigated 
(bottomland) conditions. The yields of irrigated crops are also still below potential. An extended household may farm 
around 9.6 hectares (24 acres) in total, but plot sizes are small, with each plot averaging only 0.4 hectares, producing 
mostly for household consumption with little marketable surplus1. The production of food/ feed grains, of which by-
products are used for animal feeding (e.g., shredded millet/corn stalks), is common and remains the customary crop-
livestock mixed production model.  
 
6. Agriculture faces difficult agro-ecological conditions which are getting harsher due to climate change and 
increasing human pressure, leading to a situation where vulnerability and food insecurity remain key issues.  Along 
the Southern edge of the Sahelian band, the country faces the arid to semi-arid climate typical of the region. The rainfall 
is low overall (400 mm per year average in the Sahelian zone and 800-1000 mm in the Sudano-Sahelian zone), irregular 
and poorly distributed; and it is experiencing a downward trend. Some estimates indicate that more than 3.5 million 
people, roughly 20 percent of the population, are food insecure and/or suffer from inadequate nutrition. Like in much 
of the Sahel region, the increase of the population is both an asset and a challenge for agriculture, as demand for food 
increases and the needs for proper nutrition and food security must be addressed. The country’s rural areas are 
experiencing changes in land occupation patterns, with many former pastoralists becoming sedentary farmers and 
growing crops but also retaining roaming livestock herds. Therefore, pressure on land has increased, and there are 
increasing conflicts between pastoralists and farmers.  As a result, improved land management practices are 
increasingly required to secure land tenure, to optimize crop yields and to conserve land as a viable resource for the 
long run, including maintaining the carbon sequestered in the soil and landscape. 
 
7. The transport sector in Burkina Faso suffers from numerous constraints which hinder economic development, 
reducing the competitiveness of the tradable sectors of the economy including agriculture production. The state of 
transport infrastructure is poor, and the provision of transport services, hampered by road blocks and poor 
management, remains inefficient. The rural roads network is not sufficiently dense to permit access to all potential 
agriculture production areas. Key production areas remain enclaved, especially since many roads are not passable by 
regular vehicles during the rainy season. This is a major constraint to both providing the required production inputs at 
farm-gate and accessing market outlets to dispose of marketable production.   
 
8. Burkina Faso has substantial assets to develop its agriculture, both on the supply and demand side: 

i. On the supply side: (i) substantial land and agro-ecological potential, yet unexploited, offers opportunities to develop 
diversified agriculture systems; the country is endowed with 9 million ha of farmland, of which less than one-half (46 
percent) is currently under cultivation; (ii) traditional know-how and good experience of producers in certain 
production systems (flood recession cultivation, livestock fattening, poultry production, collection of agroforestry 

 

products) and existence of many technological packages ready to be disseminated and applied; and (iii) substantial 
potential for irrigated farming using ponds and rivers, as well as underground water; and 

ii. On the demand side, agriculture development is spurred by: (i) a sizable and increasing domestic demand for food, 
particularly processed food, in tune with the nutrition needs of a rapidly increasing population overall, and with 
changing consumer preferences shifting towards greater diversification of diets and more value being attributed to 
convenience and quality; and (ii) the increasing demand for key export commodities (horticultural crops, shea nuts, 
cattle/meat) on regional and international markets. 

9. To transform its agriculture, Burkina Faso needs to address key constraints: 
a. Regulatory and institutional constraints: the legal texts governing the sector’s regulatory 

framework are not always adequate, and those existing are often insufficiently used or 
enforced2, and the means and capacity of intervention of the State services are limited, 
including planning and programming, statistical services, monitoring and evaluation, and 
information systems; 

b. Weakness of extension services: there are limited agriculture extension and outreach 
services to disseminate innovations, with consequent low expertise of producers and other 
operators in the value chains;  

c. Limited access to irrigation water resources and improved inputs: There is insufficient access 
to irrigation water resources (both through gravity and pumping) and improved inputs 
(fertilizers, phytosanitary inputs, mechanized implements, feed supplies, certified seeds, 
etc.); 

d. Poor management of natural resources: both climate change and anthropic pressure are 
leading to widespread land degradation. About 170,000 hectares per year of natural 
vegetation are lost because of land degradation and deforestation. At the current pace, 
Burkina Faso will lose approximately 15 percent of its agricultural land within 10 years; 

e. Limited competitiveness and weak connection to markets: poor public infrastructure, and 
insufficient private investment for production, processing, storage, transport and 
marketing, as well as the low valorization of by-products, insufficient market information 
and capacity to adhere to commercial norms and standards, and the low degree of 
organization of sector actors, all contribute to marketing inefficiencies; and 

f. Limited access to financing: commercial banks and micro-finance institutions, are reluctant 
to lend to agriculture given the high level of risk involved in the sector. 

 
 

10. Despite a large potential, irrigation remains underdeveloped and underexploited; tapping irrigation water 
resources is crucial to improve agricultural performance. Despite low and erratic rainfall, Burkina Faso enjoys relatively 
abundant water resources, with current agricultural withdrawals for irrigation representing a fraction of total renewable 
water resources and annual recharge. Irrigation development, in the context of erratic weather conditions currently 
amplified by climate change, has the potential to increase the resilience and productivity of the agriculture sector. 
Moving from rainfed crops to irrigated crops, as possibly feasible, is the strategy emphasized by PNDES for the 
agriculture sector. The irrigation sector in Burkina Faso, like in most Sahelian countries has experienced different stages 
of development. Following the limited success of the large-scale public irrigation schemes in the 1980s, institutional 
reforms refocused the role of public irrigation companies on irrigation development, with partial management transfer 
to water users’ associations. This has required that the management (operation and maintenance) of the irrigation 

       

systems be carried out by institutions equipped with the necessary technical/ managerial capacity, with enough 
autonomy and flexibility, and with accountability to both the Government and users. In this respect, the project will 
provide support to Water User Associations (WUAs) so that they play an effective role in water management. 
 
11. There is large untapped potential for the development of Burkina Faso´s agro-industrial sector; but currently 
the country’s agro-processing base is weak. Only about 12 percent of agriculture commodities are processed before 
being sold on the market3. Many bottlenecks in the various value chains limit value addition, such as lack of conditioning 
or processing units. Linkages between farmers and downstream industrial and market operators are weak. Despite 
these constraints, agri-food systems are quickly changing in Burkina Faso like many other Sub-Saharan Africa countries, 
in response to changing demographic patterns coupled with economic growth. Fast-increasing population, urbanization 
trends and income growth are changing food demand in unprecedented ways, with large increases in total quantities 
demanded, growing preference for convenience, diversification of diets towards more fresh products, and an increased 
demand for product quality4. Food demand is growing particularly for items that are more processed, increasingly 
purchased on the market (instead of grown for self-consumption) and perishable (i.e., meat, dairy and fresh produce). 
A small but growing middle class already spends a significant fraction of its income on processed food. Demand for 
processed foods is thus expected to grow in Burkina Faso and neighboring countries, leading to sizable market 
opportunities for increased value addition through agro-processing. 
 
12. The weak enabling environment and limited access to commercial credit are major constraints for agriculture 
and agribusiness development. The 2017 World Bank Group Enabling the Business of Agriculture (EBA) report shows 
that Burkina Faso’s regulatory framework is impeding private investment in agriculture and agribusiness, all along the 
value chain. Significant weaknesses have been identified in regulations related to seed, fertilizer, agricultural machinery, 
water and market access. Public services, as well as professional organizations, need to be strengthened to address 
these weaknesses. Regarding credit, the agriculture sector receives only eight percent of commercial bank lending (of 
which 4.2 percent is for financing cotton) and fifteen percent of lending by Micro-Finance Institutions (MFIs). Access to 
finance by smallholder farmers is constrained by the following factors: low degree of organization of the value chains 
(except cotton), lack of bankable projects, limited exposure to financial entities, and lack of acceptable collateral. In 
addition, there are very few financial products whose terms and conditions would be adapted to the seasonal 
production cycles. Credit is mainly earmarked for production and trading of agricultural products, but very limited for 
agro-processing activities. The fact that agriculture is exposed to significant weather shocks increases the volatility of 
revenues and the risk due to drought, and hence the attendant risk faced by banks. The development of irrigation under 
the project, with provision of irrigation water year-round, will lessen this risk. This is important in the context of Burkina 
Faso where the use of suitable risk management instruments is lacking. 
 
13. Agriculture institutions exhibit major weaknesses. The primary institution in charge of crop production and 
irrigation development in Burkina Faso is the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Hydraulics (MAAH). MAAH carries out its 
operations through five core directorates dedicated to irrigation (Direction Générale des Aménagements of Hydo-
Agricoles et du Development de l ’Irrigation - DGAHDI), agricultural extension (DGPV), rural economy and sanitary & 
phyto-sanitary control (DGPER), land tenure and producer organizations (DGFOMR), and Monitoring & Evaluation and 
statistics (DGESS).  MAAH field operations are implemented through a network of decentralized branches including 
regional and provincial directorates, and regional technical support units. MAAH’s other decentralized institutions of 

MAAH include seed production units, rural promotion centers, and regional laboratories for seed quality control. The 
following other ministries share responsibilities for agriculture in different areas: (i) the Ministry of Infrastructure (MI) 
for rural roads and tracks, (ii) the Ministry of Environment, Green Economy and Climate Change (MEEVCC) for 
environmental matters, including management of non-timber forest products and productive parklands such as shea 
parks, and (iii) the Ministry of Commerce, Industry and Handicrafts for the promotion of Small and Medium Enterprises 
(SMEs), agro-processing and trade. There are other specialized semi-autonomous structures attached to MAAH with 
responsibility for specific interventions, as well as several private, consular or non-profit institutions active in agriculture 
such as the network of chambers of agriculture (Reseau des Chambres Agricoles - RECA) which provides general support 
to its private membership, the Maison de l’Entreprise which supports SMEs. The above institutions represent a fairly 
comprehensive set-up with good potential as framework to support agriculture development. However, as a general 
rule, most of these institutions display major weaknesses which prevent them from being fully effective, including 
insufficiently skilled staff and weak managerial and technical capabilities. This situation is compounded by limited 
operating budgets and/ or insufficient financial support from stakeholders and membership, lack of office and technical 
equipment, poor working conditions including office buildings which need renovation or upgrade. 
 
14. Gender gaps persist in Burkina Faso, particularly in farming activities. In the 2016 Human Development Report, 
the country ranked 146th out of 149 countries in gender inequality owing to gender disparities in a number of socio-
economic aspects. Female-headed households have 14 percent lower per capita food consumption and are more food 
insecure than male-headed households.5 Women's access to agricultural extension services, credit and productive 
resources such as agricultural inputs and equipment remains limited. Agriculture plots managed by women produce 
less per hectare than plots managed by men. The primary factors that contribute to the gender productivity gap in 
agriculture in Burkina Faso are essentially three fold: (i) women face constraints because of their duties in two economic 
spheres: the productive and the reproductive tasks in the household; (ii) women have limited access to farm labor, 
particularly male farm labor; and (iii) their productivity is limited by weak access to credit for agricultural inputs, 
improved farming equipment and labor.  

 
15. Youth unemployment is acute; it undermines the political and economic stability of the country. Rural youth 
(18 to 35 years) face challenges similar to those faced by women producers. They are mostly un-educated and lack 
professional qualifications. Their low social status and the difficulties they encounter to access economic resources limit 
their participation in productive activities.  In Burkina Faso, 68 percent of the population is under 24 years of age6. The 
problem of youth unemployment is severe: in 2014, 25.2 percent of youth were unemployed7. Given the lack of job 
opportunities, particularly in rural areas, youth unemployment threatens to undermine the country’s political stability, 
particularly within the present context of the influence of religious and other forms of extremism8. Hence, to avoid the 
instability and violence currently experienced by Burkina Faso, the focus should be on providing economic opportunities 
for young people. The focus on youth requires a gender perspective to develop effective and well targeted programs. 
Unless young women receive adequate training and have prospects of steady employment, the possibility of higher 
birth rates will undermine the country’s economic gains. Similarly, technical training and the creation of viable jobs for 
young men, in the agriculture sector particularly, is a precondition for sustainable development and peace. Ensuring 
that Burkina Faso’s youth are directly empowered with income earning activities, have access to education and training 
opportunities, and a voice in local decision-making is critical for the country’s stability and sustainable development. 
 
  
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
16. The PDO is to increase agricultural productivity and market access for small producers and Small and Medium 
agribusiness Entrepreneurs (SMEs)9 for selected value chains in project areas.  

PDO Level Indicators 

17. Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) include: 

(i) Increase in yield of targeted crop achieved by primary project beneficiaries (disaggregated by 
commodities); and 

(ii) Increase in the volume of market sales of targeted crop commodities produced by primary project 
beneficiaries (disaggregated by commodities). 

18. In addition, the project M&E system will measure the following four Core Results Indicators (CRIs):  

(i) Number of farmers reached with project agricultural assets or services (including women and youth 
targeted at 30 percent); 

(ii) Beneficiary satisfaction rate with the quality of project-supported services (disaggregated by gender and 
age); 

(iii) Area provided with new/improved irrigation or drainage services; and 

(iv) Number of km of roads and tracks constructed or rehabilitated. 
a)  

 
D. Project Description  

 
19. The proposed project with a total cost of US$259.6 million will be structured as an Investment 
Project Financing (IPF) implemented over a period of six years. It will be funded by (i) two IDA credits for 
a total amount of US$200 million - a regular IDA credit of US$50 million and a Scale Up Facility (SUF) of 
US$150 million, (ii) a GoBF contribution of US$13.0 million, (iii) beneficiary contributions for US$29.4 
million, and (iv) Partner Financial Institutions (PFIs) credit of US$17.2 million. The project has three 
technical components structured around three core activity clusters: raising productivity in irrigated 
production systems; improving competitiveness and linking farmers to markets; and promoting private 
sector-led agribusiness development. A fourth component will cover project coordination activities 
capacity strengthening as well as establishment of a Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC).  

COMPONENT 1 – ENHANCING AGRICULTURE PRODUCTIVITY (US$108.9 million of which US$97.2 million 

IDA and US$11.7 million GoBF) 

20. Component 1 aims to remove constraints to farm productivity, mainly in irrigated production 
systems. It will have three sub-components: (i) irrigation development, including attendant land-tenure 
arrangements and support to the input supply chain; (ii) agriculture advisory services; and (iii) support to 
producer groups. The project will mainstream gender and youth dimensions in all its activities, giving them 
preferential treatment particularly in project-provided agriculture training and services, as well as funding 

                                                           
9 Agribusiness entrepreneurs are defined as economic operators intervening both at production level as well as downstream of 
production, i.e. post-harvest, storage, processing and marketing including input suppliers and service providers. 



 
of investment initiatives. This will be achieved by targeting economic activities in which women and youth 
predominate.  

21. Sub-Component 1.1: Irrigation infrastructure and land tenure (US$86.7 million of which US$75.0 
million IDA and US$11.7 million GoBF). Sub-Component 1.1 aims at supporting productive land 
development by increasing the provision of irrigation water and securing land tenure on project sites. 
Irrigation infrastructure will focus on both rehabilitation and development of irrigated perimeters. 
Emphasis will be placed on climate-proof design and construction to ensure efficiency and climate 
resilience. Sub Component (SC)1.1 will be implemented in close liaison with the Bank-financed PARIIS 
project (FY17). 

22. Irrigation development and rehabilitation. This activity will consist in rehabilitating and 
developing the irrigation and drainage infrastructure on five selected sites the project area (see annex 2, 
appendix 1), and supporting the attendant collective institutional and organization arrangements. 
Irrigation infrastructure works will cover a total of 4,497 ha over five collective irrigation schemes to be 
either fully developed (2,947 ha) or upgraded/ rehabilitated (1,550 ha), for both smallholders and 
agriculture entrepreneurs10. The project will not finance activities related to construction and/or 
rehabilitation of dams.   

23. Land tenure. The project will support arrangements to ensure proper rights to cultivate for 
farmers benefiting from irrigated land allocation, and due compensation (to be funded by the GoBF) for 
those who will lose their lands or income losses in the process of land reallocation. It will support MAAH’s 
dedicated land tenure services (DGFOMR) at the central level and in the seven communes adjacent to the 
project irrigated perimeters. Secure land tenure will also incentivize the adoption of new technology to 
increase productivity and climate-smart practices to provide adaptation and mitigation co-benefits.  

24. Sub-Component (SC) 1.2: Agriculture advisory services (US$4.1 million IDA). Sub-Component 1.2 
aims to improve the delivery of advisory and outreach services, with a focus on extension activities 
regarding more productive and sustainable agricultural practices under irrigation conditions. This will be 
achieved by providing catalytic support towards strengthening the capacity of MAAH’s services 
(Directorate General for Agricultural Extension, DGPV) and other relevant institutions dedicated to 
delivering demand-driven agri-food-oriented extension and outreach services. In doing so, the project will 
scale up results achieved by the WAAPP project to enable a wider adoption of Good Agriculture Practices 
(GAPs). This Sub-Component will provide funding for the following activities inter alia: (i) preparation of 
specialized extension guides and provision of training regarding different Good Agriculture Practices GAP), 
e.g., the use of the Farmer Field School (FFS) approach, Climate Smart Agriculture (CSA) techniques 
(including bio-compost), Integrated Pest Management (IPM), System of Rice Intensification (SRI) and/or 
gender-oriented practices; (ii) capacity building and dissemination of the related knowledge regarding 
production and certification of improved seeds and planting material; (iii) development of an e-extension 
platform, using digital solutions and applications to modernize and increase the outreach of advisory 
services; (iv) training for DGPV staff through participation in specialized forums, provision of scholarships 
for diploma courses in selected fields, organization of exchange trips, etc. SC1.2 will also finance 
investments to support extension services such as office rehabilitation and equipment (including 
computer equipment), technical equipment and vehicles for DGPV and its communal offices in the project 

                                                           
10 Smallholders will be allocated plots of 0.5 or 1.0 ha each for a total of 3,497 ha, and agricultural entrepreneurs tracks of land of at 
least 10 to a maximum of 50 ha each for a total of 1000 ha.  NB. The project will also develop, in the form of individual investment sub-
projects under Component 3 private sites intended for arboriculture, for a total of 1,000 ha under small irrigation systems (pumping, 
Californian, drip, and solar powered irrigation systems that reduce energy use, etc.) 


areas. 

25. Sub-Component (SC) 1.3: Support to producer organizations and input supply (US$18.1 million 
IDA). Sub-Component 1.3 has a two-pronged objective: (i) to strengthen and/or facilitate the creation of 
Agricultural Producer Organizations (OPAs), including economic interest groups, and cooperative societies 
of different types, and (ii) to facilitate the supply of inputs required for targeted crops. Objective (i) will 
be achieved through MAAH’s dedicated services (DGFOMR)11, as well as the assistance of specialized non-
government organizations (NGOs) or service providers. SC1.3 will place special emphasis on developing 
Water Users Associations (WUAs) to strengthen water management. Strengthened institutional and 
organizational arrangements will allow farmers to have greater participation in decisions, leading to more 
sustainable water use and more equitable sharing of the benefits. This will also contribute to enhance 
resilience through promoting a stronger sense of ownership, and greater efficiency and accountability, in 
water use and land development. Under objective (ii), input supply to farmers will include the provision 
of the required means of production to develop cropping systems on irrigated land. This will follow the 
technical guidance of extension services received under Sub-Component 1.2. The project will make 
available to smallholder farmers the package of inputs, improved seeds and small implements through 
the current national programs for a period of two years under the same subsidy conditions as those 
granted under these programs.   

COMPONENT 2 – IMPROVING COMPETITIVENESS AND FOSTERING MARKET ACCESS (US$34.6 million of 

which US$33.7 million IDA and US$0.9 million GoBF) 

26. Component 2 aims to improve competitiveness and foster access to markets through three sub-
components aimed at (i) capacity building of MAAH central directorates regarding sanitary and phyto-
sanitary control, development of quality norms and standards, and support to market knowledge; (ii) the 
provision of marketing facilities; and (iii) construction/ rehabilitation of rural road infrastructure. 

27. Sub-Component (SC) 2.1: Sanitary and phyto-sanitary control, development of quality norms 
and standards, and support to market knowledge (US$5.2 million IDA). Sub Component 2.1 will focus, 
firstly, with regard to sanitary and phyto-sanitary control, on the regulatory framework to ensure that 
appropriate food safety regulations and means are in place to enable the country to serve the needs of 
the agriculture domestic and export markets. To that end, it will provide support to MAAH’s dedicated 
services (DGPV), including its decentralized phyto-sanitary control posts in the project area. Capacity 
building will focus on specialized areas such as food safety analysis and control. The project will also 
provide funding for logistical support and equipment of the Laboratory for Agri-food Analysis (LAPA) (e.g. 
for control of aflatoxin in maize, pesticide content in agricultural products, herbicide control, etc.) and for 
the rehabilitation of the two regional laboratories for seed control in the project area. Concerning the 
shea sector, the project will support the Institute for Research in Applied Science and Technology (IRSAT) 
for the definition of semi-industrial technological packages to reduce energy (fuelwood) consumption. 
Secondly, with regard to the promotion of the quality of agricultural products, the project will focus on 
the technical norms and trading labels so that they conform to international standards (HACCP, ISO and 
others).  To this end, it will provide training and technical assistance to MAAH’s dedicated services 
(DGPER). For the shea butter value chain, the support will aim at developing a national standard of 
production to ensure quality consistency along the chain. Thirdly, in terms of market knowledge, the 

                                                           
11 Regarding the shea nut value chain and other carbon-related activities, support to producer organizations (TFK) and biodigester 
compost suppliers will be done through the dedicated services of the Ministry of Environment, Green Economy and Climate Change 
(DGEVCC) 

 

project will finance the collection of market information regarding the project-supported commodities. It 
will support the strengthening of MAAH’s Agricultural Market Information System (SIMA), including data 
collection on specific targeted markets. Information and awareness workshops on SIMA will be organized 
throughout the project area, including radio broadcasts, so that potential users are aware of SIMA 
existence and know how to access it. MAAH’s dedicated services (DGPER), as well as the Network of 
Chambers of Agriculture (RECA) will be supported so that they can contribute to SIMA data collection and 
diffusion efforts.  

28. Sub-Component (SC)2.2: Marketing infrastructure (US$7.2 million IDA). SC2.2 aims to strengthen 
the link between producers, off-takers and processors to ease access to market outlets. The project will 
support marketing and storage infrastructure, essentially the construction/ rehabilitation of sixteen 
purchasing counters (PCs), as well as 117 small storage facilities in strategic areas in the four regions 
covered by the project.  PCs are marketing platforms, the purpose of which is to avoid direct field 
purchases from farmers and reduce asymmetric information that expose producers to buyer pressures. 
PCs will meet the required criteria of relevance, viability, cost-effectiveness, as well as job creation, 
especially for women and youth. Attention will be paid to the management and maintenance of these 
counters in collaboration with the end-users and local authorities (see Annex 2, Appendix 3). 

29. Sub-Component (SC)2.3: Rural tracks and roads (US$22.2 million of which US$21.3 million IDA 
and US$0.9 million GoBF). SC2.3 aims to reinforce the connection of producing areas targeted by the 
project with the supply sources for productive inputs and market outlets for commodities produced. It 
will include the construction and rehabilitation of rural roads and tracks to ensure all-weather access 
throughout the year to all the project-targeted irrigated areas. A total length of about 344 km of tracks 
and road sections have been selected in concert between MAAH and the Ministry of Infrastructure (MI). 
SC2.3 will finance the technical, socio-economic and environmental studies, road works, as well as 
maintenance over a period of two years. The implementation of SC2.3 will be carried out under MI’s 
supervision through its Directorate General of Rural Tracks (DGPR). The execution of road works will be 
entrusted to private civil engineering companies, and/ or projects as part of their interventions in the 
producing areas targeted. Attention will be paid to the planning and maintenance of tracks and roads 
using national norms.  SC2.3 will provide technical assistance and training to DGPR, its decentralized 
structures and local communities involved in the project area as required to oversee the construction and 
maintenance of the project rural roads and tracks. 

COMPONENT 3: PROMOTING PRIVATE SECTOR-LED AGRIBUSINESS DEVELOPMENT (US$89.5 million of 

which US$42.9 million IDA, US$29.4 million beneficiaries and US$17.2 million PFIs) 

30. Private sector development is the major thrust of the project strategy for developing value chain 
activities. Accordingly, Component 3’s objective is to enable the country’s private agriculture and agro-
processing sector to become more competitive on domestic and external markets, by helping producers, 
processors and off-takers/ traders develop and finance their investment initiatives. Component 3’s 
activities will have a two-pronged focus on: (i) the development of business plans; and (ii) the provision 
of investment financing under the project’s Cost-Sharing Facility (CSF) for project-supported crop 
production, value addition and commercialization.  

31. Sub-Component (SC)3.1: Development of business plans (US$4.5 million IDA). The objective of 
this sub-component is to support eligible beneficiaries in developing business plans which can be eligible 
for funding under the project Cost Sharing Facility (CSF). It will assist eligible value chain operators to (i) 
identify potential investment activities aligned with the project’s objectives, (ii) select potential partners 
  

 

with whom they can establish partnerships; and (iii) develop viable business plans to secure access to 
project funding; these business plans will include the required specifications to conform to the eligibility 
criteria for the CSF, including the fiduciary and safeguards aspects. The above support will be provided 
through technical assistance (TA). The TA providers terms of reference will include organization of 
sensitization campaigns to inform potentially interested operators, support for the development of 
investment sub-projects eligible for CSF funding, training as needed and assistance for the beneficiaries’ 
selection process and subsequent implementation of the selected sub-projects. 

32. Sub-Component (SC)3.2: Private investment financing (US$85.0 million of which US$38.4 million 
IDA, US$29.4 million beneficiaries and US$17.2 million PFIs). This sub-component will address the 
financing constraints of the agribusiness sector by improving access to finance. It will fund a Cost Sharing 
Facility (CSF) to provide partial support to agriculture and agri-business operators in the form of Matching 
Grants (MGs) to finance their investment Sub-Projects (SPs). The MG mechanism will target (i) individual 
smallholder producers, Agriculture Producer Organizations (OPAs), cooperatives, and Small and Medium 
Enterprises (SMEs) that need financing to create, upgrade and/ or modernize their production, storage 
and processing facilities, as well as (ii) all other private sector players and entrepreneurs involved in the 
targeted agriculture value chain (e.g. traders, transporters, equipment manufacturers, service providers, 
compost providers) with similar needs. MGs will be provided under two windows, for micro and medium/ 
large sub-projects respectively, under different terms and conditions with the MG representing between 
30 to 80 percent of eligible costs. PFIs will provide a minimum of 15 to 35 percent of sub-project funding, 
except for micro sub-projects which will not require supplementary PFI funding.  In partnership with the 
DGEVCC, all MG proposals will be assessed through an ex-ante calculation on the carbon impact and the 
most effective projects may be supported to access carbon finance12. Women and youth (18 to 35 years)13, 
will receive special treatment, especially as regard their very small and/ or start-up enterprises; their 
personal contribution requirement to the funding of sub-projects will be lower than for their male and 
adult counterparts. The initial permanent working capital requirements will be eligible for MG funding. 
The funds will be disbursed directly on behalf of the beneficiary from the project account to a dedicated 
account for SP implementation opened with the PFI. The beneficiary will have the fiduciary responsibility 
regarding the use of the funds. The eligibility and selection criteria of the beneficiaries, as well as 
procedures to be followed all along the investment cycle, will be detailed in the specific project 
implementation manual (PIM) of the CSF. Goods to be funded under sub grants will be procured in 
accordance with the provisions of Financing Agreement, the PIM, the Procurement Guidelines and the 
Anti-Corruption Guidelines, and should not include any expenditures on the negative list set forth in the 
ESMF or the IPMP. 

COMPONENT 4: PROJECT COORDINATION, INSTITUTIONAL CAPACITY STRENGTHENING AND 

CONTINGENT EMERGENCY RESPONSE COMPONENT (CERC) (US$26.6 million of which US26.2 million IDA 

and US$0.4 million, GoBF) 

33. Component 4 will (i) support project coordination and institutional strengthening of MAAH; and 
(ii) include a CERC.  

34. Sub-Component (SC)4.1: Project coordination and institutional capacity strengthening (US$26.6 

                                                           
12 DGEVCC in currently working on carbon projects regarding (i) soil carbon increase through the use of agroforestry technics and bio-
compost (from biodigesters) and (ii) the decarbonization of the shea butter production chain. This is part of the collaboration with the 
REDD+ Program (P149827) and Biodigester carbon project (P156413). 
13 The MG target for women and youth is 30 percent. 



 

million of which US26.2 million IDA and US$0.4 million GoBF). The Project will be managed by a Project 
Management Unit (PMU), housed within the Coordinating Unit of the Budget Program for Hydro-
Agriculture and Irrigation Development which is one of the six MAAH budget programs. Hence, the PMU 
will be integrated into the MAAH administrative structure as part of the sector-wide approach recently 
adopted by the Government under the budget programs. SC4.1 will fund (i) the establishment and 
operation of the PMU through provision of appropriate staffing and operating resources to take charge 
of project management including resources for fiduciary management, safeguard compliance, Monitoring 
and Evaluation (M&E), knowledge management and communications, and (ii) institutional capacity 
strengthening (training, equipment, office rehabilitation, etc.) for the key MAAH directorates and services, 
including their decentralized services, and the National Council for Food Security (NCFS); this will also 
include construction of an office building to host all projects under the Budget Program for Hydro-
Agriculture and Irrigation Development. To promote consultations at the grassroots, the sub-component 
will also fund a full set of Citizen Engagement activities. The general intervention principle under SC4.1 
will be to harmonize and/or pool resources with other similar externally-funded projects. In this respect, 
the PMU may share staff and operating resources with other units whenever possible to economize 
resources and take advantage of economies of scale14. 

35. Sub-Component (SC)4.2: Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC) (US$0.0 million). 
Component 4 includes the creation of a project CERC under the oversight of the NCFS at MAAH. The CERC 
will be a mechanism to provide funding for emergencies. It will have a zero initial funding allocation. In 
the event of a crisis, the Government will be able to request the World Bank to reallocate project funds 
to the CERC to cover the costs of the emergency response and recovery. Detailed operational guidelines 
acceptable to the World Bank for implementing the project CERC activities will be prepared during the 
first six months of project implementation. All expenditures under the project’s specific CERC will be in 
accordance with World Bank OP 10 (Investment Project Financing). They will be appraised and reviewed 
in order to be acceptable to the World Bank before any disbursement is made. Disbursements will be 
made against an approved list of goods, works and services, required to support crisis mitigation, 
response, recovery and re-construction. 
 
Project Beneficiaries 
 

36. The project is expected to benefit directly and indirectly all economic agents in the project areas 
operating along the targeted value chains from production to market, including at the processing, storage, 
transport and trading stages. The total number of project beneficiaries is estimated in the order of 150,000 
individuals (see Annex 2, Appendix 4). 

37. Direct project beneficiaries are first and foremost all the smallholder crop farmers, processors, 
traders and marketers who will be involved in project-supported activities at farm-gate level and 
downstream of production. These include prominently the smallholders and entrepreneurs who will 
benefit from irrigation development, extension and subsidy for the new technology packages, and the 
project matching grants as part of project financing windows. Other direct beneficiaries will include: (i) 
the staff of MAAH agricultural extension support services and other services directly targeted by project 
activities who will receive technical support and training, and (ii) the off-takers and transporters who will 

                                                           
14 A collaboration with DGEVCC is expected for the screening of the carbon impact of the matching grants as well as the valorization of 
the project activities on the carbon market whenever they fit under one of the existing or future carbon projects developed in the 
country. 


use the purchasing counters, and tracks and roads. The project will mainstream gender and youth 
dimensions in all its activities, giving them preferential treatment particularly in project-provided 
agriculture training and services, as well as funding of investment initiatives. This will be achieved by 
targeting economic activities in which women and youth predominate. These include small-scale agro-
processing activities such as mango drying, and activities in value chains dominated by women such as 
shea nut collection and processing. Youth will be targeted for any project activities focused on training to 
upgrade their skills, and activities generating jobs such as high labor intensity methods.  

38. Indirect project beneficiaries include all stakeholders who will benefit from project spillover 
effects both at national and local level, i.e., (i) at farmgate level regarding production: other crop farmers 
neither directly involved in project-supported irrigation perimeters, nor targeted by the project extension 
activities being outside the production basins; they will benefit particularly from project spillover effects 
regarding improved crop management, higher quality crop inputs and services, better defined market 
norms and standards and improved financing conditions as a result of the project; (ii) at post-harvest and 
market level: buyers and processors, value chain service providers, including private inputs providers 
(seeds, fertilizers, feed, equipment suppliers) who will benefit from overall increased supply of 
commodities produced and traded due to better roads and tracks; and (iii) on the consumption side: 
domestic consumers in Burkina Faso who will benefit from increased quantity of food and attendant 
nutritional benefits at household level. 
 

E. Implementation 
 

Institutional and Implementation Arrangements  
. 

39. The MAAH will have overall responsibility for project implementation, including management of 
environmental and social risks; it will liaise closely with the MI for implementation of rural tracks and roads 
activities, MEEVCC for the shea nut value chain development and with the Ministry in charge of Commerce, 
Industry and Handicraft (MCIA) for private sector development and agro-processing. The project’s governance 
structure will be modeled after the PARIIS project arrangements, including a Review Committee15 (RC) and a 
Project Management Unit (PMU) at the central level as well as three regional units based at MAAH’s regional 
offices and one regional unit hosted by AMVS. The RC will meet at regular intervals, at least once a year. It will be 
chaired by MAAH’s Secretary General and serve as guidance body. It will approve the Annual Work Plans and 
Budgets and progress reports. The PMU, based in Ouagadougou, will be fully mainstreamed into MAAH’s structure 
as advocated by authorities alongside other national project implementation units. It will come under MAAH’s 
Budget Program for Hydro-Agriculture and Irrigation Development which is one of the six MAAH budget programs.  

40. Details regarding PReCA’s organizational arrangements are presented in Annex 1. The PMU will sign 
partnerships or technical agreements with MAAH’s and other ministries’ directorates to carry out project activities 
within their respective mandates. The National Coordinator of the project will be de facto the head of Budget 
Program for Hydro-Agriculture and Irrigation Development as per the new decree organizing the budget 
programs16.. The National Coordinator will delegate the management function of the project to a Project Manager 

                                                           
15 The RC will include representatives of the MAAH (General Secretary-SG, Cabinet, General Directorate of Studies and Sector Statistics-
DGESS, DGPV, DGFOMR, DGPER); the Ministry of Economy and Finance (DGCOOP, DGEP, DGB); National Agriculture Chamber; Coordinators 
of projects and programs in the agriculture sector; representatives of financing partners, DCMEF/MAAH, DAF/MAAH, DGEVCC/MEEVCC  
and DMP/MAAH will also be invited to participate as observers. 
16 Decree no. 2018-092/PRES/PM/MINEFID dated Jan. 17, 2018 regulating development projects and programs.   

 

who might be competitively recruited or appointed following the World Bank non-objection. His/her signature 
will be required to commit project financing. S/he will be assisted by a team of high caliber who might be 
competitively recruited or appointed, covering technical, fiduciary, social and environmental safeguard functions 
deemed critical for proper project implementation and management. As needed, some staff may be shared with 
other projects under the budget program. 

41. MAAH has been responsible over the past decade, and is still responsible currently, for implementing 
several important World Bank-funded projects. It has acquired capacity to support the different PMUs from 
technical, financial management, safeguards and M&E viewpoints. Similarly, the other ministries which will be 
involved have enough capacity to implement project activities. This is the case of MI which has managed several 
externally-funded projects related to road infrastructure. Detailed implementation arrangements will be worked 
out as part of the PIM to ensure that MAAH and other ministries maintain enough implementation capacity, 
promote complementarity and avoid overlap between the different projects under their watch. The PIM will 
compile all procedures for PReCA’s operational implementation, encompassing the administrative, fiduciary, 
M&E, procurement and social and environmental safeguards procedures. It will include detailed TORs for all PMU 
staff. Drawing on the experience of other World Bank-financed projects, specific sections of the PIM will be 
prepared for (i) the Cost Sharing Facility (CSF) and (ii) the Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC). 

 
    
F. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 

Four administrative regions have been selected for project implementation in the Western part of the 
country: Douna in Léraba province, Banzon in Kénédougou Province), Dourou in Passoré province and Bissan 
and Dangoumana Mouhoun in Mouhoun province. 

 
 
G. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 
 

Abdoulaye Gadiere, Environmental Specialist 
Leandre Yameogo, Environmental Specialist 
Gertrude Marie Mathilda Coulibaly Zombre, Social Specialist 

 
 
 

SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The operation will finance the rehabilitation and 
development of irrigated perimeters. It is also 
expected the construction or rehabilitation of all-
weather rural roads to fully opening up throughout 
the year all the project-targeted producing basins. In 
addition, the project will fund the construction of 


 

market facilities of public interest at national and/ or 
regional level. Furthermore, the Banzon's irrigation 
scheme will be rehabilitated. Consequently, an 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) 
was developed for that irrigated perimeter and an 
Environmental and Social Management 
Framework(ESMF) was produced for investments 
that detailed studies are not available and locations 
unknown to date. Thereafter, both instruments were 
reviewed, consulted upon and disclosed publicly. 
The ESIA was disclosed in Burkina Faso on April 4 
and at the World bank website on April 5, 2019 
while the ESMF was disclosed in Burkina on March 7 
and at the bank's website on March 27, 2019. 

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No This policy is not triggered by the project. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

Irrigation schemes are potentially known for hosting 
natural habitats, more specifically aquatic species 
habitats. However, it is not anticipated that planned 
investments will impact negatively natural 
habitats.This policy is  triggered to draw the 
attention of the Project Management Unit (PMU) 
when civil works are going to be undertaken in 
irrigation schemes areas. The ESMF prepared in line 
with the OP4.01  includes a section for a proper 
management of Natural habitats that might be 
located irrigation schemes areas. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No 

This policy is not triggered since the Project will not 
affect forests nor forest-dependent communities, 
and the Project will also not involve or support 
changes in the management of forests. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The project intends to support agricultural 
intensification. That may lead the producers to the 
use of chemical products such as pesticides. To 
anticipate and prevent any wrong use of pesticides 
with their adverse impacts on environment and 
communities, an Integrated Pest Management Plan 
(IPMP) was developed as a separate instrument. Like 
the ESMF, this safeguard tool once prepared, was 
reviewed, consulted upon and disclosed in Burkina 
Faso on March 7 and at the World bank website on 
March 27, 2019. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 
In order to anticipate and to be sure that all the 
precautions have been taken to protect and 
safeguard physical cultural resources, a section 



 

addressing these concerns has been included in the 
ESMF. This section will show how to handle chance 
finds of cultural assets within the project area. This, 
because activities related to the construction and 
rehabilitation of irrigated perimeters, feeder roads, 
markets facilities and other infrastructure works will 
induce excavations with potential discoveries of 
physical cultural resources. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 
There are no Indigenous People as defined by the 
policy in Burkina 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

The project will finance activities that could induce 
potential adverse social impacts that may lead to 
land acquisition and/or restrictions on access to 
resources and sources of income or livelihoods: 
rehabilitation and development of irrigated 
perimeters, construction or rehabilitation of all-
weather rural roads to fully opening up throughout 
the year all the project-targeted producing basins, 
construction of market facilities of public interest at 
national and/ or regional level. Furthermore, the 
Banzon's irrigation scheme will be rehabilitated. 
Consequently, a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) was 
developed for that irrigated perimeter and 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was produced 
for investments whose detailed studies are not 
available and locations unknown to date. Thereafter, 
both instruments were reviewed, consulted upon 
and disclosed publicly. The RPF was disclosed in 
Burkina on March 22 and at the Bank's website on 
March 27, 2019. As for the RAP, it was disclosed in-
country and at the bank's website on April 5, 2019.  

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 Yes 

The policy is triggered because the project will 
intervene in irrigation schemes that rely on existing 
dams. The project will not have direct intervention 
on dams. The situation of existing dams is described 
as follows: 
 
Dourou dam: This dam is located upstream of 
Dourou irrigation scheme and has a capacity of 83 
Hm3 and a 10.5 m height. A review of Dourou dam 
safety conditions was commissioned by the Ministry 
of Agriculture and financed by the WBG project 
PARIIS in 2017. The report was approved by the 
Ministry and the World Bank in February 2017.  The 
remedial works related to the structural stability of 


 

the dam identified in this study were carried out in 
2018 under the State budget as evidenced during a 
WBG mission in November 2018. Further studies 
shall be carried out to assess the suitable  option for 
increasing the discharge capacities of the spillways. 
The hydrological risk has been identified as one of 
the most critical dam safety risks by the independent 
dam safety assessment in 2017. 
 
Mouhoun / Léry dam: Regarding the Sourou Valley 
where the project will finance the construction of 
Dangoumana and Bissan schemes, the 
Mouhoun/Léry dam (580 Hm3 / 8 m) was 
rehabilitated in 2014 through the project “Projet de 
Développement de l ’Agriculture (PDA)” financed by 
the Millennium Challenge Account (MCA) with 
complementary works financed by the Government 
in 2017 and 2019. The MCA project also financed, in 
2014, a review of the Operation and Maintenance of 
the Mouhoun /Léry dam and recommended 
procedures for the O&M during the different 
seasons and in case of extreme events (floods); 
these recommendations are currently followed by 
the entity in charge of the dam operation, the 
Mouhoun Water Agency (Agence de l’Eau du 
Mouhoun). The O&M Plan should be updated along 
with a comprehensive dam safety assessment  taking 
into account the reservoir operation of the recently 
constructed  Samendéni dam in the upstream of the 
river 
 
Samendéni dam: Two hundred kilometers upstream 
Mouhoun/Léry dam, on the Mouhoun river, the 
Government of Burkina Faso has built in 2017 
another large dam, with a capacity of 1,050 Hm3 and 
a height of 23.9 m. The reservoir has been filled for 
the first time in 2018. The overall impacts of this 
dam on the WBG investments in Bissan and 
Dangoumana would be positive: (i) the dam will 
contribute to better control flood during the rainy 
season which will reduce the risks downstream and; 
(ii) the Samendéni dam will increase the flow on the 
dry season, which will increase the water availability 
for irrigation in the Sourou Valley. The independent 
dam safety assessment and preparation of dam 
safety plans; i.e.  O&M Plan covering  


 

Instrumentation Plan, and Emergency Preparedness 
Plans, shall be undertaken in an expeditious manner.  
 
During project implementation, dam safety risk 
assessments and dam safety plans (including O&M 
plans, Instrumentation plans and Emergency 
Preparedness Plans) will be carried out as well as 
periodic dam’s safety inspections for the Dourou 
dam, the Mouhoun/Léry dam and the Samendéni 
dam and have been included in the Financing 
Agreement as Disbursement Conditions before the 
start of irrigation schemes’s construction. If some 
additional remedial works are identified for the 
dams, the Government will finance such 
complementary remedial works or safety-related 
measures. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

Yes 

The proposed project finances the rehabilitation and 
development of irrigation schemes that will draw on 
an international waterway and its tributaries. In 
accordance with the policy, riparian countries and 
the Volta Basin Authority were notified in April 2019. 
The Volta Basin authorities and riparian countries 
expressed their no-objection to the project. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
The project coverage is not located in a Disputed 
Area. 

 
 

KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The operation will finance the rehabilitation and development of irrigation schemes. It is also expected the 
construction or rehabilitation of all-weather rural roads to fully opening up throughout the year all the project-
targeted producing basins. In addition, the project will fund the construction of market facilities of public interest at 
national and/ or regional level. Some of these infrastructures may have major environmental and social impacts. 
Irrigation investments may have adverse but limited environmental impacts on water resources, for the most part, 
and will require the resettlement of some local communities. The main environmental safeguards issues for the 
project relate to water pollution, construction waste management, water abstraction and changes to water outflows 
from the rivers and associated impacts on downstream human needs and aquatic habitats, and biodiversity. 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
Irrigation investments in the project area may have a medium to long term impact on water cumulative off-takes from 
the waterways. The long-term social impact is also of importance, as agricultural development may lead to intense 

 

migration within the Project intervention area. Among the more beneficial potential indirect long-term impacts are 
the use of more water-saving irrigation systems and technologies. This will be further supported by sustained dialogue 
on water management in the project area and the proposed measures aimed at reducing water consumption for 
irrigation. This will include different measures and incentives to facilitate the adoption of water saving techniques, as 
well as a more transparent planning of public and private investments in the coming years. Lastly, in compliance with 
the triggering of OP7.50, a notification letter was sent to each of the other five riparian countries and the Volta Basin 
Authority (VBA).  The countries and the VBA expressed their no-objection to the project 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. 
The rehabilitation of the irrigated perimeters and of the access roads are crucial to the achievement of the project 
objectives and they will be done with minimal effect to the environment and all precautionary measures will be taken 
to avoid causing any irreversible damage to the environment. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower 
capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The project is rated as Environmental Assessment Category “A”, requiring a full environmental assessment. The 
following environmental safeguard policies are triggered: Environmental Assessment (OP/ BP 4.01); Natural habitats 
(OP/ BP.04); Dam Safety (OP/ BP 4.37); Pest Management (OP 4.09); Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12); Physical 
Cultural Resources (OP/ BP4.11) and Projects on International Waterways (OP/ BP 7.50). 
 
The project has adopted a framework approach to deal with environmental matters. This is justified since exact 
locations for a substantial number of program activities, particularly those of the sub-projects, which may have 
environmental potential adverse impact, have not yet been determined with certainty. Therefore, an Environmental 
and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been prepared in line with OP/BP4.01. This ESMF includes specific 
chapters on Natural Habitats and Physical Cultural Resources in compliance with OP4.04, OP4.37 and OP/BP4.11 
respectively. With respect to Pest Management in line with the OP4.09 triggering, a Pest Management Plan has been 
developed as a stand-alone document. In addition to the above-mentioned documents, the Borrower has prepared an 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) for developing and expanding the Banzon irrigation scheme as 
part of project investments. Lastly, with the aim of being in full compliance with the triggering of OP7.50, a notification 
letter was sent to each of the five other members countries of Volta Authority Basin that replied positively, granting 
their agreement for the project approval. 
 
The ESMF lays out procedures for screening and mitigating impacts from construction and operation of the irrigation 
schemes, and includes the following: (a) checklists of potential environmental and social impacts and their sources; (b) 
procedures for participatory screening of proposed sites and activities and the environmental and social 
considerations; (c) procedures for assessing potential environmental and social impacts of the planned project 
activities; (d) institutional arrangements for mitigating, preventing, and managing the identified impacts; (e) typical 
environmental management planning process for addressing negative externalities in the course of project 
implementation; (f) a system for monitoring the implementation of mitigation measures; and (g) recommended 
capacity building measures for environmental planning and monitoring of project activities.  
 
The PMP encourages the use of organic fertilizers and biological technics to fight against agriculture predators. In 
addition to that, it sets up guidance and guidelines with the aim to protect population health and environment 
integrity in promoting best practices in the case of use of chemical products. 
 
The RPF document outlines the principles and procedures for resettlement and or compensation of subproject-
 

affected people, and establishes standards for identifying, assessing and mitigating negative impacts of program 
supported activities. In addition, the RPF will guide the preparation and implementation of RAPs for each individual 
sub project that triggers the involuntary resettlement policy. Specific ESIAs and RAPs will be prepared for relevant 
activities before project implementation along with Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs). The ESIAs 
will provide mitigation measures for all the potential impacts as a result of the triggering of the above-mentioned 
safeguard policies. 
 
In addition to these above mentioned 03 documents, the borrower has also prepared 01 ESIA and 01 RAP for Banzon’s 
irrigation scheme that was clearly identified as being part of futures investments. 
 
All of these 05 safeguard instruments have been reviewed by the banks’ specialists, consulted upon and disclosed in 
Burkina Faso and at the Bank’s website as follows. 
 
-ESMF, disclosed in Burkina Faso on March 7 and at the World bank website, on March 27, 2019.   
-PMP disclosed in Burkina Faso, on March 7 and at the World bank website on March 27, 2019.  
-RPF disclosed in Burkina Faso, on March 22 and at the World bank website on March 27, 2019.    
-ESIA disclosed in Burkina Faso on April 4, and at the World bank website, on April 5, 2019.   
-RAP disclosed in Burkina Faso and at the World bank website on April 5, 2019.   
 
The Project Management Unit (PMU) carry out the screening for all investments will determine the actions necessary 
to comply with environmental and social safeguard policies and national legislation. It will determine whether an ESIA 
and/or RAP, or both, will be required and will prepare appropriate safeguards instruments for each of the sub-
projects.  The PMU will commission the preparation of detailed ESIAs and RAPs to be carried out by independent 
consultants, based on terms of reference (TORs) to be reviewed by BUNEE and the Bank. The PMU will be responsible 
not only for the overall implementation of the PMP, ESMF, RPF and specific safeguard instruments required for 
specific Project activities (i.e. ESIAs and/or RAPs), but also for the internal monitoring of proposed mitigation 
measures. All site-specific safeguard instruments will be submitted to BUNEE for decision before submission to the 
Bank for review, clearance and disclosure in-country and on the Bank’s website. 
 
Responsibility and oversight of the Project’s overall compliance with national and Bank safeguard policies will be 
devolved to the environmental Safeguards Specialist and social Safeguards specialists within the PMU, as the main 
persons in charge of project implementation and monitoring of safeguard aspects. They will be working in close 
collaboration with BUNEE. BUNEE will not only conduct periodic monitoring of project’s compliance with proposed 
mitigation of changes, but also changes in environmental resources (i.e., water and soil quality, flora and fauna, vector 
ecology, soil erosion etc.) from the baseline. 
 
Further, all civil works, for developing or expanding irrigation schemes; construction and rehabilitation activities of 
other types of infrastructure, will be contingent on broad-based and sustained consultation with local communities in 
project’s intervention area. Mitigation measures for identified environmental and social impacts, including avoiding or 
sparing cultural and historical resources and other environmental clauses, will be properly implemented by 
contractors and sub-contractors, as specified in the safeguard instruments and bidding documents. Selected 
contractors and their Resident Engineering Teams will be required, each, to hire an environmental and social experts 
with strong skills in Occupational Health and Safety issues for the environmental specialist and Labor influx and 
Gender Based Violence (GBV) for the social specialist, whose roles are to ensure specific Environmental, Safety, Health 
and Social clauses are fully and adequately implemented and reported on. 
 


The BUNEE will be responsible for ensuring the Project activities are implemented in accordance with national laws 
while the World Bank’s specialists will make sure that all investments that may have potential adverse impacts are in 
full compliance with environmental and social safeguard policies triggered by the project. 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, 
with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The preparation of the safeguard documents (i.e. ESMF, PMP, RPF, ESIA and RAP) followed a broad-based and in-
depth consultation approach with and interviews of relevant stakeholder groups in the public and private sectors and 
civil society. These consultations include Producer Organizations, particularly those within or in the vicinity of the 
Project intervention area, key Ministries and Government agencies, in particular Ministries of Agriculture, Water 
resources, Environment, Health, the Plant Protection Agency, pesticides wholesalers and retailers; BUNEE, the 
national agency in charge of review and enforcement of environmental legislation and regulations; health care 
personnel and NGOs.  
 
While local populations were enthusiastic about and confirmed their interest in the proposed investments, they 
nonetheless raised a few issues that prevail in current exploitation and management practices in the project area. 
Producers and local Government representatives have requested to be fully involved in the design and 
implementation of land allocation process; fostering marketing and commercialization of agricultural produce 
domestically, as well as in the sub-region; Fostering a dynamic framework for dialogue and consensus building 
between crop producers and livestock producers, strengthened by binding laws and regulations designed to 
avoid/minimize conflicts between them; concerted efforts and synergy among sectoral agencies for environmental 
sustainability in the project intervention area. In particular, participants wished close involvement of the forestry and 
nature conservation departments in the project implementation, in order to minimize deforestation, river banks 
degradation; proliferation of water borne diseases; existence of prohibited pesticides, inadequate storage and misuse 
of pesticides; lack of opportunities of women in productive agriculture. These concerns have all been reflected in the 
safeguards documents and appropriate recommendations have been formulated. 
 


























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
State of Maharashtra's Agribusiness and Rural Transformation Project (P168310) 

 
 

  
Sep 18, 2018 Page 1 of 11  

     

 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 03-Oct-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSC25483 
     

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

India P168310  State of Maharashtra's 
Agribusiness and Rural 
Transformation Project 
(P168310) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

SOUTH ASIA May 13, 2019 Aug 12, 2019 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Republic of India Department of Agriculture, 
Government of Maharashtra 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The project development objective is to support the development of inclusive and competitive agriculture value chains , 
focusing on small holder farmers and agri-entrepreneurs in Maharashtra. This would be achieved by expanding access 
to new and organised markets for producers and enterprises with complementary investments in technical services and 
risk management capabilities. 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 300.00 

Total Financing 300.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 210.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) 210.00 

Non-World Bank Group Financing 

     Counterpart Funding 80.00 

          Borrowing Agency 80.00 



     Other Sources 10.00 

          Foundation/s (identified) 10.00 

   
 

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B - Partial Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

 
1. India continues to be one of the world’s fastest-growing large economies and has experienced a substantial 
decline in poverty. The Indian economy’s annual growth rate grew from 5.5 per cent in 2012-13 to 8 per cent in 2015-
16, supported by robust private consumption, a resilient services sector, and some revival in industrial activity. In recent 
times, temporary disruptions from demonetization and uncertainty surrounding GST slowed India’s economic 
momentum; real GDP growth declined to 7.1 per cent in 2016-17 and further to 6.5 per cent in 2017-18. Private 
investments have remained subdued. Economic activity is expected to stabilise in 2018-19 and growth will resume 
gradual acceleration in the near term. Since the 2000s, India has made remarkable progress in reducing absolute poverty, 
declining sharply from 38.9 to 21.6 per cent at the international poverty line (US$1.90 PPP/day) between 2004 and 2011. 
With over a 100 million people escaping poverty, the pace of poverty reduction in India exceeded that of the developing 
world as well as that of Middle-Income Countries (MICs) in this period. High economic growth, a rapid rise in rural wages, 
greater rural-urban integration and increase in non-farm activity, especially construction, were the key drivers of poverty 
reduction. Since 2011, robust economic growth may have aided further reduction in poverty. However, trends in the 
construction sector and rural wages suggest that the pace of poverty reduction may have moderated.  

 
2. Agriculture plays a vital role in India’s economy and is central to policies aimed at alleviating poverty. 
Increasingly, the potential role of the sector to expand growth, create jobs and support the ongoing rural-urban 
transformation is becoming evident. More than 54 per cent of the population is engaged in agriculture and allied 
activities (census 2011), and the sector contributed 17.1 per cent to the country’s Gross Value Added (GVA) for the year 
2017-18 (at current prices). As expected in a fast-growing economy, there has been a continuous decline in the share of 
agriculture and allied Sectors in the GVA from 18.6 per cent in 2013-14 to 17.4 per cent in 2016-17. The annual agriculture 
growth rate was around 3-3.5 per cent in the 1990s and 2000s and dropped 3below 2 per cent per annum during 2013-
15, due to low productivity, growing water and land scarcity, rising labour costs, and declining commodity prices. This 



 

has led to an agrarian crisis with a growing emphasis on improving the ecological sustainability of the resource base and 
the socio-economic potential of the sector to increase farmer welfare and rural growth opportunities1. 

 
3. Rapid urbanisation in India is driving change in the agriculture value chain, deepening linkages between urban 
food systems and producers. This urbanisation leads to (i) an increased uptake of agricultural produce from rural to 
urban areas; (ii) changes in the farm production to reflect the food marketed and consumed; and (iii) larger and changing 
role of food supply chains in meeting urban food needs2. However, the current urban food system is in disarray with 
limited or no focus on food safety, food security to urban poor and multiplicity of authorities handling food related issues. 
 
4. Over the years India has developed export competitiveness in certain specialised products, making it the 
world’s 10th largest agriculture exporter.  Leading exports consisted of basmati rice, the meat of bovine animals, marine 
products, cotton, and sugar. However, India’s agriculture export basket accounts for only about 2 per cent of world trade. 
and the share of India’s high value and value-added agriculture produce in its agriculture export basket is less than 15 
per cent compared to 25 per cent in the US and 49 per cent in China.  This low share and low value are contributed mainly 
by (i) inconsistent policies in the areas of farm production, support prices and R&D (all focused on food security); (ii) poor 
inland transportation, exit point infrastructure; and (iii) export restrictions which results in uncertainty among the 
stakeholders. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 

 
5. Maharashtra has a high agricultural growth rate, agricultural transformation toward higher value crops is 
underway, and the state is relatively integrated into global commodity markets.Agriculture has grown at an annual 
average of 6.4 per cent from 2004-05 to 2011-12, and the area under cultivation for cereals has declined since 2000, 
reflecting a shift from food grains towards cash crops. Food grains (rice, wheat, and millets, excluding maize) account for 
about 25 per cent of the gross cropped area, contributing only 7. 7 per cent of agricultural GDP3.  Since 2000, with the 
upsurge in the production of high-value crops, the state has emerged as one of the country’s largest producers and 
exporter of fruits, vegetables, pulses, cotton, and soybean. Many of these changes in the sector have led to positive 
developments because production is labour intensive (e.g., horticulture and floriculture), climate resilient (pulse-based 
cropping systems increase resilience, e.g. pigeon pea intercropping leads to higher soil carbon sequestration than 
monocrop system), and responds to market needs, both domestically and globally.  The food processing industry is 
dynamic in the state with increasing value addition, and it employs approximately 240,000 workers, about 15 per cent of 
the total formal sector employment. However, agriculture growth and structural transformation are not spread evenly 
across the state with some areas, notably the north and east, lagging behind.  Likewise, around 57 per cent of all industries 
are concentrated in only three districts4.  
 
6.  Small and marginal farmers5 dominate Maharashtra's agriculture and commodity downturns significantly 
impact them as the state’s agriculture is diversified and relatively integrated with the global value chains. Commodities 
like soybean, cotton, and sugar (covering 44 per cent of the cropped area in Maharashtra) are strongly influenced by 
global price movements. Commodities with little footprint outside India are mainly influenced by trade policies. For 
example, over the past few years, the price of pulses (where pulses cover about 20 percent of the total cropped area in 

                                            
1 Annual Report, 2017-18. Department of Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers Welfare, Government of India 
2 India is the fifth largest online grocery market in the Asia Pacific region and one of the fastest growing.  India’s online food and drink market grew to $135 million in 
2016 and is expected to cross $464 million in 2021. Likewise, the emergence of larger chains and stores which began around 2005 and has grown to over 3,000 modern 
retail outlets in 2016. 
3 Economic Survey of Maharashtra, 2017-18, GOM. 
4 A Report Based on ASI 2010-11, GOM. 
5 With average farm size of 1.44 ha. 


Maharashtra), while influenced by domestic consumption, were largely affected by the inconsistent trade policies of 
India. This is reflected in periodic farm distress in sectors linked to domestic and global markets, with broad shifts in the 
global prices of commodities such as pulses, soybean, sugar and milk leading to farmers not even being able to cover the 
cost of production in many cases. 
 
7. In response to these emerging production and market-related challenges, the Government of India (GOI) and 
Government of Maharashtra (GOM) have launched a number of programs, policies, and reform initiatives under the 
overarching vision of “Doubling Farmer’s Income by 2022”. New initiatives to address the production risks include a 
crop insurance scheme with enhanced coverage and use of technology; and a dedicated long-term irrigation fund with 
an initial tranche of US$3 billion. Additionally, to liberalise the regulated agriculture market, the GOI launched, and GOM 
adopted, second-generation marketing reforms, including the move towards integrating the country into a unified 
national market; and 100 per cent Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) is allowed to enhance investments in agribusiness/food 
processing sectors. A new agricultural export policy is in the final stages of approval and proposes doing away with 
arbitrary export quotas, and price restrictions.  Through this policy, India is targeting a doubling of agriculture exports to 
4.00 per cent (US$ 60 billion) by 2022.  
 
8. Women face a number of additional barriers to the transition to high value agriculture (HVA) and agribusiness. 
While India’s farmers are increasingly likely to be women, they are less able to transition to HVA than men, and their 
ownership of agricultural assets has stagnated. Unlike men who, in addition to production, also serve as the actors in the 
upper levels of the value chains, including intermediaries or village-level traders and processors, wholesalers, retailers, 
or exporters, women are generally concentrated at the lower levels of the value chains. This division of labour is mostly 
a reflection of social and cultural norms, which discourage women to travel by themselves or own land. These factors 
curtail women’s access to resources and services, including credit, training, extension, inputs, and trading and marketing 
networks. Women do not have collateral to apply for loan or opportunities to participate in extension training because 
selection for these opportunities is often based on land ownership titles or other formal records. More than 2 million 
poor women have been mobilised into Self Help Groups (SHGs) and federated organisations in the state.    These SHGs 
and federated organisations can serve as an important pillar to substantially enhance inclusion of rural poor women into 
agribusiness transformation and related entrepreneurship opportunities.   
 
9. The state also faces significant adverse risks from climate change:   As part of the National Action Plan on Climate 
Change (NAPCC), the Government of Maharashtra has formulated the Maharashtra State Adaptation Action Plan on 
Climate Change (MSAAPCC) by commissioning a comprehensive vulnerability assessment study. The MSAAPCC climate 
modelling results for 2030, 2050 and 2070, show that temperature and rainfall are projected to increase across the state, 
with important regional variations resulting in potentially significant adverse impacts on agriculture performance. 
Impacts will be further aggravated by the projected increase in the frequency of extreme climate events (droughts, 
hailstorms, floods, delays in the onset of monsoons, higher rainfall intensity) already experienced in the state over recent 
past, as illustrated by the three severe droughts that hit the state over the past five years. Given these uncertain shifts in 
weather and climatic events, the small and marginal farmers are disproportionately exposed to risk and farm distress. 
 
10. With the support of the World Bank, Maharashtra has recently rolled out four programs, to enhance the climate 
resiliency of the state’s agriculture: the Maharashtra Project on Climate Resilient Agriculture, and three national level 
programs that have significant presence in the state: the National Dairy Support Project (P107648), the National 
Groundwater Management Improvement Program (P158119) and the proposed Agriculture Risk Resilience Insurance 
Access Project (P165923). Their focus is on enhancing climate resilience of farmers through promoting adoption of 
climate-resilient agricultural technologies, irrigation and production risk management. The proposed project will seek to 
complement and leverage these Bank financed projects/programs and other thematically related on-going/pipeline 



projects and initiatives both nationally and in the state viz., National Rural Economic Transformation Project (P104164), 
the proposed Food Processing and Value Addition Pilot Program (P167559). 
 
Relationship to CPF 

 
11. The project advances two focus areas of the India CPF of promoting more resource efficient growth and enhancing 
competitiveness and creating jobs. Specifically, the project will support the following CPF goals: 

 
12. Objective 1.1: Promote more resource-efficient, inclusive, and diversified growth in the rural sector. The project 
closely aligns to the CPF sectoral goal of supporting Government of India (GOI) priorities of agricultural transformation 
and doubling farmer incomes by 2022. The project seeks to undertake a range of interventions to enhance market access, 
competitiveness and resilience to market shocks of farmers and value chain actors in the state of Maharashtra. The 
project will seek to generate jobs in agribusiness related areas including input supply, provision of technical services and 
food processing. The project will also explicitly target and develop mechanisms for inclusion of women at all level of 
agricultural transformation, from diversification to higher value crops, to access to higher level technical services, and 
access to a broader range of markets. This will promote inclusivity and diversification of the rural growth. With its strategy 
to align with complimentary investments under other projects and schemes, the project will also advance resource 
efficient growth and build climate resilience of farmers. 

 
13. Objective 2.1: Improve the business environment and select firm capabilities. The project will support the GOM’s 
efforts to develop a more favourable regulatory environment for private investment in agribusiness related areas, 
promote private sector investments and enhance the competitiveness of the agricultural sector. This will include support 
for the improved implementation of reforms already undertaken; setting up of institutional structures for consultative 
planning and capacity building of identified value chains and growth clusters, and provision of technical services to 
agribusiness enterprises.  .  

 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
14. The project development objective is to support the development of inclusive and competitive agriculture value 
chains6, focusing on small holder farmers and agri-entrepreneurs in Maharashtra.     
 
B. Key Results 

a) Increased access to new and organised markets (gender disaggregated, with a target for increased access for 
women producers/value chain participants); (measured by increase in the value of marketed output at the 
beneficiary level); 

b) Beneficiaries of job-focused interventions (CRI) (gender disaggregated); (measured by the number of beneficiaries 
reached by training, employment in processing, entrepreneurial development and other interventions that 
contribute to the jobs agenda); and 

c) Farmers reached with agricultural assets or services (CRI) (gender disaggregated). 
 
15. Project beneficiaries include producers, community-based organisations (viz., SHG federations, Farmer Producer 
Organisations, and Primary Agriculture Credit Cooperative Societies), agri enterprises and other value chain participants, 
including individuals where relevant. 
 
D. Concept Description 

                                            
6 Competitive value chains are defined as those providing project beneficiaries with access to services, markets, and jobs. 




 
16. The proposed project will strengthen and speed up ongoing agricultural systems transformation in the state of 
Maharashtra. The project will support the state in strengthening the continuing market-driven transition, with an 
expanded private sector role in the production, processing, and value addition, commercialisation of crops, and livestock 
products. With a substantial urban population – the highest in the country; relatively high per capita incomes – third 
highest in the country; and the highest industrialisation level amongst states, Maharashtra is well placed for such 
agricultural sector transformation. The proposed project will support the following pillars of agriculture and rural 
transformation in the state:  

 
(a) Build state capacity for evidence-based agribusiness reforms. The state has undertaken many agriculture market 

reforms and plans to do more to address market-distorting interventions and bottlenecks for private sector activity.   
The project will seek to build capacity of the state to inform on how reform issues are debated, decided, implemented 
and evaluated; and develop institutional mechanisms for coordination with the private sector.  

(b) Expand market access. Constraints to producers and entrepreneurs accessing emerging domestic and export markets 
include lack of access to technical services relating to food safety and quality; weak information on market 
opportunities and requirements; and inability to invest in market development activities.  The project will seek to 
improve access of producers and entrepreneurs to a range of technical and business development services to 
enhance competitiveness through food safety and quality; new technologies; and skills training. International 
experience shows that accessing new markets requires longer-term strategic actions including identifying 
opportunity based on local competitive advantages and supply-demand projections; and support for firms and 
entrepreneurs to undertake market development. The project will support a range of such activities including: 
identifying opportunity commodities and value chains for interventions; scaling up production and processing of 
identified commodities; enhancing access to timely market information and intelligence; and supporting producer 
and enterprise associations to undertake market access activities.  

(c) Strengthen risk mitigation measures. The project will support strengthening risk mitigation measures including 
building the capacity of the state to respond to commodity-price fluctuations and agriculture sector crises; 
developing access to timely information on markets and productions trends; and enhancing access of producers to 
financing and hedging instruments. Additionally, for building the climate resiliency and resource growth, the project 
will align with complimentary investments under other projects and schemes. 

 
17. In addressing these constraints, the project will support  a number of actions for leveraging additional resources 
by (i) improving the policy and regulatory environment for private sector investments in the agricultural sector; (ii) using 
public financing to enhance private sector incentives and to reduce transaction costs and risks  ; (iii) forging innovative 
partnerships for leveraging funding, including Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) funding through the Village Social 
Transformation Foundation (VSTF), a foundation promoted by the GOM, with private sector participation and financing, 
to catalyze rural transformation. 

 
    

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
Maharashtra is one of India’s most prosperous states, with a population of 114 million. Yet, it has some of India’s poorest 

people, four of its 36 districts are among India’s 106 most backward. Agriculture and industry form the mainstay of the 
state's economy. Most of the cultivable land is still rain-fed, relying heavily on the southwest monsoon rains. The net 
irrigated area is only 30.77 million Ha or about 16% of cultivable land. Maharashtra has typical monsoon climate, with 
cold weather seasons. The state has been affected by the recurrent monsoon failures in recent years 
resulting in droughts which have disproportionately impacted the state’s semi-arid agro climatic zones. Sahyadri and 
Satpura are two important hill ranges and Godavari, Bhima and Krishna are the two major rivers of the state. The state 
also has a long coastline. About 17% area of the state is forest, majority of which are in the eastern and Sahyadri regions 
of the state. Since the central parts of the state receives low rainfall, most of the rivers in the region have multiple dams. 
Maharashtra has around 1800 notable large dams. Maharashtra is generally rich in biodiversity Southern Tropical Thorn 
with five major forest types (Southern Tropical Semi-Evergreen, Southern Tropical Moist Deciduous, Southern Tropical 
Dry Deciduous, Southern Tropical Thorn and Littoral and Swamp Forests). The Western Ghats areas of Maharashtra are 
included in the 34 global Biodiversity Hotspots. The proposed project will be implemented throughout the state. 
 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
The Borrower is familiar with the World Bank's safeguard policies having implemented several Bank funded projects. 

More recently, in the agriculture sector, Maharashtra Agricultural Competitiveness Project (MACP) and Project on Climate 
Resilient Agriculture (PoCRA) are being implemented. Both have sound environmental and social management 
frameworks. MACP has been rated Satisfactory on safeguards performance consistently. There is now adequate capacity 
in the state to manage potential safeguard risks of projects. However, some capacity building efforts are needed to deal 
with the new set of challenges arising as a result of climate change impacts. In general, Maharashtra has good institutions 
that can prove technical support to deal with safeguards related impacts, risks and challenges and build on positive 
outcomes of resource efficiency and sustainability. 
 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 
Anupam Joshi, Environmental Specialist 
Gitanjali Chaturvedi, Social Specialist 

 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

This policy is triggered. The project involves a series of 
interventions on agriculture value chain development, 
facilitating market access, supporting improvement of 
livestock productivity, food processing and, in general, 
enhancing resilience.  It is anticipated that 
investments to be made under the project will not 
lead to any major irreversible impacts. the project by 
design promotes market-led better natural resource 
and environmental management within the selected 
sectors and sub-sectors. The potential environmental 
issues that could arise if project financed investments 
are not implemented appropriately, include food 
safety, supply chain sustainability, waste generation 
and management, poor energy efficiency and 
associated emissions, soil degradation etc. Activities 
for post-harvest management and value chain creation 
for product aggregation, handling, and marketing 


could have impacts associated with general civil works 
construction, if supported under the project. This 
includes appropriate site selection for creating new 
infrastructure and reducing impacts of construction 
related activities like debris disposal, dust and solid 
wastes. 

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

TBD 

This policy may/may not be triggered. At this stage it is 
not clear if investments in enhancing the access of 
intended project beneficiaries to private markets will 
trigger this policy. The project investments may result 
in increased role of private markets and attract private 
investments in food processing etc. The proposed EA 
will ascertain whether this policy will be triggered. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 TBD 

This policy may/may not be triggered. Project 
investments are not likely to adversely impact natural 
habitats but certain elements may have some bearing 
on agro-biodiversity. The EA will ascertain whether 
this policy will be triggered. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No 
The project will not lead to any impact on forests or 
their management practices. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

Even through the project is not going to invest on the 
crop production side of agriculture, this policy is 
triggered as opportunities created through better 
market access could lead to overuse of pesticides and 
other agro-chemicals for boosting production. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No 
The project is unlikely to have any impact on physical 
cultural resources. Proposed investments are largely in 
existing markets and/or rural household level. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 Yes 

Project activities will be implemented state-wide. 
Given that Maharashtra has a large tribal population 
spread across the state with 54% of those living below 
poverty line, OP 4.10 has been triggered. As specific 
locations for the project are unknown, an Indigenous 
People's Planning Framework (IPPF) will be prepared 
after free, prior and informed consultation with 
affected Scheduled Tribes as per OP 4.10 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 TBD 
Project activities currently envisaged are not likely to 
cause any involuntary resettlement. This will be 
updated during preparation. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 
The project will not invest on constructing any new 
dam and/or support rehabilitation/improvement of 
any existing dam. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
The project does not involve any international 
waterways. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No The project does not include any disputed areas. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Apr 08, 2019 
 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
The safeguard preparation will involve undertaking an Environment Assessment. The preparation timeline is aligned with 

project processing timeline. In addition, an Indigenous People's Planning Framework (IPPF) will be prepared to take into 
account initiatives undertaken in areas populated by Scheduled Tribes. 
 
 

























































World Bank Document


COMBINED PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENTS / INTEGRATED 
SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET (PID/ISDS)  

CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: PIDISDSC17290

Date Prepared/Updated: 18-Nov-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION

  A.  Basic Project Data

Country: Kenya Project ID: P154784
Parent 
Project ID 
(if any):

Project Name: Kenya Climate Smart Agriculture Project (P154784)
Region: AFRICA
Estimated 
Appraisal Date:

17-Oct-2016 Estimated 
Board Date:

31-Jan-2017

Practice Area
(Lead):

Agriculture Lending 
Instrument:

Investment Project Financing

Borrower(s): The National  Treasury
Implementing 
Agency:

Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries

Financing (in USD Million)
Financing Source Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT 29.70
International Development Association (IDA) 250.00
Total Project Cost 279.70

Environmental 
Category:

B - Partial Assessment

Concept 
Review 
Decision:

Track II - The review did authorize the preparation to continue

Is this a 
Repeater 
project?

No

Other Decision 
(as needed):

B. Introduction and Context

Country Context
1. Kenya's economy is larger and growing faster than previously estimated. Rebasing of its 


Gross Domestic Product (GDP) reveals that Kenya?s economy is the ninth largest in Africa and 
fifth largest in Sub-Saharan Africa (after Nigeria, South Africa, Angola, and Sudan)  . Kenya?s 
growth compares favorably with other countries. It no longer lags behind its regional peers or 
other lower-middle-income countries. Average growth between 2010 and 2013 was 6.2 percent?
significantly higher than the 5.3 percent average for Sub-Saharan Africa. Kenya?s 2013 growth 
rate of 5.7 percent was above the 5.0 percent average growth rate for lower-middle income 
countries.  In December 2014, Kenya?s GDP was estimated at US$55.2 billion (up from US$44.1 
billion before rebasing), with GDP per capita standing at US$1,246 (up from US$994). Kenya is 
now a lower-middle-income country, according to the World Bank classification, with Gross 
National Income (GNI) per capita of US$1,160 in 2013.   The economy was estimated to have 
grown 5.4 percent in 2014 and expected to grow by 6 percent in 2015 on the backdrop of 
significant improvement in external and internal balances, such as falling oil prices; and public 
investment, mainly in infrastructure (energy and the standard gauge railway). The World Bank 
projects that Kenya?s GDP will grow 6.6 percent in 2016, and 7.0 percent in 2017. 
 
2. Although poverty rates in Kenya seem to have fallen, formidable challenges at reducing 
poverty and increasing shared prosperity, in particular in rural areas, remain. Poverty reduction 
has been driven by solid growth across most sectors of the economy. But improvements in 
income are not evenly shared amongst people and inequality appears to be rising among regions.  
According to the World Bank Group Kenya Country Partnership Strategy (CPS 2014-2018), 
Kenya?s poverty rate has been falling?from 47 percent in 2005/06 to about 39 percent based on 
best estimates in 2012/13. But in the remote, arid, sparsely populated north-eastern parts of the 
country (Turkana, Mandera, and Wajir), poverty rates are above 80 percent.  The scale of 
consumption poverty in Kenya is staggering, and is concentrated in rural areas. Based on the last 
national household budget survey, close to half of the population (nearly 17 million Kenyans) was 
poor in 2005. The vast majority of the poor lived in rural areas and were more likely to depend on 
income and consumption from crops and livestock, as their main source of livelihood. Revised 
poverty estimates indicate that in 2013 nearly 4 in 10 Kenyans continue to live in extreme 
poverty.  
 
3. As the roles of national and county governments are restructured, and new county 
institutions are created, a fundamental challenge is to maintain the delivery of agricultural 
services. Under the new constitution adopted in 2010, the central government is devolving 
responsibility for multiple functions to 47 elected county governments and providing a minimum 
of 15 percent of national revenues to counties to carry out those functions. The main functions for 
agriculture (crop and animal husbandry services, extension, agricultural marketing and other 
related services) were transferred in August 2013 (the national government remains in charge of 
policy and research). With some exceptions, County agricultural services are in an embryonic 
state, with limited and in some cases no technical and/or operational capacity.
Sectoral and Institutional Context
4. In Kenya, agriculture remains one of the most important sectors of the economy. But 
about 83 percent of Kenya?s land area is in the Arid and Semi-Arid Lands (ASALs), which are 
mainly pastoral areas and the remaining 17 percent (where 80 percent of population lives) is 
classified as medium to high agricultural potential zone. In 2013, the sector contributed almost 27 
percent to the national GDP . The crops, livestock and fisheries sub-sectors contributed 
approximately 78, 20 and 2 percent to agricultural GDP respectively. The sector employs more 
than 75 percent of the workforce (also accounts for more than one-fifth of formal employment), 
generates most of the country?s food requirements, and plays a key role in poverty reduction. It 


also generates nearly two-thirds (65 percent) of merchandise exports and roughly 60 percent of 
foreign exchange earnings.  
 
5. Overall, Kenya?s agricultural sector performance has been highly volatile with growth 
rates dipping into negative territory in nine years between 1980 and 2012 (Figure 1 below). 
Kenya?s agricultural growth rate has averaged between 3.4 percent during 1995-2003 and 
decreased to an average of 2.1 percent in 2003-2011 period. Recent years have witnessed 
increased volatility in agricultural growth rates with debilitating impacts on rural households 
incomes and employment; urban and rural food security, poverty reduction and the country?s 
overall economic growth. The sector?s growth in real gross value-added decelerated in 2013 to 
2.9 percent from a revised growth of 4.2 percent in 2012. The lowest agricultural GDP growth 
rate and value-added was noted in 2008, during a period which Kenya experienced the post-
election violence following the country?s 2007 general elections. 
   
6. Extreme weather events, largely droughts and to a lesser extent floods, have been the 
principal driver behind the volatility in the agricultural sector?s performance in Kenya.  The 
frequency and intensity of severe weather events have increased and this trend will be further 
amplified in the future as temperatures rise due to climate change . The World Bank?s agricultural 
sector risk assessment (2014) highlighted that recurring drought has profound effects on the 
agricultural sector, particularly in maize (main staple food) and livestock (in pastoral systems) 
production. Frequent drought events resulted in precipitous crop losses, livestock deaths, spikes in 
food prices, increased food insecurity and malnutrition for the poor and led to rural population 
displacement (temporary migrations).  
 
7. Kenya?s strong reliance on rain fed maize production system in meeting its food needs 
and growing consolidation of production toward maize (and dry beans) has rendered the country 
increasingly vulnerable to supply disruptions and food shortages. Amid declining yields, 
productivity gains have come largely through land expansion into marginal areas that receive 
lower and more variable rainfall. This trend, coupled with Kenya? increasingly erratic rainfall, 
has made the country?s maize production more susceptible to moisture stress and year-on-year 
yield variability, with significant implications for national food security.  This has contributed to a 
growing structural deficit in maize/food production, a gap currently filled by rising imports, 
aggravating the country?s exposure to globally-driven commodity price shocks. Emergency food 
aid and other ex-post responses has helped fuel growing dependency and declining resilience, 
particularly among the poorest and especially those in the ASALs. 
 
8. Livestock production plays an important socio-economic role in many areas across 
Kenya, particularly in the ASALs where it accounts for as much as nine-tenths of employment 
and family income. Extensive livestock systems and pastoralists in Kenya?s northern rangelands 
are particularly vulnerable to the effects of drought. Estimated losses to livestock populations 
from droughts that have occurred within the most recent decade amount to more than US$1.08 
billion. Ancillary losses related to production assets and future income and the costs of ex-post 
response measures are likely several times that figure. The increased incidence of droughts across 
the ASALs in recent years means that affected communities have less time to recover and rebuild 
their assets. This has weakened traditional coping mechanisms and handicapped household 
resilience against future shocks. 
 
9. Climate variability is already having an impact on agriculture and food security in Kenya, 


as a result of increased prevalence of extreme events (especially droughts) and increased 
unpredictability of weather patterns.  For example, severe droughts that occurred in 1991/92, 
1995/96, 1998/2000, 2004/2005, and 2008-11, resulted in precipitous crop losses, livestock 
deaths, spikes in food prices, increased food insecurity and malnutrition for the poor, and led to 
rural population displacement (temporary migrations). Two noteworthy extreme climate events 
are the 1998 El Nino and the 2009 drought, which resulted in a combined total cost of US$2.8 
billion (about 7 percent of the 2010 GDP equivalent).   Frequent droughts also make Kenya 
significantly food insecure.  In 2015, it ranked 83rd of 109 countries, on the Global Food Security 
Index (GFSI).   Kenya is also highly vulnerable to climate change risks. The Center for Global 
Development ranks Kenya 13th out of 233 countries globally for ?direct risks? due to ?extreme 
weather? and 71st out of 233 for ?overall vulnerability? to climate change, even when adjusted 
for coping ability.  
 
10. Kenya?s average annual temperatures increased by 1Â°C between 1960 and 2003 , and 
by 1.5Â°C in the country?s drier regions.   Climate change is projected to reduce agricultural 
yields and livestock productivity, worsening the effect of climate shocks on the food system. 
Agriculture in Kenya is largely (98 percent) rain fed and thus extremely vulnerable to increasing 
temperatures and droughts.  Estimates of crop yield and livestock losses will vary greatly, but 
most global climate models project severe and adverse consequences, especially for the most 
food-insecure regions.  In Kenya, studies also show that by 2030, under a business as usual 
scenario, climate change will most likely reduce yields of staple crops (by 12 percent in maize, 23 
percent in rice, and 13 percent in wheat).  Crop land suitability is also expected to change, 
especially in wheat and maize. Depending on the region and types of production systems, water 
scarcity will result in less productive pastures, lower dairy yields, and higher risk of the spread of 
diseases.   
 
11. Climate change will exacerbate the vulnerability of Kenya?s agricultural sector as 
projections show increases in mean annual temperature of 1Â°C to 1.5Â°C by 2030. 
Consequently, changes in rainfall distribution and more frequent extreme events, such as 
prolonged drought and floods are predicted to result in more water shortages, especially in ASAL 
regions. While precipitation is projected to increase between 0.2 and 0.4 percent per year in 
Kenya, the direction and magnitude of change will vary considerably across regions, and 
warming-induced increases in evaporation rates are likely to offset the benefits of precipitation 
increases in some regions. Meeting this challenge will require both investments in building 
resilience to near-term shocks and in adapting to long-term climate change. In this context, 
climate smart agriculture (CSA) offers an appropriate strategic framework for responding to and 
reducing the adverse effects of climate change.  
 
12. Agriculture is the largest source of Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emissions in Kenya, 
contributing about 58.6 percent to total GHG emissions. Contributions of other sectors to national 
GHG emissions are: energy (25.3 percent), industry (3.2 percent) and waste management (1.2 
percent).   The agricultural sector is also a key driver of deforestation and land degradation, which 
account for an additional 32 percent of national GHG emissions.  Agricultural emissions are 
likely to increase from 20 MtCO2e in 2010 to 27 MtCO2e in 2030, largely driven by livestock 
methane emissions, which account for 96.2 percent of agricultural emissions. Agriculture, 
therefore, needs to reduce its GHG emissions and become part of the solution to tackle climate 
change. The sector plays an important role in sequestering carbon in soil and trees on farms.  It 
has the biophysical potential to offset and sequester about 20 percent of total annual emissions 



through improved soil management techniques.   Currently, the world?s soils hold three times 
more carbon than the atmosphere. Soils also have significant potential to absorb a larger amount 
of carbon from the atmosphere than they currently do.  Restoring this carbon to the soil will not 
only sequester carbon from the atmosphere, but also boost productivity, increase water retention 
(leading to greater resilience when droughts occur), bring land back into production (thereby 
reducing pressure on biodiversity and forests), and boost incomes (thereby benefiting the rural 
poor). Similarly, Kenya?s livestock GHG emission intensities (i.e. amount of GHGs emitted per 
unit of product) amongst the highest in the world; this is mainly due to low livestock productivity. 
With the continuing rising demand for livestock products this threatens to become a growing 
problem.  Increasing livestock productivity (e.g., through improved forages and providing 
adequate year-round feed resources) would increase incomes, protect people?s asset base, as well 
as reduce GHG e/unit of product.  
 
13. The proposed CSA project can help Kenya meet the rising demand for food; and attain 
the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) of ending poverty (SDG1) and hunger (SDG2), and 
combating climate change and its impacts (SDG13). But this would require investing in 
agricultural technologies, innovations and management practices (TIMPs) that would lead into 
CSA?s triple-win: increased agricultural productivity, enhanced resilience to climate change, and 
reduced GHG emissions. 
 
14. Kenya has a wide spectrum of CSA policies, strategies and plans that would help secure 
the triple-win. The Vision 2030 recognizes the significance of agriculture to its goal of achieving 
an average GDP growth rate of 10 percent per year up to the year 2030. This level of growth will 
be crucial for attaining the SDGs 1 and 2 of ending poverty and hunger, respectively.  Kenya?s 
Agricultural Sector Development Strategy (ASDS, 2010?2020) operationalizes the Vision 2030 
by focusing on transforming smallholder agriculture from low-productivity subsistence activities 
to more innovative, agri-business oriented agriculture. Regarding adaptation to climate change, 
ASDS prioritizes investments in weather information systems, research on drought tolerant crop 
varieties, soil and water conservation, water harvesting, and strengthening integrated pest 
management systems. For livestock, it prioritizes improved management of grazing systems, 
biogas, livestock diversification, and improved breeding of animals.  
 
15. Kenya also has a National Climate Change Response Strategy (NCCRS, 2010) that 
provides a framework for integrating climate change into development priorities. The National 
Climate Change Action Plan (NCCAP, 2012)  operationalizes the NCCRS, and emphasizes low-
carbon, climate-resilient development pathway for the economy that is critical for achieving SDG 
13 of combating climate change and its impacts.  In the NCCAP, Kenya planned for a low-carbon 
Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Actions (NAMAs) pathway for six sectors, namely energy, 
transport, industry, agriculture, forestry and waste management.  The first activity undertaken 
under the NAMAs process was the analysis of emissions from the forestry and agriculture sectors. 
Selected practices for mitigation in the NCCAP included restoration of forest on degraded lands; 
REDD+; agroforestry; increase tree cover to 10 percent of total land area; conservation tillage; 
limiting use of fire in cropland; rangeland management; improved cook stoves; biogas; and 
management of agricultural wastes. The proposed Project will support these interventions, which 
are aimed at achieving the CSA triple-win of increasing productivity, building resilience to 
climate change, and reducing GHG emissions. 
 
16. The Kenya Climate Change Bill (2014) is about to be approved by the President, after 


undergoing a public hearing and passing through the Senate. More recently, Kenya has developed 
a Climate-Smart Agriculture Program (CSAP, 2015?2030), that will be jointly implemented by 
MoALF, the Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources (MENR), and the Ministry of Water 
and Irrigation (MoWI). The Vision for the CSAP is a ?climate resilient and low carbon growth 
sustainable agriculture that ensures food security and contributes to national development goals in 
line with Kenya Vision 2030.?  In addition, Kenya has a National Policy on Climate Finance 
(2015) that seeks to position Kenya to better access climate finance through a variety of 
mechanisms. With support from the World Bank, the International Center for Tropical 
Agricultural (CIAT) recently developed a Kenya CSA Country Profile. The Profile systematically 
assesses the state of CSA nationally, including agricultural practices that deliver higher 
productivity, improved resilience, and lower emissions. It also assesses the institutional, policy, 
and finance entry points for taking CSA options to scale. The Profile will be an important 
mechanism for building awareness of country options, facilitating dialogue, and helping identify 
high-interest CSA options and opportunities for investments to deliver on the triple win. The 
Profiles coupled with prioritization tools  can provide in depth analyses of agricultural practices, 
detailed assessments of their ?climate-smartness?, and costs and benefits of various investments. 
The ongoing development of County-level CSA risk profiles and prioritization of interventions 
would bring this information to the relevant level of devolved governance in Kenya. 
 
17. At the international level, Kenya has been actively engaged in dialogue on mainstreaming 
climate change into agricultural policies, plans, and actions. The country is a signatory to the 
United Nations Conventions on Combating Desertification (UNCCD), Framework Convention on 
Climate Change (UNFCCC) and Conservation of Biological Diversity (UNCBD). Regionally, 
Kenya is implementing the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme 
(CAADP) Framework (2010) and the East African Community Climate Change Policy 
(EACCCP). Both of these frameworks emphasize sustainable land and water management for 
improved agricultural productivity through research, technology adoption and dissemination; and 
agricultural GHG emissions reduction. In July 2015, Kenya declared its Intended Nationally 
Determined Contributions (INDC) to UNFCCC that by 2030, the country seeks to abate its total 
GHG emissions by 30 percent relative to the ?business as usual? scenario of 143 MtCO2-e. It is 
suggested that US$40 billion would be required to finance the mitigation and adaptation efforts 
across six key sectors until 2030.
Relationship to CAS/CPS/CPF
18. The Kenya CPS (2014-2018) highlights achieving rapid and uninterrupted growth over a 
decade or more as the foundational challenge for Kenya. The CPS indicate that for Kenya to make 
a huge dent on poverty, support for the growth and realization of people?s potential must focus on 
sectors and locations where the majority of the poor can benefit. In rural areas, the single most 
sustainable impact would be to improve agricultural performance, both in terms of increased 
productivity and resilience to shocks, including climate change risks. The proposed KCSAP aims 
at fulfilling two priority domains of the CPS: (i) Domain 2 ? ?Protection and potential for shared 
prosperity?, KCSAP will contribute to Outcome 4 (Greater agricultural productivity), and 
Outcome 6 (Improved capacity to manage risks from Climate Change); and (ii) Domain 3 ? ?
Consistency and equity in delivering a devolution dividend?, KCSAP will contribute to Outcome 
8 (Better provision of agricultural extension services by counties) and Outcome 9 (Adequate 
systems to monitor performance of services delivery by counties). The proposed project is also 
well aligned with current GoK policies and priorities as articulated above.  
 
19. The proposed Project is also in line with the Africa Climate Business Plan: Accelerating 

Climate Resilience and Low-Carbon Development. The Plan aims at boosting the region?s ability 
to adapt to the changing climate while reducing GHG emissions through a number of concrete 
actions in various sectors. For agricultural sector, the Plan is focusing on promoting climate-smart 
agriculture, creating climate-resilient landscapes, and promoting integrated watershed 
management. It underscores that there is a range of agricultural management solutions, which can 
improve crop productivity, enhance resilience to climate shocks and reduce carbon emissions.

C.  Proposed Development Objective(s)

Proposed Development Objective(s) (From PCN)
20. The proposed development objective is to increase agricultural productivity and build 
resilience to climate change risks in the targeted smallholder farming and pastoral communities in 
Kenya. 
 
21. The PDO is informed by the CSA concept; one that ambitiously aims to integrate climate 
change risks responsiveness into agricultural development activities. The CSA outcomes are 
increased productivity, enhanced resilience, and reduced GHG emissions. While the concept is 
new and still evolving, many of the practices that make up CSA already exist worldwide and are 
used by farmers to cope with various production risks – particularly droughts and floods. The 
utility of CSA then comes in as a way of explicitly integrating productivity, adaptation, and 
mitigation planning, often done in isolation; and understanding of expected outcomes of CSA 
investments on different users and locations over time.

Key Results (From PCN)
22. Achievement of the proposed PDO will be measured using the following outcome 
indicators: (i) Increased yields of selected crop and livestock value chains (percent); (ii) Direct 
project beneficiaries adopting TIMPs leading to CSA triple-win (percent);  (iii) Increased land 
covered due to adoption of agro-forestry and sustainable land management (SLM)  practices 
(percent); (iv) Improved access to agro-weather, technical and market information by direct 
beneficiaries(percent);  and (v) Direct project beneficiaries (number), of which female (percent).  
A detailed results monitoring framework and indicators will be developed during the project 
preparation, and enhanced by quantitative modeling of uncertainties along the impact pathway .

D.  Concept Description

A. Concept  
 
23. Climate resilient agriculture that increases productivity requires a major shift in the way 
land, water, soil nutrients and genetic resources are managed to ensure that they are used more 
efficiently, effectively and equitably. Making such a shift requires considerable investments in 
ongoing and new technologies, rural/production infrastructure, financing/credit mechanisms, as 
well as improving farmers? access to climatic information and markets. Actions to build climate 
resilience can, in many cases, also mitigate climate change by reducing GHG emissions or 
increasing carbon sinks.  
 
24. Kenya has three main agricultural production systems. The smallholder mixed crop-
livestock system found in areas that receive more than 1,000 mm of rainfall annually (high 
potential zones), spreading from central Kenya, through the central Rift Valley to western Kenya 
and the coastal strip. This system takes the form of a maize-based, dairy production system with 
or without cash crops, such as coffee, tea and horticulture. The crop-livestock-tree production 



(Agro-silvo-pastoral) system found in areas that receive between 750 and 1,000 mm of rainfall 
annually (medium potential zones). This system focuses on integration of livestock and crops, soil 
and water conservation, and growing drought tolerant and early maturing crops. In some areas, 
irrigation schemes have also been set up to enhance crop production. The pastoral/extensive 
livestock production system  found in areas receiving 200?750 mm of rainfall annually (low 
potential zones), stretching from north and north-eastern Kenya to the southern parts bordering 
Tanzania. Livestock production, mainly beef animals and small ruminants, are the major 
enterprises under small-scale, but also some large scale ranches 
 
25. KCSAP will primarily focus on supporting interventions aimed at increasing productivity 
and building resilience to climate change, with reduction of GHG emissions as a potential co-
benefit , where possible and appropriate, through: (a) Promoting sustainable, community?driven 
rangeland management and improved access to quality livestock services in ASALs (i.e. in 
pastoral/extensive livestock production systems); (b) Improving water/soil management, 
especially within smallholder maize systems in the marginal rainfall zones (i.e. in smallholder 
mixed crop-livestock, crop-livestock-tree production (Agro-silvo-pastoral systems), and crop-
forest production (agro-forestry)); (c) Supporting the generation and dissemination of improved 
agricultural technologies,  innovations, and management practices, and building a sustainable 
seed system; and (d) Enhancing access to quality climate/agro-weather, advisory services, and 
market information among farmers/herders for improved decision making. 
 
26. KCSAP interventions will be concentrated in selected counties within the crop-livestock-
tree production system and pastoral/extensive livestock production system (mainly in ASALs), 
with high potential for increasing production, but ones that are also prone to droughts. To 
maximize the impact of project interventions, about 15 - 20 counties will be selected using these 
criteria: (a) vulnerability to climate change, extreme weather events, and variable rainfall; (b) 
potential for increasing agricultural and livestock production; (c) current share in national 
agricultural production; (d) climate change projections; and (e) poverty distribution and rates. The 
project design would be informed by the following seven main principles:   
 
(i) Prioritization of promising TIMPs: CSA is very context specific?what is CSA in one 
place is not necessarily CSA in another place?so there is a need to prioritize technologies that are 
most promising for specific places and provide the best value for money. The CCAFS-CIAT CSA 
Prioritization Framework is one such approach that entails a series of activities to filter a long list 
of possible CSA options into a set of best-bet practices and services for an area ;   
 
(ii) Scaling-up promising TIMPs: The Bank and other donor-funded projects in Kenya, such 
as the Kenya Adaptation to Climate Change in Arid and Semi-Arid Lands (KACCAL) and Kenya 
Agricultural Productivity and Sustainable Land Management Project (KAPSLMP) have used 
participatory and community-driven development (CDD) approaches to pilot a number of 
adaptation and mitigation TIMPs including financing options, such as the Payment for Ecosystem 
Services (PES). While existing TIMPs are a good starting point and their broader application 
needs to be scaled up, new technologies must be developed to achieve the CSA triple-win;  
 
(iii) Value chain (VC) approach:  An approach that focuses on developing priority, promising 
agricultural and livestock commodities in the respective counties, through interventions covering 
production, value addition and links to markets will be taken. This approach will look at supply 
chains, delivery channels, and enabling environment issues, to identify and address bottlenecks 


and leverage points in the chains. Innovation platforms and methodologies, such as LINK  
developed by CIAT provides approaches for developing innovative business models that take a 
value chain approach and link smallholder farmers to markets; and IFC can finance private sector 
investments, such as in animal health services, commercial-scale bio digesters, solar-pumps, 
micro-and-drip irrigation, seed production and distribution, on-farm storage, weather info/
advisory/climate services, rural credit, and processing facilities; 
 
(iv) Gender sensitivity: Looking at various interventions through a gender lens to ensure that 
the project benefits women as much as possible. Alternative livelihood interventions would be 
primarily geared for women participants. Special care would be paid to ensure that intervention 
do not contribute to increased drudgery and burden for women; 
 
(v) Nutrition informed: Favoring those interventions and leveraging activities that have a 
direct and indirect links with improving the nutritional outcome (dietary/nutrients diversification 
using fruit tree and vegetables ) of the project beneficiaries, particularly women and children 
under the age of five;  
 
(vi) Collaboration with other World Bank Group Agencies: The VC development approach 
will require a close collaboration with the International Finance Corporation (IFC) and the 
Multilateral International Guarantee Agency (MIGA), which have greater roles to play in 
agricultural value addition, linking smallholder farmers to markets (i.e. inputs, outputs and 
financial markets); and abating political risk for local and international private investors, 
respectively; and 
 
(vii) Complementarity with other interventions: Ensuring that synergies and alignment with 
other Bank-funded projects, such as the National Agricultural and Rural Inclusive Growth Project 
(NARIGP), and the Rural Roads Project (RRP), given that could be operating in the same 
counties, will allow for greater complementarity and impact. 
 
27. Although reduced GHG emissions might be co-benefits, these will nonetheless be 
measured. At appraisal stage, the project will undertake GHG accounting to estimate the impact 
of project interventions against a baseline. It is expected that by improving per unit efficiency, the 
project will have a positive impact on GHG net emissions.  
 
Project Components  
 
28. The proposed project will comprise four components briefly presented below: 
 
Component 1: Upscaling Climate-Smart Agricultural Practices (US$100 million) 
 
29. This component aims at supporting and incentivizing smallholder farmers to implement 
TIMPs that provide triple-wins: increased productivity, stronger resilience and reductions in GHG 
emissions, as co-benefits. It will comprise two subcomponents. 
 
Subcomponent 1.1: Supporting Pastoral/Extensive Livestock Production Systems (US$40 
million) 
 
30. Livestock production is a key contributor to CSA?s three strategic outcomes: (i) 



agricultural productivity and food security - animals contribute directly (through meat and milk 
output) and indirectly (through fertilization, draft power) to food production and also to income 
diversification; (ii) adaptation to climate change - livestock represents a diversification asset, a 
coping mechanism for households (risk management tool, that contributes to household 
resilience), and a contributor to the management of organic matter in soils (through manure), 
which improves water retention and drought resistance; and (iii) mitigation - there is typically a 
great potential for reducing GHG emission intensity among low productivity ruminant systems, 
and carbon sequestration in pastures.  
 
31. This subcomponent will therefore support interventions aimed at: (a) increasing 
productivity of livestock (e.g. feeding practices, animal health, herd management and off-take 
rates); (b) promoting integrated soil fertility and SLM practices based on crop-livestock 
integration (e.g., manure management, biogas production, use of crop residues and food products) 
and modern inputs; and (c) supporting market access (e.g., stock routes/migratory corridors, 
watering points, quarantine or holding grounds and animal markets). 
 
32.  In the arid lands, ensuring that pastoralists can access feed and water resources at critical 
times is essential to resilience. Demography and increased pressure on land and water are greatly 
challenging the traditional arrangements through which sedentary and mobile populations have 
managed resources. The project will thus support the development of new management practices 
and institutional arrangements that can secure pastoralists? access to resources, especially during 
drought and the dry season. In the semi-arid lands, interventions may aim at increasing the 
efficiency of animal production (e.g., feeding practices, animal health, herd management and off-
take rates), increasing crop-livestock integration (e.g., manure management, use of crop residues 
and food by-products), and increasing institutional mechanisms and markets for resilience.  
 
33. Interventions inter alia could promote: (i) innovative rangeland co-management (state and 
local community) approaches that leverage customary forms of collective action and economic 
instruments to reward sound pasture management; (ii) development of fodder production, storage 
and marketing; (iii) small-scale fattening operations managed by pastoral communities, to which 
young animals from mobile herds could be sent for fattening before commercialization; and (iv) 
sustainable resource use practices, including  contour ridges and barriers, cisterns for storing 
rainfall and runoff water, controlled/rotational grazing, grazing banks, homestead enclosures, 
residue/forage conservation and other practices ensuring access to feed and water resources 
during drought. ILRI has relevant research outputs to contribute to these interventions.  
 
Subcomponent 1.2: Supporting Smallholder Mixed Crop-Livestock-Tree Systems (US$60 
million) 
 
34. The smallholder mixed crop-livestock-tree systems account for more than 70 percent of 
total maize output in Kenya. Characterized by low productivity, these systems are increasingly 
vulnerable to extreme and variable weather. Thus, achieving national food security will require 
concerted efforts and targeted investments to improve yields and strengthen their resilience. 
 
35. This subcomponent will therefore focus on: (a) improving water and soil management; 
(b) promo ting livelihoods and crop diversification, including drought-tolerant crops (e.g., 
legumes - beans, cowpeas, pigeon pea etc.,), intensive dairy production and agro-forestry systems; 
(c) investing in small-scale irrigation development; and climate risk mitigation initiatives, 



including exploring the smallholder adapted crop insurance options.  
 
36. KCSAP support under this component will aim at promoting sustainable intensification 
and increasing climate resilience of Kenya?s small-scale, rain fed production systems. This will 
be achieved through myriad, yet mutually-supportive interventions designed to improve crop 
yields and reduce losses (pre-and post-harvest) in the near-term, and to mitigate climate change 
impacts via adaptation over the long-term. Project interventions will focus on, inter alia, curbing 
rainfall run-off, improving soil nutrition and moisture holding capacity, and strengthening 
fertilizer- and water-use efficiency. This will be achieved via incentivizing broad farmer adoption 
of improved water, soil and land resource TIMPs. To promote income diversification, the project 
will promote take-up of animal husbandry, micro-gardening, agro-forestry and other income 
generating activities less dependent on rainfall. 
 
37. KCSAP investments will be guided by County Integrated Development Plans (CIDPs)  
and community priorities. Integrating project activities within the CIDPs will ensure alignment, 
sustainability and optimization of outcomes. In the case of high agricultural (medium-to high 
rainfall) potential areas in the central and western highlands, interventions will broadly focus on 
improving maize yields and farm-gate prices via quality, drying and storage upgrades. In more 
marginal, more variable rainfall zones, greater emphasis will be placed on stimulating farmers? 
uptake of more robust, drought-tolerant crops (e.g., cowpeas, cassava, millet and sorghum). 
Project interventions will also aim to enhance risk-sharing and strengthen smallholder access to 
markets across target food commodity chains via catalyzing upgrades (i.e. product, process) and 
downstream linkages (horizontal and vertical).   
 
38. Matching grants will be provided to common interest groups (CIGs) organized along the 
VCs to finance community micro-projects. The grants will enable smallholder farmers adopt 
TIMPs developed under Component 2. Making direct payments to farmers conditional on 
adoption of climate adaptation and mitigation practices will lead to better CSA triple-win 
outcomes.  
 
Component 2: Strengthening Climate-Smart Agricultural Research and Seed Systems (US$60 
million) 
 
39. Building strong research capacity and seed systems at the national level is critical for 
achieving the CSA triple-win: increasing productivity, building resilience and reducing GHG 
emissions. Strong and sustained support to agricultural research and development (R&D) can 
have large payoffs as evidenced by R&D?s significant contribution to the impressive agricultural 
growth achieved in Brazil, China and India. More broadly, returns to investment in agricultural 
research have been high and the benefits will only rise as the losses from climate-induced crop 
and livestock systems failure increase. Investments in seed and animal breeds research and their 
market-driven distribution systems will better equip farmers and livestock keepers with timely 
access to quality, affordable seeds (also for forage crops - grasses, legumes, herbage, fodder trees 
and regeneration practices) and planting materials; and animal breeds that respond to their 
specific needs (e.g., higher-yielding, fast maturing, drought resistant, and heat tolerant breeds) 
and that would help them better manage growing climate change risks. This component will have 
two subcomponents ? supporting CSA research and innovations, and building competitive and 
sustainable seed system. 
 


Subcomponent 2.1: Supporting Climate-Smart Agricultural Research and Innovations (US$40 
million) 
 
40. A renewed urgency, and international and national commitment, is needed to sustain CSA 
research to deliver needed science-based solutions. Kenya should act now given that developing 
improved TIMPs can take many years. Developing improved seeds, planting materials and 
livestock breeds that are more adapted to changing climates to meet rising food demand, while at 
the same time reducing GHG emissions will need significantly more investment in agricultural 
research and development.  It also requires commitment to strengthen the Kenya Agricultural and 
Livestock Research Organization (KALRO); build partnerships with international research 
institutes (e.g., CGIAR institutes, such as the World Agroforestry Centre (ICRAF) and the 
International Livestock Research Institute (ILRI), International Center for Tropical Agriculture 
(CIAT), ICRISAT, which operate in Kenya) and local universities (e.g., University of Nairobi, 
Jomo Kenyatta University of Agriculture and Technology (JKUAT), Moi and Egerton); and 
engage the private sector (contracted extension services delivery model) to facilitate the uptake of 
TIMPs at local levels.  But agricultural research and innovation processes require long-term 
political commitment, financial stability, human resources, and institutional strength. Thus this 
subcomponent would finance activities aimed at strengthening national agricultural research 
system (NARS) and competitive collaborative research grants focusing on CSA research and 
innovations. 
 
Subcomponent 2.2: Building a Competitive and Sustainable Seed Systems (US$20 million) 
 
41. Kenya has one of the more developed cereal (maize and wheat) seed systems in Africa 
with over 70 registered seed merchants. But legume seed systems are poorly developed. Highly 
regulated, the formal cereal seed system produces over 30,000 tons of seed per annum. But only 
supplies about one-quarter of the country?s total seed needs. The remaining supply mostly comes 
from recycled seeds. While robust seed research by KALRO and CIMMYT, among others, have 
resulted in the release of dozens of improved maize and other varietals (e.g., drought-tolerant, 
high-yielding, disease-resistant, and short-season) that can help farmers better respond to climate 
and market signals and manage uncertainty, adoption among smallholders remains low. Even in 
ASAL regions that receive less than 500 mm of rainfall per annum, farmers continue to grow 
maize rather than drought-tolerant crops, such as sorghum and millet.  Such areas could benefit 
more from short duration legumes, such as beans, cowpea and pigeon pea. As a result, the 
productivity of many staple crops (e.g., wheat and maize) remains below regional averages.  
 
42. The project will promote pluralistic seed systems model depending on level of crop 
development. Working with KEPHIS , Kenya Seed Company (KSC), KALRO, CIMMYT , 
ICRAF  and other stakeholders, KCSAP will finance activities geared towards strengthening seed 
research (e.g., seed production and processing equipment, TA and training, grants for community-
level seed multiplication, etc.,), as well as promoting commercially viable multiplication and 
distribution systems to ensure that farmers and pastoralists have access to the right seeds at the 
right time. Specifically, KCSAP will finance interventions related t o: (i) strengthening the 
capacity of KALRO?s research centers/institutes in the production of foundation seed; (ii) 
supporting private sector companies involved in the commercial seed production and community-
based seed multiplication systems; (iii) promoting the use of selected drought-resistant seeds; (iv) 
strengthening seed associations and inter-professional organizations; (v) supporting innovative 
mechanisms of seed marketing; and (vi) strengthening seed policy, production and distribution 

strategies and institution al support to the national seed control and certification agency.  
 
Component 3: Supporting Agro-weather, Market, Climate and Advisory Services (US$30 million)
 
43. Improving productivity and resilience of smallholder farmers requires access to timely, 
cost-effective, and personally relevant information on improved agricultural practices, markets, 
prices, inputs, weather?and news of impending disasters. Integrating information on weather and 
markets into planning for CSA interventions and sustainable agriculture development entails: (a) 
use of modern tools for climate data sourcing and analysis, including automatic meteorological 
measurements and satellite data products on a near real-time basis; (b) analysis of weather risks 
and assessment of impacts using advanced crop?weather interactions modeling; (c) formulation of 
highly practical advice that farmers can apply directly to their operations; and (d) dissemination 
of weather and market advisories to farmers using modern information and communication 
technologies (ICT). 
 
44. The quality of these climate and market information services are critically low or non-
existent in many parts of Kenya. Under this component, KCSAP will address this obstacle by 
developing modern agro-weather forecasting and dissemination tools, as well as marketing 
information system to help farmers address the challenges of climate variability and change and 
enhance their resilience. 
 
45. Building on infrastructure already provided to KALRO under the Kenya Agricultural 
Productivity and Agribusiness Project (KAPAP), as well as experiences of BNPP-funded Agro-
weather Tools for Climate Smart Agriculture pilots in Embu, Kenya,  this component will finance 
interventions related to the following: (i) improving agro-meteorological forecasting and 
monitoring; (ii) developing climate-smart, location-specific agro-weather and market information 
system and advisories using ?big data?; and (iii) building institutional and technical capacity for 
agro-meteorological observation, forecasting and market advisory dissemination.  
 
Subcomponent 3.1: Improving Agro-meteorological Forecasting and Monitoring (US$15 million) 
 
46. One of the main obstacles to effective meteorological forecasting is Kenya?s limited 
agro-meteorological observation network. To improve data collection and geographic coverage, 
existing agro-meteorological and hydro logical stations will be upgraded, whilst modern, near real 
time automated weather stations (AWS) will be installed in areas lacking the facilities. KCSAP 
will work with other initiatives that are already in-place to expand the country?s agro-
meteorological and hydrological network to meet international standards. This subcomponent will 
therefore finance the following investments: (a) installation of new AWS, hydrometric stations 
and rain gauges to complement existing weather infrastructure; (b) upgrade and modernization of 
the existing agro-meteorological network and priority hydrological stations country-wide; (c) 
establishment of agro-meteorological centers in targeted counties to improve drought and flood 
forecasts; and (d) development of the Kenya Meteorological Services (KMS) early warning 
system (EWS), and building institutional capacity for disaster preparedness and mitigation.  
 
Subcomponent 3.2: Developing Integrated Weather and Market Information System (US$5 
million) 
 
47. Systems that integrate agro-weather and market information are either non-existent or 
rudimentary in Kenya. KCSAP will address this problem under this subcomponent by financing 
activities related to: (a) developing ?big data? for CSA; (b) developing Market Information 
Systems (MIS) and services; and (c) delivering integrated weather and market advisory services 
using ICT.  Big data  crop-weather analytics help farmers in making decisions on what, when, and 
where to plant. Using advanced statistical and data mining/machine learning algorithms,  time 
series data of crop yields will be combined with weather observations at daily resolution  from 
agro-meteorological stations and satellite data,  soil and management factors to reveal climate and 
weather patterns, and detect the limiting factors for crop production. This would subsequently be 
used to generate timely and site-specific recommendations on crop cultivars, soil preparation, 
sowing rate and time, fertilization, irrigation, pest and diseases control, harvest time, and storage 
options. Access to reliable market information from the MIS using ICT empowers farmers to 
obtain and negotiate fair market prices for their crops subsequently improving their income and 
livelihoods. It also reduces their overall risk and results in greater price stability in supply and 
demand, in addition to improving overall market transparency. Using multiple ICT channel to 
reach target users will allow bi-directional information exchange - allowing the collection of data 
from farmers, as well as information delivery to farmers. Rapid and geographically targeted agro-
weather information will be disseminated using SMS and smart phone applications, and through 
more conventional radio, television, bulletins and print messages. Interactive Voice Response 
(IVR) systems that render weather conditions into human speech will also be incorporated. 
 
Subcomponent 3.3: Building Institutional and Technical Capacity (US$10 million) 
 
48. The capacity for agro-meteorological observation, forecasting and advisory dissemination 
needs to be strengthened at the MoALF, KMS, KALRO, and at county governments. KCSAP will 
finance activities related to human and institutional capacity building at these agencies. This will 
include: (a) defining proper configuration of the main elements of the system; including 
automated monitoring, new forecast techniques, big data analytics and modernization of 
management; (b) analyzing and utilizing big data for various purposes; and (c) providing the 
hardware and software needed for interaction of data from a variety of sources in a way that is 
efficient and scalable. Capacity of scientists at national and county levels will be strengthened in 
the area of crop modeling, using both deterministic and statistical models of different complexity 
levels. KCSAP will partner with national and international research and academic institutions to 
provide state-of-art training in agro-meteorology, climate science, including downscaling and 
weather predictions, artificial neural network and machine learning applications, seasonal 
forecasting, ICT, GIS and remote sensing. KALRO?s capacity to implement a national soil 
information service based on soil spectroscopy and remote sensing technology to help target 
interventions and monitor impacts on soil health will be further enhanced . 
 
Component 4: Project Coordination and Management (US$20 million) 
 
49. The Project will be implemented by MoALF with close collaboration with MENR and 
MoWI at the national level and county governments at subnational level. Activities financed 
under this component will comprise coordination, fiduciary aspects, M&E, safeguards monitoring 
and compliance, and day-to-day implementation of the project; and consists of three 
subcomponents. 
 
Subcomponent 4.1: Project Coordination (US$15 million) 
 


50. The purpose of this subcomponent is to ensure that the project is implemented in 
accordance with the Financing Agreement. A Project Coordination Unit (PCU) and a small team 
of experts located at the national and participating county levels will be established. Costs related 
to national and county level project coordination (i.e., salaries of the contract staff, operations and 
maintenance (O&M), office space rental, fuel and spare parts of vehicles, office equipment, 
furniture and tools, among others) will be financed. Safeguards monitoring and compliance will 
be carried out under this subcomponent.  
 
Subcomponent 4.2: Monitoring & Evaluation and Impact Evaluation (US$5 million) 
 
51. An M&E system will be established to collect and process appropriate information, to 
verify the output, effects and eventually the impacts of project activities over time. Baseline 
information for M&E will be collected as part of the preparation process. In addition to the 
routine M&E functions (e.g., data collection, analysis and reporting), it will also finance the 
baseline, mid-point and end of project impact evaluation of the project; and the development and 
operation of the ICT-based Climate Smart Agriculture Information System. Where possible, 
M&E approaches will be harmonized with continental and global efforts (e.g., Global Alliance for 
CSA and the Alliance for CSA in Africa) to build robust and harmonized evidence of the impacts 
of TIMPs supported by the project to achieve CSA triple-win.  
 
Subcomponent 4.3: Contingency Emergency Response (US$0 million) 
 
52. This subcomponent will finance natural disasters risk management (DRM) activities in 
the agriculture sector. The contingency emergence response financing will be triggered through 
formal declaration of a national emergency and upon a formal request from the GoK.  In such 
cases, funds from unallocated category and other project components could be reallocated to 
finance emergency response expenditures and meet crises and emergency needs.  
 
53. The subcomponent will finance the training and capacity building for disaster risk 
management (DRM); community-managed disaster risk reduction (CMDRR) interventions; 
development of an EWS; and response, mitigation, recovery and reconstruction following 
climate-induced natural disasters. Implementation of this subcomponent will follow the 
provisions of the DRM Manual. 
 
54. Annex 3 outlines in more detail some key interventions envisioned under each project 
component.

II. SAFEGUARDS
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis (if known)
29. The project will be implemented at selected locations on a national scale. The activities will 
be implemented in the rural areas and will include projects in rural infrastructure, such as watering 
points, quarantine or holding grounds and animal markets of fodder production, storage and 
marketing sustainable resource use practices, including  contour erosion and barriers, cisterns for 
storing rainfall and runoff water, controlled/rotational grazing, grazing banks, homestead enclosures, 
residue/forage conservation and other practices ensuring access to feed and water resources during 
drought, agro-forestry projects and hydromet systems/stations.


B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
30. The MoALF will the implementing agency of KCSAP. MoALF will work closely with 
MoENR and MoWI. These ministries have adequate capacity and experience of implementing Bank-
funded projects, including knowledge for implementing World Bank safeguards in the devolved 
context. However, the implementation of previous projects identified a number of significant 
capacity issues in monitoring and enforcement of environmental and social safeguards compliance. 
KCSAP will allocate resources to build the counties’ capacity in for safeguards implementation, 
based on institutional capacity assessment that would be carried out at the project preparation stage.

C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Gibwa A. Kajubi (GSU07)
Svetlana Khvostova (GEN01)

D. POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment 
OP/BP 4.01

Yes The initial scoping of the proposed project 
interventions suggests that due to the nature of 
proposed activities, the potential environmental and 
social impacts will be moderate, largely reversible 
and site-specific. The identification mission noted 
that the potential project investments in rural 
infrastructure and agriculture VCs will trigger the 
Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01). 
 
Given that specific micro-project designs and 
locations would not be known at the time of project 
preparation, the project will take framework 
approach to managing safeguards. There are three 
framework reports that will need to be developed by 
GoK: (a) Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF); (b) Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF); and (c) Vulnerable and 
Marginalized Group Framework (VMGF). These 
frameworks will need to cover the types of activities 
envisioned; identify potential impacts of these 
activities; propose screening mechanisms and 
processes of assessing their impacts; and designing 
mitigation measures. The scope of these frameworks, 
the exact implementation arrangements and costs 
will be identified during project preparation. The 
preparation of ESMF, RPF and the VMGF will 
include wide public consultations and will be 
disclosed prior to project appraisal. During project 
implementation, based on the screening, an 
Environmental Assessment (EA)/ Environmental 
Management Plans (EMPs), Resettlement Action 


Plans (RAPs) and Vulnerable and Marginalized 
Group Plans (VMGPs) will be developed for 
individual subprojects.

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 TBD Applicability of this policy will be confirmed during 
project preparation, based on the target areas of 
project interventions.

Forests OP/BP 4.36 TBD Applicability of this policy will be confirmed during 
project preparation, based on the target areas of 
project interventions.

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes The project is envisioned use of agrochemicals to 
implement activities such as fodder production and 
agro-forestry projects. A Pest Management Plan 
(PMP) will be prepared to promote the adoption of 
an Integrated Pest Management (IPM) approach, 
which stresses non-chemical pest management 
methods as much as possible, with use of 
agrochemicals only as a “last resort” when  
other methods are not sufficiently effective. The 
PMP would describe specific actions needed to be 
implemented, timeframes, estimated costs, 
monitoring indicators, institutional and beneficiary 
roles and responsibilities etc.).

Physical Cultural Resources 
OP/BP 4.11

TBD Applicability of this policy will be confirmed during 
project preparation, based on the target areas of 
project interventions.

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 
4.10

TBD Applicability of this policy will be confirmed during 
project preparation, based on the target areas of 
project interventions. Should it be confirmed during 
the project preparation that the implementation will 
cover the areas where vulnerable and marginalized 
groups are present, the project will prepare the 
VMGF, which will then guide the preparation of 
VMGPs, where required.

Involuntary Resettlement OP/
BP 4.12

Yes The project activities may require land acquisition 
and may result in the loss of community resources. 
To guide the process of compensation, the project 
will prepare the RPF and publicly disclose it in 
Kenya and in the World Bank InfoShop prior to 
project appraisal.

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 TBD

Projects on International 
Waterways OP/BP 7.50

TBD

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/
BP 7.60

TBD


E. Safeguard Preparation Plan
1. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS
26-Sep-2016
2. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be 
needed. The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage 
ISDS.
The ESMF, RPF and VMGF will be prepared, consulted upon and publicly disclosed before project 
appraisal in November 14, 2016.


























































World Bank Document


 

Combined Project Information Documents /  
Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (PID/ISDS) 

 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 23-Feb-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSA24200 
 
 
 
 
 
 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

India P166745 National Rural Economic 
Transformation Project 
(Additional Financing to 
the National Rural 
Livelihoods Project ) 

P104164 

Parent Project Name Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date 

National Rural Livelihoods Project SOUTH ASIA 23-Feb-2018 20-Apr-2018 

Practice Area (Lead) Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency 

Agriculture Investment Project 
Financing 

DEA National Rural Livelihood 
Mission 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) Parent 
 
The project development objective is to establish efficient and effective institutional platforms of theruralpoor that 
enable them to increase household income through sustainable livelihood enhancements and improved access to 
financial andselected public services. 
 

 
Components 

Component 1. Institutional and Human Capacity Development 
Component 2.  State Livelihood Support 
Component 3.  Innovation and Partnership Support 
Component 4.  Project Implementation Support: 

 

Financing (in US$, millions) 
 
FIN_SUMM_PUB_TBL 
SUMMARY 
 

Total Project Cost 500.00 

Total Financing 500.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 

 
 
DETAILS-NewFin3 

Total World Bank Group Financing 250.00 

     World Bank Lending 250.00 
 



Total Government Contribution 250.00 

 

Environmental Assessment Category 

Partial Assessment (B) 
  
OPS_TABLE_SAFEGUARDS_DEFERRED 
 

  
Decision 

 

B. Introduction and Context 
 

Country Context 
 
1. India continues to be one of the world’s fastest growing large economies and has experienced a 

substantial decline in poverty. The Indian economy registered gradually rising growth from 5.5 
percent in 2012-13 to 8 percent in 2015-16. This was supported by robust private consumption, a 
resilient services sector, and some revival in industrial activity. Since the 2000s, India has made 
remarkable progress in reducing absolute poverty. Between 2004 and 2011, poverty declined sharply 
from 38.9 to 21.6 percent at the international poverty line ($1.90 PPP/day). With over a 100 million 
people escaping poverty, the pace of poverty reduction in India exceeded that of the developing world 
as well as that of Middle Income Countries (MICs) in this period. High economic growth, rapid rise in 
rural wages, greater rural-urban integration and increase in non-farm activity, especially construction, 
were the key drivers of poverty reduction. Since 2011, robust economic growth may have aided 
further reduction in poverty. However, trends in the construction sector and rural wages suggest that 
the pace of poverty reduction may have moderated. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 

 
2. Agriculture continues to be important for rural Indians and there are 68 percent of the rural 

population dependent on it for livelihoods and about 49 percent of the labor force works in the 
agricultural sector but paradoxically it contributes only around 10 to 11 % to National gross domestic 
product (GDP). The Government of India’s new agenda of “Doubling Farmer’s Income”, which not only 
emphasizes upon productivity enhancement, intensification and diversification but also on agri-
processing, Agri-logistics, resource use efficiency, agriculture marketing and sustainability could 
possibly transform the Indian Agriculture. The opportunities in the agribusiness sector and local level 
primary value addition are growing with the changing consumer basket and increasing urbanization 
and demand for diversified and nutritious foods. Small producers have the opportunity to directly 
participate in this value chain if they are organized and provided with appropriate infrastructure, 
technology and information support. 



3. Non-farm economy, in recent times, has emerged as an important livelihoods source in rural 
India. A shift away from agriculture toward nonagricultural wage employment and reduced reliance 
on agricultural income has become evident. Non- farm activities contributed 65% rural income in 
2016-17 (Chand, 2017). Diversification into non-farm interventions (both self-employment and 
wage employment) marks the shift from low-productivity jobs to high productivity and it is an 
important pathway for poverty reduction and employment generation. Non-farm rural jobs are 
predominantly in manufacturing, services (including public administration, education, health, 
community, other personal or household services) and trade and transport (including wholesale 
and retail trade, hotels, restaurants, transport, storage and warehousing and communication).  
 

4. The Ministry of Rural Development, Government of India launched the National Rural Livelihood 
Mission in 2011 as its flagship program to enhance rural livelihoods and reduce rural poverty in the 
country. The world bank supported National Rural Livelihoods Project provided intensive support 
to the launch and scale up of the NRLM over the last 7 years. The National Rural Livelihood Mission 
(NRLM) has now been scaled up to o all 29 states of the country.  The intensive approach 
successfully demonstrated by NRLP in around 500 blocks is now being implemented across nearly 
2500 blocks across 29 states through the NRLM program. A total of 45 million rural women are 
currently part of Self-Help Groups and they have cumulatively leveraged nearly 25 billion USD of 
financing from commercial banks since the launch of the NRLM program in 2011.  

 
5. Ministry of Rural Development has subsequently launched two critical programs that aim to 

leverage the National Rural Livelihood Mission and scale up efforts to enhance agriculture incomes 
and on-farm incomes for the rural poor namely the Mahila Kisan Sashiktikaran Program (MKSP ) 
and the Startup Village Entrepreneurship program . The Mahila Kisan Sashaktikaran Pariyojana 
(MKSP) is launched as a sub-component of the Deendayal Antodaya Yojana-NRLM to improve the 
status of women in agriculture, who constitute 33% of the total agricultural labour force, and 
enhance economic opportunities available to them. The program exclusively focus upon small and 
marginal farmers, sustainable agriculture practices and vulnerability reduction. Community 
Resource Persons (CRP) are identified as best practitioners (locally named as Pashu Sakhi, Krishi 
Sakhi etc.) and are instrumental in promoting farm sector livelihoods (agriculture, animal 
husbandry and NTFP), through community to community sharing and learning – as a “proof of 
concept”. The ‘Start-up Village Entrepreneurship Programme’ (SVEP) launched by Government of 
India in 2014-15 aims to promote and support existing rural entrepreneurs by providing bouquet 
of business development services including entrepreneur capacity building, seed & growth capital 
along with handholding support for business development. Currently, the programme is being 
implemented in 47 Blocks across 14 states with support of 5 technical support agencies. Results 
from SVEP and other world bank supported programs to promote SMEs will inform the scaling up 
of enterprise development initiatives to be taken up under NRETP ( NRLP-AF) 

 
6. The Government of India has recently launched Mission Antyodaya to improve the well-being of 10 

million households from 5000 economic clusters (covering around 50,000 Gram Panchayats) by 
addressing multiple dimensions of poverty through convergent actions under wide range of existing 
development schemes and following a saturation approach. The movement of Panchayats away 
from poverty will be tracked through a mobile based application i.e. “Panchayat Darpan” using a 
set of indicators having differential weightage scheme. In a list of 24 indicators, 30% weightage has 
been provided on GP level Infrastructure development; another 30% on Human Development 
outcomes and rest 40% weightage has been given to livelihoods promotion. Mission Antyodaya 
further accelerates economic transformation process building on the NRLP outcomes 



 
7. One of the central lessons learned during the last seven years of implementation of NRLM has been 

that while investments in building institutional platforms of rural poor households is a critical 
foundation for sustainable poverty reduction, it is not sufficient unless these institutions are 
engaged in higher level production systems and have better market interface. Integration of core 
social mobilization and leveraging of financial resources have been adequately demonstrated. The 
next level challenge is to leverage social capital into economic opportunities and crowd in private 
investments; and engage with more commercial partnerships to integrate rural households into 
higher-level income opportunities. Therefore, one of the main thrusts of the NRETP (NRLP- AF) will 
be to develop value chains using end-to-end investments in selected commodities and facilitating 
access to finance to support enterprises in agriculture and allied sectors, thus contributing to 
productivity and profitability. The proposed project will build on existing investments and 
institutional capital to bring further income increase and inclusive growth in rural areas.   

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
Original PDO  
 

1. To establish efficient and effective institutional platforms of the rural poor that enable them to increase 
household income through sustainable livelihood enhancements and improved access to financial 
andselected public services. 

 
Current PDO  
 

2. To establish efficient and effective institutional platforms of the rural poor that enable them to increase 
household income through sustainable livelihood enhancements and improved access to financial 
andselected public services. 

 
Key Results:  

3. The PDO indicators for the additional financing are:  

• 60% of SHGs# federated into Village Organizations.  

• 40% of SHG members* report reduction in high cost debt 

• 50% of SHG members report 30% increase in asset. 

• 20 % increase in income of households that have accessed technical and financial services1 
 
D. Project Description  
        
Project Beneficiary:  

1. The proposed NRETP (NRLP AF) intends to support 100 districts from the existing 13 NRLP States 
towards high end technical assistance and investment support towards deepening and scaling up of 
the economic transformative initiatives that were introduced as part of dedicated funds under NRLP. 

 
1 Define technical and financial services that will be provided/considered  



Additionally, it would support to the Mission Antyodaya program that intends to further accelerate 
economic transformation in selected areas, building on the NRLP outcomes.  

 
2. While MoRD through their own increased budget allocation would continue to saturate and bring 

remaining rural poor into the fold of women SHGs,  the specific investments under additional financing  
will work with targeted households that are already part of SHGs and would focus on strengthening 
of existing network (higher level federations i.e. VO and above) of community organizations of women 
having potential to be mobilized into producer groups and producer organizations and transit to next 
generation economic initiatives like high value agriculture including market access, enterprise and 
skills development etc. MoRD will directly reach out to over a million households through these 
initiatives. The project will support around 50000 individual enterprises; and around 100,000 youth 
will be trained and placed with in formal job markets using the resources available under DDUJKY and 
other skilling & entrepreneurship program of the Government of India. 

Project Component 

3. Component 1: Institutional and Human Capacity Development 
This component will continue to finance technical assistance consultancies, human resources, 
training and development of training material/approaches. Financing under this component will 
endeavor to place skilled professionals to work with NRLM at the national, state and district levels. 
As mentioned in the section on rationale, the TA will be focused on helping the National and State 
teams transition to a new phase of the NRLM that involves greater focus on economic initiatives such 
as high value agriculture and value chain development, enterprise and skills development. Given that 
experiences from these initiatives are relatively nascent, the additional financing support will 
emphasize sourcing of technical support from agencies (Public, Private and NGOs) with the requisite 
technical expertise in rural enterprise development.  National, regional and international experiences 
and skills may be sourced for this objective.   

 
4. In addition, a new sub component focused on providing technical assistance for Mission Antyodaya 

will be introduced. Specifically, as part of this sub component:  
 

a. TA will be provided for Mission Antyodaya at the national, state and district level.    
b. Support under this sub-component will be for 13 NRLP states and nearly 100 districts in those 13 

states. The 100 districts with the highest intensity of the NRLM implementation will be selected 
for the project. These districts will be the districts with the highest amount of mobilization and 
capitalization (both the catalytic capital from NRLM and the finance from commercial banks) and 
the possibilities of having transformative economic potential. Additionally, and as far as possible, 
the project will strive for coordinated technical or investment support with the blocks and 
panchayats selected under Mission Antyodaya and those under NRLP.   
  

5. Component 2. State Livelihood Support  
The activities to be financed under this Component will remain essentially the same but with further 
refinements to focus on the next generation institutional and investment support as described above 
in the rationale. Sub component 2.1 (State Rural Livelihoods Support) will remain the same but 
district level support will be focused on 100 districts that will be selected for project coverage under 
this NRETP (NRLP AF). Under sub component 2.2 (Institution Building and Capacity Building) financing 
will be oriented towards the mobilization of the producer groups and producer organizations. Under 
sub component 2.3 (Community Investment Support) the focus would be on financing community 



organizations mainly towards enterprise and skill development initiatives. The quantum of financing 
under sub component 2.4 (Special Programs) will be significantly scaled up and most of this financing 
will be focused on scaling up initiatives like high value agriculture including market access, enterprise 
and skills development etc.  that were introduced under the dedicated funds under this sub-
component during the project restructuring undertaken in January 2016. 

 
6. Component 3. Innovation and Partnership Support: There is no change in the activities to be financed 

under this component. The component will continue to finance pilot initiatives and technical 
assistance consultancies that support innovative livelihoods activities in agriculture, livestock, youth 
employment, among others, for rural poor households.  Learning and documentation of experiences 
from these initiatives will be emphasized. 

 
7. Component 4. Project Implementation Support: There is no change in the activities to be financed under this 

component. This component will continue to strengthen the National Mission Management Unit for effective 
project management at the national level, finance the Monitoring and Evaluation activities and ICT initiatives.  
Learning and documentation of experiences under the economic transformative investments and institutional 
strengthening programs will be emphasized. 

 
E. Implementation 

 
1. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements:  The MoRD through National Rural Livelihoods Promotion 

Society (NRLPS)/National Mission Management Unit (NMMU) will be responsible for overall technical 
assistance, guideline formulations, National level partnerships, coordination, monitoring, supervision and 
release of funds to thirteen participating States. At the State level, the project will be implemented by the 
State Rural Livelihoods Missions (SRLMs) set up under NRLM as per the agreed framework detailed out in 
Project Implementation Plan (PIP). Each participating States will carry out a diagnostic study of pro-poor 
agriculture value chain and potential of cluster based enterprise development based on which they will 
prepare their Annual Action Plan (AAP) or multi-year State Perspective and Implementation Plan (SPIP). 

 
 
 
 . 

   
F. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 

The additional finance would cover about 100 districts in the current 13 states. The states are spread across 
different agro climatic zones with varied natural and geographical features ranging from wet and humid to 
dry and deciduous as well as include some coastal areas. All the states have previous experience in 
implementing NRETP (NRLP AF) supported livelihood activities in varied agro climatic zones. There is also 
prior experience of working in different geographies and with environmental and social setting of the rural 
areas, which are primarily agrarian. The expected locations influenced by additional financing are likely to 
be similar to those covered under the ongoing NRETP (NRLP AF), and therefore, poses no significant risks of 
potential cumulative and localized significant adverse environmental impacts. Livelihood activities would 
continue to centre around the sustainable use of natural resources, where these are available at project 
locations. NRETP (NRLP AF) NRETP (NRLP AF) The additional financing will be spread across 100 Districts in 
13 high poverty states. The states and project areas were identified based on their high incidence of rural 
poverty and socioeconomic backwardness as well as higher concentration of marginalized population 
groups such as scheduled tribes (indigenous peoples) and scheduled castes. States like Bihar and UP have 
substantial population of Scheduled Castes (SC) and Other Backward Castes (OBC) who are more vulnerable 
and marginalized compared to general population. On the other hand, states like Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh, 
Odisha and parts of Rajasthan, MP, and Maharashtra are dominated by tribals. Within these geographies, 
the NRETP (NRLP AF) will prioritize districts/blocks with higher levels of social mobilsation and financial 
capitalization, which will overlap with pockets of higher tribal and marginalized populations.  

 

 
 

SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 
SAFEGUARD_TBL 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes  

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes  

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes  

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes  

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No  



Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 Yes  

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 No  

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No  

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No  

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No  

 
 

KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 OPS_SAFEGUARD_SUMMARY_TBL 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project proposes to scale-up the existing livelihoods promoted through dedicated special funds. The livelihoods 
include varies use of natural resources and linked processes, such as, Agriculture, Dairy, Small ruminants, Fisheries, 
Non-Timber Forest Produce (lac culture, hill broom, tamarind etc.). The project will also support Non-farm enterprises 
including small processing units and value addition. The project has been consciously promoting special initiatives for 
environmental sustainability of livelihoods such as community managed sustainable agriculture, fodder cultivation and 
stall feeding of milch animals and goats etc. However as the project proposes to scale-up the same interventions 
through additional financing, improper management of any of these livelihood activities and unawareness among the 
SHG members may result in negative impacts, such as: (i) indiscriminate use of chemical inputs in agriculture leading 
to contamination of soil, water and surroundings; (ii) degradation of common grazing lands due to increased pressure 
of grazing and improper pasture management practices; (iii) decreased regeneration capacity of NTFP species in forest 
areas; and (iv) over use of water resources, particularly ground water etc. Most of these activities are small-scale 
interventions, spread over wide areas in several villages. Further, any potential adverse environmental impact and risk 
from these activities can be mitigated, contained and even reversed. Therefore, no potential large scale, significant 
and/or irreversible impacts are envisaged. In addition to Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01), the safeguard policies 
on Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), Forests (OP/BP 4.36) and Pest Management (OP/BP 4.09) have been triggered 
recognizing the importance of integrating sustainable management practices in forest-dependent and agriculture-
based livelihoods. The safeguard policy on Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) has not been triggered as the project funds are 
unlikely to be used for community-level civil works such as small dams, embankments, etc. (Project funds would not 
support activities involving excavations, etc., that may impact physical cultural resources. Therefore, OP/BP 4.11 is not 
triggered. The key social safeguard issues and impacts associated with the NRETP (NRLP AF) are: ensuring project 
interventions and implementation processes are aligned with the socio-cultural context in tribal areas and respond to 
their development priorities; inclusion of traditionally marginalized social groups such as scheduled castes, migrant 
labor, and other households identified under socioeconomic census survey (SECC); promoting strategies that reduce 
gender gaps and advance women’s economic empowerment; and mitigation of any localized, adverse impacts from 
small scale infrastructure that would be coming up in project areas. No adverse long terms impact on tribals and 
indigenous population are expected from this project. OP 4.10 is triggered as states and districts having substantial 
tribal population are included in Project areas. OP. 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement) is not triggered as involuntary land 
acquisition is not envisaged. Small scale community level, infrastructure such as citizen service centres, training 
centres and custom hiring centres are expected to come up largely in pre-existing facilities. However, some of these 
may require small land parcels that are expected to be leased or donated by Panchayats or local government 


departments or individual donors with proper MoUs and due diligence. Given the size of small scale infrastructure, a 
large portion of which is expected to be rented/leased with no or minimal construction, the risks of labor influx are 
not going to be significant. Project interventions are not expected to cause any adverse livelihood impacts and 
restriction of access to land and resources as a result to land taking by the project.  
  
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
Describe any potential indirect and/or long-term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: No 
severe or long-term impacts are expected due to proposed livelihood activities, mainly implemented through the 
women Self Help Groups. Agriculture, livestock, fisheries, non-timber forest produce and non-farm sectors are the 
predominant sectors in which rural poor households are involved and individual and household level investments in 
these sectors generally do not result in potential indirect and/or long-term impacts in the project areas. Further, as 
the experience of existing Bank projects has shown, the nature of activities/works taken up by the SHGs and 
federations under the ongoing project is likely to remain so during the additional financing. No adverse long term 
social impacts are envisaged from the AF interventions and investments. The potential long-term positive impacts are 
expected to be: social, economic and financial empowerment of the poorest households, especially of Scheduled 
Castes and Scheduled Tribes, and women. The poorest and most excluded households would have greater access to, 
security and sustainability of livelihood resources, and enhanced household incomes. The project villages would most 
likely see greater cohesion amongst the poorest social groups, greater capacity and assertiveness among the poor in 
claiming their rights and entitlements, and better participation in local government structures and processes. Gender 
relations could improve as collective action gives women self-esteem and confidence to voice their needs and 
priorities in both the public and private spheres. Overall, the social dynamics and rural institutional environment are 
expected to be much more supportive of the livelihood needs of the poorest households.  
 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. 
Since this is an additional financing aiming to scale up successful interventions, no analysis of alternatives was 
undertaken. However, based on implementation experience during the ongoing project, the safeguards strategy will 
continue to mainstream the environmental best practices into the Package of Practices (PoP) of the livelihood 
activities (e.g.: stall feeding in goatary, non-chemical pest control measures in agriculture). In addition, Promotion of 
alternate green solutions like use of renewable energy, Community Managed Sustainable Agriculture are planned 
during the additional financing. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower 
capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The measures taken during the ongoing project for addressing safeguard policies issues will continue throughout the 
implementation of the additional financing. EMF compliance with the mandatory regulatory requirements list would 
apply to all the clusters in the project and appropriate capacity building support for compliance with regulations and 
awareness building on better environmental practices in livelihood activities would be provided. Efforts will be made 
to develop and apply a sustainability index for funding potential activities through the dedicated fund. The index will 
be based on the principles of resource efficiency, minimal adverse impacts and post-investment support continuation 
of the livelihood. An assessment of the EMF in select states was undertaken during the ongoing project .There is mixed 
experience in terms of borrower’s capacity to plan and implement the measures required for addressing safeguards 
issues. Most of the states (Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, Tamil Nadu and Rajasthan) have had previous experience 
in implementing livelihood projects and other states have also implemented EMF and SMF under NRETP (NRLP AF). 
States that have implemented World Bank-supported livelihood projects as well as NRETP (NRLP AF) have a higher 



 

level of readiness and competency to implement the EMF. Some of these states (e.g. Bihar) have implemented the 
green solutions at a considerable scale. The above findings from these assessments are being incorporated into the 
updated EMF To streamline these capacities, it has been agreed with the Ministry of Rural Development that the 
National Mission Management Unit (NMMU) will have the Livelihood Specialists as the anchor person for EMF to 
support and monitor the implementation in the participating states. Further, the State Mission Management Unit 
(SMMU) of the State Rural Livelihoods Missions (SRLM) would have Environmental Focal Points at the state level 
(Livelihood Managers), district levels and among the block level project facilitating teams to streamline the EMF 
requirements at all levels. The Technical Partners on different value chains will be taken on board for integration of 
the best practices and regulatory requirements into the Package of Practices and Capacity Building programs. The 
NRETP (NRLP AF) social management framework (SMF), including OP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples (Scheduled Tribes), 
will continue to apply to the AF. The SMF comprises strategies for targeting and inclusion of scheduled castes and 
schedule tribe groups/areas, consultation and participation, gender & women’s economic empowerment, citizen’s 
engagement, grievance redress and safeguard screening/mitigation planning for community projects involving 
land/infrastructure. The SMF addresses the issues and needs of tribal people and incorporates the key requirements 
of O.P. 4.10 especially with respect to free, prior and informed consultations and broad community support. The SMF 
includes specific provisions for informed consultations, participation and inclusion of the SC/ST and other excluded 
households, with a special focus on tribal people. The SMF also provides for institutional arrangements and capacity 
building activities of project staff, community institutions and partner agencies. Community projects involving 
productive infrastructure and land donation would follow consultative, transparent and voluntary procedures. MORD 
and the 13 SRLMs have implemented the SMF and its constituent strategies with varying levels of intensity and quality 
in the ongoing NRLP satisfactorily. Under the NRETP (NRLP AF), the capacities and performance of the social 
development staff and partners would be strengthened through a range of measures. NRETP (NRLP AF) aims to 
intensify interventions, financing & technical support for high value agriculture, rural value chains, skills and 
enterprises, producer organizations, innovative livelihood approaches, digital financial inclusion as well as productive 
infrastructure for post-production processes and value addition. Technical Assistance will also be provided to 
convergence (Mission Antoyodaya). Partnerships with technical resource agencies from private and non-profit and 
public sector will be strengthened. Increased investments in high value agriculture, enterprises, productive 
infrastructure and financing of producer organizations would need more explicit criteria for inclusive beneficiary 
targeting and benefit sharing as well as social safeguard screening to minimize elite capture and social exclusion. 
Dedicated HR and Capacity building program on socially inclusive and gendered value chains/enterprises, social 
safeguard screening and risk mitigation and social sustainability will be supported to ensure satisfactory social 
performance of project counterparts. To respond to these focus areas in the AF, MORD has updated the existing SMF 
especially with respect to social inclusion protocols, social safeguard screening mechanisms and inclusive beneficiary 
targeting and benefit sharing criteria for financing of producer organizations and productive infrastructure. Additional 
measures on staffing, capacity building, technical assistance, knowledge programs as well as citizen engagement and 
grievance redressal would be implemented. The results framework will continue to track and report on gender, 
inclusion, citizen’s engagement and women’s economic empowerment. NRETP (NRLP AF) will significantly advance the 
gender mainstreaming and women’s economic empowerment agenda through strategies/specific interventions on 
women led producer organizations and enterprises, Start-up Village Entrepreneurship Program (SVEP) and upgrading 
of skills in selected self-employment occupations for women SHG members and youth. Interventions on digital 
payments, financial inclusion/literacy, Business Correspondents (BC) and enterprise financing will lead to significant 
financial empowerment of rural women. Support to Mission Antoyodaya will strengthen women’s advocacy and 
agency in delivery of social safety net and entitlement services for the rural poor. Nutrition sensitive agriculture and 
interventions on food handling and hygiene will benefit the women disproportionately. The results framework will 
continue to track and report on gender, inclusion, citizen’s engagement and women’s economic empowerment. Client 
has also been organizing regular reviews and lesson learning events on the gender, social inclusion and vulnerability 



reduction dimensions of the SMF. A discrete stocktaking review was undertaken at Midterm stage of the project. 
Overall the project has been performing satisfactorily on mobilsation, inclusion and financial and economic 
empowerment of women and marginalization communities particularly tribals and SC households. SMF 
implementation and reporting would need to improve further on safeguards, GRM and benefit sharing dimensions of 
productive infrastructure and economic clusters. As described above, these are the aspects that are being updated in 
the SMF  
 
 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, 
with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders in the proposed project include the SHG members, groups and federations of rural poor in the 
project districts, technical partners, relevant government departments etc. The existing safeguards arrangements will 
continue to apply. If required, the existing EMF document will be updated based on a short field assessment and 
would be disclosed in English and the local language (Hindi) on the websites of the NMMU, State Departments of Rural 
Development and on the Bank’s InfoShop. The most important stakeholders of the project are the rural poor and their 
organizations, including SHGs, federations, producer organizations and government and non-governmental 
organizations working on rural poverty reduction and livelihoods advancement. The MoRD has held stakeholder 
consultations to inform the design and implementation of the project and address the limitations of existing rural 
development programs that target the poorest and most excluded groups. The following field consultations were also 
held.  
 
 
 

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Morocco Digital and Climate Smart Agriculture Program (P170419) 

 
 

  
Jul 30, 2019 Page 1 of 10  

     

 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Program Information Document 
 (PID) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 28-Jul-2019 | Report No: PIDC190843 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

A. Basic Program Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Program Name 

Morocco P170419  Morocco Digital and 
Climate Smart 
Agriculture Program 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date 
Does this operation 
have an IPF 
component? 

MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH 
AFRICA 

23-Mar-2020 14-Jul-2020 No 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency Practice Area (Lead) 

Program-for-Results 
Financing 

Ministry of Finance Ministry of Agriculture, 
Fisheries, Rural 
Development, Water and 
Forestry 

Agriculture and Food 

 

Proposed Program Development Objective(s)  
   

The Morocco Digital and Climate Smart Agriculture Program aims at increasing the adoption of digital and climate-
smart technologies in agri-food value chains in Morocco. 

  

COST & FINANCING 
   
FIN_SRC_TABLE1 
SUMMARY (USD Millions) 
 

Government program Cost 1,000.00 

Total Operation Cost 200.00 

Total Program Cost 200.00 

Total Financing 200.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 

 
  
FINANCING (USD Millions) 

Total World Bank Group Financing 200.00 

     World Bank Lending 200.00 
 

     
B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

 
1. Over the last two decades, Morocco has achieved relatively strong economic and social outcomes thanks to a 
series of reforms which resulted in the improvement of the well-being of its population. In the 2000-2017 period, 
Morocco’s real per capita GDP almost doubled from US$1,727 to US$2,948. Extreme poverty dropped to a level of 1 
percent and the national poverty rate declined to 4.8 percent. The main reforms which led to these achievements were 
(i) stabilization of the macroeconomic framework by reducing domestic and external vulnerabilities, (ii) enhancement of 
fiscal and financial policy frameworks, and (iii) support of economic diversification and competitiveness.  

 
2. Over the past 10 years, however, growth has been on a downward trend, and the economy has not generated 
enough jobs to reduce the persistent high rate of unemployment, especially among the youth and educated. Real GDP 
growth decelerated from an average of 4.8 percent over 1996-2006, to 4.6 percent over 2007-2011, to only 3.4 percent 
over 2012-2017. During the first half of 2018, GDP growth fell to 2.8 percent. Morocco continues to face high 
unemployment rates and substantial urban-rural disparities. Morocco has close to 34 million inhabitants of which 13.6 
million live in rural areas (WB, 2019). Approximately 1.1 million people in the country are unemployed; they represent 9-
10 percent of the working-age population and 20 percent among the youth. Poverty rates in rural areas remain twice as 
high as the poverty rates at national level and the rural population accounts for 79.4 percent of the poor. While inequality 
as measured by the Gini coefficient at national level declined from 40.7 to 39.5 between 2007 and 2014, it remains high. 

 
3. Morocco is highly exposed to climate change. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) projects a 
continued warming trend for Morocco. Every decade since 1970, a 0.5 degrees Centigrade temperature increase has been 
observed, greatly exceeding the global average by about 0.15 degrees. Unless strong action is taken to mitigate this trend, 
additional temperature increases of as much as three to seven degrees Centigrade are projected for Morocco by 2100. 
The largest increases (four to seven degrees) are anticipated for the summer months (June, July, and August). Annual 
precipitation is projected to decline by 10-40 percent, including a 10-30 percent decrease during the wet season from 
October to April, and a 10 to 40 percent decrease during the dry season, from May to September. As a consequence, 
droughts and other extreme weather events will be increasing in frequency and intensity in Morocco. 
 
4. To address those challenges and to foster the structural transformation of the economy, the Government of 
Morocco has launched a number of ambitious sectoral programs. Those programs, which cover the main economic 
sectors including the agri-food sector through the Plan Maroc Vert (PMV), which aims to promote market-oriented 
agricultural growth, doubling sector value added and creating 1.5 million jobs, have started to generate results in terms 
of increased investments, growth and diversification within each sector. Considering the remaining challenges, however, 
and while pursuing its macroeconomic reform agenda, the Government of Morocco is now looking at ways to increase 
the impact of those sectoral programs on growth, income generation and employment creation. A new strategy for the 
agricultural sector, building on the achievements of the PMV will focus on creating a rural middle class with a strong focus 
on increasing human capital and ensuring the sustainable management of natural resources.  

 
 
 
 



Sectoral (or multi-sectoral) and Institutional Context of the Program 
5. Morocco’s agri-food sector can contribute to economic growth, boost shared prosperity, and increase jobs, 
incomes, and livelihoods. The agri-food sector is a key growth area. The sector represents 15 percent of GDP, 23 percent 
of exports, and close to 30 percent of employment. From 2000 to 2015, the non-agriculture sector’s GDP grew at a slower 
rate than overall GDP, meaning that agricultural GDP was the fastest growing sector in Morocco (CEM, World Bank, 2016). 
Agriculture is the only source of employment and income for 80 percent of the rural labor force, hence growth in the 
sector results in substantial reductions of poverty rates. To ensure the sector’s continued performance and contribution 
to Morocco’s economic development, a stronger focus on job creation in agri-food value chains and on the sector’s 
resilience to climate change is needed. 

 
6. Increasing farm incomes and creating more and better rural jobs is a priority for Morocco’s agricultural 
transformation. Today, Morocco’s agricultural sector lies between the transition and urbanized agriculture stages in its 
agricultural transformation process.1 Hence, Morocco’s agriculture has yet to reach its full export and production 
potential, which could further boost shared prosperity in the country. Furthermore, Morocco is not tapping into the 
potential of its women and youth. Women are highly appreciated for their work ethic and rigor, but often lack access to 
the necessary assets such as extension services, finance or social security, which keeps them trapped in low-pay jobs. 
Morocco’s young population offers exceptional knowledge in new digital technologies but has difficulty in finding 
appropriate employment. Supporting growth in agri-food value chains—beyond agricultural production, and developing 
storage, processing, distribution, transport, logistics, retailing and other services—could ensure that Morocco’s food 
system increasingly contributes to job creation in the country. Furthermore, necessary policies and investments can 
improve the quality and quantity of jobs and facilitate the inclusion of more women and youth. 

 
7. The agri-food sector also needs to adapt to a rapidly changing climate. Moroccan agriculture is strongly exposed 
to climate change. With rising temperatures and high levels of water-stress, Morocco is likely to face longer and more 
frequent periods of drought over the coming decade, less predictable rainfall and more frequent extreme weather events. 
In addition, agriculture and land use activities represent a substantial share of greenhouse gas emissions, although their 
overall volume remains low. To ensure the sector’s sustainability, Morocco has incorporated the climate change issue into 
its development strategies in order to manage its impact and reduce vulnerabilities. Morocco’s vision is to make its 
territory and people more resilient to climate change while ensuring a rapid transition to a low carbon economy.  

 
8. Digital technologies offer solutions to the challenges faced by Moroccan agri-food value chains. Driven by both 
public and private sector, the digital transformation of Moroccan agriculture has begun. The sector is experiencing various 
digital improvements related to satellite imagery, internet and mobile phone-based technologies, IOT networks and E-
commerce platforms. The main examples of these digital solutions include: (i) Databases such as FERTIMAP2, Crop Growth 
Monitoring system (CGMS)3, Système d'information sur les prix des produits agricoles (ASAAR4), RNA (National Agriculture 

 
1 A country’s transition from an agriculture-based economy to a developed one can be broken down into five stages: (i) agri-based, (ii) pre-transition, (iii) transition, 
(iv) urbanised, and (v) developed. Policy priorities differ depending on where a country stands in the agricultural transition process. ‘Agricultural Transformation 

Process maps’ help decipher the different stages of agricultural development and where countries are located. Thes maps are created by taking into consideration (i) 

the percentage of farming jobs, and (ii) the primary agriculture’s share of total GDP and allow for the country categorization mentioned before. 

2 This provides (i) knowledge of soil fertility; and (ii) ad-hoc cost-effective fertilizing recommendations based on soil fertility map and soil sampling. The initiative runs 

on a GIS platform accessible online.  
3 It allows forecasting yields of cereals through (i) weather data processing (9km x 9km resolution); and (ii) simulation of crop growth. The platform is online 
4 Provides information on daily, time series and analyses on agricultural prices according to regions, type of market (wholesale, retail, souk, Ramadan) and type of 

product (horticulture, fruit and livestock). See: http://www.prixagriculture.org/ 

Registry)5, and ARDNA6; (ii) digital farm management services delivered to large cooperatives or producers/exporter 
associations7; (iii) a dynamic banking sector within which digital solutions (FinTech) are catching on8;  and (iv) E-commerce 
platforms that are starting to turn to food trade9. The digital transformation of agriculture in Morocco will require a 
significant effort in building domestic capacity to manage the access and use of data, build digital infrastructure in rural 
areas, improve the regulatory framework, foster the demand/adoption of digital solutions, boost the supply of technology 
by start-ups and SMEs, disseminate digital technical knowledge and improve academic currincula to address the market 
demand for digital expertise.  

 
9. The development of digital technologies in agri-food value chains will be underpinned by the overall digital 
economy.10 The Plan Maroc Numérique 2020 (Digital Morocco Plan) was developed by the Ministry of Industry, 
Commerce, Investment and the Digital Economy (MICIEN) and is the vision for the development of the digital economy in 
Morocco. This strategy aims by 2020 to digitize 50% of administrative procedures and bills, connect 20% of Moroccan 
SMEs, , and position Morocco as a digital hub. The transformation of the administration towards digital constitutes the 
backbone of this plan. The plan rests on three pillars i) Digital Transformation of the economy and national government, 
ii) Digital Hub for Africa, and iii) Digital Foundations including data infrastructure, digital skills and digital regulations and 
frameworks. In 2016, the Digital Development Agency (ADD), was created to undertake the implementation of the Plan 
Moroc Numeric 2020 and support the implementation and development of the digital economy, by encouraging the 
dissemination of digital tools and promoting their use among the population. The Digital Morocco Plan for 2020's major 
measures aim to authorize the entry of new players, to set up an investment-friendly legal and regulatory framework, and 
to use Public-Private Partnerships to deploy broadband infrastructure in areas that are less profitable for private 
investors.   

 

10. Digital Economy. Considering the current situation of broadband in Morocco, and the country's ambition to 
become a regional leader and to rise to the level of economic development of upper-middle income countries, the 
Moroccan government now faces the need to introduce a second wave of reforms in the broadband sector. Following the 
example of international best practices, Morocco should primarily strive to: (i) increase coverage for the remaining 40% 
of the population (who live in more remote, sparsely populated semi-urban and rural areas with poor and/or no 
profitability); (ii) encourage the arrival of new players (without limits on their numbers and without prohibiting 
infrastructure deployment) on all market segments (international gateways, backbones, backhauls, access); (iii) introduce 
regulation for open and non-discriminatory access to communications networks (wireline infrastructure, civil engineering 
and easements); (iv) promote private investment in telecommunications; and (v) improve regulatory framework for the 

 
5 That has significantly improved the national cadastre by merging agriculture census data and satellite imagery.  
6 An online capacity development, research, extension and communication platform sponsored by the Ministry of Agriculture and FAO. See: 

http://www.ardna.org/accueil# 
7 This is the case of AGRIDATA (http://agridata-consulting.com/en/ ) working with APEFEL (fruit and vegetable exporter association), Maroc Citrus (citrus exporter 

association) and COPAG (large cooperative active on dairy, meat, citrus and vegetables). 
8 Crédit Agricole du Maroc (CAM) stands out as it started the implementation of a “digital agenda” in 2011. 
9 Jumia is entering into niche products sold by cooperatives and is increasing its sales volumes of processed food for supermarkets.  
10 This is aligned with the Digital Economy for Africa (DE4A) Initiative, which aims to digitally connect every individual, business and government in Africa by 2030 and 
ensure that each person is digital-enabled and ready to thrive in the digital economy. This includes every farmer and agribusiness. In order to digitally enable the 

broader food system in Morocco, there needs to be a concentrated effort to build up the core foundations of the digital economy including digital infrastructure, digital 

platforms, digital skills, digital financial services and an environment supportive of digital business and entrepreneurship. A simultaneous effort will be needed to 

mitigate the growing risks of the digital era including cybersecurity, data privacy and protection and market concentration. This becomes relevant for the large portion 

of rural inhabitants in Morocco. 


use of new digital technologies like IoT, Drones, Artificial intelligence key to the modernization and improvement of 
efficiency in the agriculture sector.11 

 
Relationship to CAS/CPF 

 
11. The proposed operation is fully aligned with the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) 2018-2024. In particular, 
it is aligned with Strategic Focus Area A (Promoting job creation by the private sector) and Strategic Focus Area 3 
(Promoting inclusive and resilient territorial development). Specifically, the proposed operation would support CPF 
Objective 2 (Increase opportunities for private sector growth with a focus on MSMEs and youth employability) as well as 
CPF Objective 10 (Strengthen adaptation to climate change and resilience to natural disasters). Under CPF Objective 2 the 
CPF foresees to crowd-in the private sector to generate further growth and job opportunities. Under CPF Objective 10 the 
CPF envisages to support climate adaptation and resilience in sectors threatened by climate variability and change. Yet, 
the activities of the operation will also indirectly touch upon Strategic Focus Area B (Strengthening human capital), as the 
Program aims at building, strengthening and protecting human capital by extending academic curricula and developing 
digital extension services. Given the strong focus on gender and digital technologies in the Program, the Cross-Cutting 
Themes ‘Gender’ and ‘Harnessing Digital Economy for Jobs and Faster Growth’ are equally broadly covered in the Program. 

 
12. The proposed operation also supports the new MENA Regional Strategy on Economic and Social Inclusion for 
Peace and Stability. In particular the Program is aligned with (i) Pillar 1 on Renewing the Social Contract as it emphasizes 
more inclusive economic growth and the protection of natural resources which are considered public goods to be 
preserved as part of the intergenerational social contract, and (ii) Pillar 2 on Strengthening Resilience to Shocks, such as 
climate shocks. The Program is also aligned with the new enlargement of the strategy which focuses on youth, 
entrepreneurship, and technologies. In particular, the Program touches upon (i) human capital development, and (ii) 
digital transformation. With respect to human capital development the Program focuses on improving the quality of 
extension services and access to the social protection systems. With respect to digital transformation, the Program aims 
at improving skills for youth and women, support entrepreneurship and SMEs, improve contestability in markets, including 
via disruptive technologies. The regional strategy has an equally strong focus on gender equality and female 
empowerment, which is clearly reflected in the operation. 

 
 
 
Rationale for Bank Engagement and Choice of Financing Instrument 

 
13. The World Bank has been engaged in the agricultural sector in Morocco for almost three decades and supported 
the PMV since its inception, through operations which have collectively built capacity and systems in the agriculture 
sector. This included: (a) a DPL series in support of the PMV (2011 to 2014, USD 408 million) with a focus on institutional 
and regulatory measures to – among others - improve the efficiency of domestic markets by reducing marketing costs and 
improving marketing services through the modernization of wholesale markets and slaughterhouses; improve the 
effectiveness of the agricultural innovation system; and establish an effective food safety management systems; and (b) 
two investment operations (Modernization of Irrigated Agriculture in Oum Er Rbia Basin Project, 2010-2017, US$ 70 million 
IBRD; Large Scale Irrigation Modernization Project, 2015-2022, US$150 million IBRD) with a focus on improving water 
service to small farmers in large scale irrigation perimeters as a prerequisite to the adoption of improved irrigation 

 
11 The Program will be able to build on and create synergies with other WB sector projects, such as (i) the ‘Financing Innovative Start-ups and Small and Medium 

Enterprises Project’ (P150928), which aimed at increasing private equity and quasi-equity finance for innovative startups and small and medium enterprises in Morocco, 

and (ii) the ‘Financial Inclusion and Digital Economy’ project (P 168587), which focuses on fostering financial inclusion and contributing to digital transformation for 

individuals, enterprises, and entrepreneurs.  



technologies and increase in agricultural water productivity. Furthermore, a PforR supporting the PMV (2018-2022, US$ 
200 million IBRD) aims to increase the volume of added-value products commercialized in the olive and citrus agri-food 
value chains. In addition, sustainability of the agricultural sector in rainfed marginal areas has been addressed through 
two dedicated grants by the Global Environmental Facility (GEF) (Integrating Climate Change in the Implementation of the 
Plan Maroc Vert Project, 2010-2015, US$4 million; and Social and Integrated Agricultural Project, 2013-2017, US$6 million) 
focusing on climate change adaptation, biodiversity and land conservation. The proposed operation would complement 
and build on these project experiences by putting a stronger focus on equity/job creation and resilience/environmental 
sustainability in agricultural value chains, while also ensuring the sustainability of the investments made in earlier 
projects/programs, in particular the irrigation IPFs. 

 
14. The GoM is now seeking assistance to support the development and implementation of the new phase of the 
PMV—a new agricultural strategy currently being finalized. The GoM has demonstrated its commitment to results and 
reforms through the implementation of the PMV and the development of the new agricultural successor program of the 
PMV, which will be finalized in September 2019. During the preparation of the CPF 2019-2024, the MAPMDREF has asked 
for the continuous support of the World Bank to strengthen its agriculture sector by leveraging digital and climate smart 
technologies. On January 29, 2019, the GoM officially solicited World Bank financing and technical assistance to implement 
the new agricultural strategy. The request also stressed two angles to design the support: digital technologies and climate 
smart agriculture.  

 
15. The final choice of the instrument will be made during project preparation and appraisal.  
 
C. Program Development Objective(s) (PDO) and PDO Level Results Indicators 
 
Program Development Objective(s) 
 
The Morocco Digital and Climate Smart Agriculture Program aims at increasing the adoption of digital and climate-
smart technologies in agri-food value chains in Morocco. 

 
PDO Level Results Indicators 
 
At PDO-level, it is proposed that the following three indicators would be used to assess the PDO results: 
 

• Number of farmers and agri-food SMEs adopting climate-smart technologies and practices;  

• Number of farmers and agri-food SMEs adopting digital technologies.  
 
D. Program Description 

 
 

 
16. The Government’s program is the next phase of the Plan Maroc Vert (PMV). The proposed projectwill focus on 2 
key areas of the Governement’s program: the diffusion and adoption of i) climate smart technologies and practices and ii) 
digital technologies in agri-food value chain. The Program will mainly focus on building the ecosystem and setting up the 
incentive schemes to enable the private sector to provide digital and climate smart technologies and farmers and agri-
food SMEs to adopt them. The increased adoption of these technologies will transform the Moroccan agri-food sector and 
will contribute to reaching the higher-level objectives of the new strategy: i) Creating jobs in rural areas (especially for the 
youth and women); and ii) Managing natural resources in a sustainable and climate-resilient way.  



     

 
17. The PMV was launched in 2008 to modernize and foster the growth of the agri-food sector. The PMV aims to 
transform the agri-food sector into a key source of economic growth that contributes to employment creation and poverty 
reduction in rural areas, while promoting the sector’s integration into the global economy, and helping the sector adapt 
to climate change. The PMV includes a set of transversal institutional reforms, as well as an investment support program 
based on public-private partnerships. At sub-sector level, specific targets and actions have also been jointly negotiated 
between MAPMDREF, the Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF) and representatives of the private sector 
(Interprofessions) through Contrat-Programmes (CPs, result-based agreements) in 19 sub-sectors. For each action, the 
CPs define the respective contributions of the public and the private sectors. The PMV has also been translated into 
agricultural development plans endorsed by each region. 
 
 
 
E. Initial Environmental and Social Screening 
 
18. In terms of environmental and social risk management,  the concept stage examination of potentially critical 
aspects based on the PforR E&S tool for initial screening of types of risks shows that:  
 

a) Environmental and social risks: Initial assessments show that social and environmental risks are expected to be 
moderate, and that E&S management capacities are likely to be adequate to manage risks related to the social and 
environmental context of the project. In accordance with OP 9.00 the project would not finance activities expected to 
have significant adverse impacts that are sensitive, diverse, or unprecedented on the environment and/or affected people. 
The project’s operation proposals will be screened during program preparation and implementation for such adverse 
impacts. If such activities are likely to occur within the project, they should be excluded from PforR support. An 
Environmental and Social Systems Assessment (ESSA) will be conducted during preparation to ensure E&S risk 
management capacities are adequate, that screening capacities are adequate, and that eventual gaps are mitigated during 
implementation. In fact, the project is likely to yield important benefits for producers and processors in selected sub-
sectors, both through its institutional strengthening activities and the specific investments to be financed. Physical 
investments are expected to have no negative social impacts in terms of resettlement and land acquisition, while they 
may yield environmental benefits, particularly by developing climate-smart value-chains and improved environmental 
management practices. Overall impacts are expected to be positive, through improved environmental management 
practices along value-chains, and increased capacity and economic returns for beneficiaries;  

 
b) Capacity of National Systems: Morocco has a legal framework in place for environmental and social management and 
impact assessments, and reliable country systems to manage the risks associated with project activities. The key legislative 
text is Law no. 12-03 of May 12, 2003, aimed at minimizing the negative impact of projects and improving ecological 
sustainability. Regarding land tenure, the protection of property is ensured by Article 35 of the new Constitution of 2011 
and implemented through numerous laws. The Constitution also establishes equality, inclusiveness, participation (art 136, 
139), including disclosure and consultation processes, the right of petition, grievance redress mechanisms as well as citizen 
engagement (art 19, 136, 139, 156). Moreover, Morocco has adopted in March 2014 a National Charter of the 
Environment and Sustainable Development. As the main beneficiaries of the Program include farmers, SMEs and 
agribusinesses, it will be important for project design to identify cultural, social, economic, geographical and political 
constraints to equitable access to project benefits, giving special attention to the needs and concerns of women, youth 
and the most vulnerable groups. Some specific weaknesses still do exist and will have to be managed through the ESSA 
and Program Action Plans; for instance, timely compensation in cases of land acquisition. The need for coordination of 
safeguards standards and procedures across a number of agencies executing program activities deserves particular 



attention. Any specific weaknesses pertaining to the execution of the project’s activities will be the subject of corrective 
actions recommended in the Program Action Plan; 
 
c) Reputational and political risk: The PMV is not seen to be a controversial program and has been widely supported by 
beneficiaries. Program assessment should review both the overall decision-making processes and allocation of resources 
to strengthen social inclusiveness (e.g., ensuring that women, youth, and vulnerable groups at least have a fair opportunity 
to benefit from the Program). The primary reputational risk to the Bank is that the Program may not deliver the scope and 
scale of benefits envisioned, or that the explicitly environmental and social aspects of the program development objective 
cause the program to somehow become associated with broader social or political protest causes. 
 
 
 
 
 
























































World Bank Document


1 

 

 

PROGRAM-FOR-RESULTS INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 

APPRAISAL STAGE 

Report No.:PIDA0128822  

 

Program Name Strengthening Markets For Agriculture And Rural 

Transformation In Punjab (Smart Punjab) 

Region SAR 

Country Pakistan 

Sector Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Program for Results 

Program ID P162446 

Parent Program ID  

Borrower(s) Economic Affairs Division, Government of Pakistan 

Implementing Agency Planning & Development Department, Government of Punjab 

Date PID Prepared October 1, 2017 

Estimated Date of Appraisal 

Completion 

October 23, 2017 

Estimated Date of Board 

Approval 

December 19, 2017 

 

 Country Context 

1. Pakistan has achieved continued GDP growth and substantially reduced poverty. 
GDP growth was 5.3% in FY16/17, largely owing to gains in the agricultural and services 

sectors. The national poverty headcount declined from 64.3% in FY02 to 29.5% in FY14.  

 

2. Amid these gains, evidence is emerging that Punjab—a major driver of the national 
economy and an agricultural stronghold—is experiencing rising inequality. Punjab accounts 

for more than half of Pakistan’s GDP, and the majority (63%) of Punjab’s population of 110 

million is rural. Although poverty declined even more within Punjab than nationwide over 2002–

14 (from 61% to 25%), Punjab is the most unequal province in Pakistan, with a Gini coefficient 

of 29.7 in FY14. Four out of five of Punjab’s poor live in rural areas, where 8.7 million 

households earn an average of PKR 28,517 per month through farming alone (35%), a mix of 

farm and non-farm employment (31%), and non-farm employment (34%). The average rural 

household has 6.49 individuals but merely 1.66 income earners. Farm size continues to decline. 

Two-thirds of farms were smaller than 2 hectares in 2010 (versus less than half in 1990). 

 Sectoral and Institutional Context 

3. Agriculture is a key contributor to the economy in Pakistan in general and Punjab 
in particular, yet agricultural growth is languishing. Nationally, agriculture—crops, 

livestock, fisheries, forestry—accounts for 21% of GDP, employs 44% of the labor force, and 

directly and indirectly delivers nearly 80% of the total value of Pakistan’s exports (worth about 

US$ 12 billion). Growth is evaporating in the sector; it was 3.3% over the last decade but nearly 

zero in FY16 (0.3%). Crop and livestock productivity are lower than in other Asian countries. 

Except for maize, crop yields have barely risen in decades. In Punjab, where agriculture 


contributes 26% of GDP and provides 40% of employment, growth in agriculture has been 

highly erratic as well as low, although the livestock subsector has exhibited encouraging signs. 

Punjab encompasses 72.6% of national cropped area and 77.7% of national irrigated area. 

Approximately 62% of Punjab’s area (20.63 million hectares) is cultivated, and about 60% of 

cultivated area lies within the Indus Basin Water System. The province provides large shares of 

the country’s primary crops: maize (78%), wheat (77%), cotton (73%), sugarcane (63%), and 

rice (52%). The factors limiting agricultural growth include poor adoption of modern 

technologies, poor service delivery, and poorly functioning agricultural markets.  

 

4. Above all, however, flagging agricultural and economic growth in Punjab can be 
traced to current agricultural and irrigation policies. Ample evidence confirms that 

subsidies, agricultural support prices, caps on meat and milk prices, low investment, and 

weakening institutions support investment in traditional crops at the expense of high-value 

agriculture (HVA), discourage efficient water use, and ultimately suppress agricultural growth.  

 

5. Subsidies dominate public spending on agriculture in Punjab. These subsidies—US$ 
1.25 billion in FY17 (Table 1)—are largely regressive, generate significant negative 

environmental externalities, and focus almost exclusively on major crops rather than HVA. The 

provincial government (GoPunjab) pays more than 40% (US$ 515 million) of these subsidies, 

which are about 2.5 times higher than the funding for agriculture in the provincial Annual 

Development Plan (ADP). Not all of this largesse reaches the producer; for example, a 

substantial share of fertilizer subsidies benefits fertilizer companies and the bulk of wheat 

subsidies goes to banks. Few subsidies target small-scale producers.  

Table 1: Subsidies to agriculture in Punjab (US$ m) 

Item Subsidies paid by 

the Federal 

Government in 

Punjab 

Subsidies paid by 

the Government of 

Punjab 

Total 

subsidies 

Fertilizer gas subsidy 300
a
 0 300 

Reducing General Sales Tax (GST) on diammonium phosphate 

from PKR 400 to PKR 100/bag 

92
b
 0 92 

Reducing GST on urea from PKR 400 to PKR 75/bag 78
c
 0 78 

Reduction in electricity tariff for tubewells from PKR 8.85 to 

PKR 5.35/kWh  

219
d
 41 260 

Subsidy on imported fertilizer 34
e
 0 34 

E-voucher–based subsidy for potash fertilizer  19 19 

Wheat procurement scheme  333 333 

Wheat export subsidies 10
f
 0 10 

Interest-free loans to farmers  57 57 

Irrigation maintenance and repair (M&R)  60 60 

Cotton and wheat seed  3 3 

Crop insurance through Crop Loan Insurance Scheme (CLIS)  2 2 

TOTAL 733 515 1,248 
Source: Federal and Provincial Budget Speech 2017–18, and Agriculture Department.

 

a Total gas subsidy to fertilizer manufacturers is US$ 425 million, while Punjab accounts for approximately 70% of total fertilizer use in 

Pakistan. b Total subsidy is US$ 131.5 million, of which 70% is in Punjab. c Total subsidy is US$ 112 million, of which 70% is in Punjab. d 

Total subsidy on electricity for tubewells is US$ 257 million, and 85% of tubewells are located in Punjab. e Total subsidy for imported fertilizer 
is budgeted at US$ 48 million, of which 70% can be assigned to Punjab. f Total subsidy is US$ 14.3 million, of which 70% is Punjab. 

 

6. The costs of current policies and subsidies extend beyond their fiscal cost. Because 
most subsidies are embodied in inputs or input prices, they promote excessive or imbalanced use 



3 

 

of inputs such as water and fertilizer, resulting in negative externalities and sustainability issues 

(for instance, salinity, sodicity, and waterlogging from water pumping or overuse have degraded 

about 25% of formerly fertile land in Punjab). Wheat subsidies are embodied in the wheat price, 

which is governed by a procurement price set far above import parity, to the detriment of net 

wheat buyers (Box 1). Current policies and subsidies encourage farmers to produce more of the 

same surplus commodities rather than to provide a more diverse range of other products 

demanded by the market. Ninety percent of the cropped area in Punjab remains under major 

crops (dominated by wheat), while only nine percent is planted to higher-value crops. Significant 

benefits are sacrificed by this misallocation of resources: export earnings; the jobs that would 

otherwise be created downstream through value chains; the value added by agro-processing 

beyond milling alone; the higher incomes for producers; the production of nutrient-dense crops 

that reduce malnutrition; and the efficiencies in water use that promote diversification, 

sustainable use of scarce water (Box 2), and resilience to climate shocks and climate change. 

 

Box 1: The high costs of wheat procurement in Punjab  

Since the late 1950s, the government has purchased up to 25% of the wheat crop and up to 50% of the marketed 

wheat surplus. The costs of this procurement system are passed on to urban consumers and to the rural poor who 

are net buyers of wheat. Patronage and rent-seeking are endemic, particularly in the distribution of gunny bags, 

delivery of wheat to purchase points, and releases to flour mills). The system has other enormous costs. The 

direct costs of buying, storing, and releasing wheat at a fixed price over the year are estimated at US$ 333 million 

per year, of which more than 90% consists of interest payments on current borrowing and accumulated debt. As 

of July 2017, the wheat debt of GoPunjab to the State Bank of Pakistan stood at US$ 3.36 billion, against a 

collateral wheat stock worth half of that amount at best. Efforts to dispose of excess wheat stocks in export 

markets have been largely unsuccessful, despite generous export subsidies. Indirect costs include physical losses 

owing to poor storage, high spoilage, and pilferage; over-production of wheat and the consequent under-

production of higher-value commodities; diversion of credit from the banking system; and a lack of incentives for 

private actors to build storage facilities that could also serve other crops. The high procurement price has caused 

wheat production to surpass domestic needs, even as annual average per capita consumption of wheat continues 

to decline. 

 

Box 2: Irrigation price policy and inefficient water use in Punjab 

Irrigation has delivered notable agricultural productivity gains to Punjab in the past, but the irrigation sector 

suffers from major financial deficits. Water charges (abiana) fail to reflect actual water use or cover maintenance 

and repair (M&R) costs. Abiana rates typically represent less than 0.2% of crop budgets. The flat water rate per 

acre implemented in 2003/04 gives farmers little reason to conserve water and use it more efficiently. At best, 

current M&R spending (about US$ 65 million per year) is one-third of the minimum amount required. 

 

7. Now that Pakistan has achieved self-sufficiency in wheat, it seeks to spur further 
agricultural growth and transformation, a process in which Punjab will have a major role. 

The goal of becoming self-sufficient in food grain (especially wheat) production has long 

underpinned policies, investment priorities, and public expenditures in agriculture, but now 

Pakistan must evaluate options for future growth in light of: (1) the rapid shift in domestic 

demand away from food grains to high-value agricultural products; (2) the significant yet largely 

unexploited comparative advantage for several of those products, which can provide 

opportunities to generate export revenue and jobs; (3) the exhaustion of options for new sources 

of irrigation water (productivity improvements depend on obtaining “more crop per drop”); and 

(4) the need for production systems to become more resilient as climate change progresses. 



4 

 

 

8. Agriculture requires a paradigm shift in Punjab to unlock opportunities for future 
growth. Punjab should restore its agricultural competitiveness through innovations that renew 

growth in on-farm productivity and improve efficiency and quality throughout the post-harvest 

value chain. At 0.18% of agricultural GDP, Pakistan’s public expenditures on agricultural 

research are the lowest in a region that is already lagging others. Most agricultural research 

expenditures still go to food grains and other “major” crops (rice, maize, sugarcane, cotton) 

rather than to high-value crops and livestock products. Few resources are dedicated to post-

harvest management, including value addition, quality, food safety, and nutrition. A high 

potential pay-off is associated with redirecting public expenditures and associated policies 

toward the best potential investments for outcomes, with a focus on reforms in wheat, irrigation, 

fertilizers, and marketing, and concomitant investments to improve service delivery, agricultural 

R&D, and insurance. 

 

9. The rural non-farm sector is a neglected source of overall economic growth for 
Punjab. Half of Punjab’s 14.6 million households are classified as agricultural (5.3 million farm 

households and 2 million livestock households). These farm households on average earn almost 

half of their income from non-farm activities, including agriculture value adding and 

agribusiness. But poor access to and high cost of finance, inefficient markets, limited skills, 

insufficient power (electricity), and a weak enabling environment hinder growth in the rural non-

farm sector, including agribusiness. Most rural non-farm employment (77%) remains informal. 

 

10. Lack of funds limits the size of most rural enterprises and 30-40% of them make 
very small fixed investments. Lack of credit at reasonable interest rates and appropriate 

maturities, is also a key constraint for most rural enterprises including agribusinesses. Major 

barriers to institutional credit include lack of collateral, poor financial records and an inability to 

prepare business plans. 

 

11. In assessing sources of economic and agricultural growth, the issues of gender and 
climate change cannot be overlooked. Agriculture in Pakistan suffers from serious gender 

inequality and discrimination. According to the Global Gender Gap Report 2016, Pakistan ranks 

143
rd

 out of 144 countries for women’s economic participation (labor force participation is 22% 

for women, compared to 68% for men). Agriculture is the main source of income for 75% of 

economically active women in Pakistan, yet women are less likely than men to own income-

generating assets (land, equipment), obtain credit, and exercise power in financial or economic 

decisions. Poor access to new farming technologies and techniques, the lack of female extension 

workers, and high illiteracy among rural women further discourage success in agriculture.  

 

12. Punjab agriculture is increasingly feminizing. The share of female employment in 
agriculture has grown steadily as male employment has shifted to more productive sectors. In 

2014, women accounted for 47% of agricultural employment. Anecdotal evidence suggests that 

women work mostly on small farms and engage predominantly in horticultural and livestock 

production. It is vital to recognize how much of this agricultural work is unpaid (67% in 2014 

based on Labor Force Survey data). The Punjab Livestock & Dairy Development Department 

recognizes women’s primary role in livestock production and has invested in improving the 

capacity of female producers (including training and hiring 45,000 young extension assistants 

http://reports.weforum.org/global-gender-gap-report-2016/economies/#economy=PAK


5 

 

who will work on a part time basis, half of them women), but often women’s significant 

contributions to agriculture are poorly reflected in plans and programs. 

 

13. Pakistan’s climate change risk is magnified by growing water scarcity, uncontrolled 
urbanization, and rapid population growth. The Global Climate Risk Index places Pakistan 

among the top 10 most climate-vulnerable countries. Pakistan increasingly experiences droughts 

and cyclones; since 2010 floods have caused damages approaching US$ 14 billion. Climate 

change heightens the pressure to manage water resources with utmost care. The melting Hindu 

Kush–Karakoram–Himalayan glaciers could affect water flows into the Indus River system, with 

implications for energy and food security. Agriculture produces approximately 41% of all GHG 

emissions in Pakistan, mostly through livestock production, and Pakistan has a growing 

population with an increasingly animal-based diet. To continue to reduce poverty and increase 

shared prosperity, Pakistan requires technologies and practices for climate-smart agriculture 

(CSA), which will sustainably improve productivity in agricultural systems (particularly 

livestock systems), enhance resilience, and reduce GHG emissions. 

 

14. The proposed SMART Punjab Program aligns with the World Bank objectives of 
private sector development and inclusion in the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) 

(FY2015–19) and the twin goals of ending extreme poverty and promoting shared 

prosperity. The CPS recognizes that proper water resource management is the next key 

development challenge in Pakistan, particularly Punjab. The SMART Punjab Program 

specifically supports CPS Outcomes 2.2 (Increased Productivity in Farms), 3.1 (Increased 

Financial Inclusion for Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises and Women), 3.2 (Reduced 

Vulnerability for Groups at Risk), 4.1 (Improved Public Resources Management), and 4.4 

(Adoption of Performance and Transparency Mechanisms in Selected Institutions). The Pakistan 

Performance and Learning Review 2015–20 approved by the Board on June 15, 2017 also 

recognizes the need for additional attention to agricultural productivity and creating markets for 

high value commodities. 

 

15. A Program for Results (PforR) is the most suitable instrument for the SMART 
Punjab Program. A coherent package of policy change, institutional strengthening, and 

reorientation of public investments in agriculture is required to attain fundamental improvements 

in the policy regime, stronger institutions in the agricultural sector, and improved post-harvest 

value addition through increased private investment in agribusiness. The PforR instrument 

appears uniquely suited for delivering this kind of package through a clearly articulated results 

chain, while further building the GoPunjab’s capacity and deepen and develop its own systems. 

The US$300 m provided by the PforR will be co-financing a much larger government program 

of US$1.6 billion This PforR mobilizes experience from World Bank Global Practices and 

solution areas (Agriculture, Trade & Competitiveness, Water, Social Development, Environment 

& Natural Resources, disaster risk management/climate change) and the International Finance 

Corporation. Although the PforR is a comparatively new instrument, GoPunjab is familiar with it 

under the Bank-supported Jobs & Competitiveness PforR (P155963). 

 Program Scope 
 

16. The GoPunjab program for agriculture and rural transformation (the “broader 
Government program”) emphasizes enabling productivity, increasing competitiveness in 



6 

 

agricultural marketing and trade, and enhancing resilience as reflected in planning 

documents
1
 and the Medium-Term Development Framework (MTDF). The broader Government 

program is supported by a capital investment for agriculture, livestock, farm to market roads, and 

irrigation of US$3.797 billion over five years (FY18–22), including US$1.145 billion to 

agriculture and livestock. In addition, there is a recurrent budget allocation of US$0.330 billion 

for irrigation M&R and US$0.115 billion for human resources, bringing the size of the 

expenditure framework of the broader Government program to US$4.242 billion. Recall that the 

GoPunjab also spends an estimated US$515 million each year on agricultural subsidies including 

wheat (US$333 million) as part of its recurrent expenditures. 

 

17. The SMART Punjab PforR will support selected parts of the broader Government 
program over a five-year period (Table 2). These selected parts will be referred to as the 

“PforR-supported Program” and consist of 14 out of the Government’s 25 focus areas with a 

focus on increasing crop and livestock productivity, research and extension policy, transition 

towards HVA and CSA, improving the functioning of crop as well as livestock markets 

including food safety, livestock breed and preventive care, agribusiness, and enhancing resilience 

and inclusiveness. 

 

18. There are several GoPunjab investments that are part of the broader Government 
program but not part of the PforR-supported Program. These include the Extension 2.0 

program; agricultural finance, mechanization and education; livestock census, feed, marketing, 

and women programs; government farms and experiment stations; the on-going rural roads 

program; development and rehabilitation of irrigation infrastructure; and on-farm water 

management (including high-efficiency irrigation systems) which is already funded by the Bank 

through the Punjab Irrigated-agriculture Productivity Improvement Project (PIPIP – P125999). 

 

19. The SMART Punjab PforR will help the government promote transformational 
change in the crop and livestock subsectors by focusing on activities contributing to three 

Results Areas: (1) increased on-farm productivity and value of agriculture and livestock; (2) 

increased value addition and competitiveness of agriculture and livestock; and (3) enhanced 

resilience of smallholder farmers to climate change and natural disasters. Each Results Area 

involves a specific combination of policy reforms, institutional strengthening, and public 

investments. 

 

 

        
Table 2: Government of Punjab agriculture program and scope of proposed SMART Punjab Program for Results (PforR) 

Government program Scope of PforR  Activities Responsible department(s) 

Results Area 1: Increased on-farm productivity and value of agriculture and livestock 

(1) Providing farmers with access to 
quality inputs including seed and E-

vouchers for fertilizer 

(1) Targeted subsidy on fertilizer for small 
farmers through E-vouchers 

 

 Develop E-voucher–based subsidy scheme for fertilizer 
and gradually extend the scheme from 21,000 farmers in 

August 2017 to 200,000 smallholders with less than 5 ha 

by 2021 

Agriculture Department  

(2) Improving agriculture and livestock 
research and extension services 

 

(2) – Re-orientation of crop and livestock 
research and extension 

– Increased financial support for crop 
and livestock research 

 Review existing agriculture and livestock research and 
extension systems 

 Approval of new research and extension policy and 
strategy by the Provincial Cabinet 

 Gradual increase of allocation for agriculture and livestock 
research from 0.1% of AgGDP in FY17 to 0.4% in FY22 

through Annual Development Plan (ADP) and recurrent 

budget 

– Agriculture Department  
– Livestock & Dairy 

Development Department 

– Planning & Development 
(P&D) Department 

(3) ICT-based Extension system 2.0 in 
Agriculture, and 9211 Virtual 

Governance System in Livestock 

   

(4) Introduction and promotion of Hi-
Tech Farm Mechanization 

Technologies 

   

(5) Agriculture land improvement and on-
farm water management through high-

efficiency irrigation systems (HEIS) 

   

(6) Strengthening agriculture and 
livestock education 

   

(7) Promoting micro-finance linkages and 
interest-free loans for small farmers 

   

(8) Improving livestock health (8) Paradigm shift in public support to 
animal health from curative to 

preventive healthcare, disease 

surveillance and regular vaccination 

 Establishing separate head of account in the provincial 
budget for curative and preventive health allocations 

 Gradually increasing the ratio of expenditures on curative 
and preventive animal health from 35:65 in FY17 to 10:90 

in FY22 

Livestock & Dairy Development 

Department 

(9) Enhancing productivity and improving 
livestock breeding through targeted 

progeny testing framework 

(9) Improving livestock breeding of 

specific species 
 Increasing stocks of specific animal breeds, including 

Sahiwal cow, Cholistani cow, and Neeli Ravi buffalo 

 Registration and development of verification database 

Livestock & Dairy Development 

Department 

(10) – Rationalizing wheat procurement 
and reducing strategic wheat 

reserves 

– Moving storage of public wheat 

reserves from bags to bulk through 

(10) – Phasing out government wheat 

procurement and reducing strategic 

wheat reserves to 1.0 million metric 

tons (MT) by 2021 

– Construction of steel silos for 1.0 

 GoPunjab to develop and approve plan for withdrawal 
from wheat market and reduce strategic wheat reserves to 

1.0 million MT in 2018 

 Gradual reduction of public wheat stocks to 1.0 million 
MT by 2021  

Food Department 



8 

 

Government program Scope of PforR  Activities Responsible department(s) 

construction of modern bulk storage 

facilities 

million MT  Development of modern silos for bulk storage of 1.0 
million MT of wheat 

(11) Promoting high-value agriculture 
(HVA) 

(11) Transitioning to HVA  Ensure gradual increase in allocation for HVA in the ADP 
from 3.5% of total capital budget for Agriculture (ADP) in 

FY17 to 15% in FY22 

– Agriculture Department 
– P&D Department 

Results Area 2: Increased value addition and competitiveness of agriculture and livestock 

(12) – Developing agricultural and 
livestock value chains 

– Promoting value addition through 

Agribusiness and Innovation Fund 

(12) Providing incentives to agribusiness 

for investments in value addition 

through matching grant scheme, 

training, and capacity building 

 Establishing the Agribusiness and Innovation Fund 

 Notifying the governance structure of the Fund 

 Notifying the Operational Manual for the Fund, including 
the modus operandi of the matching grant component 

 Approval of matching grants 

 Training and capacity building 

Agriculture Department 

(13) Deregulating and improving market 
conditions for livestock 

(13) Improving market conditions for 

livestock through removal of price 

caps on meat and raw milk 

 Excluding meat and milk from GoPunjab’s pricing list for 
Essential Commodities from 2018 onward 

Industries Department 

(14) Improving regulatory framework and 
institutions for agriculture produce 

marketing to enable private sector 

investment 

(14) Modernizing agriculture produce 

markets by regulatory transition from 

the Punjab Agricultural Produce 

Markets Ordinance, 1978 to the 

Punjab Agricultural Marketing 

Regulatory Authority (PAMRA) Act, 

2017 

 Stakeholder consultation on proposed PAMRA Act 

 Approval of PAMRA Act by GoPunjab Cabinet 

 Approval of PAMRA Act by GoPunjab Provincial 
Assembly 

 Enforcement of PAMRA Act 

 Full transition to PAMRA Act by 2021 

Agriculture Department 

(15) Revamping government livestock 
farms and experiment stations 

   

(16) Improving livestock feed systems    

(17) Revamping livestock markets and 
establishing eco marketing zones 

   

(18) Improving food safety (18) Establishment of food safety testing 
infrastructure 

 Establishing and staffing of one (1) provincial food, 
agriculture, and drug testing reference laboratory 

 Establishing and staffing of three (3) regional food testing 
labs 

 Establishing and staffing of nine (9) divisional mobile 
food testing labs 

Food Department 

(19) Poverty alleviation through provision 
of livestock and poultry to women 

   

Results Area 3: Enhanced resilience of smallholder farmers to climate change and natural disasters 

(20) Adapting to climate change for 
enhanced resilience of small farmers 

(20) – Increasing public investment in 

climate-smart agriculture (CSA) 

– Rolling out of agricultural insurance 

scheme 

 Gradual increase of allocation for CSA from 3% of total 
capital budget for agriculture in FY17 to 15% in FY22 

 Preparation of Diagnostic Report for agricultural 
insurance  

– Agriculture Department  
– P&D Department 



9 

 

Government program Scope of PforR  Activities Responsible department(s) 

 Preparation of work plan based on the recommendations 
of Diagnostic Report 

 Piloting of agricultural insurance in two districts in 
Punjab 

 Rolling out of agricultural insurance to all districts 

(21) Refurbishing small dams, barrages, 
rehabilitation and improvement of 

irrigation infrastructure, canal lining, 

improving flood works and irrigation 

drainage systems 

    

(22) Water conservation and institutional 
and regulatory reform 

(22) Improving financial sustainability of 

irrigation maintenance and repair 

(M&R) and governance 

 Modernizing the methods of assessing the area subject to 
water charges (abiana) and improving collection of the 

same 

 Approval and notification of Punjab Water Policy 

 Approval and notification of Punjab Groundwater Act 

 Improving water delivery performance ratio in seven (7) 
specific canals: Muzaffargarh, Abasia Link, Abasia, 

CRBC-III, Rangpur, Rangpur Lower and Upper Jhelum 

Irrigation Department  

(23) Widening and construction of 15,000 
km of rural roads 

   

(24) Enhanced implementation support for 
operationalizing sector plans 

(24) Capacity building and institutional 

strengthening 
 Preparation of annual work plans for training and 

capacity building including training for agribusiness and 

government departments 

 Approval of annual work plans by the government 

 Implementation of annual work plans 

Implementing departments 

(25) Establishing ICT-based M&E systems 
in government departments 

(25) Establishing ICT-based M&E systems 

in Agriculture and Food Departments 
 Establishing of ICT-based M&E systems – Agriculture Department 

– Food Department 
 

PforR geographic scope: Entire Punjab Province 

PforR implementation period: FY18–23 

Total investment plan: US$ 3.8 billion, out of which agriculture and livestock is US$ 1.145 billion, plus US$ 300 million PforR 



10 

 

 Program Development Objective 
 

20. The development objective for the SMART Punjab Program (referred to here as the 
“Program Development Objective” or PDO) is to increase the productivity of crop and livestock 

farmers, improve their climate resilience, and foster agribusiness development in Punjab. Box 3 

lists the PDO-level indicators by Results Area. 

Box 3: PDO-level indicators for the SMART Punjab Program, by Results Area 

Results Area 1—Increased on-farm productivity and value of agriculture and livestock 

PDO Indicator 1: Farmers reached with agricultural assets or services 

PDO Indicator 2: Annual increase in Punjab AgGDP 

Results Area 2—Increased value addition and competitiveness of agriculture and livestock 

PDO Indicator 3: Beneficiaries reached with financial services 

PDO Indicator 4: Number of private wholesale markets and collection centers established 

Results Area 3—Enhanced resilience of smallholder farmers to climate change and natural disasters 

PDO Indicator 5: Number of farmers covered by agricultural insurance 

PDO Indicator 6: Number of farmers adopting CSA packages 

PDO Indicator 7: Improvement in irrigation water service delivery 

 

21. To achieve the PDO, the SMART Punjab PforR supports the implementation of a 
coherent package of policy reforms, institutional change, and reorientation of public 

resources toward productive public investments and smart subsidies. Specific key reforms 

include a shift from universal to targeted subsidies through an E-voucher Scheme for 

smallholders (< 5 hectares), modernization of wheat marketing by phasing out public wheat 

procurement, reducing strategic wheat reserves from 4 million metric tons (MT) to 1 million MT, 

removing distortions in output markets for crops and livestock products, and reforming 

provincial crop and livestock research. SMART Punjab will also improve the financial 

sustainability and efficient use of irrigation systems, promote agribusiness, and improve the 

resilience of producers by designing and implementing an area yield index-based crop insurance 

system, which could potentially leverage access to production credit. 

 

22. Progress toward each of the three Results Areas that contribute to the PDO will be 
measured through 12 Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs). Each DLI involves one or 

more specific actions required for agricultural and rural transformation in Punjab. Each DLI was 

selected based on: (1) the criticality of the activity, output, or outcome in the results chain; (2) 

the need to introduce a financial incentive to deliver the activity, outcome, or output; (3) 

measurability and ease of verification; and (4) the capacity of GoPunjab to achieve the DLIs over 

the period that SMART Punjab is implemented. Table 4 represents the Results Area and brief 

description of DLI.  

 

23. The four DLIs under Results Area 1 (increased on-farm productivity and value of 
agriculture and livestock) will be achieved by supporting SMART reforms in the policy regime 

for agriculture (crops and livestock) and reorienting public expenditures from subsidies toward 

targeted investments to improve crop and livestock productivity.  
 DLI 1: Improving access to quality farm inputs. Better targeting of subsidies, particularly for fertilizers, to 

small-scale farmers would increase overall production; it would also help smallholders to close the yield gap 



11 

 

with larger producers and reduce poverty. This DLI will be measured by tracking the number of small farmers 

(<5 hectares) enrolled in the E-voucher Scheme for fertilizers. 

 DLI 2: Revitalizing provincial crop and livestock research and extension systems. A comprehensive, 
strategically relevant policy for agricultural and livestock research and extension will be designed. Over time, 

funding for public research would increase (measured as the percentage of AgGDP spent on research), along 

with the role of the private sector (measured by the composition of the Punjab Agriculture Research Board and 

the percentage of research grants awarded on a competitive basis).  

 DLI 3: Improving livestock health and breeding. Resources will shift from curative to preventive animal 
healthcare (measured by the ratio of expenditures on preventive and curative medicine) to reduce losses to 

disease. Good breeding stock is essential to improve productivity (measured by the number of breeding animals).  

 DLI 4: Modernizing the wheat marketing system and transitioning to high-value agriculture. Deregulating 
the wheat market would reduce wheat and flour prices and free land for HVA (substantially raising farm incomes 

and employment)—measured by the official notification that GoPunjab is withdrawing from the wheat market, 

subsequent phasing out of government wheat procurement, and the percentage of the Agriculture allocation in 

the ADP to HVA schemes. An additional measure is approval of the Punjab Agriculture Policy, which is 

expected to provide further strategic directions for agricultural policy.  

24. The four DLIs under Results Area 2 (increased value addition and competitiveness 
of agriculture and livestock) will be achieved through policy and institutional reforms, as well 

as by marshalling public support for private investors, mainly through a matching grant scheme. 
 DLI 5: Providing incentives to agribusiness for investment in value addition. SMART Punjab will contribute 

US$ 10 million to an Agribusiness and Innovation Fund to be set up by GoPunjab. The fund will award matching 

grants, with particular consideration for women and young people, on a competitive basis (measured by the 

number of matching grants awarded for agribusiness). 

 DLI 6: Deregulating the livestock sector. Removing meat and raw milk price caps (measured by the 
discontinuation of notification of meat and milk prices) would stimulate production and marketing of better 

quality and safer livestock products, raising producers’ incomes and increasing supplies for urban areas.  

 DLI 7: Modernizing agricultural markets. Reforming wholesale market legislation to allow greater private 
sector participation and enhance transparency (measured by approval and notification of the Punjab Agricultural 

Marketing Regulatory Authority Act) would reduce margins taken by middlemen and commission agents and 

reduce the government’s role in controlling these markets.  

 DLI 8: Improving food safety. Better food and agricultural standards, backed by testing and enforcement 
mechanisms, would improve the quality of food products and public health, and address concerns about 

contaminated or adulterated products. This DLI will be measured by tracking progress in establishing and 

operationalizing a provincial food testing reference laboratory as well as regional and mobile laboratories.  

25. The four DLIs under Results Area 3 (enhanced resilience of smallholder farmers to 
climate change and natural disasters) will be achieved by improving the management and 

sustainability of water resources, designing and extending the coverage of improved agricultural 

insurance products for different kinds of producers, and public investment in CSA. 
 DLI 9: Improving sustainability of irrigation M&R. More equitable access to water and better assessment and 

collection of abiana would encourage producers to use water more efficiently with no increases in overall water 

use, and increase funds for M&R. Adoption of a provincial water policy and groundwater act are important first 

steps in addressing the overexploitation of water, falling groundwater tables, and increasing salinization. This 

DLI would be measured by approval of the Punjab Water Policy, notification of the 2017 Punjab Groundwater 

Act, improvements in the area assessed for abiana, tracking abiana collection rates, and water delivery 

performance ratios (defined as actual amount of water delivered divided by amount delivered as per canal 

design, measured at different points along the canal and relative to the delivery performance at the head of the 

canal). 

 DLI 10: Rolling-out an agricultural insurance system. Crop insurance can help crop producers stabilize 
incomes and sustain resilience when natural events deplete harvests. The World Bank submitted a feasibility 

report detailing a suitable crop insurance scheme to GoPunjab in July 2017. This DLI will be measured by 

official government approval of the report, development and notification of a workplan aligned with the report’s 

recommendations, piloting a crop insurance scheme in two districts, and rolling out the scheme in all districts.  



12 

 

 DLI 11: Increasing public investment in CSA. Enhancing public investment in CSA would help farmers adopt 
new technologies and approaches and reduce potential losses related to climate change, measured by tracking the 

percentage allocation of Agriculture in the ADP for CSA schemes. 

 DLI 12: Communications, capacity building, and monitoring and evaluation (M&E). A substantial 
communications strategy and capacity-building program will mobilize support for agricultural and rural 

transformation among stakeholders into the future. Strengthening M&E capacity in participating departments 

will facilitate monitoring of progress. This DLI will be measured by development and implementation of annual 

capacity development plans. 

 

 Environmental and Social Effects 

26. An Environmental and Social Systems Assessment (ESSA) was prepared for 
SMART Punjab. The assessment incorporates feedback from all stakeholders (governmental, 

non-governmental, producers) and presents recommendations and actions to address 

environmental and social risks associated with the Program. The main actions are included in the 

PAP and some of these constitute dated legal covenants. 

 

27. Environmental risks are Moderate. In general, the expected environment impacts from 
Program activities are assessed as medium to low. Environmental concerns include the 

possibility of increases in use of chemicals due to the shift from conventional crops to HVA; 

institutional capacity for effective environmental management; and environmental compliance 

by micro and small enterprises and food safety testing laboratories. SMART Punjab promulgates 

reforms and related actions that promote balanced fertilizer use, improved water resource 

regulation and efficiency, increased land productivity, agricultural insurance, and CSA. The 

Program is not expected to support large infrastructure except wheat storage facilities which are 

subject to EIA preparation. The Program will involve no expansion of the irrigation network but 

rather promote water resource efficiency. The Program will also not support expansion of 

agricultural land but contribute to increased land productivity. Improvements in animal health 

combined with deregulation of livestock prices would benefit public health. Improvements in 

animal breeding will relieve pressure on rangelands. Crop residue burning and application of 

untreated wastewater for irrigation are important environmental issues related to agriculture but 

not targeted by the proposed Program. 

 

28. Social risks are Substantial. The key social risks include (i) access to program benefits 
for vulnerable and marginalized groups, and (ii) potential social conflict. Smallholders and 

marginalized or vulnerable groups may find accessing some elements of SMART Punjab more 

challenging than other stakeholders — e.g. HVA, the E-voucher scheme, and matching grants. 

These groups may require special support, ranging from technical assistance, training, two-way 

communication, and social mobilization strategies. Phasing out of the wheat procurement system 

while lowering the wheat price thus benefiting the >90% of households who are net wheat 

buyers, may face strong opposition from large wheat growers. The Bank has agreed to provide 

significant technical assistance to assist the Food Department in mitigating social risk associated 

with wheat market reform. Attempts to improve abiana assessment and increase abiana 

collection are likely to meet resistance. Removal of price caps while having beneficial impacts 

on public health and incomes of livestock owners (most of them women), may also negatively 

impact consumption of fresh milk in low income households, unless preceded by an engagement 

strategy in which stakeholders are informed of the benefits of deregulation well in advance and 

milk producers can move towards increasing supply capacity in anticipation of better prices. An 



13 

 

effective conflict mitigation and awareness strategy must be in place to ensure that reforms do 

not lead to marginalization and conflict. No significant land acquisition is envisioned under the 

Program. 

 

29. With regard to grievance redress mechanisms, communities and individuals who 
believe that they are adversely affected as a result of a Bank-supported PforR operation, as 

defined by the applicable policy and procedures, may submit complaints to program grievance 

redress mechanisms or the World Bank Grievance Redress Service. The Grievance Redress 

Service ensures that complaints are promptly reviewed to address pertinent concerns. Affected 

communities and individuals may submit their complaint to the Bank’s independent Inspection 

Panel, which determines whether harm occurred or could occur as a result of the Bank’s non-

compliance with its policies and procedures. Complaints may be submitted at any time after 

concerns have been brought directly to the World Bank's attention, and Bank Management has 

been given an opportunity to respond. To submit complaints to the World Bank’s corporate 

Grievance Redress Service, visit www.worldbank.org/grs. To submit complaints to the World 

Bank Inspection Panel, visit www.inspectionpanel.org.  

 

30. In sum, although the proposed operation will undertake or support no activities of high 
risk from an environmental or social perspective, and although federal and provincial 

environmental and social management systems are appropriate, social management procedures 

require strengthening with respect to gender and the poor, conflict management, and two-way 

public engagement. Certain departments need to strengthen their grievance redress systems. The 

Environmental Section of P&D should be strengthened because P&D, having primary 

responsibility for coordinating and monitoring the Program, is in charge of environmental 

screening. For activities that require an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) or an Initial 

Environmental Examination (IEE), the relevant implementing agencies should coordinate with 

District Environment Officers. 

 Financing 

31. The financing framework for the activities under the three Results Areas includes 
two sources of finance: (i) GoPunjab budget; and (ii) SMART Punjab PforR (Table 3). 

32. In addition, a significant portion out of 
GoPunjab’s spending on subsidies is expected to 

be diverted towards investment in agriculture 

and livestock when the program is fully 

implemented by 2021. The GoPunjab has already 

substantially increased the capital investment 

allocation for agriculture and livestock in 

anticipation of such savings becoming available. 

33. Budgetary allocations for agriculture and livestock are considered sufficient and 
together with acceptable historical budget execution rates provide enough confidence that 

the intended results of the SMART program will be achieved. The government’s expenditure 

framework is sufficiently aligned with the SMART program to achieve the intended results. 

 

Table 3: Financing of SMART program (US$ m) 

Source Amount % of total 

Punjab Government
 

1290 81 

PforR 300 19 

Total Program 

financing 

1,590 100 


 Program Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 

34. The Departments of Agriculture, Livestock & Dairy Development, Food, Irrigation, 
Industries, Finance, and P&D are responsible for implementing the SMART Punjab 

Program. Each department will have a dedicated Program Delivery Unit (PDU) or a Focal 

Person, depending upon the workload. Each PDU will include current departmental staff, 

supplemented by consultants as needed. Some departments have dedicated PDUs; others will 

establish them.
2
 The Member Agriculture (P&D Department) will act as the Program 

Coordinator for SMART Punjab in the Program Coordination and Monitoring Unit (PCMU), 

assisted by the Chief Agriculture as Deputy Manager. The PCMU which has been established 

under the Punjab Resource Management Program in the P&D Department and also coordinates 

the Jobs & Competitiveness PforR, will coordinate with the seven implementing agencies, 

monitor and evaluate implementation, and report to the Bank in accordance with the terms and 

conditions of the Financing and Program Agreements. It will consolidate reports of all 

implementing agencies and communicate them to the Bank; to do so, it will develop a standard 

template for monitoring and reporting progress. The PCMU will also coordinate with the 

Independent Verification Agency for verifying achievement of DLIs and reporting, and will 

establish an Assignment Account to manage technical assistance funding supported by the 

PforR. The Finance and P&D Departments will ensure that PforR resources are adequately 

budgeted for in their annual budget and disbursed in line with the expenditure framework to 

accomplish the DLIs.   

 

35. A SMART Steering Committee (SC) was established in September 2016. The SC has 
played a constructive role throughout preparation, especially in guiding and confirming policy 

reforms and institutional changes. Headed by the Chief Minister, Punjab, it includes 

administrative heads from all implementing agencies, other key stakeholders, and representatives 

from the Bank (including the Senior Director and Country Director) as observers. The SC will 

provide strategic guidance and direction, facilitate coordination between the seven implementing 

agencies, and oversee progress in all three Results Areas and DLIs on a quarterly basis as 

reported by the PCMU. To ensure effective implementation, the SC may refer any major 

implementation challenge or matter requiring a policy decision for guidance to the three high-

level committees (Secretaries’ Committee, Commissioners’ Conference, and DCO Committee) 

chaired by the Chief Secretary. 

 

36. SMART Punjab will coordinate and collaborate with other programs. It will create 
synergies with Bank projects in Punjab—including the Punjab Irrigated-agriculture Productivity 

Improvement Project (PIPIP) and the Jobs & Competitiveness PforR (P155963)—and operations 

of development partners.
3
 National entities with supporting roles include: (1) the Auditor 

                                                 
2
 The Agriculture Delivery Unit (ADU) will act as PDU in the Agriculture Department; the Statistical Planning and Reform Unit will act as PDU 

in the Irrigation Department; and the Food and Livestock & Dairy Development Departments will establish PDUs or (in the case of the Industries 

and Finance Departments) Focal Persons before appraisal. At a minimum, PDUs will be staffed by a Procurement Specialist, Financial Specialist, 

Communications Specialist, M&E Specialist, and Internal Audit Specialist, aside from the appropriate technical specialists. PDUs are responsible 
for procurement (tender documents, advertising, bid evaluation and award of contracts), FM, internal audit, communications, M&E, and 

environmental and social management. PDUs will report as required to the PCMU, including: (1) an annual investment plan for their department; 

(2) Terms of reference (ToRs) for consultancy services; (3) an annual procurement plan; (4) reports on implementation progress for each DLI 
under the Program; (5) Program Financial Statements, including procurement, if any; (6) internal audit reports; and (7) implementation of the 

communications strategy. 
3
 For example, the Food and Agriculture Organization (with the recently approved Technical Cooperation Project—Support for the formulation 

of projects for Strengthening Markets and Rural Transformation (SMART) Initiatives in Punjab, Pakistan), USAID (particularly the Punjab 



16 

 

General of Pakistan for the annual external audit of the Program; (2) the Punjab Public 

Procurement Regulatory Authority, which will provide technical guidance on public 

procurement and monitor compliance with procurement standards and practices; and (3) the 

National Accountability Bureau, which will investigate complaints on fraud and corruption (if 

any) relating to the Program. 

 

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Henan Green Agriculture Finance Fund (P169758) 

 
 

  
May 22, 2019 Page 1 of 9  

 

 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document (PID) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 10-Apr-2019 | Report No: PIDC26846 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

China P169758  Henan Green 
Agriculture Finance 
Fund (P169758) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC Oct 15, 2019 Mar 26, 2020 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Finance Henan Agriculture 
Development Financing 
Investment Corporation 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The proposed objective of the project is to strengthen the green agriculture initiatives in Henan. 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 400.00 

Total Financing 400.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 200.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) 200.00 

Non-World Bank Group Financing 

     Other Sources 200.00 

          Borrowing Agency 200.00 

   
 


Environmental and Social Risk Classification Concept Review Decision 

Substantial  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

 
Since start of the reforms China has embarked successful rural transformation, which has stimulated economic growth 
and urbanization. On the other hand, broad-based economic growth, urbanization and industrialization have further 
enhanced rural transformation.  Over the last two decades over 200 million rural people have moved to urban areas to 
engage in labor-intensive industrial jobs.  Today about 58 percent of the Chinese population lives in urban areas, up from 
just 16 percent in 1960.  More than one billion Chinese – that is, 70 percent of the projected 1.5 billion population – are 
expected to live in urban areas by 2030.  Urbanization will increase aggregate demand for food as urban population 
consume more higher value products, especially meat, dairy, fruits and vegetables, as well as processed food.  
 
However, urbanization is also expected to increase the pressures on the agri-food systems in China through increasing gap 
between food demand and environmental supply limits. Addressing the latter requires managing pressures on intensive 
margins to increase productivity per unit of land, and on extensive margin to produce more high value food.  The largest 
environmental pressures come from primary agricultural production stage, which is dominated by large number of small-
scale production units. China is the world’s largest producers and user of synthetic nitrogenous fertilizer, both on an 
absolute and per hectare basis.  The consumption of agricultural fertilizers in China was 58 million tons in 2017.  Grain 
production is the leading user of chemical fertilizers at aggregate level, although the highest rates of fertilizer application 
generally occur in fruit and vegetable production. It has been estimated that only around 25% of nitrogen is taken up by 
crops in China compared to 50% in Europe and almost 70% in the U.S. and Canada, with the remainder running off into 
water sources or entering the air as nitrous oxide.  Ammonia emissions from inefficient use of N fertilizers contribute 
around 10% of the air pollution (PM2.5) over the North China Plain and Pearl and Yangtze River Deltas. According to the 
first census on national pollution source in 2010, Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD), Total Nitrogen (TN) and Total 
Phosphorus (TP) are major sources of pollutants from agriculture sector. While COD mainly comes from livestock sector, 
accounting for 96% the total emissions, TN and TP are primarily attributable to overuse of fertilizers in crop sector, 
accounting for 38% and 59% of the total emissions. The consumption of pesticides in China was about 1.8 million tons per 
year in 2015, and it has been estimated that only about 30% of it was utilized by crops. Soil and water pollution are also 
threat to the environment and food safety.  While industrial pollution is a leading source of soil and water contamination, 
the overuse of pesticides is also a significant contributor (about 10 million hectares of farmland are affected by overuse 
of pesticides). Heavy use of pesticides has been especially common in rice, vegetable, and tea production. Addressing 
above environmental management and pollution control in agriculture, requires thus a simultaneous attention on the 
modernization of farming systems, while meeting increasing consumer demand for nutrition, high quality and safe food.  
 
Chinese agriculture is also the largest producer of agriculture related greenhouse gases (GHGs) in the world, accounting 
for about 13% of total global agricultural GHG emissions. Overall, primary agriculture sector accounted for about 11% of 



China’s GHG emissions - third largest source of GHGs in China after energy and industry. Agriculture is major source of 
methane (from rice and livestock manure) and nitrous oxide (from manure and use of N fertilizers). Livestock, particularly 
cattle and pig rearing, is single largest sub-sector contributing to nearly 15.5 percent of total human induced GHG 
emissions in the country. There is evidence that climate change itself is contributing to increasing pressures on Chinese 
food production systems and already limited water and land resources. Further, climate change is also expected to 
exacerbate exposure of agricultural produce to pathogens and toxins that will increase the risk of food borne diseases. 
 
Henan is an important agricultural province in China. It is the largest producer of livestock and the second largest producer 
of grains (6.8 million ha of arable land) in China. It produces also a significant quantities of oil crops, fruits and vegetables.  
The total manure discharges from livestock industry has risen since 1990, reaching about 253 million tons per year. The 
increase is largely contributed to the rapid growth of pig and cattle production since 1990s as a response to increasing 
demand for meat. Pork industry accounts for 50.1% of the total manure discharges, followed by cattle 28.1%, and poultry 
with 12.6%. The consumption of pesticides in Henan was 128,700 tons in 2015 (the second largest after Shandong 
province), while the consumption of chemical fertilizers reached 7.06 million tons in 2017 (the largest in China). Grains, 
fruits and vegetables are the major users of fertilizers, accounting for 82.8% of total crop fertilizer consumptions.  Total 
COD discharges in Henan were 10.2 million tons, most of which come from livestock sector, while crop sector mas a major 
contributor of TN with 93,500 tons and TP discharges with 5,300 tons (NBS, 2017). Total GHG emissions from agriculture 
in Henan increased from 16.6 million tons in 1999 to 18 million tons in 2015 (9%).  Livestock sector was the biggest 
contributor to GHG emissions, followed by fertilizer use and soil management.  Henan has thus a good potential to reduce 
environmental footprint from agriculture (both at national level and globally) and contribute to the production of safe, 
high quality and nutritious food. The proposed project aims to support the transformation of Henan agriculture sector 
towards more resource-efficient, environmentally sustainable, and climate smart development path, which is expected to 
reduce agriculture’s environmental footprint and increase agri-food safety. 
 

Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
Transformation of Chinese agri-food systems towards more sustainable development path requires massive financing 
from financial institutions (both public and private) and private sector (e.g. agribusinesses, capital funds, etc.). However, 
financial sector institutions in China have lent a disproportionately lower share of their loan portfolios to agriculture, 
compared to agriculture sector’s share of GDP. The growth and deepening of agriculture finance markets is constrained 
by a variety of factors which include: (i) low profitability, (ii) collateral requirements, (iii) covariance of production, market, 
and price risks and absence of adequate market-based instruments to manage risks, (iv) fragmentation of value chains, (v) 
high perception of risks, etc.  
 
China has put in place policy environment which is conducive for the development of green agriculture financing to 
encourage transformation of its agri-food systems towards more sustainable development path. In 2018, the Government 
formulated its Rural Revitalization Strategy (RRS) which aims to create more modern and resource efficient production 
structures, while ensuring environmental sustainability and safety of agri-produce.  Promoting green agriculture is an 
important aspect of the RRS which provides the package of policies and incentives to encourage higher-quality agricultural 
development, strengthening environmental protection and pollution control in rural areas, while ensuring the quality of 
poverty-reduction efforts.  Other key goals of Government’s sustainable agriculture development plans include: (i) zero 
growth of chemical fertilizers and pesticides by 2020; (ii) control of methane emissions from rice fields and nitrous oxide 
emissions from farmland; and (iii) adoption of recyclable agricultural systems that includes reutilization of animal waste. 
These efforts also aim improved resource use efficiency (water, energy, natural resources) and improved environmental 
governance. The structural changes promoted through above policies, such as consolidation of livestock industry and 
transfer of farm land to more professional entities (agribusinesses, farmer cooperatives, etc.), better access to new 

 

technologies, and increasing resilience of production systems through more professional management practices could 
harbinger new opportunities for access to agriculture finance.  
 
China introduced Green Credit Policy in 2007 to encourage financial institutions to offer green credit for environmental 
protection, emission reduction, and energy conservation projects. However, little progress has been made in green 
agriculture finance, largely due lack of clarity in the definition of what constitutes “green”, the incipient nature of many 
potential innovations (e.g. enhanced efficiency fertilizers, etc.), and risk aversion towards the sector. Only few banks 
currently engage in green agricultural finance which is quite narrowly defined to cover organic agriculture and livestock, 
seed production, and animal breeding. The aggregate national level green finance portfolio is about $1.2 trillion of green 
credit and $ 89 billion in green bonds, most which has gone to energy, urban water, transport and industrial sectors where 
commercial investments options and technologies are relatively well defined. Total green finance for agriculture is about 
$9 billion or only 0.4% from aggregate national green finance.  Banks with larger loan portfolios in green agricultural credit 
are Agricultural Bank of China, Agricultural Development Bank and Postal Savings Bank.   
 
There are signs of emerging policy guidance for streamlining green financing for agriculture in China.  In 2018, the Ministry 
of Agriculture and Rural Affairs (MARA) issued the Notice on the Technical Guide for Green Agriculture Development 
(2018-2030) outlining range of investments to accelerate the pace of green input creation, improve green technology 
supply, establish green development system and low carbon model, build or enhance green standards system, formulate 
the monitoring and early warning mechanism of agricultural resources, environment and ecology. However, on the policy 
side, there are currently little incentives for financial institutions to increase their lending for green agriculture investments 
beyond showing adherence with the PBOC green finance guidelines and counting towards their CSR activities.   
 
The demand of agriculture and agribusiness for green financing will be driven either by commercial opportunities or by 
stringent regulations. Some investments that increase the environmental efficiency of agriculture and agri-processing such 
as investments in precision agriculture or investments in energy efficient processing facilities are profitable on their own 
right, requiring mainly technical assistance and access to financing to be adopted by farms and firms.   On the other end, 
some environmentally necessary investments such as those related to the treatment of residual waste, water pollutants 
and livestock manure do not generate significant private income, although they significantly contribute to public welfare. 
The adoption of such investments thus depends on the existence of adequate regulations and enforcement mechanisms 
to ensure that they are adopted. It is expected that the 14th 5YP will bring increased push for more stringent enforcement 
of environmental and pollution control regulations, including agriculture. This should generate important new policy 
incentives to foster the demand for environmentally sustainable growth models and investments. 
 
Increasing demand for high quality, nutritious and safe food has created renewed private sector interest to invest in 
Chinese agri-food sector, which provides scope to harness green agriculture finance.  This renewed interest is creating 
new opportunities for financial institutions which would need to develop the right skills to capture opportunities in 
investing in green agriculture.  At the same time, emerging evidence obtained from CBRC shows that while agricultural 
loan NPLs in China are around 7%, NPLs for organic agriculture (one type of green agriculture) are only 3.5% indicating 
that lending to green agriculture could potentially be less risky.  There is thus an opportunity to create new  financial 
markets for agriculture green investments by equipping financial institutions with global knowledge of green agriculture 
finance standards, financing instruments, innovative risk measurement and control systems, and providing them tools to 
build a pipeline of bankable green agricultural investments for financing which could enhance their capacity and risk-
taking ability for expanding  green finance to agriculture sector in China over coming years.    
 

 

Relationship to CPF 
 
The proposed Henan Green Agriculture Financing Fund Project is fully aligned with the World Bank’s Country Partnership 
Strategy (Report 67566-CN) for China (FY2013–16), discussed by the Board on November 6, 2012 and the new CPF under 
preparation consistent under its expected objective of demonstrating sustainable agriculture practices and improving food 
system quality and safety.  The relevant criteria from capital increase paper which apply to the proposed project include:  
 

• Strengthening of institutional capacities for the graduation (development of the capacity to identify and manage 
green agriculture investments); 

• Delivering regional and global public goods (e.g., financing climate smart agriculture, climate change mitigation or 
adaptation in agriculture, etc.); and 

• Introducing innovative institutional and technical solutions to emerging challenges that can provide lessons for 
other middle-income countries (e.g., financing climate smart agriculture and pollution control, etc.).  

 
The project places emphasis on institutional and financing innovations for inclusive and green growth agenda contributing 
to enhanced economic opportunities in rural areas, addressing environmental pollution and climate change under the CPF 
pillar of promoting more inclusive development. Further, the proposed project would have the potential for generating 
high climate co-benefits and contributing to the achievement of China’s agriculture-related Nationally Determined 
Commitments (NDCs) under the Paris Agreement. 
 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
The proposed objective of the project is to strengthen the green agriculture initiatives in Henan.  
 
Key Results (From PCN) 

 
• Increased volume and value of green agriculture investments (particularly attracting more social capital); 
• Increased awareness among key stakeholders about green agriculture investment opportunities; and 
• Enhanced institutional capacity for managing green investments portfolio. 
 
D. Concept Description 

 
The selected lending instrument is an Intermediary Financing (FI). The proposed IBRD funding is $200 million, with at least 
same amount being raised from social capital and other funding sources. The proposed project will have two components, 
the first one providing the funding for investments in eligible green agriculture sub-projects and the second one providing 
technical assistance.   
 
Component 1: Green Agriculture Fund (GAF). The project will establish a dedicated investment facility to demonstrate the 
viability of a financing vehicle in Henan, which will operate in a transparent manner conforming to market principles on 
sustainable basis. This facility will provide direct support to eligible firms with ‘patient capital’ using ‘blended finance 
options’. Direct investments by GAF will aim to leverage to the extent possible private and commercial capital from social 
capital partners (i.e. local commercial banks, private investment firms and financial institutions).  
 
 
Component 2: Technical Assistance (IBRD financing $20 million). The project will support the Henan Agriculture 
Development Financing Investment Corporation (HADFIC) and its social capital partners in building their institutional 

 

capacity in managing green agriculture investment cycle including: pipeline development, investment policies, 
implementation guidelines and monitoring mechanisms meeting prudential and regulatory requirements under the 
framework for green financial system.  
    
 
Legal Operational Policies                                  Triggered? 

Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50 No 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60 No 

 
Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts 

 
Overall, the project will bring about positive environmental and social benefits in terms of reducing the pollution from 
agricultural productions, reducing the GHG emissions, and reducing health risk for consumers by improving the food 
safety and quality. As the project will involve small or medium size civil works for processing and/or storage facilities, the 
potential environmental impacts in construction phase may include the dust, noise, solid waste, and wastewater, and 
social disturbance, such as the traffic safety. Other potential adverse environmental impacts could include noise, dust, 
solid waste, wastewater generated from the manufacturing of equipment, high-efficiency fertilizers and biocides as well 
as processing of agro-products; occupational health concern regarding the mechanical damage by operating machine 
tools, inhaling fine particles in processing of agro-products, and toxicity by production, storage and use of biocides which 
is albeit low toxic to human beings. The probability for such risks is very low, and the impacts are small given their size. In 
addition, the use of multi-resistant varieties will cause a concern on both environemntal and social aspects. However, the 
specific information is not clear for these varieties at current concept stage. The criteria for assessing and excluding any 
invasive species and screening for risk categorization will be developed in the ESMS. The potential environmental 
impacts are mostly temporary, predictable and/or reversible, and the nature of the Project does not preclude the 
possibility of avoiding or reversing them. They are medium in magnitude and/or in spatial extent. These adverse impacts 
can be readily and reliably managed through the environmental mitigation hierarchy. As per the Environmental and 
Social Directive, the environmental risk for this project is classified as Substantial.  
 
The main social risks and impacts for the project are related to (a) land acquisition and resettlement for establishing 
facilities and structures by targeted enterprises, (b) leasing of land use rights (LUR) and land consolidation for 
appropriate-scale farming, (c) management of direct workers and primary supplier workers, and (d) community health 
and safety and (e) social implications (positive, negative or perceived) relating use of multi-resistant varieties. Land 
acquisition and resettlement would happen upfront before determination of the sub-projects; however, documentation 
should be provided to ensure compliance with national regulations. According to ESS9, the FIs will categorize any sub-
project which involves resettlement as High or Substantial risk (unless the risks or impacts of such resettlement are 
minor). Leasing of LUR, different from involuntary land acquisition and resettlement, is carried out at village level and 
Henan has put in place relatively sound laws and regulations to facilitate this process. However, the level of regulation 
enforcement could vary from one village to another in terms of public consultation, and arrangement of rental 
payments. Adequacy of current system is subject to further assessment. The project would introduce a few direct 
workers and the number of primary supplier workers, which could potentially increase the risks related to working 
conditions and community health and safety, if not well managed. Use of multi-resistant varieties would induce social 
implications which will be further assessed when “green agriculture” is defined under this project and there are more 
information on project activities. Based on possible social risks associated with the leasing of LUR and until relevant 
national and provincial systems and practices governing such activities are fully assessed, the overall social risk of the 



























































World Bank Document



COMBINED PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENTS / INTEGRATED 
SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET (PID/ISDS)  

CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: PIDISDSC17964

Date Prepared/Updated: 18-Jul-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION

  A.  Basic Project Data

Country: India Project ID: P158522
Parent 
Project ID 
(if any):

Project Name: Tamil Nadu Irrigated Agriculture Modernization Project (P158522)
Region: SOUTH ASIA
Estimated 
Appraisal Date:

15-Feb-2017 Estimated 
Board Date:

15-Mar-2017

Practice Area
(Lead):

Agriculture Lending 
Instrument:

Investment Project Financing

Borrower(s): Republic of India
Implementing 
Agency:

Water Resources Organization, Public Works Department, GoTN

Financing (in USD Million)
Financing Source Amount
Borrower 136.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 318.00
Total Project Cost 454.00

Environmental 
Category:

A - Full Assessment

Concept 
Review 
Decision:

Track II - The review did authorize the preparation to continue

Is this a 
Repeater 
project?

No

Other Decision 
(as needed):

The Decision Review Meeting discussed the risk ratings of the project and 
agreed to the proposed overall project risk rating of Moderate.  The review 
meeting discussed project safeguard issues and agreed with the 
proposed classification as Category A in view of potential issues related to dam 
safety, increased pesticides and fertilizer usage. The safeguard responsibility will 
remain with RSA.

B. Introduction and Context

Country Context
India in recent years witnessed impressive economic growth and poverty alleviation. During the 
past decade, India's Gross Domestic Product (GDP) grew at 7.6% annually and poverty incidence 
reduced on average by 1.5 percentage points per year during 2005-10. Also,improvements in key 
development indicators have been remarkable: life expectancy increased from 31 years in 1947 to 
68 years in 2015 and adult literacy increased from 18% in 1951 to 71% in 2015. 
 
Despite such impressive progress in economic growth, poverty alleviation, and improved human 
development indicators, India remains home to 263 million poor people (80% of whom reside in 
rural areas) living on less than US$1.90/day and the country is still at the bottom of the group of 
middle-income countries. To address these challenges, the Government of India (GoI) through its 
12th Five-Year Plan (FY2013-17) put forward an ambitious goal for economic growth, poverty 
reduction, job creation, and environmental management. The plan foresees during this period an 
annual GDP growth of 8.2%, a reduction in poverty rate by 10 percentage points, and 50 million 
of new jobs.
Sectoral and Institutional Context
Tamil Nadu is the second largest state economy in India with one of fastest growth rates: over the 
past three years its Gross State Domestic Product (GSDP) grew at 9.2% per annum.  The average 
annual per capita income of the state is around INR 61,500 (at 2010/2011constant prices), which 
is around 42% higher than the national average. Tamil Nadu is also the most urbanized state in 
India with around 48% of population living in cities. 
 
Agriculture and allied sectors in Tamil Nadu account for 12% of the state's GSDP. About 40% of 
state's population is dependent on agriculture for their employment and more than two thirds of 
state's poor people live in rural areas and are engaged in predominately in agriculture activities. 
The majority of farmers are small and marginal with average family landholdings of 0.83 ha. The 
main crops are rice, maize, pulses, groundnut, sugar cane, vegetables, and banana. Rice dominates 
both consumption and agriculture production accounting for 34% of total gross cropped area and 
60% of irrigated area. Due to seasonality and scarcity of water supply, cultivation is mostly 
limited to only one crop per plot per year. 
 
Tamil Nadu is one of the driest and most water stressed states of India with average annual 
rainfall of 925 millimeters, which is well below the national average of 1,200 millimeters. Per 
capita availability of water in the state is around 900 cubic meters a year compared with the 
national average of 2,100 cubic meters.  The agriculture sector in Tamil Nadu is highly exposed 
to climatic risks, especially droughts, floods, cyclones, and erratic rainfall, which have frequently 
affected the performance of agricultural sector in the past. The dry season lasts five months 
(January through May) even in good years, and droughts occur in three out of ten years.  Climate 
change is likely to exacerbate the vulnerability of agricultural sector with increasing erratic 
weather patterns and climatic shifts.  A clear example is the consequence of devastating floods 
that occurred in November-December 2015, which severely damaged irrigation infrastructures in 
three districts and affected Chennai, the capital city of Tamil Nadu as well. 
 
The state is heavily dependent on irrigated agriculture and over the years an impressive inventory 
of irrigation and water infrastructure was built in the state. There are 89 major reservoirs, 39,000 
tanks (traditional water harvesting structures) and 3 million wells. Irrigated agriculture is the 


largest consumer of water in the State accounting for 75% of total water usage. About 3 million 
ha of land (54% of total crop land) is under irrigation with different sources of water: 30% of total 
irrigated area is under canal irrigation, 21% is under tank irrigation, and 49% is irrigated by wells. 
 
In recent years the state's agriculture sector has grown modestly at less than 3% per annum 
compared with 6-9% growth of the state's economy. The productivity of major crops has largely 
stagnated:  the current average yields of rice and maize are slightly higher than the national 
average, the average yields of vegetables, cotton, and pulses are lower than the national average. 
To unlock the full potential of agriculture sector growth, there is a strong need for policies and 
programs to focus on: (i) improvement of water use efficiency; (ii) intensification of cropping 
systems and diversification into high value crops; (iii) enhancement of post-harvest management 
and value addition; and (iv) improvement of the resilience of agriculture system in order to deal 
with increasing threats of climate change. 
 
The Bank-supported Tamil Nadu Irrigated Agriculture Modernization and Water-Bodies 
Restoration and Management Project (TN IAMWARMP), which was concluded in 2015, has had 
a significant development impact in the state by modernizing irrigation infrastructure, improving 
water use efficiency, enhancing yields and productivity of agriculture, livestock and fisheries, and 
promoting diversification to high value crops. It also supported the introduction of participatory 
irrigation management in the state and the establishment of water users associations (WUAs). 
Under the project 5,300 tanks and irrigation supply canals were rehabilitated and modernized, and 
2,800 WUAs were established resulting in increases of fully irrigated areas by 39% and water 
conveyance efficiency by more than 30%. The total area under high value crop was also doubled. 
Moreover, the project helped the state improve its water resource planning and implementation 
capacities.  These achievements and lessons learned during implementation of TN IAMWARMP 
serve as a good base for further enhancing the performance of irrigated agriculture in the state 
through the proposed project.
Relationship to CAS/CPS/CPF
The proposed project is fully consistent with the India Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for 
FY2013-17 to support poverty reduction and shared prosperity in India. In line with the pillar for 
Transformation, the project promotes inclusive rural growth, development and dissemination of 
new agricultural technologies, climate-resilient agriculture, enhanced market linkages for small 
and marginal farmers, and improved water and natural resource management. Further the 
proposed project will have a positive impact in terms of environmental protection, and reduced 
greenhouse gas emissions by disseminating high efficiency irrigation systems, and promoting 
diversification into high value crops, which significantly reduce water consumption. 
 
The proposed project will contribute to the Inclusion pillar of CSP by enhancing the livelihoods 
of small and marginal farmers through crop diversification, enhanced market access, and also by 
improving disaster management abilities of GoTN and the local communities through the 
enhanced design and restoration of irrigation infrastructure with better flood protection features.

C.  Proposed Development Objective(s)

Proposed Development Objective(s) (From PCN)
To enhance agriculture productivity, water use efficiency, climate resilience of irrigated 
agriculture and increase post-harvest value-addition for smallholder farmers and agro-
entrepreneurs in Tamil Nadu. 

The project beneficiaries are farmers, including small and marginal, water users associations, 
farmer producer organizations, and other entrepreneurs.

Key Results (From PCN)
The key project indicators (KPI) will be: 
 
(i) Increase in water use efficiency (resilience, water use efficiency); 
(ii) Increase in agricultural productivity (productivity); 
(iii) Increase in areas cultivated by non-paddy crops (diversification and value added);  
(iv) Adoption of resilient technologies and practices (resilience); and  
(v) Total number of project beneficiaries (including number of female beneficiaries).

D.  Concept Description

The design of the proposed project will include innovative aspects that build on lessons learned 
from TN IAMWARMP and also reflect the evolving needs of the state when it comes to 
modernization of irrigated agriculture. These include improved designs of irrigation 
infrastructure, stronger focus on the demand-side of irrigation with aim to improve water-use 
efficiency, further advances in agricultural diversification, agri-entrepreneurship, and movement 
toward climate resilient agriculture with relevant agriculture-water related investments and 
substantial improvements of participatory irrigation management practices by beneficiaries.  
Improved resilience of agriculture production systems is expected to be achieved under the 
project through e.g. higher water use efficiency, increased adoption of sustainable technologies 
and practices, and enhanced diversification of production systems. Activities under the project 
will be duly complimented by use of innovative ICT and new media technologies for enhanced 
efficiencies and faster turnaround time for delivering services to project beneficiaries.  As 
requested by GoTN, the project is also expected to finance on-retroactive basis, rehabilitation and 
modernization of tanks and other irrigation infrastructures damaged by the flooding of 
November/-December 2015 floods in three districts of Tamil Nadu. 
 
The total project cost is expected to be around US$454 million, of which the Bank will finance 
$318 million (70% of total project cost) and the GoTN will finance US$ 136 million (30% of total 
project cost). The project activities will cover the entire state of Tamil Nadu (its individual 
components will cover different geographic areas) and will be implemented over seven year 
period.    The project activities would be grouped into three main components: (i) Agriculture 
Water Management; (ii) Agriculture Productivity Enhancement, Diversification, and Value 
Addition; and (iii) Project Management Support. The individual components are summarized 
below: 
 
Component A: Irrigation and Water Management 
 
This component addresses irrigation and water management in a holistic fashion by covering both 
supply and demand simultaneously.  It consists of four inter-related sub-components, including: 
(i) institutional strengthening and capacity building of water management; (ii) irrigation systems 
modernization; (iii) participatory irrigation management;   and (iv) converged service delivery at 
the grass-root level.     
 
Sub-component A.1: Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building of Water Management 
 


This subcomponent aims to assist the GoTN in addressing the pressing water sector issues, 
including: (i) need for integrated water resources planning, bulk water allocations  and 
management in a basin context, involving all water using sub-sectors to improve the efficiency 
and productivity of limited water resources; (ii) need to improve the knowledge base and 
instruments; (iii) need to improve the financial sustainability of water sector assets, and cost 
effective reliable service delivery; and (iv) need to promote participatory irrigation service 
management. These will be done through strengthening of capacities for enhancing policy 
analysis and implementation, knowledge base, analytical capacity, staff mobility, filling of subject 
matter specialists/experts gap, technology induction, office facilities, and related technical/
logistical support.  
 
Sub-component A.2: Irrigation Systems Modernization 
 
This sub-component will modernize irrigation infrastructures, including tanks, and irrigation 
canals.  The modernization of irrigation infrastructure will focus on improving the bulk water 
delivery to irrigation systems through rehabilitation and modernization of approximately 4,800 
tanks, and 477 anicuts in 66 sub-basins out of total 127 sub-basins.  Activities under this sub-
component will be carried out based on individual sub-basin development plans specifically 
developed and tailored to local conditions, and will aim to revive traditional water bodies (tanks) 
that are either part of or outside the state➢❨ s irrigation systems network.  The sub-component 
will finance civil works, equipment, consultancies, training and incremental operational costs 
associated with modernization of the schemes, and the work will be carried out by WRD, and as 
required  with direct involvements of WUAs.  
 
Sub-component A.3:Participatory irrigation Management 
 
This sub-component aims to integrate participatory irrigation management (PIM) practices into 
the operations of the Water Resource Department as a distinct unit within the Department in order 
to improve Operation and Maintenance (O&M) of modernized and rehabilitated irrigation 
infrastructures.  The sub-component will assist in strengthening and establishing new water users 
associations (WUAs), including operationalizing WUAs to undertake O&M, water distribution, 
and asset rehabilitation works within their command areas.  
 
Sub-component A.4: Converged Service Delivery at Grass-Root Level 
 
For effective service delivery to farmers, all departments involved in the water sector need to 
collaborate. This convergence for service delivery will be promoted through establishing and 
strengthening Single Window Information and Knowledge Centers (SWIKCs), and facilitating 
Community Collaborative Water Management (CCWM) at village level. CCWM will sensitize 
local communities about the water situation and enable them to draw community level action 
plans for sustainable use of water in their villages for all water users. 
 
The overall component will be supported by information and communication technology (ICT) 
Innovative ICT and new media solutions coupled with robust monitoring and evaluation systems 
for real time submission of information related to the project activities will be designed, 
developed and deployed under Component A in addition to leveraging on the existing ICT 
solutions developed during IAMWARM.  In particular, specific ICT interventions to be 
undertaken under this components will be:  (i) Operationalization and enhancement of Enterprise 


Information Managemenget System platform developed under IAMWARMP through retroactive 
financing and (ii) Implementation of Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition systems based 
upon sensors based inputs for automation of at least one canal network. 
 
Component B: Agriculture Productivity Enhancement, Diversification, and Value Addition 
 
The interventions of this component are aimed at increasing productivity, promoting 
diversification of agriculture production systems, and improving farmers➢❨  access to markets in 
project sub-basins. The component will adopt climate-resilient approaches that promote 
sustainable use of land and water resources. The component will consist of two sub-components:  
(i) sustainable intensification and diversification of agriculture production systems; and (ii) 
marketing, value-addition and post-harvest management.  
 
Sub-component B.1: Sustainable intensification and diversification of agriculture production 
systems 
 
Sustainable intensification and diversification of agriculture production systems will be achieved 
through a large scale program of awareness creation and on-farm demonstrations on new seeds 
and promising technologies, capacity building and training activities; and by leveraging private 
sector investments in water management and farm mechanization.  Climate risk resilience will be 
built into crop and horticulture production systems by:  (a) promoting cultivation of short 
duration, high yielding, drought-, pest- and disease-tolerant crops/varieties of pulses, maize, 
oilseeds, millets, vegetables and fruits; (b) installation of micro irrigation drip and fertigation 
systems; and (c) promoting water saving agronomic practices like the system of rice 
intensification and the sustainable sugarcane initiative.  For linking production with market 
demand, farmers will be supported and trained to grow those crops and commodities for which 
significant market demand exists, including a shift from paddy to crops with low water 
consumption in which Tamil Nadu is deficient.  ICT-based leveraged activities will be introduced 
like E-velanmai, Farmer Cropping Advisory.  
 
Animal husbandry activities will aim at improving production potentials of livestock through 
adoption of sustainable and climate resilient animal husbandry practices (including fodder 
cultivation) technologies, strengthening of input, extension, and service delivery systems, 
establishing ICT based MIS and infrastructure strengthening and capacity building in breeding, 
disease surveillance and food safety. 
 
Fisheries activities will aim at improving fish productivity mainly in reservoirs, tanks and ponds 
through demonstration of climate resilient modern technology packages such as: short production 
cycle models involving improved fast growing fish varieties; improved reservoir fisheries 
management; introduction of suitable formulated fish feed using locally available ingredients; 
promotion of innovative technologies such as cage fish culture and pen fish farming in an 
environmentally sustainable manner; and facilitation of suitable market linkages for better access 
to markets.   
 
Related to above activities, the project will finance the incremental requirements of contractual 
subject matter experts and support staff, goods and equipment, consultancies, studies, trainings, 
civil works, and incremental operating costs. The Project will also support the GoTN in 
improving existing policies, regulations, and procedures to achieve a climate-resilient and 



sustainable agriculture system by commissioning feasibility studies, preparing detailed action 
plans and implementation guidelines.  
 
Sub-component B.2: Value Addition and Post-Harvest Management 
 
This subcomponent will aim at enhancing farmers' linkages to markets by providing alternative 
marketing channels and improving farm level post-harvest management and value addition.  The 
project will support the setting up of an Agribusiness Promotion Facility, development of farmer 
producer organizations/companies, integration of commercial value chains of agricultural 
commodities, and will facilitate public-private partnerships to enable direct buying arrangements.  
Support will also be provided for modernization and upgrading of selected Regulated Markets 
dealing with project produces and weekly farmers➢❨  markets/rural markets (Varashanthais) on 
cost sharing basis, innovative pilots, institutional strengthening and capacity building of 
Agriculture Marketing and Agribusiness Department. The GoTN is currently in the process of 
amending the Agriculture Produce Market Act of 1987, which would bring in substantial reforms, 
and among others, would create a conducive environment to development of more efficient 
markets with extensive usage of latest ICT technologies. 
 
Component C: Project Management Support 
 
The project will adopt the model of multi-departmental coordination and convergence, and will 
follow the general institutional structure of IAMWARM. The Multi-Disciplinary Project Unit 
(MDPU) established under the IAMWARM will also serve as the management and coordination 
unit for the proposed IAMP, with modifications as needed to be considered during project 
preparation. The MDPU will be responsible for ensuring support to preparation and 
implementation of overall project budget, sub-basin development plans, and implementation 
progress reports by the line departments. The MDPU will provide M&E, procurement and 
fiduciary support as needed to the project implementing agencies. 
 
The activities to be undertaken under the component will also be supported by: i) implementation 
of mobile application and associated back-end software tools for Geo Tagging and remote sensing 
based monitoring of project outcomes and  ii) Implementation of GIS based data acquisition and 
analysis system for studying emission of Methane and other Green House Gases (GHG) in project 
area. Citizen Engagement including Grievance Redressal is to be done by respective department 
as per agreed system.

II. SAFEGUARDS
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis (if known)
The project will be implemented in 66 sub-basins, including the areas experiencing droughts, floods 
and other climate/natural shocks, particularly in coastal areas. The project activities might  influence 
a diverse set of habitats/ecosystems, including, coastal, plains, hilly, wetlands, rivers and sub-river 
basins as explain below.

B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The primary implementing agency has developed some capacity in managing social and 
environmental impacts under IAMWARM Project, which is the first phase to this project    but 
remain weak when it comes to monitoring and reporting of environmental and social manageent 




aspects. Moreover, officials, particularly engineers, who were engaged in the previous project may 
move out due to transfers and this may require additional capacity building measures for the current 
staff. The implementing agency has some familiarity in preparing secondary data based 
environmental atlas for sub-basins, undertaking minor Social and Environmental Assessments, 
preparing Environmental Status Reports and contracting special studies of the river basins in the 
State. However, the second phase project will cover new sub-basins, a fresh full environmental and 
social assessment would be required for which the borrower will prepare and share with the Bank a 
detailed Terms of Reference. A multi-disciplinary project unit (including environmental and social 
experts) is being set up to facilitate the preparation and implementation of this project and based on 
experience of the previous project, will require additional support of external experts to facilitate the 
assessment both during preparation and then during operational phase for implementing the 
mitigation measures.

C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Anupam Joshi (GEN06)
Samuel Thangaraj (GTC06)

D. POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment 
OP/BP 4.01

Yes Significant physical investments are expected under 
the project and although the nature of these 
investments would be largely rehabilitation of 
existing assets, improper construction could result in 
adverse impacts. An Environmental and Social 
Assessment will be undertaken and an 
Environmental and Social Management Plans would 
be developed for managing risks and maximize 
environmental and social opportunities. These will 
take into account earlier work and experiences of the 
TN WRCP project and consideration of new 
activities proposed in the TN IAMWARM project.

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes This is triggered, as a large number of tanks will be 
rehabilitated, including carrier system, which may 
impact natural habitats, particularly wetlands. 
Careful mapping using remote sensing will be 
undertaken as part of conducting the environmental 
assessment.

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No No impacts on forests are expected and the project 
will not affect existing forest management practices.

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes No pesticides and fertilizers are expected to be 
financed directly by the project; however, there may 
be induced impacts of increased fertilizer and 
pesticide use due to improved agricultural 
intensification and diversification. The project will 
support scaling-up state-wide Integrated Pest 


Management and Integrated Nutrient Management 
efforts and support for safer and organic food 
production and marketing. A pest management plan 
will be prepared as part of the EA.

Physical Cultural Resources 
OP/BP 4.11

TBD No significant adverse impacts on cultural property 
expected, but this issue will be examined during the 
ESA (particularly in relation to proper management 
of any religious and other physical cultural property 
associated with tanks during rehabilitation).

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 
4.10

TBD A Tribal Mapping of 66 sub-basins to identify areas 
in the sub-basins that are categorized as belonging to 
Schedule 5 areas where GoTN's Tribal Sub-Plans 
and where Forest Rights Act are implemented  will 
be undertaken as part of Social Assessment to 
determine whether or not the OP/BP 4.10 is 
triggered.

Involuntary Resettlement OP/
BP 4.12

Yes Modernization of irrigation systems and 
rehabilitation and required civil works are likely to 
involve involuntary resettlement. Though efforts will 
be made to avoid this, necessary structures and 
processes to mitigate adverse impacts, if any will be 
put in place in the Social Management Plan.

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 Yes The dam safety policy is triggered as some tanks 
may have embankments higher than 15 m, though it 
will be confirmed once tanks are identified. The 
proposed project will draw technical resources from 
the ongoing World Bank funded Dam Rehabilitation 
and ImprovementProject (DRIP) in the State of 
Tamil Nadu, including the participation of the Dam 
Safety Review Panel. During preparation, the 
specific needs for supporting safety of Dams and 
tank systems will be assessed comprehensively and 
interventions needed will be determined. This 
includes the necessary monitoring system.

Projects on International 
Waterways OP/BP 7.50

No The project does not fall on any international 
waterways.

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/
BP 7.60

No The project is not in any disputed areas.

E. Safeguard Preparation Plan
1. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS
29-Dec-2016
2. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be 
needed. The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage 
ISDS.
An Environmental and Social Assessment (ESA) shall be completed by November 30, 2016, which 


will be for the entire project period. A number of safeguards instruments are expected to be 
prepared. An Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared, as all 
investments and their locations would not be known by appraisal. An Environment Management 
Plan (EMP) and a Social Management Plan (SMP) will be prepared by appraisal for at least one 
large infrastructure sub-project. In addition, a Pest Management Plan (PMP) will be prepared that 
will be applicable through the project period. Based on the assessment to trigger the policy on 
Indigenous Peoples, an Indigenous Peoples Framework may be prepared.  Finally, A Resettlement 
Action Plan (RAP) will also be prepared.


























































World Bank Document

PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
APPRAISAL STAGE

Report No.:  PIDA19698

Project Name Second Agricultural Growth Project (P148591)
Region AFRICA
Country Ethiopia
Sector(s) General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (30%), Irrigation 

and drainage (30%), Agricultural extension and research (20%), 
Ag ro-industry, marketing, and trade (20%)

Theme(s) Rural services and infrastructure (50%), Water resource 
management (20%), Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support 
(10%), Gender ( 10%), Nutrition and food security (10%)

Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P148591
Borrower(s) Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia
Implementing Agency Ministry of Agriculture
Environmental Category B-Partial Assessment
Date PID Prepared/Updated 07-Feb-2015
Date PID Approved/Disclosed 09-Feb-2015
Estimated Date of Appraisal 
Completion

09-Feb-2015

Estimated Date of Board 
Approval

26-Mar-2015

Decision

I. Project Context
Country Context
Ethiopia is a large and diverse country. It is land-locked and located in the Horn of Africa, with an 
area of 1.1 million km2. Its bio-physical environment includes a variety of ecosystems, with 
significant differences in climate, soil properties, vegetation types, and agricultural potential, 
biodiversity and water resources. Ethiopia is a country of many nations, nationalities and peoples, 
with a total population of 91.7 million (2012).  Only 17 percent of the population lives in urban 
centres, the great majority of them in Addis Ababa. At a current annual growth rate of 2.6 percent, 
Ethiopia’s population is estimated to reach 130 million by 2025, and is projected by the UN to be 
among the world’s ten largest countries by 2050. Ethiopia is vulnerable to terms of trade shocks 
from international food and fuel prices, and to large domestic weather-related shocks as 
demonstrated by the 2011/12 East Africa drought. 
 
Ethiopia has a federal, democratic government system, established in the early 1990s, with nine 
autonomous states (‘regions’) and two chartered cities. Decentralization of governance to the 

regional and district (woreda) levels has been actively pursued since 2003. The Ethiopian People’s 
Revolutionary Democratic Front (EPRDF) has been in power in Ethiopia since 1991. EPRDF 
comprises four regionally-based parties from the four major regions (Amhara, Oromia, Southern 
Nations, Nationalities and Peoples (SNNPR), and Tigray). The long-serving Prime Minister, Meles 
Zenawi, (from Tigray) died in August 2012 and was succeeded by Hailemariam Desalegn (from 
SNNPR) who has pursued largely the same policies. The next national elections are scheduled for 
2015. 
 
Ethiopia has experienced strong economic growth over the past decade. Economic growth averaged 
10.7 percent per year in 2003/04 to 2011/12, compared to the regional average of 5.0 percent. 
Growth reflected a mix of factors, including agricultural modernization, the development of new 
export sectors, strong global commodity demand, and government-led development investments. 
Private consumption and public investment have driven demand side growth, with the latter 
assuming an increasingly important role in recent years. On the supply side, growth was driven by 
an expansion of the services and agricultural sectors, while the role of the industrial sector was 
relatively modest. Recently, annual growth rates have declined slightly, but still remain at high 
single-digit levels. Growth in the export of goods has also moderated in recent years and a decline 
was observed in 2012/13 for the first time since 2008/09. There have been bouts of high inflation in 
recent years and, while inflation is currently much lower, keeping it down remains a major 
objective for monetary policy. 
 
Ethiopia is one of the world's poorest countries, but has made substantial progress on social and 
human development over the past decade. The country’s per capita income of US$470  is 
substantially lower than the regional average of US$1,257 and among the ten lowest worldwide. 
Ethiopia is ranked 173 out of 187 countries in the Human Development Index (HDI) of the United 
Nations Development Program (UNDP). High economic growth, however, has helped reduce 
poverty in both urban and rural areas. Since 2005, 2.5 million people have been lifted out of 
poverty, and the share of the population below the poverty line has fallen from 38.7 percent in 
2004/05 to 29.6 percent in 2010/11  (using a poverty line of close to US$1.25/day). However, 
because of high population growth, the absolute number of poor (about 25 million) has remained 
unchanged over the past fifteen years. Ethiopia is among the countries that have made the fastest 
progress on the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) and HDI ranking over the past decade. It 
is on track to achieve the MDGs for gender parity in education, child mortality, HIV/AIDS, and 
malaria. Good progress has been made in universal primary education, although the MDG target 
may not be met. Reduction of maternal mortality remains a key challenge. 
 
GoE is currently implementing its ambitious Growth and Transformation Plan (GTP; 
2010/11-2014/15), which sets a long-term goal of becoming a middle-income country by 2025, 
with growth rates of at least 11.2 percent per annum during the plan period. To achieve the GTP 
goals and objectives, GoE has followed a “developmental state” model with a strong role for the 
government in many aspects of the economy. It has prioritized key sectors such as industry and 
agriculture as drivers of sustained economic growth and job creation. The GTP also reaffirms 
GoE’s commitment to human development. Development partners have programs that are broadly 
aligned with GTP priorities. 
 
The World Bank Group’s Country Partnership Strategy (CPS, FY13-16) builds on the progress 
achieved by Ethiopia in recent years and aims to help GoE address structural transformation and 
assist in the implementation of the GTP. The CPS framework includes two pillars. Pillar One, 


“Fostering competitiveness and employment”, aims to support Ethiopia in achieving: (i) a stable 
macroeconomic environment; (ii) increased competitiveness and productivity; (iii) increased and 
improved delivery of infrastructure; and (iv) enhanced regional integration.  Pillar Two, “Enhancing 
resilience and reducing vulnerabilities”, aims to support Ethiopia in improving the delivery of social 
services and developing a comprehensive approach to social protection and risk management. Good 
governance and state building form the foundation of the CPS. In line with the GTP, gender and 
climate change have been included as cross-cutting issues to strengthen their mainstreaming across 
the portfolio. The programs of IFC and MIGA are well aligned with the CPS framework, 
contributing mainly to the strategic objectives under Pillar One.

  

Sectoral and institutional Context
The agricultural sector remains a dominant sector in the Ethiopian economy and an important 
source of economic growth. Although there is an on-going structural transformation in the 
Ethiopian economy, predominantly from agriculture to services and manufacturing, agriculture still 
comprises 45 percent of total output and continues to dominate employment (78 percent). The 
sector is also a major contributor to export earnings, with over 80 percent of goods exports. Despite 
its declining share in the economy, the agriculture sector is growing rapidly. Over the past 15 years 
the average rate of growth has been around seven percent per year according to official statistics. 
Sources of growth have come from an increased area under cultivation and from increased 
productivity, the latter driven by large public investment in the sector, including agricultural 
extension, rural roads, and advances in public policy such as improvements in land tenure security. 
In addition to contributing to economic output and exports, agricultural growth is correlated with 
poverty reduction, for smallholder farmers and also through positive impacts on non-farm rural 
economies. 
 
Although Ethiopia has a trend of negative overall balance of trade, the country has consistently had 
a positive balance of trade in the agriculture sector. The agriculture imports per capita and exports 
per capita stood at $13.28 and $18.27 respectively in 2011. The top three agriculture exports have 
been coffee, oil seeds and pulses while the largest imports have been cereals, edible oils and sugar. 
In spite of the positive trade balances in the sector, marketing (including intra-regional trade) in the 
sector is constrained by mixed and often unfavorable policies for input and output markets and poor 
infrastructure leading to high transportation costs. There remains considerable potential for both 
increased exports from the sector and further import substitution, especially for cereals 
(predominantly wheat) and sugar.   
 
The further growth of the agriculture sector is expected to feature prominently in the second phase 
of the GTP (GTP-II), currently under preparation.  Maintaining the current growth rate in the sector 
will be challenging as recent gains from land expansion may be exhausted, and further increases 
will need to come from increased agricultural productivity. Progress requires both investment and 
policy reform.  The general thrust on policy reform is to pursue agricultural transformation by 
increasing private sector investment and value added in the country to increase the value of exports. 
In 2012, the Government agreed a G8 New Alliance framework for Ethiopia with a number of 
commitments for policy actions to facilitate the expansion of private investment.  Under this 
framework, the Government intends to focus its efforts in particular on: i) increasing stability and 
transparency in trade policy; ii) improving incentives for the private sector investment; iii) 
developing and implementing a transparent land tenure policy; and iv) developing and 
implementing domestic seed policies that encourage increased private sector involvement in this 

area. To support the transformation agenda, the Government established the Agricultural 
Transformation Agency (ATA) in 2011 to support the Ministry of Agriculture to advance policy 
and build capacity.  Notable achievements include the new Agricultural Cooperatives Development 
Strategy and the passing of the Seeds Proclamation. 
 
The Government’s agricultural development strategy focuses on both encouraging large scale 
investment in commercial agriculture and support to smallholder farmers, who in 2012/13 
contributed 96 percent of the total agricultural production according to official statistics. To 
increase agricultural productivity of smallholders and their transformation to commercial farmers 
requires a strengthening and focusing of support services and infrastructure, and greater private 
investment to support input and output value chains.  To drive this transformation, the Government 
is moving towards focused support to specific commercialization clusters targeting areas with the 
highest potential for the production of commodities for which Ethiopia has a comparative 
advantage and can stimulate agro-processing and value addition.   
 
Despite the large investment into public agricultural services, especially into extension, which has 
seen a rapid rise in the number of extension workers and beneficiaries served year on year, there are 
capacity weaknesses which continue to inhibit the identification and dissemination of technologies 
to support increased productivity.  Strengthening research and extension linkages, further expansion 
and capacity of the extension service and enhancing farmer access to inputs are required to support 
investments in extension workers.  Improving agriculture research has been prioritized in GTP and 
the same is expected in GTP II because of the pivotal role it plays to improve agricultural 
productivity and production and recognizing that in recent years it has been underfunded.  Animal 
health and production services also suffer from capacity limitations and low outreach, leading to 
low productivity and quality across a range of animal products.  
 
Access to and application of agricultural inputs is a decisive factor to improve agricultural 
productivity and production.  In addition to improved seeds, animal breeds and fertilizers, there is 
considerable opportunity to promote the use of machinery for production and post-harvest 
activities.  Innovations such as row planters for teff have had a considerable impact on productivity. 
However, input markets in Ethiopia are typically overly dependent on cooperative unions and the 
agro-dealer market is small and underdeveloped.  While cooperatives can play an important role in 
linking smallholder farmers to input and output markets, they are often hampered by weak 
management and facilities, and currently only handle a small percentage of agricultural output.  
There is potential for strengthening cooperatives while also enabling greater private engagement in 
both input and output markets.  
 
Output marketing system and infrastructure in Ethiopia are dominated by traditional, informal 
exchanges. For a large part of the country, this means trading with limited infrastructure. There are 
few market structures, storage, loading and unloading facilities, quality checking and banking 
services in or around most of the market centers. This has resulted in the cost of trading being very 
high due to cumbersome conditions for transaction, low product qualities and post-harvest losses.  
Value chains (other than for coffee which has a relatively efficient market structures) are therefore 
characterized by an absence of market participants, market inefficiencies and limited value addition. 
With increasing agricultural surpluses, rapid urbanization and increased opportunities for agro-
industrial investment, there are gaps in the current functioning in a number of value chains which 
are prioritized under the commercialization cluster approach to achieving transformation.  
 


Agricultural water development is crucial to improve smallholders’ livelihood and income in 
Ethiopia, since irrigation can help farmers increase their crop production, increase crop varieties, 
and lengthen their agricultural seasons. From a very low base, over the next five years there are 
targets to increase the total area of irrigated land from the current 640,000 hectares (about 4 percent 
of currently cultivated land) to about 1.8 million hectares. Small Scale Irrigation (SSI) and Rain 
Water Harvesting (RWH) will account for about two-thirds of this expansion, as these technologies 
require lower capital and technical investments and they are possible on small plain areas. Beyond 
the next five years, plans are to reach the full irrigable potential of the country of over 5 million 
hectares. Household irrigation as well as medium- and large-scale schemes will be an important 
strategy to achieve this goal, in combination with exploring and developing groundwater potential, 
especially given that an estimated 85 percent of Ethiopia’s total surface water irrigation potential is 
estimated to be in large-scale schemes.  
 
Future agricultural growth needs t o be sensitive to gender.  On average, female farm managers in 
Ethiopia produce 23 percent less (in terms of gross value of output) per hectare than their male 
counterparts. Differences in both the levels of productive factors used and the returns that these 
factors generate drive this gender gap. Future inclusive agricultural growth should consider: (i) the 
promotion of labor-saving technologies for women; (ii) the provision of relevant information to 
female farmers, customized to the needs of female farmers; and (iii) the easing of the time burden 
of household responsibilities, by providing services to reduce the time that female farmers need to 
perform household duties to enable them to devote more time to productive farm activities. Recent 
research demonstrates the potential of women to contribute to agricultural growth and improve 
outcomes, including improved nutrition.   
 
In Ethiopia, forty percent of children under the age of five suffer from stunting as a consequence of 
chronic and cyclical malnutrition. The National Nutrition Program (NNP) was revised in 2013 to 
strategically address the nutrition problem in the country to include initiatives that have emerged 
since the 2008 NNP, including taking into account the multisectoral and multidimensional nature of 
nutrition and the linkages among key implementing sectors, one being agriculture.  This program, 
endorsed by the Ministry of Agriculture, the Ministry of Health and another eight line Ministers, 
includes a strategic objective to strengthen implementation of nutrition sensitive interventions in the 
agriculture sector. The initiatives focus on improving the consumption of diversified diets at the 
household level through: (i) diversification of crop, fruits and livestock production; (ii) promotion 
of appropriate technologies for food production and processing through the handling, preparation 
and preservation for food diversification to ensure nutritious food utilization;  (iii) building the 
capacity of Development Agents (DAs) at community level and agriculture program managers at all 
levels to implement nutrition sensitive agriculture;  (iv) supporting local complementary food 
production and creating economic opportunities for women through development groups and 
cooperatives; and, (v) supporting agricultural research centers to develop seeds of high nutritional 
value.  Thus, it calls for aligning the agricultural growth programs to improve nutritional status. 
 
With the limits of bringing uncultivated land under production being met, the likelihood of climatic 
variability and the potential degradation arising from more intensive production practices increases, 
and thus there is an urgent need for agriculture to conserve resources and reduce degradation. In 
recent years, considerable amount of work in natural resource conservation and development work 
has been undertaken. In 2013/14 alone, the communities undertook natural resources conservations 
work on 20.15 million hectares of land throughout the country, according to official statistics.  This 
current momentum of community mobilization in natural resource conservation by pursuing 




activities such as slope stabilization, watershed approaches to water management and reduction of 
tillage should be sustained to make the sector more resilient and sustainable. 
 
The opportunities for inclusive and sustainable growth in the sector are strong as is the 
Government’s commitment to achieving ambitious growth and transformation targets.  The 
Agricultural Sector Policy and Investment Framework (PIF), 2010 – 2020, provides an investment 
framework to align the investment and policy priorities with higher level goals to transform the 
sector and is designed to operationalize the CAADP Compact signed by the Government and its 
development partners. Under the PIF, there have been concerted efforts to collaborate and partner 
on investments and the Agricultural Growth Project (AGP I – P113032) was a clear output of this. 
The first phase of the program was financed to around US$350 million, including US$150 million 
from IDA, US$50 million from the Global Agriculture and Food Security Program (GAFSP), a US
$50 million Multi-donor Trust Fund with contributions from the Netherlands, Canada and Spain, 
and parallel financing from USAID and Italy.  Currently, AGPI operates at  kebele levels (the 
lowest administrative unit) in 96 woredas of the four regions of Amhara, Oromia, SNNPR and 
Tigray and has provided support for improved public agricultural service provision, technology 
transfer, improved market access and marketing, infrastructure (household and small-scale 
irrigation, feeder roads and market centers) and capacity building.  The project further explicitly 
aims to increase the participation of women and youth in the sector.  The proposed project therefore 
aims to build on AGP1, to scale up the geographical extent, consolidate the investments, and meet 
the emerging challenges of the sector outlines above. 
 
Under AGPI, the project has been operating in 4 regions (Amhara, Oromia, SNNP and Tigray), 96 
woredas and 2,423 kebeles, targeting 1.57 million direct beneficiaries.  The AGP2 project would 
cover 157 woredas, which would include all woredas targeted under AGP1 plus an additional 61. 
The woredas are distributed among the following regions: Amhara, Oromia, SNNPR, Tigray, 
Benshangul-Gumuz, Gambella, Harari and Dire Dawa Administrative Council. The expansion into 
the new regions and Dire Dawa would be on a limited scale, with two woredas in each of 
Benshangul-Gumuz and Gambella, and one in each of Harari and Dire Dawa.

II. Proposed Development Objectives
The Project Development Objective is to increase agricultural productivity and commercialization 
of small holder farmers targeted by the project.

III. Project Description
Component Name
Agricultural Public Support Services.
Comments (optional)
To increase access to public agricultural services for smallholder farmers, the project will support 
the strengthening of public services delivery, including for agricultural extension services;  animal 
production and animal health services; crop production and plant health services; natural resource 
management services; soil fertility management services; and agricultural mechanization.

Component Name
Agricultural Research
Comments (optional)
To increase the supply of demand driven agricultural technologies which directly link to the other 
components, the project will support technology adaptation and generation and the release of 


technologies to the agricultural extension system; pre-extension demonstration and participatory 
research for recommended agricultural technologies; and source technology production, including 
the production of breeder and pre-basic seeds for major crop varieties.

Component Name
Small-scale Irrigation
Comments (optional)
To increase the access to and efficient utilization of irrigation water of small holder farmers, the 
project will support the increased availability of irrigated water through: i) the rehabilitation, 
upgrading and/or improvement of existing Small-scale Irrigation Schemes; ii) establishment of new 
SSI systems integrated with access roads where necessary; and iii) household irrigation systems. 
The project would also support improved water management services through establishing and/or 
strengthening Irrigation Water Users Organizations and the introduction of improved irrigation 
agricultural management.

Component Name
Agricultural Marketing and Value Chains
Comments (optional)
To commercialize small holder farmers through market access and efficiency of input and output 
markets, the project would support: the promotion and distribution of agricultural inputs, 
specifically seed multiplication and distribution; the strengthening of formal and informal farmer 
organizations, including formal farmer organizations and informal, commercially oriented farmer 
groups; the strengthening of selected livestock and crop value chains; and market infrastructure 
development and management.

Component Name
Project Management, Capacity Building and Monitoring and Evaluation.
Comments (optional)
To ensure project implementation, the effective monitoring and evaluation of results and a 
consistent and effective approach to capacity development, the project would support: project 
management and coordination; monitoring, evaluation and learning; and the Capacity Building 
Support Facility.

IV. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 581.80 Total Bank Financing: 350.00
Financing Gap: 216.20
For Loans/Credits/Others Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT 15.60
International Development Association (IDA) 350.00
Total 365.60

V. Implementation
The AGP 2 will build on institutional arrangements and implementation mechanisms established for 
th AGPI.  As in the first phase, the implementation of the project will rely on existing GoE 
structures, with the exception of parallel funding through the USAID and Canadian DFATD that 
will be channeled through specific implementation arrangements. The Ministry of Agriculture will 
have the overall responsibility of the coordination and implementation of the project. To fulfill its 


bilities, the MoA will use - or will establish in the new targeted regions - the institutional 
mechanisms already established for AGP 1 at Federal, Regional, and Woreda levels, i.e: (i) the 
Steering Committees (SCs), (ii) the Technical Committees (TCs), and (iii) the Project’s 
Coordination Units (CUs). The existing composition of these Committees will be reviewed in order 
to include new implementing agencies such as the Ethiopian Institute for Agricultural Research 
(EIAR). At the Zonal level, the Zonal Agriculture Office (ZAO) will provide technical support, 
extension services and M&E to the group of woredas under its authority. The ZAOs will coordinate 
with the Woreda Offices of Agriculture (WOA). 
 
Implementation of the project will be decentralized. Federal implementing agencies will provide 
guidance and support to regions, spearhead most institutional capacity building activities and 
undertake monitoring, evaluation and communication activities. At regional and woreda levels, the 
Bureaus/Offices of Agriculture will assume primary responsibility for execution of the project.  
Implementation of AGP at the regional level will also be supported by relevant service providers 
and institutions.  
 
The annual planning process will follow a two-pronged approach associating: (i) a demand-driven 
approach based on the Community Level Participatory Planning (CLPP) approach adopted for AGP-
I in which communities are assuming primary responsibility for identifying and executing the 
community-based investment of the project, and (ii) a strategic-based approach in which 
investments are pre-identified through the Kebele, Woreda and Regional development plan or 
through specific feasibility studies, and implemented in close collaboration with the community 
after a consultation process. At the woreda and kebele levels, the implementation of the project 
would be undertaken jointly by Woreda Office of Agriculture through the Woreda Development 
Committee (WDC), the Kebele Development Committee (KDC), and the communities. The WDC 
and the KDC will be guided by their respective SCs and TCs.

VI. Safeguard Policies (including public consultation)
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖


























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
LIVELIHOODS RESILIENCE AND COMMERCIALIZATION PROJECT (LRCP) IN PASTORAL AND AGRO-PASTORAL AREAS 
(P164336) 

 

 

  
Jun 07, 2018 Page 1 of 10  

     

 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 07-Jun-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSC23863 


BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Ethiopia P164336  LIVELIHOODS 
RESILIENCE AND 
COMMERCIALIZATION 
PROJECT (LRCP) IN 
PASTORAL AND AGRO-
PASTORAL AREAS 
(P164336) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA Jan 22, 2019 Mar 27, 2019 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Finance and 
Economic Cooperation 

Ministry of Federal and 
Pastoral Development 
Affairs 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
 
To Enhance Livelihood Resilience and Commercialization of the Production Systems among PAP Communities in 
Ethiopia.  
 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 600.00 

Total Financing 500.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 400.00 

Financing Gap 100.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 400.00 



          IDA Credit 400.00 

Non-World Bank Group Financing 

     Other Sources 100.00 

          International Fund for Agriculture Development 100.00 

 
  
 

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B - Partial Assessment   
 

 
SAFEGUARDS_TABLE_OPS Have the Safeguards oversight and clearance functions been transferred to the Practice Manager? (Will not be 
disclosed) 
No    
 
 
 
 
Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
 
B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
 
Ethiopia, with a current estimated population of 102.4 million1 (2016), has seen rapid economic growth over the past 
decade and is one of the fastest growing economies in the World. The IMF predicted the growth rate of Ethiopia to be 
8.5 percent in 20182.  The rapid economic growth over the past decade3 has not been able to generate adequate 
employment opportunities and Ethiopia needs to generate 1.7 million jobs4 every year to provide gainful employment 
to youth who are entering workforce. The arid and semi-arid low-lands, accounting for 60 percent of land area with 12 
to 14 percent of population, comprising of pastoral and agro-pastoral (PAP) communities lag behind in most of the 
social and economic indicators and their livelihoods are highly vulnerable to a multitude of shocks, primarily droughts, 
which is being exacerbated by climate change.  

 
 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
The pastoral and agro-pastoral system are complex systems that need to balance the dynamic interplay between 

                                            
1 World Development Indicator, World Bank  
2 IMF World Economic Outlook, April 2018  
3 Average annual GDP growth was 10.1% between 2010 and 2016, World Development Indicators, World Bank 
4 National Planning Commission, Government of Ethiopia. 


people, livestock and environment resource base. The complexity of these livelihood system is getting exacerbated, 
driven by multiple factors droughts, degradation of rangelands, active conflict and insecurity, constrained livestock 
mobility and access to key resources etc. All these changes are resulting in significant changes in PAP production and 
livelihood systems. The commercialization pull is resulting into a category of commercially oriented large-scale herd 
owners who are successfully managing the transition. The stress-push has resulted into a category of population who 
has moved-out of pastoralism either being forced out by successive droughts or opting out since the pastoral livelihood 
is no longer viable or being pulled-in towards other market opportunities. Despite the complexity and high stress 
environment, there are significant economic opportunities in the pastoral and agro-pastoral areas and a significant 
proportion of population is still engaged in pastoral and agro-pastoral systems while others are pursing alternate 
livelihood opportunities.  

 
 
Relationship to CPF 
 
The operation features in the Bank’s CPF for FY 17-21 under the Building Resilience and Inclusiveness Pillar. In addition, 
it strongly contributes to “Promoting Structural and Economic Transformation through Increased Productivity’ pillar.  
The project will contribute to CPF result framework targets of enhance resilience, increase in agricultural yield, job 
creation, natural resource management, climate co-benefits, improved service delivery, as well as Ethiopia’s targets of 
National Adaptation Plan and Second Growth and Transformation Plan (GTP-2).  

 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
 
To Enhance Livelihood Resilience and Commercialization of the Production Systems among PAP Communities in 
Ethiopia.  
 

 
Key Results (From PCN) 

 
The key PDO level Indicators includes:  

1. Number of direct project beneficiary (disaggregated by gender)  
2. People provided with access to improved Economic and Social services (disaggregated by service type and 

gender)  
3. Proportion (volume and value) of production sold by targeted beneficiaries for selected products  
4. Range and agricultural land area (in HA) under improved natural resource management practices 
5. Percentage increase in yield of selected crop and livestock commodities  
6. Jobs created (disaggregated by gender) 

 
 
D. Concept Description 

 
A comprehensive and integrated approach, rather than discrete interventions, that addresses multiple dimensions of 
livelihood is needed to address the binding constraints described above. By understanding the needs of different 
beneficiary groups, pastoralists, agro-pastoralists, and households pursing or intending to pursue alternate livelihoods, 
and designing intervention packages to meet their specific needs, this project aims to support livelihood resilience and 
commercialization through the following project components. The project would invest in improving the overall 


     

enabling environment of rangeland management, pastoral risk management, and institutional development and 
capacity building which will contribute to increased resilience of the PAP communities and production systems.  To 
improve livelihoods, the project would support improving productivity and commercialization of pastoral and agro-
pastoral production system, small scale irrigation in lowland areas, and promoting livelihood diversification. To project 
would support improving access and utilization of basic social and economic services among the target communities 
through a decentralized Community Driven Development approach, which will be complimented by a strategic inter-
community, and inter woreda investments with the purpose of improving prevention and preparedness against 
disasters.  

 
    

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
The project will be implemented in the Pastoral and agro-pastoral areas of Ethiopia. The geographical coverage of the 

project would include regions of Afar, Ethio-Somali, Oromia and SNNPP. 
 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
The borrower has implemented a number of Bank projects and have moderate institutional capacity for implementing 

safeguard policies.The project implementation arrangements will largely follow the existing mechanisms for the ongoing 
PCDP III with slight modifications to capture recent developments. 
While implementing various World Bank Financed infrastructure projects (PCDP I-PCDP III), the Borrower has gained 

experiences in preparing safeguards instruments (ESMF, RPF, ESS and ESMP documents) to identify and address potential 
environmental and social risks. The Ministry of Federal and Pastoral Development Affairs (MoFPDA) has implemented 
three successive phases of Pastoral Community Development Project (PCDP) under an Adaptable Programme Lending 
(APL) spanning 15 years, which has been jointly supported by the World Bank and IFAD. It is, therefore, proposed that this 
new LRCP will utilize the existing experience that has been built up with the ongoing PCDP III safeguard implementation 
arrangements. MoFPDA has the responsibility for overall coordination, monitoring and evaluation of the LRCP. Currently, 
there are safeguards specialists dedicated for PCDP III at federal and the four regional bureau levels. However, if 
Gambella and Benishagul regions will be benefited from the proposed project they are required to deploy safeguards 
experts before commencement of the project. 
Experiences revealed that proper implementation and documentation of safeguards related matters still remains a 

challenge that needs to be further strengthened, through ensuring adequate personnel and capacity at the ministerial 
and local levels, to ensure environmental and social safeguards compliance. 
 

 
D. Policies that might apply 

 


Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The Livelihoods Resilience and Commercialization 
Project (LRCP) is expected to finance the following 
activities: pasture development, supporting area 
enclosures, Prosopis and other invasive species 
control, water resource development along cattle 
corridors, soil and water conservation measures, 
afforestation activities, small dams, flood control, rain 
water harvesting, breed improvement, feed/forage 
improvement and management, animal health 
services, rain-fed agriculture, build demand-driven 
social and economic infrastructure; which may include 
schools, health posts, veterinary posts, small water 
supply and irrigation, small feeder roads, catchment 
management improvements. Given that most of the 
aforementioned activities result in environmental and 
social risks, an environmental and social assessment is 
necessary; ergo OP/BP 4.01 will be triggered. The 
assessment will be outlined in an Environmental and 
Social Framework to be updated prior to appraisal and 
key resullts and measures will be integrated into the 
project documents (PAD, PIM, ESMF, etc.). Further, 
site specific ESIA, ESMP and PMP will also be prepared, 
as required, during project prepation.  

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No 

The Project is being implemented by the Ministry of 
Agriculture. In case of any linkages to private sector 
via the commercialization component of the Project, 
these will be handled via OP 4.01. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

Pastoral areas cover some natural habitats which are 
protected by law, such as the Awash and Yangudi Rasa 
National Parks (Afar), Yabello Sanctuary (Borena) and 
the Babile Wildlife Sanctuary (Somali). However, LRCP 
is not expected to be operated within such areas or 
other areas that qualify as critical natural habitats 
under OP. 4.04 or include any sub-projects that have a 
bearing on protected areas. However, it will affect 
rangelands and pastures, for which OP/BP 4.04 will 
apply to protect even those non-critical natural 
habitats from any adverse impacts. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes 

OP/BP 4.36 is triggered to avoid any anticipated 
potential impacts that may affect the natural forests 
found in Gambella and Benishangul Gumuze regions. 
Besides, LRCP is expected to finance afforestation and 
other natural resources management (range land 
management, area enclosure, …) related activities for 




which OP/BP 4.36 would apply. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

Promotion of rain fed and/or irrigated farming where 
feasible and profitable is part of promoting sustainable 
livelihoods and may indirectly involve use of 
agrochemicals including fertilizers and pesticides for 
both crop and livestock improvements. The ESMF will 
include guidelines and procedures for the preparation 
of specific PMPs, when is required, during the project 
implementation. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 

There are few areas in the Ethiopian lowlands that 
may constitute physical cultural resources in the sense 
described in BP/OP. 4.11. Although the nature and 
scope of the LRCP sub-projects is not known now, they 
are unlikely to involve any major excavation work or 
inundation of areas with water, and are thus not likely 
to affect any physical cultural resources. Furthermore, 
subprojects will be carried out only in areas selected, 
through a broader consultative process that includes 
prior informed consent, by local citizens who would 
normally give great importance to safeguarding their 
cultural resources. Nonetheless, the policy is triggered, 
predicated on the assumption that there could be 
“chance find”. No sub-project that might have 
negative impacts on cultural property will be funded 
without acceptable mitigation measures prepared 
prior to execution of any such sub-project. There are 
national procedures and guidelines for reporting 
chance finds to be followed, and a national entity for 
coordinating and facilitating the archiving, safekeeping 
and documentation of physical cultural resources. The 
Project would work closely with the national authority, 
should any chance find issues arise. The requirements 
and standard measures of a chance-find procedure 
will also be included in the ESMF.  

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 Yes 

The Project triggers OP 4.10 as the vast majority of 
people in the project area meet the criteria for OP 
4.10, with the project explicitly targeting lowlands in 
emerging regions. While the Project therefore will 
benefit specifically these areas, assessing culturally 
appropriate interventions as well as ensuring equal 
access to project benefits, a related Social Assessment 
shall be conducted and respective results integrated 
into the Project design. The SA will contain an explicit 
Social Development Plan and the Project will integrate 
the required measures into the PAD as well as 



allocating ressources to ensure its implementation. 
Consequently it will also be addressed in the PIM and 
the ESMG. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

LRCP interventions may involve acquisition of land and 
/or restriction of access to communal natural 
resources. Therefore, an RPF has to be prepared to 
ensure that appropriate measures are in place to 
address any issues which might arise from potential 
land acquisition and or restriction of access to 
communal natural resources under the Project. This 
RPF shall include appropriate tools to address 
potential impacts by a large number of sub-projects. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 Yes 

LRCP is not expected to finance any investments 
aimed at rehabilitating or constructing large dams. 
Although there could possibly be construction of small 
dams under LRCP, particularly for small scale 
irrigation, they may not be large (more than 4.5 
meters high) and therefore may not require special 
procedures that are normally applied for large dams to 
follow. This notwithstanding, the Project will trigger 
OP 4.37 (Safety of Dams). In cases of small dams 
construction (less than 4.5 meters), the Project will 
use the FAO ‘Manual on Small Earth Dams, A Guide to 
Siting, Design and Construction’. In addition, the 
guideline for small dam construction prepared by the 
MoA will be used to ensure safety of small dams. 
Generic dam safety measures designed by qualified 
engineers will be included in the design and 
implementation/rehabilitation of small dams; with 
respective requirements outlined in the ESMF. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

Yes 

LRCP could extract very small amounts of water from 
any of the shared rivers or drainage systems. This 
notwithstanding, the Project will, in accordance with 
the requirements of the policy, send renewal 
notification of intended water use to the relevant 
riparian countries. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
The project is not expected to be implemented in any 
disputed areas. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Jan 21, 2019 
 



 

Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Before the project appraisal date 
 
 

























































World Bank Document


 

The World Bank  
Guangxi Poverty Reduction Project (P163138) 

 

 Project Information Documents (PID) 
 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 28-May-2018 | Report No: PIDA155787 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Program Data 

Country Project ID Program Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

China P163138 Guangxi Poverty 
Reduction Program for 
Results 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC 23-Apr-2018 28-Jun-2018 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency 

Program-for-Results Financing PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF 
CHINA 

Guangxi Poverty Alleciation Office, Guangxi 
Agriculture Department 

 
Proposed Program Development Objective(s) 
 
The program development objective is to enhance the impact and efficiency of the Guangxi Consolidated Poverty 
Reduction Program (CPRP) in the Targeted Counties. 

  
COST & FINANCING 

 

SUMMARY (USD Millions) 
 

Government program Cost 5,129.00 

Total Operation Cost 400.00 

Total Program Cost 400.00 

Total Financing 400.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 

 
   
FINANCING (USD Millions) 

Total World Bank Group Financing 400.00 

     World Bank Lending 400.00 
      

 
B. Introduction and Context 

 


Country Context   
China’s success in reducing extreme poverty since the economic reform period is widely recognized as an 
event of global significance. Based on the international poverty line of US$1.90 per day (expressed in 2011 
purchasing power parity), the World Bank estimates that the incidence of poverty in China declined from 
877.8 million in 1981 to 87.4 million in 2012 (or from 88.3 percent to 6.5 percent of the total population).  
These World Bank estimates indicate that about 790 million Chinese escaped poverty during this period, 
representing about 72 percent of global poverty reduction. These estimates of declining poverty have 
been matched by broad-based improvements in nutritional status, educational attainment, longevity and 
other health outcomes, as well as other indicators of well-being. In fact, China was the first country to 
achieve the Millennium Development Goal (MDG) of halving the number of people living in poverty by 
2015, and it did it ahead of schedule. This highlights the country’s leading role in global poverty reduction. 
 
In its Thirteenth Five Year Plan (13th 5YP), Chinese government made an ambitious commitment to 
eliminating rural poverty by 2020, ten years before the WBG’s target of 2030. The Plan includes an explicit 
poverty eradication goal: “All rural residents falling below China’s current poverty line will be able to lift 
themselves out of poverty” and underlines the importance of focusing poverty efforts: “We will identify 
and register those living in poverty throughout the country …(and) will strengthen dynamic statistical 
monitoring of these populations….”. Poverty eradication in China refers not only to help people earn more 
than a minimum income threshold, but also have access to basic goods and services. Consequently, the 
plan includes a list of anti-poverty programs in eight fields: locally viable industries, labor services, finance, 
relocation from inhospitable areas, transportation, ecological conservation, education, health care and 
social security. 
 
The Chinese government has established a comprehensive poverty reduction strategy to achieve the goals 
of the 13th 5YP. Central to this strategy are two institutional innovations which have the potential to 
provide important global lessons to other countries. The first is accurately targeting poverty households, 
villages and counties with the establishment of the National Poverty Registration System (NPRS).  The 
NPRS, established in 2013, is a census of all poor people and villages in China which timely tracks a wide 
range of detailed data about the characteristics of the poor and their main causes of poverty. The first is 
accurately targeting poverty households and villages through the establishment of the National Poverty 
Registration System in 2013.  The NPRS is a census of poor villages and people in China (about 70 million 
at its inception), which timely tracks characteristics of the poor and their main causes of poverty. The 
database is closely integrated into the reporting, prioritization, and accountability lines running upward 
from the village, county, region, and national levels. It provides critical information from the annual 
assessments of which households or villages have exited poverty, are at risk of falling back into poverty, 
or face challenges exiting from poverty. It thus plays a key role in both the identification of the remaining 
poor and the monitoring of programs to eradicate poverty.  
 
Secondly, since 2016, China has introduced the concept of decentralization of poverty reduction efforts 
with the aim to empower county governments to achieve their poverty targets. It consolidates large 
number of earmarked poverty reduction funds into a program-based budgeting system tailored to local 
context. and hold local governments accountable for achieving their poverty reduction targets. It works 
through consolidation of dozens of rural and agricultural earmarked funds which county governments are 
now authorized to use to develop a poverty reduction program tailored to local context.  The designated 
poverty counties have now been put fully in the driver’s seat for achieving poverty reduction goals. 



 

Nevertheless, the program development and implementation remains to be a great challenge for the 
county governments, as little technical guidance and support is provided to them from higher authorities.   
 
The proposed Program for Results operation (PforR) enhances these institutional advancements through 
connecting planned activities more closely to poor households and villages in the NPRS database, and 
aligns fiscal inputs with results by introducing improved planning, budgeting and monitoring systems for 
poverty programs in Guangxi. It also aims to help to improve the monitoring of poverty reduction 
programs in one of the most impoverished regions of the country. The lessons from adopting these 
innovations in Guangxi can serve as learning experience to similar complex settings in the rest of the world 
and will help the WBG in supporting other countries eradicate extreme poverty by 2030. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context  

Guangxi poverty reduction program is a continuing success, which is supported by strong government 
leadership, substantial and increasing funding, and broad assistance from society. In the areas of more 
intense poverty, it has brought about 18 percent annual reduction in rural poverty from 4.68 million poor 
in 2013 to 2.61 million poor in 2016.  However, Guangxi is still one of the 10 provinces in China with rural 
poverty rates above the 7 percent and, given its population size, is one of the six provinces with more than 
3 million rural poor (as of 2016), partly due to low soil fertility in the karst mountain areas and low levels 
of infrastructure and connectivity to other regions in China.   Moreover, as of 2013, the poor in Guangxi 
represented approximately 0.8 percent of the global poor. In this regard, helping the region to achieve its 
poverty eradication goal, would have a noticeable contribution to global poverty eradication. 
 
The Guangxi 5YP aims at achieving poverty eradication not only through households having a regular 
source of income above the minimum poverty threshold, but also in terms of access to housing, basic 
health care, compulsory education, appropriate roads to villages, safe drinking water, access to electricity 
and access to telecommunications. This is akin to a multi-dimensional definition of poverty, and is defined 
in Guangxi as the 8+1 “haves”. Despite of rapid poverty reduction in recent years, projections indicate 
that, to achieve poverty eradication, poverty reduction rates for the period 2016-2020 will have to be 
faster than the ones experienced in 2013-2016. Analysis of data indicates that poverty reduction is closely 
linked to rural net incomes, and that agricultural activity is the main driver of growing rural incomes. 
Moreover, data from the NPRS shows that when asked about the main cause poverty, lack of income was 
the cause mentioned more often by interviewees. Nevertheless, in some counties, other gaps such as lack 
of access to roads or safe drinking water can be the significant cause of poverty. 
 
Mountainous areas of Guangxi are exposed to extreme events, such as heavy rains and floods and to a 
lesser extent longer dry spells on a seasonal basis, as well as climate variability. In addition, Guangxi is also 
classified with high river flood risks and with medium water scarcity risk, especially in karst mountain areas 
where majority of the rural poor are located.  Areas with medium water scarcity could potentially 
transition to more adverse condition with climate-induced drought, affecting crops and/or resulting in 
agriculture competing with drinking water requirements. Mountainous conditions combined with average 
annual rainfall of 1,500-2,000 mm could result in floods and landslides, which could cause damages to 
rural roads.  Guangxi’s present hazard level may increase in the future due to the effects of potential 
climate change. For example, rainfall intensity (which is already above the national average) is expected 
to increase across a range of climate scenarios (Ying et al, 2014 and Wang et al 2015, respectively).  
Knowledge about, and adoption of, climate resilient and climate smart agronomic practices and 



technologies among Guangxi farmers and farmer cooperatives needs to be strengthened to address these 
climate change vulnerability issues in rural areas.   
 

PforR Program Scope  
Guangxi 13th 5-Year Plan (5YP), sets a target of lifting all rural people out of poverty by 2020. Specifically, 
the 5YP sets its main goals to lift: (i) all 4.52 million registered rural poor people out of poverty (end-2015 
figure); (ii) some 5,000 remaining poor villages out of poverty status; and (iii) 54 poverty counties out of 
poverty status. Guangxi Rural Poverty Reduction Program (GRPRP) is summarized in the document: 
“Guangxi Tackling Poverty Thirteen Five Year Plan”, issued in December 2016. It defines the poverty 
reduction strategy for the region to achieve the poverty eradication objectives of the National 13th 5YP. 
 
Within the GRPRP lies the Guangxi Consolidated Poverty Reduction Program (CPRP). The CPRP represents 
a sub-set of the GRPRP in the following ways: (i) it covers 54 designated national and provincial level 
poverty counties; (ii) over 40 earmarked funds from national, regional, municipality and county sources 
are pooled together to constitute the Consolidated Poverty Reduction Fund (CPRF); (iii) expenditures are 
prioritized by the counties in conformance with the 13th 5YP Poverty Reduction Plan priorities; and (iv) 
program activities are targeted at poverty households and villages identified in the national poverty 
registration system. At the heart of the CPRP’s more integrated and locally-driven approach is an annual 
mechanism of bottom-up budgeting in the designated poor counties for meeting their poverty reduction 
targets, coupled with transparent and accountable financing, monitoring and evaluation support from 
higher levels of government. 
 
The proposed PforR will support a sub-set of the activities, funded under CPRF with some exclusions and 
in a circumscribed geographic area. Moreover, the proposed PforR will also support enhanced 
expenditure monitoring efforts that the region will be able to report on budget allocation and execution 
by its major subprograms.  
 
The timeline of the proposed PforR is 2018 – 2021, which are the remaining years of the 13th 5YP, and 
one additional year for verifying results.  
 
The geographic boundary of the proposed PforR is circumscribed to 28 selected counties out of 54 poverty 
designated counties. The subset of 28 counties have high poverty rates (above 11 percent) or large 
poverty headcounts (above 60,000) and is representative of the rural poor in Guangxi. As of 2016, the 
selected 28 counties account for 12.6 million rural population (some 30 percent of rural population); and 
for 1.8 million rural poor, approximately 52.5 percent of the rural poor in the region. Moreover, the 
selected counties are diverse in several dimensions. Most of them are located in mountain areas -usually 
associated with high poverty rates- and a few in the river plains at the center of the region. Among the 28 
counties, there are 20 so called “deep poverty” counties, with poverty incidence rate of about 18 percent 
in 2016. There are also 9 autonomous counties (which sit specific ethnic minorities) and the proportion of 
ethnic minorities among the poor is 67.6 percent, slightly higher than in non-selected counties, 63.9 
percent. The age and gender distribution is like in the rest of the poverty-stricken counties in the region 
(i.e., lower share of adult females and higher share of elderly than the region’s average). 
To ensure the sharper focus on achieving the Government 2020 poverty reduction targets, the Result 
Areas (RAs) of the proposed PforR cover a key subset of the Government program activities, which are to 
the extent feasible, aligned with the government’s own targets. The RAs were selected considering that 
they: (i) make a strong contribution to achieving the government’s 2020 poverty alleviation targets; (ii) 

must be linked to specific measurable results; (iii) provide “value added” in terms of interventions that 
are innovative, scalable or expand upon on-going and planned piloted initiatives; and (iv) incentivize 
behavioral changes.  
 
Results Area 1: Improved Income Generation for Rural Poor. The goal is to increase the direct impact of 
the CPRP on the incomes of the targeted poor households through enabling rural poor to engage in 
agriculture-related economic activities and skills development. The proposed PforR would encourage: (i) 
increased allocation of the CPRF funding towards development of farmers cooperatives and poverty 
reduction leading enterprises; (ii) enhance institutional mechanisms associated with these two programs 
for improved poverty targeting and fund-use efficiency through introducing poverty reduction 
accreditation mechanisms for the enterprises and improved operational and governance standards and 
poverty targeting of farmer cooperatives; and (iii) significantly scale selected vocational skill training 
activities, and improving poverty and gender targeting of these programs.  
 
Results Area 2: Improved Infrastructure for Rural Poor. This results area supports the delivery of basic 
rural infrastructure for the designated poor villages in the targeted poverty counties under the CPRP 
funding arrangements. The goal is to ensure that the registered poor households have access to adequate 
rural drinking water supply and rural roads, which are required to meet Guangxi eight plus one "haves", 
multi-dimensional poverty eradication criteria needed to graduate households from poverty. The types of 
measures to be supported under the PforR include drinking water supply and rural roads. In addition, the 
proposed PforR would strengthen Guangxi infrastructure project management capacity with an aim to 
improve the efficiency and effectiveness of CPRF expenditures, and thus their poverty reduction impact 
through developing and adopting an IT-based pipeline project management system.   
 
Results Area 3: Cross-cutting Issues for Enhanced Program Implementation.  This Result Area supports 
the improvement of institutional arrangements and capacity through the introduction of poverty 
reduction program budgeting and enhanced monitoring and evaluation systems, with an aim to enable 
the governments to better align budget allocation with the expected output/outcomes and timely 
monitor the progress, efficiency and effectiveness of program implementation. The key activities are 
clustered around two themes: (i) enhancement of the CPRF program-based budgeting systems; and (ii) 
strengthening of the monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of poverty reduction activities. 

 
C. Proposed Program Development Objective(s)  

 
Program Development Objective(s)  

The proposed PforR development objective is to enhance the impact and efficiency of the Guangxi 
Consolidated Poverty Reduction Program in the targeted counties.   

 
D. Environmental and Social Effects 
 

The Environment and Social Systems Assessment (ESSA) finds that, in general, the existing legal and 
regulatory framework of environmental, health and safety, and social in China, and in Guangxi are 
consistent with the World Bank’s PforR Policy and Directive. During the PforR preparation, initial 
environmental and social screening was conducted based on the whole 13th 5YP in order to provide 
insights for the definition of the PforR boundary. Activities with potential significant adverse 



environmental and social impacts were excluded from the PforR boundary. These include ecological 
resettlement, major infrastructure construction projects (i.e. class 4 and higher roads), extractive 
activities, disaster relief and preparedness, and returning farmlands to forests. In addition, there are some 
activities subject to limitations, such as rural tourism development, which is limited to guest rooms, 
catering and agri-tourism, without involving physical cultural resources. In addition, the PforR excludes 
any activity subject to EIA Report, especially those located in natural forests; in or near physical cultural 
resources at/above county level; or in or near significant natural habitats. 
 
Some activities supported under the PforR may have potential negative impacts or risks. Pest 
management and livestock waste management are considered the main issues from an environment, 
health and safety perspective. Guangxi is promoting livestock farms to be established and run by farmers’ 
cooperatives under the context of poverty reduction. Livestock waste management is handled by 
individual farmers, who often have inadequate capacity of livestock raising. The ESSA thus recommends 
enhancing the technical capacity of staff in county livestock bureau and enhance technical training and 
support to farmers (PAP action). The current pest management system is aligned with the international 
good practices. The key aspects in the pest management system, such as mandatory system for 
production and sales permits for pesticides, pest disease monitoring and forecasting, and trainings for 
farmers, are satisfactorily performed by relevant institutions. 
 
The assessment of social risks of the activities to be supported under the PforR, concluded that there 
would not be significant social conflicts caused by its activities. However, the PforR would have limited 
social risks in terms of land acquisition or voluntary land donations and land transfers, effective 
participation and consultation, and grievance redress mechanism. The ESSA recommends developing a 
community participation and consultation manual, which will be the PAP action. 
 
OP 7.50 on International Waterways is triggered as the Program activities could potentially involve water 
extraction for rural water supply systems and irrigation from the Pearl River Basin, which is regarded as 
an international waterway, as certain tributaries of the basin originate or flow through Vietnam.  
 
Consultations and information disclosure. Between November 2017 and January 2018, meetings were 
held with representatives from Guangxi region, and three counties government institutions to discuss 
policies and procedures on land acquisition and resettlement, land use right transfer, ethnic minority 
development, among others. Formal public consultation meetings were held during April 14-15, 2018, in 
Nanning and in Du’An county. An electronic copy of the draft ESSA report was uploaded on Guangxi 
government official website and hardcopies were made available together with the consultation 
announcement to key stakeholders prior to formal consultations. 
 

E. Financing 
 

Program Financing 
 

Source 
Amount 

(US$ Million) 
% of Total 

Government 
5.13 93 




IBRD 
0.40 7 

Total 
5.53 100 

 

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Colombia Institutional Strengthening for Territorial Development DPF (P170728) 

 
 

  
 Page 1 of 5  

     

     
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Program Information Document 
(PID)  

 
Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated:  18-Jun-2019| Report No: PIDC27150 


BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Colombia P170728 Colombia Institutional 
Strengthening for Territorial 
Development DPF 
(P170728) 

 

Region Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) Financing Instrument 

LATIN AMERICA AND 
CARIBBEAN 

Jan 16, 2020 Governance Development Policy 
Financing 

Borrower(s) Implementing Agency 

Republic of Colombia National Planning Department 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The objective of this operation is to support policies to strengthen the institutional frameworks for coordination, 
planning and resource allocation, and capacity building that promote strategic investments at the regional level, as 
well as to foster efficient rural and urban land markets to leverage regional development. 

 
 Financing (in US$, Millions) 

FIN_SUMM_PUB_TBL 
SUMMARY 
 

Total Financing 400.00 
    
DETAILS-NewFin3 

Total World Bank Group Financing 400.00 

     World Bank Lending 400.00 
   

  
Decision 
The review did authorize the preparation to continue 

    
 
 
 
 
 
B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
 
Advancing inclusive, sustainable and productive territorial development is one of the salient objectives in Colombia’s new 
National Development Plan (NDP) for 2018-2022. Historically, gaps in the frameworks and institutions for territorial 
planning and subnational public management have contributed to important challenges to equitable regional 
development in Colombia, as reflected in poor service delivery indicators and inequality measures. Recognizing the 
importance of addressing these challenges, the Government’s 2014-2018 NDP outlined a program of reforms targeted 
at establishing the enabling environment and regulatory framework for integrated territorial development, actions that 
were supported by the First Programmatic Territorial Development Development Policy Financing (P158520). Important 
milestones - including approval of a new territorial planning policy, a comprehensive cadaster policy, and the 
strengthening of investment agreements between the national and subnational governments, among others - were 
achieved under this Program. Under the framework of the new 2018-2022 NDP, the Government is now advancing on 
the next generation of policies aimed at strengthening the institutional frameworks needed to further consolidate 
territorial development in Colombia.  
 
Relationship to CPF 
 
The proposed operation is well-aligned with Pillar 1 (Fostering Balanced Territorial Development) of the 2016-2021 CPF, 
which recognizes the important role of subnational governments in supporting territorial development.  
 

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The objective of this operation is to support policies to strengthen the institutional frameworks for coordination, 
planning and resource allocation, and capacity building that promote strategic investments at the regional level, as 
well as to  foster efficient rural and urban land markets to leverage regional development.  

 
Key Results  

 
Key results are expected from improved coordination, planning and resource allocation that promote strategic 
investments at the regional level, more efficient rural and urban land markets such as increased coverage of cadastral 
information for improved multisectoral public management, and improved public management capacity at the 
subnational level.  
 

D. Concept Description 
The proposed operation aims to achieve its objective in supporting policy actions under three pillars. As the design further 
develops, these may be consolidated into two pillars.  
 
Pillar 1: Coordination, Planning and Resource Allocation that Promote Strategic Investments at the Regional Level -  
Despite recent advances in the implementation of Colombia’s frameworks for effective territorial development, 
challenges related to weak inter-institutional coordination at the territorial level and investment atomization continue.  
Thus, further efforts are needed to consolidate these reforms and address persistent regional inequalities in territorial 
development. As such, reforms under this pillar focus on strengthening the institutional framework for multi-level 
governance, enhancing coordination within and between regions, and incentivizing regional investments aimed at 
supporting strategic regional development needs. 


 
Pillar 2: Fostering Efficient Urban and Rural Land Markets - Rural and urban land markets in Colombia have operated 
inefficiently, in part due to the lack of reliable and current information about land parcel demarcation, land ownership, 
land prices and overall land economic potential. As a result, land disputes have multiplied exponentially, complicated by 
the country’s long civil conflict which impeded access to the entirety of the territory. The operation will support 
government policies to establish efficient land information systems and processes and more dynamic land management 
at the urban level. 
 
Pillar 3: Improving Public Management Capacity at the Subnational Level - The effectiveness of the Government’s 2018-
2022 NDP in achieving its regional development objectives will depend, to a great extent, on the capacity of subnational 
governments to effectively manage the underlying processes essential for operationalizing and implementing policy, as 
well as for the central government to effectively monitor the process and provide subnational entities with relevant 
incentives and support.  As such, the operation supports reforms that build on previous and existing efforts to strengthen 
institutional capacities in subnational governments.  
 

E. Poverty and Social Impacts and Environmental Aspects 
 
Poverty and Social Impacts 

The Poverty and Social Impact Analysis (PSIA) will be organized around the pillars outlined in the DPF. In particular, the 
policies in Pillar 1 aimed at strengthening policies and institutions to enable integrated territorial development are 
expected to have positive effects on territorial management and planning at the subnational level, as well as on the 
enhancement of territorial development. The effects on welfare are likely to be mostly indirect and moderately positive 
overall, operating through a better provision of public services and local public goods. Actions under Pillar 2, supporting 
policies to improve the efficiency of rural and urban land markets are expected to have moderate positive effects in the 
long-run through tenure formalization, and the improvement of efficiency and performance of sub-national entities that 
could help to reduce socio-economic gaps. The impact on poverty and shared prosperity of policy actions under Pillar 3, 
aimed at supporting the strengthening of management capacity in the public sector at subnational level are expected to 
be positive; it will, however, depend on the way those savings will be allocated and the elasticity between local public 
investment and poverty. Further analysis and a more extensive literature review will take place as the team moves forward 
to determine the distributional impact of these prior actions. 
 
Environmental Impacts 
 

The policy actions supported by this operation will likely contribute to more adequate management of local resources and 
a better planning of territorial development, which, by way of integrating environmental preservation and conservation, 
can generate better contributions in information, institutional coordination and allocation of budgets for environmental 
management. To expand the coverage of cadastral information should contribute to increased tenure security and secure 
access of local communities to forest and natural resources and to strengthen local governments’ ability to generate 
resources, improve public service delivery, and potentially develop environmental enforcement capacity; those 
improvements can help to reduce illegal deforestation and degradation of rural landscapes, maintain vital ecosystems 
services, reduce greenhouse emissions, and improve agricultural productivity. Policies supporting strong environmental 
requirements for urban permits and urban land regulations could bring about climate change co-benefits in cities. The 
environmental analysis identified a potential risk for possible indirect negative environmental effects from some policies 
supported under the DPF, which are not considered to be significant, as long as government applies existing environmental 
legislation and best practices.  
 

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
UY - COVID-19 Response & Economic Recovery (P172796) 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Program Information Document 
(PID)  

 
Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 15-May-2020 | Report No: PIDA29255 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Uruguay P172796 
UY - COVID-19 Response & 
Economic Recovery 
(P172796) 

 

Region Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) Financing Instrument 

LATIN AMERICA AND 
CARIBBEAN 

18-Jun-2020 
Environment, Natural 
Resources & the Blue 
Economy 

Development Policy 
Financing 

Borrower(s) Implementing Agency 

Oriental Republic of Uruguay Ministry of Economy and Finance 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The development objective of the proposed operation is to support the Government of Uruguay in (i) mitigating the 
economic and social impact of the COVID-19 outbreak and (ii) laying the foundations for a strong and resilient economic 
recovery.  
 

 
 Financing (in US$, Millions) FIN_SUMM_PUB_TBL 

SUMMARY 
 

Total Financing 400.00 
 

 
DETAILS-NewFin3 

Total World Bank Group Financing 400.00 

     World Bank Lending 400.00 
   

  
Decision 
The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate 

   
B. Introduction and Context  
 
Country Context  
 

1. The COVID-19 outbreak is expected to push Uruguay’s economy into a recession for the first time in two 
decades. Over the past years, real GDP growth had been on a downward trend, declining from 4.6 percent in 2013 to 0.2 
percent in 2019, the lowest level since 2002. Prior to the outbreak, it was expected that this trend would be reversed in 
2020 as result of the implementation of the new Government’s reform agenda as well as the prospect of large 
infrastructure investments associated with a paper mill project of historic proportions coming on stream. The economic 
fallout resulting from the COVID-19 outbreak has changed this scenario dramatically. Total exports contracted y-o-y by 
10.9 percent1 as early as February, due to a drastic drop in exports to China, Uruguay’s largest trading partner. The 
domestic lockdown mandated in March then triggered a sharp decline in economic activity, affecting both demand and 
supply. Real GDP growth projections are nearly 6 percentage lower than they were at the beginning of 2020; they are 
projected to register at -3.7 percent, from an originally projected growth of 2.0 percent.  

 
2. The economic fallout will result in a significant increase in poverty and will generate an enormous strain for 
many Uruguayan families, with children and youth being particularly vulnerable to the shock.  Although the Government 
swiftly adopted emergency measures to mitigate the impact on the most vulnerable, building on existing social safety nets 
and adding temporary measures to expand the protection to those that do not qualify to existing programs, notably 
informal workers, Bank staff estimate that poverty will increase from 8.8 percent in 2019 to 11.8 percent in 2020, 
annihilating the major progress witnessed over the past decade. This is due to the economic impact of the pandemic 
layered over the effects of the drop in agricultural productivity from the drought as well as contagion from both 
Argentina’s economic crisis and Brazil’s recession. The increase in the poverty incidence translates into 106,000 additional 
people falling into poverty, disproportionately affecting households with children. Afro-descendants (1 in every 5 people 
in the poorest decile) and informal workers (7 in every 10 workers in the poorest decile) are disproportionately exposed 
to the shock. People in the bottom 40 percentile of the income distribution face higher risks of unemployment and labor 
income losses and make up a disproportionally large share of the workforce in the sectors most affected by the crisis, such 
as retail and hospitality. The expected increase in poverty incidence and severity threatens to erode human capital with 
lasting negative effects, and to raise concerns about perpetuation of disadvantages and social exclusion which stands in 
contrast to Uruguay’s societal preference for equity and social cohesion.  
 
3. To spur a strong economic recovery, Uruguay will have to set the foundations for a robust growth trajectory, 
notably by strengthening policies and institutions to enhance resilience to different types of shocks. The unprecedented 
economic shock caused by the COVID-19 outbreak is hitting Uruguay at the time of multiple risks pressing on the economy. 
First, Uruguay is confronting an increasingly adverse regional economic scenario, notably the protracted economic crisis 
and high market volatility in Argentina. Second, Uruguay is faced with a growing exposure to climate variability that is 
putting at risks major sectors of its economy, particularly agriculture. The different risk dimensions - health, fiscal and 
environmental - are mutually reinforcing and have the potential to create a “perfect storm” for the Uruguayan economy. 
The COVID-19 outbreak highlights the need for a more comprehensive and integrated approach to risk management, at 
the core of which is restoring prudent fiscal policy making. In order to put the economy back on a strong recovery path, 
the new authorities will need to embark on their ambitious medium-term reform program once the crisis abates, with a 
focus on the following dimensions: (i) fiscal consolidation, (ii) development of the private sector and (ii) resilience to 
climate and weather-related shocks.  
 

 
1 Although exports began to recover in March (in line with the rebound in industrial activity in China), they still were 23 percent lower than in 
March 2019. 


Relationship to CPF 
 

4. The proposed operation is fully aligned with the 2016-20 Country Partnership Framework (CPF), and the 2018 
PLR, notably as it supports Uruguay in “building resilience to shocks.” The 2015 Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) had 
identified the need to “build resilience to face economic volatility and extreme weather events” as one of the three main 
challenges for Uruguay. Accordingly, the first of the CPF’s two Focus Areas is dedicated to “building resilience to shocks.” 
This operation responds to the immediate needs to cushioning the impact of the pandemic on the most vulnerable 
workers and firms (Pillar 1) and lays the ground for a strong recovery (Pillar 2), through enhanced resilience to future 
shocks. The SCD update, currently under preparation, deepens the analysis of the vulnerability of the Uruguayan economy 
to multiple, reinforcing shocks (i.e. fiscal/financial, sanitary and environmental) and identifies key institutional weaknesses 
in this regard.  
 

C. Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
5. The development objective of the proposed operation is to support the Government of Uruguay in (i) mitigating 
the economic and social impact of the COVID-19 outbreak and (ii) laying the foundations for a strong and resilient 
economic recovery.  
 
Key Results  

 
6. Following corporate guidance on new IBRD financing for countries with an income above the Graduation 
Discussion Income (GDI), this operation addresses critical institutional shortcomings. At the core of the operation are 
policy and institutional reforms that will lay the foundations for a strong and resilient economic recovery, notably through 
enhancing resilience to multiple shocks. It supports measures that aim at mitigating the economic shock caused by COVID-
19, helping weather the impact on public finances, and restoring a robust fiscal outlook in the medium term. The operation 
thereby also contributes to safeguarding access to external capital markets on reasonable terms, an additional key feature 
of corporate guidance on GDI countries. This is critical given that the COVID-19 crisis has rendered access to sovereign 
financing more challenging for emerging economies, including Uruguay. Uruguay is currently rated just above the 
investment grade2, with a negative outlook in recognition of its large fiscal consolidation needs in a time of economic 
downturn. In addition, through its objective of enhancing resilience of the economy against climate shocks, the operation 
supports the provision of regional and global public goods.   
 

D. Project Description   

7. The proposed DPL is a stand-alone operation aimed at mitigating the economic and social impact of the COVID-
19 outbreak and improving policies and institutions for a strong and resilient economic recovery. The policy matrix of 
the operation includes key priorities in the Government’s emergency response to the COVID-19 crisis and in the medium-
term reform program. The first pillar is focused on supporting efforts to cushion the expected strong social and economic 
impact of the crisis, with a focus on the most vulnerable households and firms that would otherwise by financially viable. 
The second pillar is reflective is reflective of the ambitious medium-term reform commitments of the Government to 
support a strong and resilient economic recovery through: (i) instituting a fiscal policy framework that safeguards fiscal 
and debt sustainability, (ii) improving business climate for private sector development, (iii) enhancing disaster and 
environmental risk management and, (iv) transforming agricultural production towards higher resilience to climate 
change and increased productivity.  

 
2 Uruguay’s sovereign credit rating, according to Fitch, is the lowest possible rating within the creditworthiness band, i.e., BBB- with a negative 
outlook. The other two major credit rating agencies place Uruguay at BBB. 


 
8. The proposed DPF will support important reforms along two pillars:  
 

• Pillar 1 of this operation aims at supporting a series of temporary countercyclical measures to protect the most 
vulnerable and avoid the destruction of productive assets in the face of the COVID-19 pandemic. These measures 
include: (i) the enactment of a series of countercyclical measures, including the creation of the COVID-19 Fund to 
swiftly respond to the sanitary crisis (PA#1), (ii) the strengthening of three important social assistance programs to 
(partially) offset temporary income losses of lower income groups (PA#2), (iii) the creation of a temporary 
unemployment insurance scheme to protect workers against effects of lay-offs or partial suspensions (PA#3), (iv) the 
strengthening of the institutional response to the expected rise of violence in the context of the COVID-19 quarantine 
(PA#4), and (v) the adoption of emergency measures to support access to finance for MSMEs (PA#5). In the 
presentation of these emergency measures, the Government emphasized their temporary and countercyclical nature 
and committed to rolling them back once the crisis will have passed.  

 

• Pillar 2 of this operation aims at laying the foundations for a strong and resilient economic recovery. The COVID-19 
outbreak brings to the fore how the deteriorating fiscal position over the past years has limited the scope of a 
countercyclical fiscal crisis response. The Government is committed to reversing the trend of rising fiscal deficits and 
debt levels by instituting a fiscal policy framework that safeguards fiscal and debt sustainability and allows for 
conducting countercyclical policies in times of economic downturns. This agenda is at the heart of the medium-term 
reform program, as reflected in the Urgent Reform Bill, and will be implemented in full once recovery sets in. The 
commitment to fiscal consolidation has already manifested itself by measures adopted soon after the Government 
started its mandate, such as the elimination of certain tax expenditures in VAT (as reflected under the PA#6). Pillar 2 
also reflects the Government’s commitment to continue advancing on structural reforms for private sector 
development and on institutional strengthening for better protection of the economy against climate-related shocks. 
Both agendas were initiated under the previous Government and have been endorsed by the current administration 
as critical foundations for a dynamic and sustainable recovery after the COVID-19 pandemic. The Government will 
pursue a broader reform effort aimed at improving Uruguay’s regulatory environment, such as by easing requirements 
and costs for firm registration (PA#7). Uruguay also needs to strengthen its capacity to shelter its economy against 
climate variability to avoid jeopardizing its recovery post-COVID. Addressing disaster and environmental risks is by 
nature a complex and multi-sectoral endeavor, transmitting through various channels to the entire economy, and 
requires differentiated yet coordinated interventions at various levels of government. In this sense, the operation 
supports the institutional strengthening of the emergency response system, with enhanced coordination (both 
horizontal and vertical) between public and private stakeholders (PA#8) as well as the transformation of the 
agriculture model that increases resilience to climate variability, while enhancing productivity (PA#9). 

 

E. Implementation  
 
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements  

 
9. The Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF) will be the main responsible agency for the monitoring, evaluation, 
and results framework and will coordinate actions across relevant ministries and agencies involved in the operation. 
The agencies responsible for the implementation of the prior actions supported by the operation include: (i) Pillar 1: 
Ministry of Social Development (MIDES), Ministry of Labor and Social Security (MLSS), Ministry of Public Health (MPH), 
National Institute for Women (InMujeres) and MEF; (ii) Pillar 2: MEF, SINAE and Ministry of Livestock, Agriculture and 
Fisheries (MGAP). The World Bank will be monitoring the implementation of the DPF program through regular supervision 



 
The World Bank  
UY - COVID-19 Response & Economic Recovery (P172796) 

 
 

  
 Page 6 of 8  

     

missions. The World Bank will maintain close dialogue with counterparts throughout preparation and collaborate with 
MEF for the monitoring of indicators.  
 

F. Poverty and Social Impacts, and Environmental, Forests, and Other Natural Resource Aspects 
 
10. The policy measures supported by this DPF series are aimed at mitigating the short-term social and economic 
impact of the Covid-19 pandemic on the most vulnerable, while implementing structural reforms aiming at building 
enhanced resilience to multiple shocks (sanitary, fiscal and environmental). As such, the overall reform package 
supported is expected to contribute to mitigating the effects of the pandemic shock on the poor, both directly through 
strengthening the social safety net, but also by facilitating a faster and more sustainable recovery. By strengthening the 
social protection systems, the policy program under the first pillar is expected to mitigate the impact of the Covid-19 
shock on the most vulnerable by providing emergency relief as part of a time-bound countercyclical economic stimulus 
package. Policies supported under the second pillar of the operation are aimed at strengthening the foundations for a 
strong economic recovery with an emphasis placed on enhancing institutional capacities in reducing the country’s 
exposure to future shocks, which tend to affect disproportionally the most vulnerable groups of the society. 

 

Environmental, Forests, and Other Natural Resource Aspects 
 

11. The policies supported under Pillar 1 of this DPL are not likely to cause significant negative effects on the 
environment, forests, or other natural resources. The policies supported under the second pillar of this operation aim at 
strengthening the foundations for private sector development and are expected to increase overall economic activity. 
Spurring economic recovery after the COVID-19 pandemic does not imply a relaxation of environmental standards, given 
the strong environmental management framework in Uruguay. The adoption of a policy on emergency and disaster risk 
management and institutional strengthening of the National Emergency System-SINAE (PA#8) is expected to reduce 
adverse impact to the environment including degradation of natural resources and the human urban environment from 
exposure to disease and effects of infrastructure loss. The adoption of the national plan of adaptation to climate 
variability and climate change (PA#9) is expected to have significant positive environmental effects.  
 
12. Uruguay has a strong legislative and regulatory framework and relatively effective public-sector environmental 
agencies. The limited negative environmental effects that could result from the operation will be well managed and 
mitigated by the existing laws and regulations. Agencies such as the DINAMA and DINAGUA and DIGESA (under the 
Ministry of Health) provide oversight and regular monitoring of environmental indicators, especially pollution. 
Environmental impact assessment and licensing has been a requirement since 1994 (Ley 16,466) and is considered among 
the top ranked countries based on environmental performance.3 

 

G. Risks and Mitigation 
 

13. The overall risk to achieving the PDO is assessed as Moderate. Given the severe economic impact of the COVID-
19 outbreak around the globe, the macroeconomic risk is rated as Substantial: if the projected recovery path that foresees 
a return to positive growth rates at end-2020 does not materialize, the country may be stretched beyond its fiscal capacity 
to support the businesses and households affected by the crisis. The temporary COVID-19 response measures supported 
through this operation would help the economy withstand the shock, while the medium-term institutional and policy 
reforms also contained in the policy matrix will be critical for embarking as swiftly as possible on a sustained recovery 


trajectory. The risks related to Sector Strategies and Policies are rated Substantial because the timing of this operation, 
(prepared shortly after the new Government took up its mandate, as well as the enormous amount of personal and 
financial resources needed to respond to the COVID-19 crisis) may affect the ability to implement effectively the measures 
contained in the policy matrix and meet the result targets. These risks are however mitigated by supporting through this 
operation the reforms falling under the Government’s priority areas, as set by the COVID-19 response package and policy 
package put forward in the Urgent Reform Bill. The risk categories for the Technical Design of the Program, Institutional 
Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability and Stakeholders are rated as Moderate. In terms of technical design and 
institutional capacity, Uruguay has a strong track record in terms of implementing programs, and a long trajectory of 
successful DPL programs with the Bank and similar programs with other IFIs. On risks related to Stakeholders, the DPL 
series supports further strengthening of the policies underpinning this social contract, notably those captured under Pillar 
1.  . 
    
























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Maharashtra Project on Climate Resilient Agriculture (P160408) 

 
 

  
Dec 21, 2016 Page 1 of 19  

     

 

 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal. 
 

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 22-Jan-2017 | Report No: PIDISDSC20715 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

India P160408  Maharashtra Project on 
Climate Resilient 
Agriculture (P160408) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

SOUTH ASIA Jun 05, 2017 Aug 24, 2017 Agriculture 

Lending Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Republic of India Ministry of Agriculture, 
Government of Maharashtra 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
To enhance climate-resilience and profitability of smallholder farming systems in selected districts of Maharashtra. 

 

 Financing (in USD Million) 

 

Financing Source Amount  

Borrower  120.00  

International Bank for Reconstruction and Development  480.00  

Total Project Cost  600.00  

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B-Partial Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 

 
 
Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
 
B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
 
1. India is one of the fastest growing economies in the world, ranked among the top ten highest GDP countries, and is 

the world’s second most populous country. During the past two decades, India’s GDP grew at an average of 7 

percent annually. Poverty incidence declined on average by 1.5 percentage points per year during 2005–10 and 

improvements in key development indicators have been remarkable. However, following years of impressive 

economic growth and poverty alleviation, India is now at a critical juncture in its paths towards becoming an 

economic powerhouse and is facing important development challenges and structural constraints to a more 

inclusive growth and a more sustainable development. India remains home to 263 million poor people (most of 

which reside in rural areas) living on less than US$1.90/day and the economic growth has not generated jobs fast 

enough to absorb labor out of agriculture and low productivity rural jobs. To address these challenges, the 

Government of India (GoI) through its 12th Five-Year Plan (FY2013-17) put forward an ambitious goal for accelerated 

economic growth, poverty reduction, job creation, and environmental management. The plan foresees during this 

period an annual GDP growth of 8.2 percent, a reduction in poverty rate by 10 percentage points, 50 million new 

jobs – and an annual growth in the agriculture and allied rural sectors of 4 percent. 

 
2. Climate change may impede socioeconomic development within India and increasing investment in adaptation 

measures to reduce vulnerability will be essential to maintaining economic growth. India’s rapid growth has 

increased its prominence on the global stage and drawn attention to its climate mitigation and adaptation efforts. 

The country has shown leadership in global efforts to limit climate change and is among the early countries to have 

ratified the Paris Agreement on Climate Change (in October 2016). Analyses of the country’s historic climate data 

support the extent of the change taking place: an increase in mean annual temperature (0.56°C between 1901 and 

2007), as well as a decrease in seasonal mean rainfall with more frequent extreme rainfall events. Looking ahead, 

temperatures are projected to increase further and at a faster rate than before (by 1.7-2.0
o
C by the 2030s), coupled 

with an overall increase in monsoon rainfall (with an increase in geographic variability) and extreme precipitation 

events (with an increase in rainfall intensity). India shows an increasing trend in its per capita emission of GHGs, 

though current per capita levels are still among the lowest in the world (2.44 tCO2 equivalent per capita in 2012, 

against global average of 5.5 tCO2 equivalent). In absolute terms, India remains one of the largest GHG emitters, 

with its agriculture sector the second largest contributor (around 18 percent of the country’s total GHG emissions).  

 
3. Agriculture sector growth is essential in achieving India’s development goals: the sector currently accounts for 14 

percent of national GDP and is a source of livelihood for more than half of the population. More than two thirds of 

the country’s poor live in rural areas, and their chance of getting out of poverty directly depends on the 

performance of agriculture and allied rural sectors. The success of ongoing massive rural-urban transformation will 

also depend on improved connectivity of rural areas to cities, enhanced agriculture productivity and value chains for 

agricultural products and off-farm job creation in rural areas, which would temper down current massive migrations 

to urban areas. The agriculture sector also has a major potential for reducing GHG emissions and improving 

environmental management through enhanced soil and water conservation and climate-resilient farm management 

practices.  

 
4. Over the past two decades, the agriculture sector has performed below its potential and has not yet met the 

envisaged growth targets. In the 1990s and 2000s, the annual agriculture growth rate was around 3-3.5 percent, and 


dropped even below 2 percent per annum during 2013-15, due to low productivity, growing water and land scarcity, 

rising labor costs, and declining international commodity prices, exacerbated by the late onset of monsoon rainfall 

and increase rainfall intensity. While overall rainfall is projected to increase, its distribution over time and space is 

likely to become much more erratic, thereby leading to increasingly frequent droughts and floods. Unless significant 

efforts to capitalize on the projected increase in rainfall are made to improve water conservation and soil moisture 

management, water scarcity at farm level will remain a key impediment to achieving higher levels of crop and water 

productivity. 

 
5. Going forward, five inter-related and strategic shifts are required to achieve the 4 percent annual growth target 

set by GoI for agriculture and transform the sector into a modern food system: (i) a shift away from food grain 

production targets towards diversification into high-value horticulture and livestock products; (ii) a shift away from 

pure focus on physical productivity (yields) towards resilience and stability of agriculture to deal with the effects of 

climate change and short-term weather anomalies; (iii) a shift away  from a focus on on-farm production towards 

value addition in the post-harvest segments of the food value chains; (iv) a shift away from a calorie focused 

production structure towards nutrition sensitive agriculture, and (v) a shift away from increasing irrigation water 

supply towards improved water use efficiency. The proposed project is designed to directly contribute to this 

structural transformation process by supporting several of those strategic shifts with a focus on building climate 

resilience in the agriculture sector in the State of Maharashtra.  

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
6. The State of Maharashtra is one of the economic growth engines of the country:  it is the top-ranked state in terms 

of contribution to the national GDP (14.4 percent, 2014-15) and has witnessed an average economic growth rate of 

over 8 percent per annum over the last decade. With 9.3 percent of country’s population and 9.4 percent of the 

country’s geographic area, Maharashtra is also the second largest state in India. Structurally, Maharashtra is more 

urbanized and industrialized compared to the rest of the country and economic contributions of the industries and 

of the services sectors are much larger than that of agriculture and allied sectors (which account for only 11 

percent). However, the agriculture sector remains central to Maharashtra’s economic and political landscape, and 

growth in the sector is critical for the state as over 50 percent of its population depends on agriculture.  

 
7. In Maharashtra, agriculture has grown at an annual average of 6.4 percent from 2004-05 to 2011-12, but growth in 

the sector fluctuates heavily and is depending on highly erratic rainfall during any particular year and rainfall 

variability over time. The distribution of rainfall is highly uneven within the state and ranges from over 4,000 mm per 

annum in coastal areas to less than 400 mm in some of the most arid districts. Agriculture remains the highest user 

of freshwater, withdrawing more than 80 per cent of the surface and groundwater (“blue water”) available to the 

state. Since the continuation of the State’s strong economic growth performance would have to be supported by 

higher water availability in all three sectors of the economy, there is a need for Maharashtra to better manage its 

water resources and in particular to enhance the efficiency of the water used for agriculture and focus on increasing 

the availability and use by the agriculture sector of “green water” (rainwater stored in the soil as soil moisture). 

Severe consecutive droughts experienced in large parts of Maharashtra over the last two years have considerably 

affected the state’s agricultural performance and social fabric in rural areas, and have prompted the highest-level 

state authorities to declare “drought-proofing” of agriculture a key development priority for Maharashtra. 


8. Maharashtra’s agriculture is dominated by small and marginal farmers with an average farm size of 1.44 ha. Most 

of the agricultural production is rain-fed, with less than 20 percent of the arable land under irrigation. Farmers’ 

annual production covers two seasons: kharif crops planted at the onset of the monsoon rainfall and ravi crops 

planted at the beginning of the winter season. Due to the broad range of agro climatic zones and soil types 

encountered, the state’s agricultural production is fairly diverse. Crop production is dominated by food grains, i.e. 

cereals (mostly rice, sorghum or jowar, maize) and pulses (chickpea or gram, pidgeon pea or tur). For oilseed crops, 

soybean remains by far the most important commodity. Cotton and sugarcane, whose production is relatively 

water-intensive, are the two cash crops most commonly found in Maharashtra’s farming systems (the State is 

among the largest producers of cotton and sugarcane in the country).  

 
9. The area under cultivation for cereals has declined since 2000, with a considerable drop in the production of 

sorghum (though naturally better adapted to dryer conditions than other cereals) and a shift from food grains 

towards cash crops has been observed, with an increase in the area for cotton and sugarcane. Since 2000, an 

upsurge in the production of high-value horticulture crops has been observed, and today, the State of Maharashtra 

has emerged as one of the country largest producers of fruits (mango, citrus, grapes, pomegranate) and vegetables 

(onion, tomato). Overall, crop productivity has increased over time but remains at relatively low levels (2013-14, 

non-drought year:  sorghum 814 kg/ha; soybean 1,214 kg/ha; cotton 361 kg/ha). Yield gaps for several key crops are 

still significant, reflecting the need for a mix of sector policies and investments to promote research on climate-

adapted varieties, irrigation for a more efficient on-farm use of water, and extension services for the adoption of 

climate-resilient agronomic practices and technologies – i.e. for building climate resilience in Maharashtra’s farming 

systems.   

 
10. In 2008, GoI released the National Action Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC), and directed the States to develop 

State Action Plans on Climate Change guided by and consistent with the structure and strategies of the NAPCC. The 

GoM took a pioneering step towards formulating the Maharashtra State Adaptation Action Plan on Climate Change 

(MSAAPCC) by commissioning a comprehensive vulnerability assessment study which included the task of 

generating model-based climate projections specific to the State’s geography. The MSAAPCC seeks to address the 

urgent need to integrate climate change concerns into the State’s overall development strategy, thus assisting in 

building long term climate resilience and enabling adaptation to the likelihood of risks arising from climate change. 

The MSAAPCC climate modelling results for 2030, 2050 and 2070, show that temperature and rainfall are projected 

to increase across the State of Maharashtra, with important regional variations – resulting, on balance, in potentially 

significant adverse impacts on agriculture performance.  

 
11. The annual mean temperature in Maharashtra is projected to increase by around 1.3-1.5

o
C by the 2030s; the 

projected increase in monsoon rainfall by the 2030s ranges from 13-30% across the state. These analytical findings 

from the MSAAPCC are consistent with the findings of the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel 

on Climate Change (IPCC). The effects of these longer term climate trends on sectors like agriculture or water, 

effectively signaling a shift in climatic conditions, will be further aggravated by the projected increase in the 

frequency of extreme climate events (droughts, hailstorms, floods, delays in the onset of monsoons, higher rainfall 

intensity) already experienced in Maharashtra over recent past, as illustrated by the 3 severe droughts that hit the 

state over the past 5 years.  

 


12. The GoI has designed a number of policy initiatives and programs aligned with the recommendations from the 

NAPCC program and the state-level action plans, including the National Initiative on Climate Resilient Agriculture 

(NICRA) to promote the development of climate-resilient villages; the Pardhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana 

(PMKSY) Program to promote efficient irrigation practices and improve water use efficiency; the Jalyukt Shivar 

Abhiyan (JSA) Program on watershed and drought management; the Integrated Watershed Management Program 

(IWMP) on natural resources conservation; as well as India’s Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC) as 

presented to the COP21 in Paris to address the adverse effects of climate change. Against this background, the GoM 

is committed to further support and implement those policies in Maharashtra and sees the proposed project as an 

opportunity to contribute to the implementation of policies in support of the climate agenda. 

 
13. Higher level authorities in the state of Maharashtra have recently embraced a new paradigm for the agricultural 

sector which now needs to be mainstreamed across institutions and stakeholders. It is built around the recognition 

and understanding of climate change and climate variability as the “new normal”; this in turn, requires a structural 

shift in the approach to sustainable agriculture growth based on longer-term adaptive interventions (reforms, 

investments, capacity development) to build climate-resilience in agriculture – in addition to focusing primarily on 

shorter-term emergency responses to recurring natural disasters. The Bank is very well placed to provide value-

added to the GoM in establishing this new paradigm through its experience with climate-resilient agriculture 

elsewhere, its capacity to work multi-sectorally, and to apply cutting-edge knowledge at scale in support of changes 

in policies and strategies to promote climate adaptation and mitigation, and generate climate co-benefits.  

 
Relationship to CPF 
 
14. The proposed project is fully consistent with the India Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for FY2013–17 to 

support poverty reduction and shared prosperity in India. In line with the pillar for Transformation, the project 

promotes inclusive rural growth, development and dissemination of new agricultural technologies, climate-resilient 

agriculture, enhanced market linkages for small and marginal farmers, and improved water and natural resource 

management (Outcome 2.4). Further, the proposed project will have a positive impact in terms of: (i) environmental 

protection by enhancing the management of soil and water resources, (ii) reduced greenhouse gas emissions by 

disseminating high efficiency irrigation systems, and (iii) promoting diversification into high value crops (Outcomes 

2.5 and 2.6). The project will also contribute to the Inclusion pillar of the CPS by enhancing the livelihoods of small 

and marginal farmers through crop diversification, enhanced market access (Outcome 3.6), and by improving local 

communities’ ability to manage droughts and floods through enhanced design and restoration of irrigation 

infrastructure with better flood protection features (Outcome 3.8).  

 
15. The project is fully aligned with the Bank’s Climate Change Action Plan (CCAP) which explicitly highlights climate-

resilient agriculture and water management as key priorities for climate adaptation in the South Asia Region (SAR). 

CCAP also advocates that transformative action on climate change requires partnerships with client countries to 

mobilize additional capital for mitigation and adaptation action, which the project proposes to achieve with 

potential co-financing from the GoM as well as from the Green Climate Fund (GCF) through IFC’s 2030 Water 

Resources Program. The project will directly contribute to WBG’s commitment to increase the climate-related share 

of its portfolio from 21 to 28 percent by 2020 in response to client demand.  

  

16. The project is based on a multi sector approach and will require close collaboration across the Bank’s Global 

Practices and Units (Agriculture, Water, Trade & Competitiveness, Climate Change, and Disaster Risk Management) 

in the design and throughout implementation. Close collaboration during planning and implementation will be 

sought with thematically related on-going/pipeline projects and initiatives (e.g. Maharashtra Agricultural 

Competitiveness Project - MACP, P120836; India Climate Change Mitigation Action Support, P162119; National 

Groundwater Management Improvement Program, P158119). Collaboration with IFC is secured through the 

inclusion on the project team of technical staff from IFC’s 2030 Water Resources Group (2030WRG) and efforts to 

develop co-financing arrangements with possible funding from the Green Climate Fund (GCF).  

 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
17. The PDO is to enhance climate-resilience and profitability of smallholder farming systems in selected districts of 

Maharashtra. 

 
18. Direct project beneficiaries will be small farmers (households with 1.0 to 2.0 ha of farm land) and marginal farmers 

(less than 1.0 ha), who will gain from knowledge and technology transfer, and access to assets to enhance climate 

resilience on their farms, as well as increased revenue from crop diversification and participation in emerging value 

chains. Farmer producer companies (FPCs) and small and medium agro-entrepreneurs (SMEs) will also benefit from 

the project through climate-resilient investments in value chain development, support with the promotion of 

backward and forward linkages, and access to business development and incubation services. The project will also 

directly benefit local institutions and agencies (e.g. agricultural research and extension, technical advisory services) 

through capacity development on climate resilience. State Agriculture Universities (SAU), various line departments, 

government agencies and other institutions at district and sub district level will also benefit through a strategic 

partnership with the project towards mainstreaming climate resilience in agriculture.  

   
B. Key Results 
 

19. The following Key Performance Indicators (KPI) are proposed for measuring the core outcomes of the project:  

a. KPI #1 - Resilience: Farmers adopting climate-resilient agricultural technologies [Corporate Results 

Indicator] 

b. KPI #2 - Resilience: Area provided with micro irrigation systems [Corporate Results Indicator]  

a. KPI #3 - Resilience: Average on-farm soil organic carbon content 

b. KPI #4 - Profitability: Average farm income  

c. KPI #5 - Direct beneficiaries: Farmers reached with agricultural assets or services (by gender) [Corporate 

Results Indicator] 

 
D. Concept Description 

 
20. Project area. The proposed project will be implemented in the 15 districts of the Mrathwada and Vidarbha regions 

that have been most affected by the recurrent monsoon failures of recent years. These districts account for a total 

population of 30.2 million people and a project area of around 3.5 million ha. Out of a total of 18,000 villages in the 

districts selected, the project will cover 5,000 villages characterized by a high climate-vulnerability index and low 

HDI; this includes about 1,000 villages located in the Purna river basin tract and showing very high levels of soil 

salinity and sodicity. Managed spill-over effects are expected for a range project activities and outputs to villages not 

covered by the project. Most of the project area is located in Maharashtra’s semi-arid agro climatic zones. The vast 

majority of rural households in the project districts are small and marginal farmers whose livelihood depends for 

more than 90 percent on rainfed agriculture.  

 
21. Cropping patterns in the selected districts are dominated by cereals (mostly sorghum and millet), pulses and 

oilseeds (soybean). While cotton remains the main cash crop, more and more farmers are growing fruit trees to 

secure their farm income. Unlike in some other parts of Maharashtra where groundwater shortage has become an 

acute problem, in the project area only 55 percent of the total groundwater potential has been harnessed. However, 

poor management of surface water and lack of in situ storage in the project area have aggravated the impact on 

agriculture from the severe consecutive droughts that have hit Maharashtra in the past couple of years. 

 
22. Project rationale and alternatives considered. The proposed project results from a clear understanding at the 

highest level of authority in the state that Maharashtra needs a comprehensive, long-term and systematic approach 

to managing and coping with climate change and variability. In the past, emergency responses to increasingly 

frequent climate events have yielded only limited results: such short-term approach did not significantly boost 

agriculture sector performance, prevent further deterioration of the socio-economic fabric in rural areas (exodus, 

farmer suicides), or lead to an increase in farmer income and prosperity. Thus, given the climate projections that 

indicate severe impact on the agriculture and water sectors in Maharashtra under status quo, the new paradigm to 

addressing climate adaptation and mitigation in the agriculture and food system is essential.  

 
23. In addition to the short-term disaster management approach, a policy-based project approach was considered to 

address the impact of climate change on agriculture. Such approach would aim at reforming policies, including those 

that encourage the rapid expansion of water-intensive crops resulting in the depletion of groundwater resources. 

This approach was not pursued, since the selected project area presents distinct agro-hydrological features (e.g. no 

rice is grown in the project area and the sugarcane grown in the selected districts represents less than 3 percent of 

the state-level production). Importantly, the key policies impacting the selected project area relate to markets, and 

on these, Maharashtra has been among the most progressive states in terms of implementing policy reform. The 

remaining policies are beyond the State mandate, controlled by the central government, and these mostly relate to 

the distorting minimum support prices for selected commodities, which by and large are not growth in the project.  

 
24. Finally, a watershed-based approach was considered for the project, with a stronger focus on natural resources 

management. This approach was eventually discarded since it would not sufficiently focus on farm-level adaptation 

and mitigation issues nor would it provide the support for value chain development, a key part of the 

comprehensive approach needed to provide the market outlets and input supplies required to incentivize farmers to 

adopt resilient crops and agronomic practices. 

 
25. In line with GoM request, the proposed project, as represented in the graph below, is built around a comprehensive, 

multi sector approach that focuses specifically on building resilience in agriculture through the scaling up of tested 

technologies and practices, while generating the following interdependent triple win solutions:  

a. enhanced water security at farm level - through the adoption of technologies for a more efficient use of 

water for agriculture, and the increase in water storage capacity (surface and sub-surface) and 

improvement in water distribution structures to address on-farm water availability and reduce the risks 

associated with intra- and inter seasonal climate variability;  

b. improved soil health - through the adoption of good agricultural practices to improve soil fertility, soil 

nutrient management, and promote soil carbon sequestration; and  

c. increased farm productivity and crop diversification - through the adoption of climate-resilient seed 

varieties (short maturity, drought and heat resistant, salt tolerant) and market-oriented crops with a 

clear potential for income security derived from the integration of farmers in corresponding value-

chains.  

 

Strategic Overview, Thematic Linkages and expected Achievements of the PoCRA  

 

 
26. Sustainable pathways to resilience. Enhancing climate-resilience in agriculture involves the integration of 

adaptation, mitigation, and other practices in agriculture that increase the capacity of the farmer and his/her 

production system to respond to various climate-related disturbances by resisting or tolerating the damage and 

recovering quickly. To ensure the sustainability of the comprehensive on-farm and off-farm interventions required 

to build resilience in agriculture, there is a need to strengthen institutions, in particular at the local level, and 

improve their capacity to plan for adaptation to evolving climatic conditions and induce a change in local practices.  

 
27. In addition, the successful adoption of climate-resilient farming practices will largely depend on the farmer’s 

perception of income gains from the new technologies, as profitability remains the most important incentive for 

change at farm level. To that effect, crop diversification, access to knowledge and farm assets needs to be 


accompanied by more market opportunities, which can be achieved through improved participation of organized 

smallholders in the corresponding value chains and the mobilization of private sector (e.g. agri business SMEs).  

 
28. Finally, generating cutting-edge knowledge on climate change and its impact on key sectors such as agriculture and 

water is key to providing strong analytical underpinnings for policies on climate adaptation and mitigation – which 

still need better implementation in Maharashtra (and the rest of the country), despite the state being a frontrunner 

in India on the reform agenda for climate change.      

 
29. Leveraging financial resources. Implementing climate-resilient practices at a scale to cover the targeted 5,000 

villages in a saturation mode with watershed treatment and on-farm technologies requires an estimated total costs 

of well over US$2 billion. The tentative budget for the proposed project is US$600 million, with US$480 million from 

IBRD and US$120 million from GoI/GoM. This represents an average budget envelope of US$20,000 per village and 

year. A contribution from project beneficiaries towards technologies adopted and assets acquired from the project 

will be subsequently factored in, on the basis of the cost-sharing norms applied in other GoM programs and 

projects. Therefore, a major task during project preparation will consist in strategically prioritizing interventions 

planned in each cluster of around 10 villages, selecting results-based investments to be financed, and phasing in 

activities to be implemented in a given cluster.  

 
30. Against this background, the GoM is seeking to leverage its own resources and the IBRD funding with 

complementary funding from the Green Climate Fund (GCF). IFC’s 2030 Water Resources Group is currently 

supporting the GoM’s efforts to access GCF grant funding in the range of US$250 million to scale up climate 

adaptation in Maharashtra rain-fed agriculture. During project preparation, Bank and 2030WRG staff will work as 

one project team and explore with counterparts possible co-financing arrangements between the IBRD funding and 

the GCF grant.  

  
31. Project overview. The proposed project seeks to introduce transformational changes in the agriculture sector by 

scaling-up proven technologies and good agricultural practices that contribute to building climate resilience and 

enhancing farm income. The project will promote the transfer of technologies for climate adaptation and mitigation 

at farm level and will support targeted interventions and limited physical investments in the catchment area to 

promote the use of surface water over groundwater. To enhance farmer income, the project will support activities 

aimed at linking organized smallholders with agri-food SMEs and accessing new market opportunities enhancing 

their participation in commodity value chains.  

  
32. Finally, for the sustainability of the comprehensive approach proposed to build resilience in agriculture, the project 

will enhance the capacity of institutions and agencies at various levels to mainstream resilience (in particular in 
agricultural services for smallholders), develop strategic partnerships with national and international entities, and 
help generate evidence-based knowledge to advance the policy agenda on climate change and vulnerability.  To 
achieve the PDO and KPI targets, the project is designed around the four components described below.    

 
Component A: Promoting Climate-resilient Agricultural Systems (US$ XXX million) 
  

33. The objective of this component is to build climate-resilience in agricultural production systems through a series of 
activities at farm level, complemented by interventions in catchment areas. Mini watershed plans will be developed 
early to provide a road map for investment priorities and the implementation of related activities. This component 



will focus on: (i) scaling-up the adoption by farmers of climate-resilient agricultural practices aimed at improving soil 
health and water-use efficiency; and (ii) catchment area treatment to promote the use of “green water” for 
agriculture over “blue water”, and improve the availability of water at farm level. This component contributes 
directly to the PDO by promoting the transfer of climate resilient technologies at farm level (KPI #1), supporting the 
development of micro-irrigation systems (KPI #2) and encouraging farmers to adopt practices that enhance soil 
health (KPI #3). 

  
34. Participatory development of mini watershed plans. In line with the Maharashtra Groundwater Development and 

Management Act (2009, effective from 2013) which promotes the watershed as participatory planning unit, this 
component will finance the development of some 500 mini watershed plans, each covering a cluster of 8 to 12 
villages and an area of around 5,000 ha. Mini watershed plans are comprehensive multi-year activity and local 
investment tools for planning and monitoring. They include a comprehensive resource mapping, a rapid appraisal of 
stakeholders taking into account gender specificities, and participatory water budgeting to inform on possible 
investments in irrigation and drainage, and water resources management. Those plans will serve as a road map for 
the implementation of subsequent activities and investments under the proposed project. 

  
35. Technology transfer and climate-resilient agriculture practices for a sustainable soil and water management.  To 

enhance increase water productivity and achieve water security at farm level, the component will scale-up the 
adoption of technologies and practices aimed at maximizing the use of surface water for agriculture, at managing 
groundwater resources in a sustainable manner, and at getting “more crop per drop”. To that effect, the component 
will finance the adoption of in-situ soil moisture conservation practices, and the expansion of micro irrigation 
systems (primarily drip and sprinkler irrigation), including water supply structures and drainage facilities. The 
component will also help improve on-farm water availability through selected investments at catchment level (as 
prioritized in the mini watershed plan) to increase surface and sub-surface water storage capacity. To that effect and 
in close coordination with the Chief Minister’s Program on watershed and drought management (Jalyukt Shivar 
Abhiyan), the project will finance drainage line treatment, the improvement of water courses, the construction of 
new and desilting of existing water harvesting structures (e.g. farm and community ponds), and the construction of 
groundwater recharge structures. Agronomic practices promoted under this component in support of improved soil 
moisture management will include, among other, contour bunding, broad-bed furrow and conservation furrow 
cultivation. The component will also support efforts towards a more rigorous monitoring of the quality of the water 
available for agriculture. 

 
36. To improve on-farm soil fertility and micronutrient management, the component will scale-up the adoption of 

climate-resilient agricultural practices aimed at: (i) increasing the soil organic matter content, and (ii) sustaining a 
viable agriculture on the naturally saline and sodic farm soils prevailing in parts of the project area. Conventional 
methods to address soil salinity and soil sodicity (i.e. land reclamation with widespread application of gypsum or 
lime) will be reviewed for their economic sustainability and financial viability in the local context, and used only 
where significant and long term net benefits can be expected. Good agricultural practices aimed at improving soil 
health have been successfully tested in other programs in Maharashtra and beyond (e.g. NICRA) and include 
biomass mulching, residue recycling, manure management, conservation tillage, in-situ moisture conservation and 
others.  

  
Component B: Climate-resilient Post-harvest Management and Value Chain Promotion (US$ XXX million) 
 

37. The objective of this component is to enhance climate resilience beyond farm gate and provide end-to-end solutions 
in selected commodity value chains. To ensure successful crop diversification, the component will help: (i) develop 

smallholder-inclusive value chains for climate-resilient commodities, and (ii) overcome constraints in the seed supply 
chain. In line with GoM priorities, this component will focus on Farmer Producer Companies (FPCs) as major drivers 
of change in the agri-food system. An increase in farm income remains the key driver of change and a pre-
requirement for the adoption of the climate-resilient technologies and good agricultural practices promoted under 
Component A. Thus, this component will directly contribute to the PDO by creating opportunities for increasing the 
revenue of small and marginal farmers (KP #4) through crop diversification and their participation in selected value 
chains.  

   
38. Promoting Farmer Producer Companies. This component will build on the outcomes of other GoM programs and 

projects that have focused on FPCs as agent of change (e.g. MACP). A rapid appraisal exercise, with mapping, 
profiling and capacity needs assessment of the 420 FPCs in the project area (most of them in early development 
stage), will provide the basis for a series of activities tailored to the growth potential of existing FPCs. The 
component will also support the development of farmer-group based organizations into entrepreneurial, market-
oriented, financially sustainable companies with the capacity to perform selected value-adding activities and deliver 
a range of services (e.g climate-related technical advisory services, training on climate adaptation and mitigation 
practices in post-harvest management). The component will support viable mechanisms to further consolidate and 
set up new business linkages for FPCs with private sector (e.g. exporters, seed companies, farm machinery, agro-
input suppliers, and financial institutions). For the professionalization of FPCs, the project will explore a 
collaboration with IFC’s Agribusiness Leadership Program and/or Business Edge Program. Eligible FPCs will also 
benefit from participating in the incubation program of the proposed Climate Innovation Center (see Component C). 

  
39. Strengthening emerging value-chains for climate-resilient commodities. The selection of agricultural value chains for 

end-to-end solutions (from agricultural research to consumer markets) will be finalized by the PMU during project 
preparation. Pulses and oilseeds are emerging as potential priority commodities for end-to-end solutions. In 
addition, the component will support value-chains emerging in the project area following farmers’ production 
diversification to include higher-value commodities, in particular fruit trees (more climate-resilient than annual 
crops given their deeper root system). The component will also support viable investments in product aggregation, 
handling, transformation and marketing (e.g. collection centers, grading and packaging units, cold storage facilities, 
ICT-based market information systems). Priority will be given to investments that promote the use of green 
technologies (including solar energy). Value-chain financing and specifically access to finance and financial services 
for value chain actors will be explored under this component 

  
40. Improving the performance of the supply chain for climate-resilient seeds. The adequate supply of seeds with short 

duration, drought-, salinity- or heat-tolerant features, is a key priority for the GoM’s in its strategy to build climate 
resilience in the agriculture sector. The seed industry in MH is largely segmented, with private seed companies 
mainly focusing on the high value, low volume seeds (e.g. cotton, sugar cane, GM and hybrid varieties), while public 
sector seed corporations dominate the market for low value, high volume seeds (e.g. cereals, pulses and oilseeds). 
The component will address the need for increasing the availability of seeds, given farmers’ evolving demand 
resulting from the recommendations of the district-level contingency plans triggered by climate events (e.g. delays 
in onset of monsoon rains call for different crop mix). To address the shortage of breeder seeds, the component will 
assess the SAU’s breeder seeds programs and support solutions aimed at enhancing their performance (including 
developing linkages with FPCs for seed multiplication). This component will also seek to support key actors in the 
seed supply chain such as the Maharashtra State Seed Corporation who plays a unique role in the production and 
distribution of climate-resilient certified seeds for small and marginal farmers (e.g. pulses and oilseeds). It will also 
finance the development of a limited number of seed processing and storing hubs in strategic locations of the 
project area. 

 
Component C: Institutional Development, Knowledge and Policies for a Climate-resilient Agriculture (US$ XXX million) 
 

41. The objective of this component is to ensure sustainability in the approach proposed for building climate resilience 
through a longer term adaptive management of agriculture, soil and water resources, by: (i) strengthening the 
capacity of existing institutions to design and deliver agro-technical and climate advisory services, (ii) establishing a 
Climate Innovation Center, and (iii) promoting an evidence-based policy dialogue on climate resilience. Successful 
implementation of the activities in this component will contribute to achieving the PDO by increasing the outreach 
of institutions and agencies promoting climate-resilient agriculture in the project area (KPI #5) and generating 
spillover effects to farming communities from other villages in the project area not covered by project activities.   

 
42. Sustainability and institutional capacity development. To ensure the sustainability of the comprehensive approach 

on climate-resilient agriculture proposed in this project, this component will support the development and 
implementation of a capacity development program for district and local level stakeholders. This component will 
mainstream climate-resilience in the strategic objectives of institutions and agencies involved in the delivery of 
services to small and marginal farmers. At district level, the project will work closely with the Superintendent District 
Agricultural Offices (SDAOs) and build their capacity to coordinate and monitor the implementation of the climate-
resilience agenda on the ground. At state level, the project will develop partnerships with the SAUs and support 
existing programs for the development and field-testing of emerging agricultural technologies and practices for 
climate-adaption of dryland farming systems. The component will also promote knowledge and learning exchanges 
on climate-resilience with national/international entities such as ICRISAT, CRIDA, the Indian Institute of Science, the 
Indian Meteorological Department, the Australian Centre for International Agricultural Research (ACIAR), the 
Australian Water Partnership (AWP), and the Carbon Management and Sequestration Center (CMASC, Ohio State 
University).  

 
43. Maharashtra Climate Innovation Center (CIC). This component will finance the planning, launch and start-up phase 

for a CIC until it operates in a self-sustained manner. The CIC will support local private sector capacity – with focus 
on entrepreneurs and SMEs – to commercialize and deploy emerging technologies and business models in growing 
climate sectors (e.g. climate-resilient agriculture, water, energy) to provide local solutions to climate change. The CIC 
will offer services tailored to local needs and conditions among a suite of tools which includes: access to latest 
technology information and market intelligence, fee-based business advisory and other incubation/coaching support 
services, and tailored proof-of-concept grant and seed investment financing to prove and scale early-stage firms and 
concepts. The CIC will draw on local and international expertise to support the GoM with the review and formulation 
of policies and strategies relevant to climate change and climate resilient, in particular as linked to the agri-food 
sectors. During project preparation, the PMU will commission a feasibility study for the CIC; it will be followed up 
during early project implementation with the development of a detailed CIC business and financial plan to be 
submitted for approval to the relevant authorities.  The CIC will be established with technical guidance from the 
Bank’s Climate Technology Program. 

  
44. Knowledge and policies. This component will finance a range of analytical studies aimed at updating and 

disseminating existing knowledge on a range of issues related to climate resilience and agriculture. Such studies will 
provide the analytical underpinnings to improve the policy and strategy framework required to further enhance 
resilience in the agri-food system in Maharashtra (and beyond). This component will support efforts towards a multi 
stakeholder dialogue on policies promoting climate resilience in agriculture, as well as direct payments to farmers 
for environmental services (e.g. soil carbon sequestration, groundwater conservation). This component will also  
look at reliable ways to quantify potential mitigation benefits from activities promoted by the project and aim at 



providing a pathway to carbon financing. The component will also finance the development of a state-of-the art 
climate and agro-hydrological model that supports policy-makers Maharashtra by: (i) making projections on the level 
of sustainable withdrawal of surface and groundwater in a given watershed under various climate and land use 
scenarios, (ii) generating suitability maps for Managed Aquifer Recharge (MAR), and (iii) assessing the magnitude of 
MAR in the project area.  

  
Component D: Project Management (US$ XXX million) 
 

45. This component will primarily finance the project’s incremental operating costs.  A PMU has been set up by the 
Department of Agriculture (GoM) and tasked with the overall management of the project, while ensuring smooth 
coordination of activity implementation by various agencies and strategic partners. Given the transformative nature 
of the project, institutional coordination within and across the relevant sectors is emerging as a critical task in 
developing an effective project implementation mechanism. The PMU will be responsible for compiling an annual 
Activity Plan and Work Program and develop the corresponding budget proposal to be submitted for approval to the 
Project Steering Committee.  

 
46. The PMU will ensure that all project activities are implemented in line with the provisions in the official project 

documents; in particular, the PMU will be in charge of financial management, project procurement, and safeguards 
compliance. The component will support all activities related to project communication, public awareness and 
outreach, including the development of a comprehensive project web site. It will finance the services of specialized 
consultant firms to develop and implement a comprehensive project impact evaluation (including all surveys). 
Further, the project will promote the intensive use of ICT across components; to that effect, this component will 
finance both ICT goods and specialized consultant services. The project’s M&E system will be ICT-based, enabling the 
PIU to access project information and data from the field in real-time. ICT will also be used to facilitate the feedback 
from project beneficiaries on project activities planned/under implementation (citizen engagement), and will be 
mainstreamed in the project’s grievance and redress mechanism. 
 

 
    

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
Maharashtra is one of India’s most prosperous states, with a population of 114 million. Yet, it has some of India’s poorest 

people, four of its 36 districts are among India’s 106 most backward. Agriculture and industry form the mainstay of the 
state's economy. Most of the cultivable land is still rain-fed, relying heavily on the southwest monsoon rains. Districts in 
eastern Maharashtra on the Deccan plateau are particularly prone to drought. The net irrigated area is only 30.77 million 
Ha or about 16% of cultivable land. In Maharashtra, main crops include rice (although not grown in the project area), 
jowar, bajra, pulses, vegetables and onions. The main cash crops include cotton, sugarcane (though the project area 
accounts for only 3 percent of the state sugar cane production), turmeric, and several oilseeds. Amravati and Yavatmal, 
respectively in Vidharba region are the largest orange and cotton growing districts. 
The Project will be implemented in two main regions:  Vidharbha  and Marathwada comprising some 5,000 villages - 

selected for their high climate vulnerability index and low HDI; in addition, about 1,000 of these villages are characterized 
by high levels of soil salinity and sodicity. The project area is characterized by a substantial spatial and temporal rainfall 
variation and scarcity of water resources . These are increasingly exacerbated by frequent droughts associated with 
climate change and high human pressure on natural resources.  


The proposed project is premised on the fact that climate changes are quite inevitable and that it affects all the 
households  much more on the livelihoods of the poor and vulnerable sections. Further, it is well recognized that the 
households/ communities in the rain fed agriculture are quite diverse and heterogeneous with several sub groups 
identifiable based on several factors – resource endowment, gender, ethnicity ( scheduled tribes), castes (scheduled 
castes), religious minorities and geographical setting ( forests, hills, coastal areas). Each of these subgroups gets affected 
differently and has differential capacity for participation. Lastly, to ensure a village/ community spread resilience, group / 
collective action would be essential which demands substantial outreach efforts. Given this scenario, following issues 
emerge as significant: local participation, institutional linkages and communication outreach. 
 

 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
GoM has established a PMU, with a full time environmental specialist, to guide and coordinate preparation of 

environmental and social management framework (ESMF) of the project. A consultant firm has also been brought on 
board by GoM to prepare the ESMF together with the project implementation plan (PIP). During project implementation, 
there will also be environment specialists at the District PMUs in Akola and Aurangabad. GoM has experience with 
implementing World Bank funded projects, in similar sectors, such as Maharashtra Agriculture Competitiveness Project 
and Maharashtra Water Sector Improvement Project. For these projects, GoM is already implementing various tools for 
managing environmental and social issues, such as ESMF. Therefore, there is good borrower orientation and sensitivity to 
implement Bank’s safeguards. 
The project, through the safeguards instruments, will also put in place a capacity building program for staff, and project 

beneficiaries to ensure successful implementation of ESMF and IPM plan, and compliance with the Bank’s safeguards 
policies. A full understanding of the capacity-building need is expected once the draft ESMF is prepared.  
 

 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 
Suryanarayana Satish, Anupam Joshi, Sharlene Jehanbux Chichgar 

 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

OP 4.01 is triggered because the project involves a 
series of interventions for increasing productivity, 
enhancing resilience, and agriculture value chain 
development.  Investments to be supported under the 
project will not lead to any major irreversible impacts, 
however, if not designed effectively,  may generate 
impacts such as soil degradation, water pollution, 
biodiversity conservation, labor safety issues. (these 
are mostly temporary by nature and site specific).  
 
The project will also have positive impacts on the 
environment and natural resource base of the project 
area such as drought-proofing rain-fed agriculture in 
the semi-arid regions, prevention of soil degradation, 

increase of soil moisture and in biomass and organic 
matter of soil, decrease of run-off and soil losses, 
increased climate resilience and annual water 
availability. All mitigation measures would be carefully 
designed in order to enhance the positive impacts, and 
ensure sustainability of investments. 
 
Overall, the project related impacts are mostly 
positive, hence it has been classified as category B. At 
this very juncture, the scope and location of the 
interventions are not known. Hence, an Environmental 
and Social Management Framework (ESMF) is being 
prepared which outlines the process for future 
subprojects to ensure that they are environmentally 
and socially sound, sustainable, and in line with GoM 
and World Bank operational safeguards policies. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

Project financed investments are not expected to 
intervene in any critical natural habitats. The project 
areas contain some essential ecosystems with rich 
biodiversity, and a number of wildlife sanctuaries such 
as Jayakwadi Bird Sanctuary, in Marathwada, and 
Bhamragarh, Bor, Charpala, Chikhaladara Wildlife 
Sanctuary. There are also a number of tiger habitats 
such as Tadoba Andhari Tiger Project, Melghat Tiger 
Project, Pench Tiger Reserve located in Vidarbha 
region. 
 
As details of the exact sites of the proposed 
investments are yet to be known, and investments 
involving civil works may be located within the 
proximity of these areas OP 4.04 is triggered. The 
ESMF would include all adequate measures for 
avoidance, mitigation of impacts and preventive 
measures for negative effects on natural habitats.  
 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No 

Project financed activities will not support 
afforestation, reforestation or pasture improvement 
activities. The project will not encroach on forest land 
or change the management of forest resources. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The policy is triggered because investments targeted 
at increasing agricultural productivity and climate-
resilient agronomic practices may encourage the use 
of pesticides. There is therefore a need to promote the 
use of integrated pest management techniques, 
including the safe use, storage and disposal of agro-
chemicals. The ESMF will aim at providing as much 



information as possible on biological approaches to 
pest management. The project will prepare and 
promote an Integrated Pest Management Plan. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 TBD 

The project is not expected to have an impact on 
physical cultural resources, as it will be implemented 
in areas where agriculture is already practiced. 
However, the project area comprises of Aurangabad 
district, which contains many historical structures and 
UNESCO world heritage sites.  
The project will ascertain through preparation, if there 
is evidence that the project location sites would 
contain features of archeological, historical or cultural 
significance.  Following which, the ESMF would include 
provisions of chance finds to be followed by 
implementing partners, on the proper management of 
physical cultural resources if discovered during project 
implementation.  
 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 Yes 

There are 2.7 million Scheduled Tribe population in 
the 15 project districts which account to about 8% of 
the total population. Further, 27 Tehsils spread across 
11 districts are covered under the Fifth Schedule of 
the Indian Constitution which provides a variety of 
safeguards for the tribals. Given this, the project 
triggers the Bank’s Operational Policy (OP) 4.10 on 
Indigenous Peoples.  However, the next step on 
deploying the instrument- Tribal Peoples Plan (TPP) or 
Tribal Peoples Planning Framework (TPPF)— needs to 
be decided. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 TBD 

Once the project interventions are firmed up and the 
Social Assessment Study is completed, a decision can 
be made on whether lands are required and the 
methods of scuring thereof. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 

OP 4.37 is not triggered as the project investments will 
not support construction, or rely on performance of an 
existing dam >15m height. The project will not  
support rehabilitation of existing or building any new 
irrigation schemes originating from existing dams in 
the State 
 
The project may include construction of small check 
dams. The potential adverse safety and security 
impacts will be addressed in the ESMF which will 
include adequate measures to ensure that the design, 
construction and the maintenance of the small dams 
will be done by qualified engineers.  

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
OP 7.5 is not triggered as no international waterways 
are involved. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No NA 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
May 05, 2017 
 

Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Project has initiated efforts towards the conducting a comprehensive Environmental and Social Assessment. This is 

expected to result in: (i) Integrated Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF); (ii) Tribal People Plan/ 
Framework, as appropriate; (iii) Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), if need be; (iv) IPM/IPNM plans.  A Terms of 
reference (TOR) for the conduction of assessments and preparation of the ESMF  has been prepared by the PMU.  
 
The ESMF will provide essential baseline data, confirm policies that are triggered, assess likely impacts of the project 

interventions. The ESMF will also propose mitigation measures for any adverse impacts that may be envisaged through 
the design and construction phases of various interventions. Recommendations for strengthening institutional capacity, 
and estimate the budget required for the implementation will also be included. While the assessments will be 
participatory with due and extensive consultations with all the stakeholders, especially, the poor and vulnerable farming 
community. Further, the ESMF will also outline arrangements for consultations with the stakeholders and disclosures 
thereof both during preparation as well as implementation phases.   
 
 All safeguards studies shall be completed and the ESMF publicly disclosed by April 15, 2017. 
 
 

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Agriculture Modernization and Competitiveness Project (P158372) 

 
 

  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document (PID) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 05-Feb-2019 | Report No: PIDISDSC20304 


BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Uzbekistan P158372  Agriculture 
Modernization and 
Competitiveness 
Project (P158372) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA Sep 26, 2019 Dec 16, 2019 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Finance State Investment 
Committee, Rural 
Restructuring Agency 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The proposed PDO is to strengthen generation and delivery of selected agricultural public services in Uzbekistan. Such 
services would include generation of new agricultural technologies and innovations, their dissemination through 
extension services, support to productive partnerships, and improvement of sanitary and phytosanitary and food safety 
systems. 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 200.00 

Total Financing 200.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 200.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) 195.00 

     International Development Association (IDA) 5.00 

          IDA Credit 5.00 

 

Environmental and Social Risk Classification Concept Review Decision 

Substantial  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

1 Uzbekistan is currently undergoing a paradigm shift away from its state-managed economy. In 2017 and 2018, the 
Government of Uzbekistan (GoU) launched a wide range of reforms that represent a shift from a state-led economic 
system to a market economy. As noted in the 2018 Performance & Learning Review of the World Bank (WB), these entail 
four fundamental economic and social shifts: (i) from the state to the private sector; (ii) from inward-looking to outward-
looking growth and jobs drivers; (iii) from general government subsidies to targeted social programs; and (iv) from central 
government to regional and local authorities, in particular as regards responsibility and accountability for the 
implementation of the reform agenda on the ground.  

2 Important progress has been made in the reform agenda. In an especially significant move, in September 2017, 
the GoU allowed a 50 percent devaluation of the Uzbek Som and abolished many foreign exchange controls. This almost 
immediately eliminated a thriving parallel foreign exchange market and eliminated about 30 percent of the cotton 
taxation, which was depressing agricultural incentives for decades1. The GoU further boosted market incentives by 
liberalizing many import tariffs and committing to WTO accession, lifting price controls for certain raw materials and 
production inputs, and extending the use of commodity market exchanges. It eliminated the monopoly on exports of fruits 
and vegetables and has taken steps to improve safety nets for vulnerable groups, which is critical for further agricultural 
and broader economic reforms. 

3 Significant progress has also been made in reducing the use of forced labor, which has been hampering sustainable 
development of agriculture and damaging Uzbekistan’s image on the global arena. Systematic use of child labor in cotton 
harvesting has been eradicated, while overall use of forced labor has been declining over time. The use of forced labor in 
2018 was estimated by the International Labor Organization (ILO) to drop to 7 percent compared to 15 percent in 2017. 
There is the highest level political commitment in Uzbekistan to fully eradicate the use of forced labor in all sectors, and 
an increased level of transparency and dialogue on the issue, encompassing all groups of civil society, including critical 
voices. The WB’s partnership with ILO has been instrumental to this achievement. Yet, the issue remains, requiring 
continued serious attention to it in future policy dialogue and investment operations.                    

4 While the above reforms are significant, they need to be deepened to facilitate the transition from a state-led to 
a market-oriented economic system as noted in the WB’s Reform Roadmap 2.02. This requires a fundamental reevaluation 
of the state’s role in the economy, from direct involvement in production and marketing to delivery of core public goods 


and correction of market failures. In other words, the government needs to decide what to “do less” and what to “do 
more” going forward. Yet, the definition of a new role of the state and economic transition itself has only just begun.   

Sectoral and Institutional Context 

5 In the overall reform context, agriculture is a sector of the economy where ambition and investment can be 
rewarded. Reforms in the sector present an opportunity to deliver quick economic and social wins, given the large share 
of employment and other economic gains this sector generates3, on the one hand, and its heavy overregulation and a lack 
of high-quality public services on the other. Recent reforms on cotton pricing, import tariffs for inputs and liberalization 
of horticulture exports need to be complemented by a broader shift in the government’s approach to agricultural 
development. This requires putting competitiveness, farm incomes, jobs, and sustainability at the center of the reform 
agenda.  

6 During the preparation of the Concept/Strategy for Agricultural Development in Uzbekistan by 2030 during 
September-December 2018, the completion date of which was moved to October 2019 by the President’s Decree4, it was 
largely agreed that modernizing agriculture requires delivery of a wide range of quality agricultural public services, with 
many of them have been either underfinanced or even not existed in the past. This should help restore the agricultural 
growth, which dropped sharply in recent years (Figure 1)5. Public services include applied agricultural research and 
development, extension/advisory services, education, soil fertility improvement, food safety, animal disease 
control/veterinary services, phytosanitary services, support for smallholder market inclusion (associations, cooperatives, 
clusters, productive partnerships), market and statistical information, market infrastructure and logistics, and 
environment protection and climate change adaptation, among others. The global experience shows that these public 
services are key to correct some large market failures and eventually accelerate agricultural transformation.   

7 Supporting the above-mentioned agricultural public services would constitute a significant departure from current 
practice, under which only few programs receive adequate attention and funding. In 2017 about 80 percent of the 
agricultural budget was spent on irrigation (for its operation and management, pumping water, building new canals, and 
improving drainage). The largest share of the remaining 20 percent was spent on subsidizing 130,000 cotton and wheat 
farmers, who cultivate about 3 million ha or 70 percent of the irrigated area. The public spending on agricultural research 
and development was just 0.01 percent of agriculture sector’s value added, compared to the average 1.5 percent in 
middle-income countries with successful agricultural transformation and of above 2 percent in the developed countries. 
Agricultural extension services do not even exist from the market-economy’s perspectives. Food safety and sanitary and 
phytosanitary (SPS) standards are outdated, preventing Uzbek agri-food products from entering many foreign markets. As 
a result, most farmers do not receive any information and technical assistance (TA) on new technologies and farming 
practices, which leads to the large market failures. 

8 The most underserved are dehkan smallholders. There are 4.7 million of them, who cultivate 481,000 ha or 13 
percent of irrigated land arears. Even though they generate more than 75 percent of agricultural output, including more 
than 90 percent of horticulture and livestock outputs, they do not receive public services from the Ministry of Agriculture 
and other ministries. As dehkan farms are too small and often unskilled, private sector also do not provide any services to 
them either, except buying surpluses they produce. This leads to the market failure. The government has recently 
recognized the need to support this group of farmers through extension, TA, and investments6. Yet, more focus has been 

                                            
3 In 2017, the primary agriculture generated 19 percent of GDP, 20 percent of export, and 27 percent of employment. It provided inputs for 
development of food and textile industries, which accounted for 5 percent of GDP and 2 percent of employment. 
4 Decree of the President No. 5614 “On Additional Measures to Ensure Further Development of Economy and Increase Efficiency of Economic 
Policy” dated January 8, 2019.   
5 The recent decline in the growth of agricultural value added was a result of the decline in production of wheat and cotton caused by adverse 
weather and the more accurate statistical reporting in recent years.     
6 The President’s Decree No. PP-3680 “On Additional Measures to Improve Functioning of Farmers, Dehkans, and Household Plots” dated April 26, 
2018 assigned the Council of Farmers, Dehkans and Household Plots to lead engagement and delivery of services to small farms.  



so far given to their investment/credit support and less to their capacity building, voluntary cooperation, and their 
integration into modern value chains. This hampers the development of inclusive agri-food value chains as experienced 
under the ongoing WB and other donors-financed projects for horticulture and livestock development where the efforts 
to link dehkan farms to large farms and agribusinesses, who receive loans for their business development, largely fail. 

9 While the horticulture sector gets some boost from the government’s desire to increase and diversify exports, the 
livestock sector, which is oriented to domestic market, suffers from a lack of strategic approach to its development. The 
sustainability of its growth is affected by the limited fodder base,7 neglected pastural development, and the lack of 
veterinary, animal nutrition, and other TA services. The government’s attention in recent years has been more to bringing 
highly-productive cattle and upgrade dairy processing and less to addressing the above constraints. 

10 Uzbekistan’s agriculture is significantly exposed to the climate hazards. It is the most vulnerable to the decreased 
and more variable precipitation, higher temperatures, reduced river runoff, and increased frequency and severity of 
extreme events. The adaptation capacity of Uzbekistan’s agriculture is assessed to be weak8. The proposed options for 
increasing adaptation include: (i) generation of drought-and pest-resilient seeds; (ii) increasing access of farmers to 
technology and information through extension services, both generally and for adapting to climate change; (iii) optimizing 
the use of agronomic inputs, especially fertilizers, and adopting good agricultural and animal husbandry practices; (iv) 
investing in water saving technologies; and (v) encouraging farmers to efficiently adapt to climate change.      

11 Generating and delivering agricultural services in a coordinated manner is challenging due to the fragmentation 
of public institutions responsible for delivery of agricultural services. In 2018, the Ministry of Agriculture and Water 
Resources were split into the Ministry of Agriculture and the Ministry of Water Resources. Moreover, during this split the 
State Plant Quarantine Inspection and the State Veterinary Inspection were both moved to the Cabinet of Ministers. Food 
safety’s responsibility of the Ministry of Agriculture is shared with the Ministry of Health. And finally, the newly created 
Ministry of Innovations is responsible for agricultural research, especially seed development. The proposed project will 
engage selectively and strategically with these institutions during the project preparation and implementation. 

Relationship to CPF 

12 The proposed operation is aligned with the Country Performance Framework (CPF) for FY19-21, which has been 
adapted to meet Uzbekistan’s growing social and economic transformation. It largely falls under the Focus Area 1 
“Sustainable transformation towards market economy,” supporting a more strategic engagement in agriculture outlined 
in the CPF. The proposed project would leverage: (i) the WB Livestock Sector Development Project (US$150 million 
approved in June 2017) and additional financing to the WB Horticulture Development Project (US$500 million approved 
in January 2018), which stimulate private investments in production, processing, storing and marketing; (ii) the WB 
Fergana Region Entrepreneurship Project (US$200 million to be approved in March 2019), which will stimulate job creation 
and regional development; (iii) Climate Adaptation for Aral Sea Project (US$14 million), which provides financing for 
climate-smart adaptation practices; (iv) additional grants from the European Union for technical assistance to the WB 
operations to support value chain organization, institutional capacity building strengthening, regulatory framework 
improvement, and small farmers’ access to higher value markets through value chain inclusion in livestock and horticulture 
subsectors; (v) the IFC’s agribusiness and agrifinance programs; and (vi) projects of other development partners such as 
the Asian Development Bank’s horticulture and livestock projects, the European Union’s agricultural budget support, the 
French Development Agency’s livestock project, and the UN Food and Agriculture Organization’s capacity building for 
agricultural institutions.     

13 The proposed project aims to add value by addressing needs that are currently unmet in the WB and other donors’ 
portfolio. The current WB projects are mainly focused on improving access to finance for larger farmers and agribusinesses 

                                            
7 The ratio of fodder area per a unit of cattle in Uzbekistan is 0.03 ha, against the global standard of 0.5 ha of irrigated area and 1.5 ha of dryland.  
8 World Bank. 2013. Reducing the Vulnerability of Uzbekistan’s Agricultural Systems to Climate Change. A World Bank Study, Washington, D.C.  




and just marginally on strengthening selected public institutions to deliver better services for horticulture and livestock 
subsectors. The situation is similar with the projects financed by other major agricultural donors. The ongoing agricultural 
projects amount US$2.5 billion, while the pipeline for the next two years is US$0.8 billion. There are limited investments 
in strengthening public institutions to deliver services to agriculture in a coherent and integrated manner, especially for 
small farms, to increase the rates of economic return of many credit line’s projects and reduce risks for agricultural credit 
borrowers. The proposed project would work with the ongoing agricultural projects to identify investment gaps and design 
activities to leverage operations of the various donors and ultimately improve the agricultural sector outcomes. 

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

14 The proposed PDO is to strengthen generation and delivery of selected agricultural public services in Uzbekistan. 

15 Selected services would include generation of new agricultural technologies and innovations, their dissemination 
through extension services, support for smallholder market inclusion, and improvement of sanitary and phytosanitary and 
food safety systems. 

Key Results (From PCN) 

16 The proposed project would help: (i) generate more and better innovative farm and agribusiness technologies, 
information, and other public services through applied agricultural research; (ii) make them readily available to farmers 
and agribusiness through extension and advisory services; (iii) integrate smallholders in modern food value chains; and 
(iv) reduce costs of pest invasions and animal diseases and expand export opportunities through SPS and food safety 
services. 

D. Concept Description 

17 The proposed project will be a departure from the standard Uzbekistan’s donor-financed agricultural projects of 
the recent years. The standard project consists of a credit line component, typically accounting for 80-90 percent of the 
project costs, and a component for complementary TA to farmers and public institutions, either associated or not 
associated with the credit line. The latter is usually financed by grants. In two ongoing WB projects, for example, the 
capacity building TA activities are financed by the EU grants.     

18 The proposed project will be centered around strengthening public institutions to deliver more and better services 
to farmers and agribusinesses. The efforts will be made to modernize the public institutions through capacity building and 
investment support, encourage their more strategic engagement with private sector, and pilot delivery models of public 
services through public-private-partnerships (PPPs) and using digital technologies. The geography of the project activities 
will be nationwide.    

19 The key guiding principles for designing the proposed project would be the following: 

a. Supporting agricultural reforms: The proposed project will support reforms in agriculture, helping: (i) pilot 
new approaches for public programs, including through PPP; and (ii) define a new role of the government 
in market-oriented agriculture, including improvement in sustainability of land and water use, boosting 
shared prosperity, and elimination of unsustainable labor practices in the entire agri-food industry. It will 
be aligned with the WB Development Policy Operation(s), and, where relevant, with the EU’s agricultural 
budget support program (under preparation), to complement an improved agricultural policy 
environment by investments and capacity building.  

b. Financing public goods: Agricultural programs such as agricultural R&D, extension, cooperation and 
production partnerships, good agricultural practices (including climate-smart agricultural technologies), 
integrated pest management, and food safety and SPS are globally recognized as critical to induce 
agricultural modernization by correcting market failures and providing public goods. These public 




functions have been chronically underfinanced in Uzbekistan; to make impact, these programs require 
both investment and TA to increase quantity of services and, more importantly, improve their quality and 
outreach.   

c. Selection of public goods: Priority will be given to public programs critical to increase competitiveness of 
agricultural production and trade, both domestically and internationally. Competitiveness can be 
increased through higher productivity (or lower costs), adaptivity to climate change, better quality, higher 
(food) safety, and lower transaction costs.        

d. Maximizing Finance for Development (MFD): The proposed project will seek to crowd in private 
investments by strengthening the quality of public programs, reducing transaction costs for farmers and 
agribusinesses, piloting PPP in service delivery, and encouraging private investments in entire food 
system, including from the IFC. It should seek mobilize expertise and resources of the World Bank Group 
to deliver the best services to clients.       

e. Complementary investments that do not duplicate ongoing and planned programs: Several investments 
and capacity building projects financed by the WB and other development partners already support the 
above-mentioned areas of agricultural development and several more are in the pipeline. The proposed 
project will be complementary, focusing on filling gaps and connect various activities.   

20 The following activities and components will be considered during the project preparation. This list is intentionally 
long to provide the task team with flexibility during preparation and give the authorities more options to select from it 
when defining (and narrowing down) the scope of the proposed project.  

Component 1: Generating new agricultural technologies and innovations       

21 This component would support: (i) investments in constructing and upgrading buildings, equipment, laboratories, 
machinery and irrigation/drainage for agricultural research stations; (ii) competitive research grants; (iii) capacity building 
of researchers and other stakeholders associated with operation and management of their fixed assets, knowledge and 
skills for conducting modern agricultural research; and (iv) institution strengthening. Thematically, the support will focus 
on crop and fodder seeds and good agricultural practices (GAP). Preparation of this component will be carried out in 
collaboration with the Ministry of Innovations and the Ministry of Agriculture.      

22 Seeds: Generating drought and pest-resistant seed varieties, multiplying, and making them available to farmers 
are critical to increase competitiveness of agricultural production, given the limited land and water availability in 
Uzbekistan. Yields are low even for crops, on which local agricultural research has focused in the recent decade. Thus, 
improvements are needed for a wide range of crops, from cotton and wheat to fruits and vegetables, and from seed 
genetics to seed multiplication. Seeds will need to be adjusted for different agro-ecological zones of the country. In 
addition, Uzbekistan can produce seeds for exports, which would require, among other things, to have seed laboratories 
accredited by the International Seed Quality Control Agency (ISTA). Furthermore, the proposed project can support PPPs 
in seed production, encouraged by the recent legislation9, by cofinancing the public aspects of the projects. 

23 Fodder crops and pasture management: Applied research on fodder crops and integrated pasture management 
could be supported to help increase the supply of feed to the growing livestock sector, which faces the rapidly rising feed 
cost. Feed account for 60-70 percent of meat and milk prices, so identifying suitable feed varieties and pasture 
management technologies (due to the limited irrigated areas to produce fodder) through agricultural research and 
extending this knowledge to farmers through extension services will be valuable investments. The current ratio of fodder 
area per unit of cattle in Uzbekistan is at least ten time lower than the international norms10; thus, efforts are needed to 

                                            
9 President’s Resolution No. PP-4020 “On Measures to Create Additional Incentives for Greenhouse’s Development” dated November 20, 2018. 
10 The ratio of fodder land per cattle unit in Uzbekistan is 0.03 ha, while international norms require it to be 0.5 ha for irrigated land and 1.5 ha for 




identify and promote high-productivity fodder crops suitable for production on both irrigated and dry lands to inform 
decision of farmers on selecting appropriate varieties and techniques suitable for various agro-ecological zones.     

24 Good agricultural practices: Uzbekistan does not have a code of Good Agricultural Practices (GAP) for crop and 
livestock production, which is common in other countries to promote climate-smart agricultural practices. In many 
countries the adoption of GAP is a precondition for farming or for receiving subsidies. It is also used as a precondition for 
adopting stricter Global GAPs and other standards such as organic and halal. There are many locally-tested best farming 
practices in Uzbekistan, but they are not put together in one coherent place and they are not widely disseminated and 
adopted. The project could support the preparation of the GAP code and guidelines using the best practice local and global 
knowledge; introduce pilot training courses and adjust draft code and guidelines based on experience/feedback; and 
publish final version of the code and guidelines and promote it widely through training programs for extension staff and 
farmers.  

25 The project could also support investments to update soil fertility maps, which is needed for GAP adoption. Such 
investments include upgrading soil testing laboratory infrastructure, digitalize map information with open-date access, 
developing best practice guidelines on soil monitoring and fertilizer use adjusted to different soil types and agro-ecological 
zones, making this information available to farmers through field-based advisers and extension services, and procuring 
portable field-based soil testing equipment to allow extension services and other advisers to provide immediate feedback 
to farmers on soil quality and proposed adjustments needed to enhance soil fertility.   

26 Institutional strengthening: Engagement will be required with the Ministry of Innovations, Ministry of Agriculture, 
other agencies/institutes and private sector (farmers and agribusinesses) to develop mechanisms to bring research and 
private sector together for better defining applied research priorities that would address constraints faced by farmers and 
agribusinesses in a timely and coordinated manner. The experience of the Netherlands and other countries will be used 
to foster a closer collaboration between researchers, farmers, and agribusiness companies. The proposed project could 
foster this kind of collaboration and generate knowledge and lessons to inform a roadmap for other reforms in the 
agricultural research system in Uzbekistan.                 

Component 2: Disseminating agricultural technologies and innovations and creating markets    

27 This component would support: (i) investments in infrastructure for extension/advisory activities, including 
mobility, learning campuses/facilities, demo plots close to farm fields, and creation of digital platforms for reaching out 
many farmers at low cost; (ii) capacity building of extension/advisory officers and preparation of extension materials for 
farmers and agribusinesses; and (iii) operation costs for delivering services to farmers and other clients. Preparation of 
this component will be carried out in collaboration with the Ministry of Innovations, the Ministry of Agriculture, the Council 
of Farmers, Dehkans and Household Plots (Farmers Council), and other stakeholders such as cotton-textile clusters. 

28 Currently, the work of the public agricultural extension services is limited to delivery of production-oriented advice 
to farmers producing wheat and cotton under the government production quota and to make sure that farmers have 
inputs to meet their quotas. The proposed project would help transform them into market-oriented extension and 
advisory services differentiated to the needs of dehkan smallholders, larger farms, and agribusinesses, building on the 
recent legislation11 and the strategy for agricultural extension being drafted by the Ministry of Innovations. The reformed 
extension service would extend knowledge on new technologies and farming practices generated by research locally and 
globally to farmers; promote GAP adoption; offer diversified agribusiness support services; and use digital platforms to 
design services, deliver training and information, improve responsiveness, and increase farmer outreach.  

29 For dehkan farms, extension services could be delivered as a part of establishing productive partnerships, which 
are proved globally as a potent mechanism to promote farm collective actions and reduce transaction costs for 

                  

agribusinesses to include these farm groups in their value chains.  Productive partnerships as a part of the proposed 
project would help include smallholders in modern value chains and reduce transaction costs for agribusinesses to interact 
with smallholders, through: (i) TA for dehkan smallholders; (ii) promotion of their voluntary cooperation and development 
of joint investment plans; (iii) co-financing of investment plans through grants; and (iv) linking farm groups with 
agribusiness and lead firms. The latter could be selected from the ongoing WB-financed horticulture and livestock projects. 
Preparation of this component will be carried out in collaboration with the Farmers Council and the Ministry of Agriculture.     

30 For larger farms, for example, the PPP arrangements with cotton-textile clusters could be developed to deliver 
advisory services on cotton and wheat production and develop technology and information database using digital 
platforms on GAP, crop protection, integrated pest management, decent work, water usage, soil fertility, as well as good 
manufacturing practices in textile factories, to strengthen technical capacity of clusters’ technical staff to increase 
productivity, profitability, and sustainability of agricultural production. For agribusiness, the project could support 
preparation and delivery of targeted courses on agri-food enterprise business diagnostics, business planning and 
preparation of investment applications, and pilot agro-business schools and start-ups for small and medium scale farmers 
and agri-businesses. This part will be prepared in collaboration with IFC and ILO. 

Component 3: Improving SPS and food safety standards  

31 This component would support: (i) investments in constructing and upgrading buildings, equipment, laboratories, 
and other fixed assets of selected SPS and food safety-relevant public institutions; (ii) capacity building of staff associated 
with operation and management of their fixed assets and knowledge and skills for delivering public services; and (iii) 
institution strengthening. These investments will finance and co-finance public programs and be complementary to those 
already carried out or planned under the donor-financed projects. Preparation of this component will be carried out in 
collaboration with the Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Health, the State Plant Quarantine Inspection, and the State 
Veterinary Committee.     

32 Veterinary services: Efficient and trustworthy veterinary services are critical to reduce risk for farmers to invest 
in livestock, reduce economic losses in case of animal diseases, and protect human health. Currently, the delivery of 
veterinary services and their outreach are unsatisfactory to deal with the growing number of animals in the country. The 
World Animal Health Organization (OIE) has recently completed the assessment of the performance of veterinary services 
and investment gap, with the support of the WB-financed livestock project and the State Veterinary Service, with the 
purpose of identifying, detailing, and costing priority activities. The Gap Analysis identified priority areas of support and 
the associated investment needs (funding requirements) in all areas of veterinary services, including trade, veterinary 
public health, animal health, veterinary laboratories, and veterinary management services for the next five years. The 
identified gaps include investments needs in fixed assets, human capital, and operational resources, which will be used to 
define the activities for the proposed project. Veterinary laboratories alone include the large network of laboratories and 
veterinarians, which could be supported by the project.12 Investments will be based on thorough assessments of the needs 
and the role of specific units in delivering public services vis-à-vis the role of private sector.     

33 Phytosanitary/quarantine services: Uzbekistan incurs significant economic losses from pest invasions and from 
difficulty to meet the SPS requirements of importers. Uzbekistan, for example, is on top of the rejection of its fresh 
horticulture exports by the EU, mainly caused by the high level of mycotoxins in dried fruits, which is very far in excess of 
the EU standards. The proposed project could support the State Plant Quarantine Inspection to improve surveillance 
capacity to prevent pest invasions, promote adoption of integrated pest management as a part of GAP adoption, and 
facilitate trade, both export and import. Among several things, the project could help the Inspection to accelerate signing 

                                            
12 The network of veterinary laboratories in Uzbekistan comprises of the State Center for Animal Diseases and Food Safety, which also manages the 
State Research Center on Quality Control of VMPs and Feed Additives; 13 Regional Veterinary Laboratories; 130 Local Veterinary Laboratories; 
1,411 Field Veterinary Stations; 265 laboratories at food markets; and 27 Border Inspection Posts and Transport Stations. Together these veterinary 
laboratories employ 2,600 veterinarians and veterinary para-professionals.   



the International Plant Protection Convention (IPPC) and develop a Pest Risk Analysis capability that is credible to IPPC 
members; establish minimum residual level standards and protocols per international norms and support an awareness-
raising program for existing and potential agri-food exporters; and establish a system of accreditation of SPS laboratories 
and where needed, reference laboratories connected to a network of public and private laboratories. 

34 Food safety standards: The WB’s CPSD analysis found that the food safety standards called GOST require 
modernization to meet the requirements of importers outside of the former Soviet Union and even to expand on 
traditional markets such as Kazakhstan and Russia, who adjust their food safety standards to internationally accepted 
norms and practices. This is especially urgent for horticulture products, for which foreign buyers are sensitive to meeting 
strict food safety requirements, as the above figure shows. The proposed project could support the process of bringing 
domestic food safety standards to the requirements of the major importing countries and provide TA to agribusinesses 
and exporters to adopt the upgraded food safety standards. 

Component 4: Project management and coordination  

35 This component will finance project management and coordination activities, as well as monitoring and 
evaluation. The scope of work under this component will be further defined as institutional and implementation 
arrangements are refined during preparation. 

    
 
Legal Operational Policies                                  Triggered? 

Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50 No 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60 No 

 
Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts 

Although this project intends to provide institutional strengthening, capacity building, and improved service 
delivery, the project will be working with farmers. The GoU has a history of Child and Forced Labor (CFL) 
which was inherited from Soviet times. The GoU has made tremendous strides towards eliminating the use of 
CFL for harvesting of cotton. Third party monitoring by the ILO has reported that child labor seems to have 
been eliminated, however recent reports state cases of forced labor, although at much lower scale than 
previously, still exists. The project will be working with all farmers, which may include farmers who include 
cotton in their crop rotation. Therefore, the concern of forced labor raises project risk to a moderate level. All 
project initiatives, where relevant, will include addressing CFL, as well as ensuring women and the rural poor 
are included in project initiatives. 

 

 
























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Additional Financing - Horticulture Development Project (P164226) 

 
 

 
      

 

Combined Project Information Documents /  
Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (PID/ISDS) 

 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 06-Dec-2017 | Report No: PIDISDSA23288 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Uzbekistan P164226 Additional Financing - 
Horticulture Development 
Project 

P133703 

Parent Project Name Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date 

Horticulture Development Project EUROPE AND CENTRAL 
ASIA 

28-Nov-2017 25-Jan-2018 

Practice Area (Lead) Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency 

Agriculture Investment Project 
Financing 

Republic of Uzbekistan Rural Restructuring 
Agency 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) Parent 
 
The project development objective is to enhance the productivity and profitability of horticulture sector in the project 
area. 
 
 
Components 

Agricultural Support Services 
Access to Credit 
Project Management 

 

Financing (in US$, millions) 

 

FIN_SRC_TBL 

Financing Source Amount  

Borrower 17.98  

Free-standing Cofinancing Trust Fund 25.00  

International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 500.00  

LOCAL: BENEFICIARIES 98.14  

Total Project Cost  641.12  
  
 

Environmental Assessment Category 

Partial Assessment (B) 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the preparation to continue     



 
 
 
 
Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

 
Uzbekistan is gradually moving away from a state driven development model towards a more diversified and 
private sector led economy. This structural change – which has accelerated significantly in the past year – is 
also taking place within the context of significant macroeconomic policy shifts, the most prominent of which 
has been the recent move towards greater currency convertibility and a significant devaluation in September 
2017. These developments play a strong role in shaping the country’s development agenda going forward. 
 
Agriculture continues to play an important part in Uzbekistan’s economy and in 2016 accounted for 17 percent 
of GDP, 15 percent of export revenues, and over one-third of employment. As noted in the May 2016 
Systematic Country Diagnostic, the agriculture sector can produce significant results in terms of economic 
growth and employment in the medium-term and diversification of outputs and exports have considerable 
space to expand.  
 
Horticulture plays an important role promoting a gradual shift away from the traditional crops (cotton and 
wheat) and public intervention towards a more liberal and diversified agricultural sector. Agriculture value 
added has grown at an average annual rate of 6.5 percent since 2003 and the strongest growth has come from 
crops other than wheat and cotton. With a growing domestic and export market, the area devoted to 
horticulture has increased steadily, primarily by displacing land used to grow cotton. The economic impact of 
the fruit and vegetables subsector is also large, accounting for 50 percent of the value of crop output and over 
35 percent of agriculture export value. Despite delayed returns and higher investment costs, horticultural 
crops generate revenues to farmers significantly higher than wheat and cotton.  The horticulture sector 
provides an important source of all-season jobs in rural areas and is a significant employer of women.   
 
The proposed Additional Financing will also contribute to Uzbekistan’s accelerating reform agenda, which is 
creating rapid structural change. Structural reforms will create both opportunities and risks – exchange rate 
depreciation has created a clear opportunity to expand exports. Price liberalization is also expected to 
contribute to the development of more competitive industries and a diversified economy. At the same time, 
the negative impacts of reform could include job losses in inefficient industries and lower overall growth while 
the economy adjusts. Significant fiscal resources may also be required to maintain currency reserves and 
address financial risks in state-owned enterprises and the banking sector. In this context, additional 
investment to increase private sector participation in the economy and finance sectors with the potential for 
growth and job creation can be an important element to mitigate the costs of structural transition. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 

The Horticulture Development Project (HDP) is part of a portfolio of agricultural investments aimed at 
diversifying agriculture into higher value crops, intensifying agricultural yields and productivity, and fostering 



greater and better rural jobs. Approved in June 2014, HDP focused on addressing several constraints facing the 
horticulture sector: (i) improving access to technologies, knowledge and markets; (ii) strengthening technical 
and managerial capacity in the farming and agri-business sectors; and (iii) introducing new financial products. 
The design of HDP drew on the implementation experience of the Rural Enterprise Support Program (RESP), 
which established a successful model for long term agricultural finance through private and state owned 
banks.  
HDP’s primary project beneficiaries are farmers, farmer groups, private enterprises, agro-firms, and agro-
processing enterprises, involved in the country’s horticultural sub-sector. Secondary beneficiaries are the 
Participating Financial Institutions (PFIs) through improved skills and acquisition of a more diverse menu of 
suitably adapted financial products; and the national network of private growers through training and 
technical assistance. At the same time, the project was designed to support the growth and development of 
small and medium enterprises in the rural areas, creating more and better paying jobs in the agro-processing, 
trading and export sectors, and increasing the value added of the agricultural sector. 
 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to enhance the productivity and profitability of the horticulture 
sector in the project area. The project has three components: Component 1 (Agricultural Support Services); 
Component 2 (Access to Credit); and Component 3 (Project Management). The original Project IBRD Loan in 
the amount of US$150 million was approved by the Board of Directors on June 12, 2014 and became effective 
on October 5, 2015.  The project was restructured in 2016 to accommodate new co-financing for HDP through 
a technical assistance program by the European Union (EU). This grant will total Euro $21.0 million and replace 
IBRD financing for Component 1.   
 
To date, 92 percent of the loan (US$137.9 million) has been disbursed primarily under Component 2. Thus, 
during the first two years of implementation 97 percent of funding for the second component was disbursed 
to finance 223 sub-loans.  
 
The rapid rate of disbursement of the project’s Access to Credit Component demonstrates the significant 
demand for credit in the horticulture sector. This was anticipated, given the RESP experience, the sector 
analysis, and expressions of interest by potential PFIs. The PFIs have a pipeline of sub-project beneficiaries 
that meet the criteria in the HDP Credit Guidelines. In view of rapid credit line disbursement and significant 
unmet demand for investment in the agribusiness sector, the Government of the Republic of Uzbekistan has 
submitted a request to the World Bank for an additional loan to scale-up the investment and working capital 
sub-loans and lease financing activities. 

 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
 
Original PDO  
The project development objective is to enhance the productivity and profitability of horticulture sector in the project 
area. 
 
Current PDO  

 



 

No change is proposed to the PDO, which will remain “to enhance the productivity and profitability of 

horticulture sector in the project area”.  The project area, however, will be expanded to all thirteen regions 

(full coverage of the country) and the closing date is proposed to be extended a further two years to 2023.  

 
Key Results 
 

PDO level results will continue to measure changes in productivity and agribusiness performance levels and 

have been adjusted to accommodate the scale up within the project. Some intermediate results indicators 

have been adjusted to reflect the increase in the volume of credit and scale out to additional beneficiaries. 

Adjustments have also been made to Component 1 indicators and technical assistance related activities.  

 
Project performance has demonstrated solid achievements and the additional financing will build on positive 
results. A preliminary beneficiary survey was carried out in July and August 2017 among fifty-five randomly 
sampled HDP beneficiaries. The survey found:  

 

 Strong job creation, with the number of permanent jobs within HDP financed enterprises increasing 
on average 78 percent after the enterprise received sub-project financing. Of these new jobs, more 
women were hired than men, with sub-loan beneficiaries reporting a doubling in permanent jobs 
held by women.  

 Enterprise sales increased on average 281 percent and enterprise profits 250 percent.  

 Increased exports with a 10 percentage point (from five to 15 percent) increase in exports after 
receiving HDP support. Several beneficiaries reported entry into entirely new export markets 
(Turkey, Ukraine, India, Great Britain, Malaysia, Turkmenistan) 

 Adoption of new crops, varieties or agronomic practices, with 15 percent of HDP loan recipients 
introducing new crops or new crop production systems.  

 
 
D. Project Description  
 

 
The project design will maintain the same three components with the additional financing supporting the 
scaling-up of the original project’s credit line for loans and leases under Component 2 - Access to Credit. This 
component will continue to focus on improving access to financial services for farmers and agribusinesses and 
will support additional financing for the purchase of new cultivars, seeds/seedlings, water-saving irrigation 
facilities (such as drip irrigation), cold storage and other cold chain facilities, and value added 
handling/processing equipment and facilities.  
 
The institutional arrangements will remain the same. The environmental safeguards category will remain “B.” 
The results monitoring framework has been revised to reflect the additional credit, introduce new sector 
indicators, and revise some target values given changes in circumstances both within and outside of the 
project. 

 
E. Implementation 
 


Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 
 

Overall responsibility for implementation continues to rest with the Rural Restructuring Agency (RRA). The 
RRA is a specialized organization that was created for implementing investment projects in the agriculture and 
rural sector. The additional financing will use the same on-lending modality to channel resources through PFIs 
on the same lending terms and conditions used under the parent HDP. Under the original HDP, nine banks 
have been qualified as PFIs and it expected that additional banks will apply under the proposed additional 
financing. The same due diligence process will be followed new PFIs as were used in the parent HDP. Terms 
and conditions of the credit line and the associated credit line guidelines will remain largely the same with 
minor adjustments. 

 

 
  

 .    
F. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 

Project activities under the first component will take place as planned under the original project within the 
fields and laboratories of participating research institutes and on farm demonstrations among participating 
producers. Under the second component, the sub-projects to be supported by the Credit Line will be based 
on demand for proposed activities. Project activities will now be implemented in all 13 provinces of the 
country, expanding the project area from the original eight provinces. The main physical characteristics of 
the new provinces are as follows: (1) Bukhara province is primarily desert plain. Water resources are limited 
and agricultural production is reliant on the Zarafshan and the Amudarya rivers. The Amu-Bukhara and 
Amu-Karakul machine canals draw water from the Amudarya for the irrigated oasis located in the south 
(Gijduvan, Bukhara and Karakul). Horticulture activities are primarily located in these irrigated oasis. (2) 
Karakalpakstan includes the southern half of the Aral Sea, where significant ecological change is occurring. A 
new salt marsh desert Aralkum is being formed due to the drying out of the Aral Sea and the lower reaches 
of the Amudarya River are drying up. The desert occupies more than 13.67 million hectares (more than 80 
percent of the territory). Horticulture production is limited but does occur in irrigated areas. (3) Navoi 
province is occupied by the Kyzylkum plateau in the northwestern part of the region, the Nurata mountain 
ranges in the east, and the Zerafshan River in the south. The climate is continental, deserted, and arid. 
Horticulture production is widespread within the region with a number of processors and exporters located 
in the region. (4) Syrdarya province is located in the center on the west side of the Syr Darya river and 
immediately west of Tashkent province. The steppe occupies part of the region and the south-eastern part 
of the region is vulnerable to crop damaging dry winds and dust storms in the summer. Horticulture 
production is widespread within the province, although concentrated in higher rainfall areas. (5) 
Surkhandarya province is located in the extreme south east with flat areas in the central and southern parts 
of the region and mountains in the north, west and north-west. The climate ranges from the dry desert in 
the south, to the sub-tropical in the north (Uzun). Horticulture production is widespread in the river valley 
and the central zones of the region. 

 
 

G. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 
 

Arcadii Capcelea, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 
Nina Kolybashkina, Social Safeguards Specialist 

 
 
 

SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 
SAFEGUARD_TBL 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The OP is triggered as the proposed project activities 
and subproject that would be supported under 
credit line, could generate a series of adverse 
impacts. Category A-type subprojects are excluded 
by the project. To address other activities the client 
has updated the parent Environment and Social 
Management Framework(ESMF) which will guide the 
EA process during the project implementation. The 
updated ESMF takes into consideration the new 
geographic locations and, in particular, the scaling-
up credit line resources and the needs for further EA 
institutional capacity building. In this regard under 
the Project AF, the RRA will hire additional 
Environmental Specialists in all participating oblasts, 
where regional RRA PIUs will be established. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 No 
The ESMF provides screening criteria to be applied 
to exclude any projects that could have an impact on 
natural habitats. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No 

The ESMF provides screening criteria for exclusion of 
any projects that could have an impact on forests, 
rights of forest communities or traditional uses of 
forests. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

As in the case of agricultural production or agro-
processing sub-projects, there might be needed pest 
management activities if this OP is triggered. The 
ESMF has a special section specifying provisions for 
preparation of simple pest/pesticide management 
plans as part of the application process and 
supporting IPM. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No 
The ESMF provides screening criteria for exclusion of 
any projects that could have an impact on physical 
cultural resources. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No This OP is not applied in the country 



 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 No 

The project will support construction of new 
buildings and processing, and cold storage facilities 
only in the case when land acquisition is not 
necessary and when people have not been displaced 
prior to the application for purposes of the proposed 
subproject and there are no resettlement issues. For 
such cases the investor should have the 
landownership title as well as proof that the land at 
the moment of subprojects application is not 
occupied or used illegally. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 
The project will not support activities which are 
dependent on an existing dam (e.g. irrigation works). 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 

Any credit investments would be limited to 
rehabilitation or modification of existing minor 
schemes in ways which would not increase the 
amount of water abstracted or have any other 
impact on the water source or local hydrological 
regime (e.g. replacing conventional irrigation with 
drip irrigation in an existing irrigation scheme would 
be still eligible). Creating a new scheme which will 
lead to increasing water abstraction from the rivers 
will not be financed under the project. This 
determination would be made in the screening 
process. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
The project will not support any activities in disputed 
areas. 

 
 

KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 OPS_SAFEGUARD_SUMMARY_TBL 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project will maintain its category B classification and will not trigger any new safeguards policies. The scope and 
scale of the project’s activities will continue to be limited as they will occur through the project’s existing sub-project 
mechanism. As a result, the project’s safeguards issues can be addressed by application of the rules and procedures 
established under the HDP Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) as well as by any implementing 
mitigation and monitoring measures stipulated in any site specific Environmental and Social Management Plans 
(ESMPs).  
 
Potential environmental impacts. The project will continue supporting various types of horticulture related production 
and processing sub-projects. Subprojects will remain limited in terms of spatial scale and take place through sub-
projects of limited duration and size. HDP’s credit line guidelines prohibit financing to category A sub-projects and as a 
result, no significant environmental impacts that fall under the Category A classification and for which a full 



 

 

Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) would be required are expected. Credit guidelines also prohibit selection of 
sub-projects located in protected areas, critical habitats or culturally or socially sensitive areas.  
 
A portion of sub-projects are expected, however, to show the potential for limited adverse environmental impacts 
that would fall under the Category B under Bank OP/BP 4.01. This is primarily due to activities related to small-scale 
agro-industries; small-scale rehabilitation, maintenance, and upgrading of various premises or storage facilities; and 
plantation of new orchards and/or vineyards.  The potential adverse environmental impacts of proposed types of sub-
projects can be summarized as follows: (a) agricultural production: soil erosion, loss of soil productive capacity, soil 
compaction, soil pollution, surface and underground water pollution, loss of biodiversity; (b) agro-processing: 
contribution to surface-water pollution, wastes generation, odor; (c) small-scale construction and/or rehabilitation of 
the existing premises: soil and air pollution; acoustic, construction wastes, and potential asbestos issues, etc. All these 
impacts are expected to be easily mitigated through good project designs and best implementation practices. 
 
The sub-projects to be implemented under the Credit Line are also expected to generate a number of both direct and 
indirect positive impacts. Direct positive impacts will be generated by increased production, products and goods which 
would result in creation of new jobs and respectively, more employment and increased income. Indirect positive 
impacts will relate to overall improving of business environment, introduction of advanced agricultural technologies 
and techniques, contribution to poverty reduction and food safety.  
 
Potential social impacts. Issues related to the risks of child and forced labor in the cotton harvest have been a 
challenge in the agricultural sector in Uzbekistan and efforts to eliminate these practices have received high level 
support within Government. Production in the horticultural sector is significantly more labor intense than in cotton 
and wheat, the peaks of seasonal labor demands are more dispersed across various crops, and the profits are higher. 
To mitigate any residual risks of child and forced labor, and to ensure that the project contributes to improved labor 
relations and practices in the agricultural sector of the country, the project envisions continued close collaboration 
with the International Labor Organization (ILO). Starting from 2018, research activities to monitor labor relations in 
the horticultural sector and to provide recommendation for creating decent working conditions would be 
implemented jointly with the ILO.  The project will also participate in the Third Party Monitoring (TPM) and Grievance 
Redress Mechanism (GRM) set up by the World Bank for the agricultural portfolio in the country to focus on issues of 
child and forced  adult labor. The TPM/GRM will be funded by a separate TF.  
  
Acquisition of land. As all proposed activities are likely to be implemented within the existing agricultural land and 
settlement boundaries, the proposed project will likely not have an impact on wildlife and natural habitats and thus, 
OP/BP 4.04 (Natural habitats) is not triggered. It is also expected there will be no impact on physical cultural 
resources, which are generally not placed in the vicinity of agricultural land. Therefore OP/BP 4.11 "Physical Cultural 
Resources" is not triggered.  
    
 Private businesses will be eligible to become project beneficiaries under the condition that they have not acquired 
and/or would not acquire land for the needs of activities to be supported with the project proceeds, through a process 
which involved and/or would involve officially supported expropriation. Additionally, project funds will not support 
any sub-loans used to invest in a business which would require the involuntary displacement of existing occupants or 
economic users of any plot of land, regardless of its current ownership, or loss of, or damage to, assets including 
standing crops, kiosks, fences and other. The project operational manual will define a screening procedure to be filled 
by PFIs, and the implementing agency will closely monitor the screening procedure, with the support of the Bank task 
team. With these restrictions in place, the project does not trigger OP/BP 4.12 "Involuntary Resettlement". 
 

 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
 
The cumulative negative impact of expanded horticultural production and processing is expected to be limited, 
particularly as expansion of the horticulture sector and successful implementation of sub-project activities are 
expected to lead to more efficient use of land and water resources compared to Uzbekistan’s current dominant 
commercial crop sector (cotton and wheat). The expected cumulative impacts are expected to be mostly positive and 
includes improved knowledge on best agricultural and manufacture practices, with consequent improvements in the 
status of the environment in the country. 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. 
Project design includes a prohibition on category A sub-projects which is expected to prevent larger scale negative 
impacts.  A "no project" scenario was considered but would result in continuation to the the current structure of 
agricultural prodution, which is dominated by cotton and wheat, which also have specific negative evnrionmental and 
social impacts. 
 
To boost employment of women, and encourage access of female entrepreneurs to loans, the project will closely 
collaborate with the Women’s Committee of Uzbekistan and the Association of Business Women of Uzbekistan for 
policy level activities for mainstreaming gender in the sector, publicizing information about female role models, as 
well as providing targeted capacity building to female entrepreneurs to enable them to access funding through the 
project. 
 
The project will have explicit focus on targeting more vulnerable farmers, both directly and indirectly. To achieve 
indirect effects, eligibility criteria for sub-loans would also consider the social impact of the project, including direct 
job creation, the multiplier effects of supporting suppliers down the value chain, as well as contributions towards 
improving community infrastructure. Trainings for the PFIs on social responsibility of business and labor rights would 
be conducted, to ensure better screening. Through Additional Financing, a share of the project resources would also 
be ring-fenced to target smaller farmers and entrepreneurs directly. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower 
capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Safeguards instruments. The primary instrument for managing safeguards policy issues is the ESMF prepared for the 
initial HDP project and which remains valid for the additional financing to the project. The document has been 
updated for the AF to address the new geographic locations and any other relevant changes from the parent project, 
including in terms of Environmental Assessment  (EA) capacity building activities (see below). The ESMF document 
outlines environmental assessment procedures and mitigation requirements for first component’s activities and the 
sub-projects which is supported by the second component’s Credit Line and, it provides details on procedures, criteria 
and responsibilities for subprojects preparing, screening, appraisal, implementing and monitoring. The document also 
includes Environmental Guidelines and Best Practices for different types of proposed sub-projects providing analysis of 
potential impacts and generic mitigation measures to be undertaken for subprojects in agricultural production, agro-
processing and storage and cooling manufacturing sectors at all stages - from identification and selection, through the 
design and implementation phase, to the monitoring and evaluation of results.  Furthermore, the ESMF provides a 
monitoring plan format which considers monitoring indicators, timing, methods, institutional responsibilities, etc. in all 
phases of the project's implementation.  
 
The project's original social assessment, prepared in 2014, was updated to cover the new regions, as well as provide a 



summary of more up to date analysis of the key issues. Issues related to labor rights and working conditions in 
horticulture sector, as well as access of women entrepreneurs to credit were flagged up. To address these, additional 
capacity building measures to be implemented in collaboration with the ILO, the Farmers Council and the Association 
of Business Women were designed for implementation under the additional financing. The project also participates in 
the Third Party Monitoring (TPM) and Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) set up by the World Bank for the 
agricultural portfolio in the country to focus on issues of child and forced  adult labor. To date RRA has been found in 
compliance and the GRM is actively receiving and responding to inquiries, however no complaints issued thus far.  
 
Institutional capacity. The project will continue be managed and implemented by the Rural Restructuring Agency 
(RRA), an institution that is currently implementing the Second Rural Enterprise Support Project, GEF Climate Change 
and Land Degradation Project, and other donors' projects. The RRA's capacity for implementation of the ESMF and of 
the participating Financial Intermediaries (PFIs) are adequate, based on the Bank supervision missions in 2016-2017. 
All sub-projects have been subject to screening and assessment and for those classified as Category B separate 
Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) have been prepared. Supervision has confirmed these are being 
implemented in a satisfactory manner and no outstanding issues have been identified.   
 
Further capacity building is anticipated with respect to several technical asepcts of horticulture production, as 
identified during the initial project implementation which are related to Integrated Pest Management (IPM), soil and 
water conservation, including field demonstrations. New training on EA is also required for Participating Financial 
Intermediaries (PFIs) which should strengthen the ability of their representatives to identify potential environmental 
and social impacts as well as their knowledge on the EA rules and procedures. The revised ESMF proposes necessary 
activities in this regard.  
 
To accommodate the scaling up of activities for the project, it was agreed the RRA will hire additional Environmental 
Specialists in all participating oblasts, where regional PIUs will be established for all WB and other IFIs RRA projects will 
be implementing (including for Livestock Development Project which was recently approved by the Board). While the 
RRA ES will have the major coordinating role on EA, the PIU ESs will be responsible for assisting the PFIs in 
implementation of the Credit Component of the project, including reviewing environmental EIA studies and/or 
environmental management plans, monitoring their implementation, advising and guiding PFIs on specific 
environmental issues and management options and ensuring that potential cumulative impacts are addressed. One of 
the major area of their responsibility will be inspection of environmental compliance at worksites, ensuring the ESMP 
provisions are fully implemented. The PIUs ESs will advise PFIs in terms of integrating environmental requirements 
into bidding documents, and analyzing contracts and their implementation in terms of environmental management 
and mitigation issues. ESs will be responsible also for analyzing the environmental conditions of the subprojects’ area 
and identify main environmental parameters. On a quarterly basis PIUs ESs will prepare short reports on implementing 
ESMF and site specific ESMPs for supported sub-projects. They will also identify the status of environmental 
compliance of sub-projects implementation, and, when needed will undertake relevant measures and agree with the 
sub-project beneficiaries on corrective measures and/or proposing to the PFIs and RRA canceling sub-project 
financing. 
 
The project will also support a series of activities on human capacity building. This would include: (a) capacity building 
in collaboration with the ILO to increase compliance with national legislation and ILO conventions on child and forced 
labor, and broader labor issues, ratified by Uzbekistan; (b) training on strengthening project environmental 
management capacity for sub-projects environmental assessment; (c) training and information dissemination for sub-
project beneficiaries and farmers on several important horticulture sector development issues, identified during the 
initial project implementation which are related to Integrated Pest Management, soil and water conservation, 


including field demonstrations; and (d) training EA practitioners in the country that are working on preparing EA 
documents as well as familiarizing representatives from State Ecological Expertise on WB EA rules and procedures and 
proposing relevant recommendations on harmonizing the National EA requirements with the WB ones. 
 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, 
with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
As part of the initial project preparation RRA disclosed and consulted the ESMF with all interested stakeholders. This 
process involved submission of the draft summary of the ESMF to the Ministry of Agriculture and Water Resources 
and other relevant ministries for their review and comments. The Executive Summary of the original document in 
Russian was posted on websites of MAWR for its access to the public on January 17th, 2014. On February 13, 2014, 
the RRA organized a consultation on the draft document. After the consultation, the draft ESMF was revised to 
consider inputs from consulted parties. The final version for the parent project was posted on the website of the 
Ministry of Agriculture on February 14, 2014 and submitted to the World Bank's external website on March 10, 2014. 
For the HDP AF the updated ESMF was posted by RRA on its website for further virtual public consultation in the 
provinces which have been already included in the parent project. Face to face public consultations with the 
participation of main stakeholders and farmers were organized in the new project provinces by RRA in October 2017. 
For that purpose RRA has provided to key stakeholders (oblast agriculture, environmental and sanitary authorities and 
environmental NGOs) hard copies of the draft ESMF.  During the consultations overall the draft ESMF was supported 
by the participants, the few received comments were related to clarifying the EA roles and responsibilities and  
simplifying the EA rules and procedures and providing awareness activities for the potential subprojects beneficiaries 
in this regard. The minutes of consultations have been shared with the Bank. 
 
  OPS_SAFEGUARD_DISCLOSURE_TBL 

























































World Bank Document


 

INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 

ADDITIONAL FINANCING 

Report No.: PIDISDSA20872 

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 27-April-2017 

I. BASIC INFORMATION 

 1. Basic Project Data 

 Country: Ethiopia Project ID: P161373 

   Parent Project ID: P151432 

 Project Name: Enhancing Shared Prosperity through Equitable Services (P161373) 

 Parent Project Name: Enhancing Shared Prosperity through Equitable Services (P151432) 

 Task Team Leader(s): Qaiser M. Khan, Louise Victoria Monchuk, Yoseph Abdissa Deressa 

 Estimated Board Date: 28-Sep-2017 

 Managing Unit: GSP01 

 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00 

(Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)? 

No 

 Project Financing Data (in USD Million) 

 Total Project Cost: 21023.70 Total Bank Financing: 700.00 

 Financing Gap: 835.00  

     Financing Source Amount 

     Borrower 19,541.30 

     Cofinancing 560.00 

     IDA recommitted as a Credit 1,300.00 

     Total 21,401.30 

 Environmental Category: C - Not Required 

 Is this a Repeater project? No 

 
Is this a Transferred 

project? 

No 

 2. Project Development Objective(s) 

 

A. Original Project Development Objectives (PDO) - The PDO of the Enhancing Shared Prosperity 

through Equitable Services (ESPES) program is to improve equitable access to basic services and 

strengthen accountability systems at the decentralized level. The program is anchored around four sets 

of key results: (a) ensuring equitable access to basic services; (b) enhancing citizens’ engagement, 

environmental and social risk management capacity; (c) deepening fiduciary aspects of basic service 

delivery; and (d) ensuring quality data access and results. 

 B. Proposed Project Development Objectives - Additional Financing (AF) 

 The PDO of the ESPES AF remains the same as the parent program. 

 3. Project Description 

 

ESPES supports Ethiopia’s Intergovernmental Fiscal Transfer Program (woreda block grant system) 

which provides funding to close to one thousand woredas all over the country which are responsible for 

delivering basic services in health, education, agriculture, water and rural roads. The block grant 

program is a decentralized system of governance that supports flows of information, resources and 

accountability between different levels of government and between service providers and citizens. This 

system has been found to be effective in improving equitable access to services as indicated in the 

Systematic Country Diagnostic, the Poverty Assessment and the technical assessment undertaken as 

part of the preparation of the ESPES. Government ownership and commitment to the program also 

continues to be very strong. 

 

This proposed additional financing is sought to help finance the expenditures associated with the 

Government of Ethiopia’s Intergovernmental Fiscal Transfer Program which provides block grants to 

region and woreda levels for delivering Basic Social Services such as health care, education, agriculture 

services, rural roads, and water and sanitation. The additional financing would (a) scale up existing 

Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs) DLR targets; and (b) introduce new DLIs especially in the areas 

of citizen engagement and fiduciary management. Alongside the AF, the operation is also being 

restructured into a hybrid PforR to include an investment component to provide capacity building 

support for citizen engagement, fiduciary management, environmental and social safeguards 

management systems (ESMS), improved data production and dissemination, and program management. 

Performance of the operation has been satisfactory over the last 12 months. The closing date will also 

need to be extended from May 1, 2019 to December 31, 2022 to cover the implementation of the new 

DLIs and the capacity building component. 

 

The objective of the system strengthening and capacity building Investment Project Financing (IPF) 

Component is to improve the Government’s federal, regional and woreda level administrative systems 

for implementing and monitoring the block grant program, thereby improving the efficiency and 

effectiveness of the country in delivering basic services to all woredas. For instance, the safeguards 

capacity building element is relevant to all sectors because the woredas are responsible for 

implementing resettlement, compensation and grievance redress for all infrastructure projects 

implemented in their respective woredas. These projects will benefit greatly from enhanced local-level 

capacity citizen engagement, fiduciary management, environmental and social management, and data 

production and dissemination. 

 

The proposed AF includes an allocation of US$100 million for the IPF component which aims at 

complementing the PforR by providing technical assistance and capacity building for service delivery 

system performance. The IPF component is made up of 3 sub-components which are described below. 

 

 Sub-component 1: Strengthening Systems and Sectors (US$30 million): This component 
provides support to the service delivery systems at the federal, regional and Woreda levels. 

Support to sectors is closely tied to the availability of quality data to monitor sectoral outputs 

and outcomes (including monitoring ESPES DLIs). The component will finance key activities 



such as (a) strengthening sectoral MIS for Education, Health, Agriculture and WASH, (b) 

providing finance and TA to the SARA health survey
1
, and (c) costs related to undertaking 

behavioral change campaigns for improving human development outcomes in the bottom 20 

percent of Woredas. The component will also finance activities that strengthen the procurement, 

financial management, governance, and social and environmental systems at decentralized 

levels.  

 Sub-component 2: Citizens Engagement (US$30 million): This component will finance three 
key areas of CE, namely (a) Financial Transparency and Accountability (US$5 million), (b) 

Grievance Redress Mechanisms (US$5 million), and (c) Social Accountability (US$20 

million). In FTA, the activities include support to budget literacy, media campaigns, support for 

audit and procurement information disclosure, related training assessing the effectiveness of 

FTA, strengthening FTA/GRM/SA linkages; capacity building support to the EIO and support 

to grievance management GRM offices. With regard to Social Accountability, to inform the 

implementation of the social accountability activities, the government is undertaking a study to 

determine the best institutional arrangement. It would involve that the government hires a 

national consultancy firm to manage the individual social accountability implementers. The 

choice will depend on technical expertise and capacity as well as independence to undertake 

social accountability activities. Overall, the technical design of the on-the-ground 

implementation of social accountability in the ESPES program will be informed by the ongoing 

design on the ESAP II successor program provided that those design details are agreed within 

the timeline of the preparation schedule of the ESPES AF. 

 Sub-component 3: Capacity building and M&E (US$40 million): The objective of the 
support is to strengthen the capacity of the Central Statistics Agency to produce and disseminate 

timely and reliable statistics to monitor progress under the second Growth and Transformation 

Plan. Some support will also be provided to VERA to improve vital statistics and especially the 

interface with CSA. The capacity building support for CSA and VERA will focus on 1) data 

production and dissemination, and 2) organizational and soft statistical infrastructure and 

capacity building; and 3) improving the quality of vital statistics. This component will also 

support M&E, management and operational costs including (a) incremental staffing costs, (b) 

operational costs including audits and program monitoring and evaluation, and (c) costs 

incurred by the DLI verification agencies.  

 

 
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis 

(if known) 

 

 

The physical setting is not relevant for safeguard analysis as the IPF component does not involve any 

capital investment or civil works and will strengthen the system by (a) enhancing citizens’ engagement, 

environmental and social risk management capacity; (b) deepening fiduciary aspects of basic service 

delivery; and (c) ensuring quality data access and results. There will be no land acquisition or restriction 

of access in this IPF component. 

The ESPES AF will be implemented throughout the country. The objective of the system strengthening 

and capacity building IPF component is to improve the government’s federal, regional and woreda level 

administrative systems for implementing and monitoring the block grant program and for improving the 

efficiency and effectiveness of the country in delivering basic services to all woredas in environmentally 

and socially sustainable manner. For instance, the safeguards local capacity building element is relevant 

to all sectors because the woredas are responsible for implementing community consultation, land 

                                            
1
 The SARA survey is not being financed by the Health PforR SDG project. 



acquisition and resettlement, including compensation enforcement and oversight of grievance redress 

mechanism, etc. for infrastructure development such as rural roads project regardless of funding 

sources. These projects will benefit greatly from enhanced local-level capacity in safeguards, especially 

in relation to social impacts and aspects, which are typically weaker than biophysical aspects, at woreda 

level.  

. 


 6. Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 No This is a capacity building project 

focusing on system strengthening, 

including safeguards. It will not have any 

negative impacts on people and 

environment 

 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 No  

 Forests OP/BP 4.36 No  

 Pest Management OP 4.09 No  

 Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No  

 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No  

 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 No  

 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No  

 
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 

7.50 

No  

 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No  

. 

 II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 

 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and 

describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 

 
There will not be any large scale and significant and/or irreversible impacts associated with this project. 

It will actually enhance local capacity in safeguards, which will be beneficial not only to basic sectors 

but also to all sectors implementing projects in woredas.  

 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in 

the project area: 

 
The long term impacts of the project activities are positive in terms of environmental and social 

management. The safeguards capacity building at local level will contribute towards improved 



environmental and social management in project design, implementation and monitoring in both the 

public and private sectors. 

 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse 

impacts. 

 Not applicable 

 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an 

assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 

 

A series of legal proclamations form the basis for the environmental and social assessment and 

management framework in Ethiopia: The Proclamation on the Establishment of Environmental 

Protection Organs (No. 295/2002); the Proclamation on Environmental Impact Assessment (No. 

299/2002); and the Proclamation on Environmental Pollution Control (No. 300/2002).  

 

As part of the Management Action Plan, in response to the PBS 3 Inspection Panel investigation, (a) the 

Government has developed Environmental and Social Management Operational Manual, and (b) a 

screening tool to manage the interface between Bank-financed projects and Commune Centers, was 

developed, and it is being rolled out. An Incremental ESSA was carried out as part of the preparation of 

the ESPES AF. It identified changes or improvement to the systems in place for environmental and 

social management at all levels, including taking stock of implementation capacity and performance at 

woreda level and the identification of any areas for improvement, based on the review of the original 

ESSA and any developments since then. This has informed the preparation of the safeguards IPF 

component with regard to local capacity building. 

 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on 

safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 

 
The key stakeholders are the MoFEC, MoEFCC, basic sector ministries, BoFEDs and regional 

environmental agencies and basic sector bureaus. Consultation on the Incremental ESSA will be held, 

and it will be disclosed on the infoshop and in-country before appraisal.  

 

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
NIGERIA: COVID-19 Action Recovery and Economic Stimulus (P174114) 

 
 

  
May 15, 2020 Page 1 of 11  

     

 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Program Information Document 
 (PID) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 08-Jun-2020 | Report No: PIDC223395 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

A. Basic Program Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Program Name 

Nigeria P174114  NIGERIA: COVID-19 
Action Recovery and 
Economic Stimulus 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date 
Does this operation 
have an IPF 
component? 

AFRICA WEST 14-Sep-2020 15-Oct-2020 Yes 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency Practice Area (Lead) 

Program-for-Results 
Financing 

International Economic 
Relations Department of 
Federal Ministry of Finance 

Federal Project Support Unit Social Protection & 
Jobs 

 

Proposed Program Development Objective(s)  
   

To protect livelihoods and food security of poor and vulnerable families and facilitate recovery of local economic 
activity in all participating states across Nigeria 

  

COST & FINANCING 
   
FIN_SRC_TABLE1 
SUMMARY (USD Millions) 
 

Government program Cost 770.00 

Total Operation Cost 770.00 

Total Program Cost 750.00 

IPF Component 20.00 

Total Financing 750.00 

Financing Gap 20.00 

 
  
FINANCING (USD Millions) 

Total World Bank Group Financing 750.00 

     World Bank Lending 750.00 
 


Concept Review Decision 
The review did authorize the preparation to continue 

     
 
 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
1. This program document outlines a proposed Program-for-Results (PforR) operation in the amount of US$750 
million to support the States of the Federal Government of Nigeria in their efforts to mitigate the impact of the COVID-
19 pandemic on the livelihoods of poor and vulnerable households and microenterprises in the country. The proposed 
PforR is an emergency operation designed to support budgeted program of expenditures and interventions at the State 
level targeting existing and newly vulnerable and poor households, agricultural value chains, and micro and small 
enterprises affected by the economic crisis. The operation provides financial support to the States to fulfill program 
objectives in four key results areas: (i) strengthening institutional support for coordination and delivery; (ii) increasing 
cash transfers and livelihood support to poor and vulnerable households; (iii) increasing food security and safe 
functioning of food supply chains for poor households; and (iv) preventing collapse and facilitating recovery of 
household/micro enterprises. It is fully aligned with the forthcoming World Bank 2020–24 Country Partnership 
Framework for Nigeria, as well as Nigeria’s Economic Reform and Growth Plan for 2017–20 and the National Economic 
Council’s COVID-19 action plan.1   
 
Country Context 
 

2. Even before the COVID-19 pandemic, poverty and vulnerability levels were already high in Nigeria. Measured 

using the national poverty line, the poverty rate in 2018/19 was 40 percent nationally, with poverty rates significantly 

higher in rural areas (52 percent) compared to urban areas (18 percent).2 Geographically, all three Northern regions have 

higher poverty rates compared to the Southern regions. The poverty rate in the North East (70.2 percent) is more than 

seven times higher than in the South West (9.7 percent). In addition to 40 percent of the population who fall below the 

poverty line, additional 25 percent of Nigerians are vulnerable to falling back into poverty in 2018/19.3 In the North East 

and North West, most individuals are either poor or vulnerable. Besides monetary poverty, Nigeria ranked sixth lowest 

globally in the World Bank’s Human Capital Index in 2018, with one in every three children under the age of five suffering 

from chronic malnutrition. In 2018, 63 percent of children in the poorest quintile were stunted compared to 18 percent 

in the richest quintile and only 29 percent of primary school age children from the poorest quintile were in school 

(adjusting for attendance) compared to 89 percent from the richest quintile, starkly highlighting the fact that the human 

capital indicators were far worse for the poorest segment of the population compared to the averages. The COVID-19 

crisis strikes at a time when Nigerian youth were already facing severe lack of job opportunities, with overall 

unemployment increasing from 8 percent in 2015 to 23 percent in 2018.4  

 

3. COVID-19 is expected to negatively affect economic growth in Nigeria, primarily due to the steep fall in global 
oil prices. Nigeria enjoyed relatively high and stable economic growth from 2000-2014, before the country went into a 
recession following the oil-price shock in late-2014. Growth averaged 6.1 percent between 2000-2014 before dropping 
below 3 percent in 2015 and turning negative in 2016. Nigerian economy has been recovering slowly since with the uptick 
in oil prices, but growth has stayed below 3 percent in subsequent years. As Nigeria’s economy and the government’s 
finances are highly dependent on revenues from sales of crude oil, current projections estimate the Nigerian economy to 
contract by at least 3 percent in 2020, due to the fall in oil prices caused by COVID-19.5  It is further expected that 
consolidated government revenues will fall by US$ 12 billion (3 percent of GDP) or more, severely constraining the 
government’s ability to respond to the crisis and at a time when fiscal resources are urgently needed to protect the poor 
and vulnerable from the negative impact of COVID-19. 
 
4. While the number of confirmed COVID-19 cases have grown slowly in Nigeria compared to the West, it is already 
having a severe impact on the lives and livelihoods of Nigerians. To prevent the spread of COVID-19, the Nigerian 
government had previously announced total lockdowns in urban centers in Lagos, Ogun, and Abuja. The prolonged month-
long lockdown severely impacted informal firms and workers in urban areas first before impacting rural areas, where many 
of Nigeria’s poor reside. An economic crisis such as the one caused by COVID-19 could push large segments of non-poor 
households back into poverty. With economic growth expected to decline by at least 3 percent in 2020, the poverty 
headcount rate is estimated to increase from 40.1 percent in 2019 to 42.5 percent in 2020 and will continue to rise absent 
any change in government policy. By 2022, the forecasts suggest that almost 100 million Nigerians will be below the 
poverty line, an additional 16.4 million poor people compared with today, which arises from both the rising poverty rate 
and natural population growth. While only 15.9 percent of the current poor are urban dwellers, 29.9 percent of the new 
poor in 2020 are predicted to be in urban areas. It is expected that consumption will fall across the distribution, leading 
to a rise in the poverty headcount rate and increase in the poverty gap index.  
 
5. The Government of Nigeria has taken important measures to stop the spread of COVID-19 and has put in place 
measures to cushion the poor and vulnerable against the negative impact of the crisis. A fiscal stimulus package in the 
form of a COVID-19 intervention fund of N500 billion (US$1.4 billion), has been approved by the President to support 
healthcare facilities, provide relief for taxpayers, and incentivize employers to retain and recruit staff during the downturn. 
Regulated fuel prices have been reduced, and an automatic fuel price formula introduced to ensure fuel subsidies are 
eliminated. The President also ordered an increase of the social register by 1 million households to 3.6 million to help 
cushion the effect of the lockdown. The Central Bank has instituted a N50 billion targeted credit facility for households 
and Micro and Small Enterprises (MSEs) that have been affected by COVID-19. The president also approved the 
establishment of a N500 billion COVID-19 crisis intervention fund while the restructuring of the Treasury Single Account 
(‘TSA’) is in progress to better mobilize cash donations from people and corporate bodies across the country. 
 

Sectoral (or multi-sectoral) and Institutional Context of the Program 
 

 
6. The proposed PforR is part of a broader emergency package offered by the World Bank Group, which is 

anchored by the key measures taken by the government, and complemented by support from other development 

partners, to put in place measures to respond to the pandemic. The Government of Nigeria is establishing a multi-

faceted economic, fiscal and health response to COVID-19 at the federal and state level and has requested a significant 

package of support from the World Bank. Based on request from the Federal Ministry of Finance, Budget and Planning, 

the World Bank is preparing a multi-pronged package of support of between USD 2.5 billion and USD 3 billion over the 

 

next six months, which includes the Nigeria CARES PforR. The broader support package includes programs designed to: 

(i) Contain the COVID-19 outbreak and prepare for a more severe outbreak (REDISSE); (ii) Immediate fiscal relief for the 

federal government (CoFFER) and funding to protect core government functions to the State level (SFTAS); and (iii) 

Support for protecting livelihoods, local economic activity, and enabling recovery (CARES and NAASP).  

 
 
7. Existing social safety nets programs can be leveraged to mitigate the effect of COVID-19 on vulnerable groups 
but the targeting mechanisms needs to be expanded and adapted to capture the people who will be vulnerable due to 
the COVID-19.  A total of more than 5.4 million Nigerians (adults and children) have benefited from existing social safety 
net interventions (Cash Transfer, Public Workfare, Special Grants to Vulnerable and Skills for Job). However, identification 
of the poor in Nigeria remains challenging due to the inadequacy of data. Multiple definitions of poverty and vulnerability 
and lack of clarity on welfare measures adds to existing challenges. In recent times, the State Social Registry and the 
National Social Registry of poor and vulnerable households have been established under the World Bank financed Youth 
Employment and Social Support Operation6 and National Social Safety Nets Project (NASSP)7 using a combined 
geographical and community-based identification and targeting system verified through proxy means testing to rank 
households. The state level registry that started in 2016 has limited coverage in many of the urban locations. There is a 
renewed effort to rapidly expand the coverage of the registries and use other objective criteria of vulnerability to capture 
the new poor especially in urban areas.  The newly created Ministry of Humanitarian Affairs, Disaster Management and 
Social Development is planning to provide the appropriate platform for interagency collaboration. The new National Living 
Standard Survey 2018/19, provides an opportunity to validate and strengthen the social registries at State and National 
level and to ensure harmonization with other existing beneficiary registries.  
 
8. The Community and Social Development Project supports the empowerment of communities and vulnerable 
groups within communities to develop, implement, and monitor social infrastructure service micro-projects (such as in 
basic services – health, education, water, roads, skills centers, among others) and natural resource management 
interventions. It also strengthens the capacity of local government authorities, LGAs and sectoral public agencies to 
support communities and build a partnership between them. The CSDP is currently managed at the State level by State 
Agencies established by Law of the States. 30 States of the Federation and the Federal Capital Territory are participating 
in the project. Kaduna State has just established its own Community and Social Development Agencies CSDA. Delta and 
Rivers has CDD/PIUs imbedded in relevant Ministries that operates like CSDAs and supported by SEEFOR -a World Bank 
assisted project in the Niger Delta.  Only Lagos, Kano and Jigawa are not participating in CSDP but do have community 
engagement agencies and departments. There is a Federal Project Support unit responsible for coordination, technical 
support, monitoring and evaluation and finance resources mobilization and management. A total of 4,600 Community 
Development plans and over 600 Group Development Plans are now approved and funded as of December 2019.  The 
North East States continued to improve on the number of CDPs and GDPs. Over 2 million people are benefiting from the 
CSDP interventions in the North East while across all the participating state, well over 7 million individuals are benefiting 
from CSDP as of December 2019.  
 

 
6 YESSO a State level Social Safety Net Operation started the State Social Registry in 2015 from a USD 400m IDA credit. It also supports 3 major 
interventions at the State level- Pubic workfare, Special Grants to the Internally Displaced persons in North East and the Aged and physically 
challenged, and Skills for Job. It is closing in June 2020. 
7 NASSP, through its exiting budget available from the IDA of USD 500 million and USD 321 million from the government through Abacha Restituted 
Fund, will be scaled up horizontally and vertically to support the existing 1 million poor and vulnerable households (over 5 million people) currently 
benefiting from CCT and will enroll additional 1 million poor and vulnerable households (5 million people) from the National Social Registry to 
receive Cash Transfer support for at least 1 year to cushion the impact of COVID-19 on poor and vulnerable households.  



 
The World Bank  
NIGERIA: COVID-19 Action Recovery and Economic Stimulus (P174114) 

 
 

  
May 15, 2020 Page 6 of 11  

     

9. The National Fadama Development Project is a state-level intervention coordinated by the Federal 
Government. Beginning in 1990 with a pilot agricultural project (Fadama I) designed to bring basic irrigation and 
productive support to farmers in selected Nigerian states, the Fadama series have evolved through two subsequent 
innovative and adaptive pro-jects (Fadama II and III) that are now well established nationally. Fadama II, launched in 2003, 
introduced a groundbreaking Community-Driven Development (CDD) model to Nigeria’s rural areas and helped 
institutionalized local stakeholder engagement in community decision making. Since 2009 when Fadama III series 
commenced, it has contributed to the Government of Nigeria’s development objectives and policy in terms of gross 
domestic product, food security, rural development, and employment generation. Cassava farmers under Fadama III, and 
it’s two additional Financing Facilities realized more than N20.6 billion as revenue and a gross margin of N13 billion in 
2019. Similarly, rice, sorghum and tomato farmers realized gross margin of N104.4 billion, N60.9 billion and N19.2 billion 
respectively during the project’s life span. The project performance evaluation report showed that 100 percent of the 
beneficiaries have increased their real income by at least 40%. Yield rose from a baseline of 5.27t/ha to 25.34t/ha for 
cassava (380.83%), 2.83t/ha to 4.93t/ha for rice (74.2%), 1.54t/ha to 2.4t/ha for sorghum (55.84%), and 1.6t/ha to 
30.44t/ha for tomato (1,802.5%).  
 
10. The Fadama structure has been successfully deployed to provide solutions to national challenges, including 
delivering inputs and services to farmers, investing in various types of productive agricultural infrastructure and assets, 
improving food supply chains in underserved areas, and supporting programs to increase employment of graduate 
youths. Specifically, the project had, in 2017 competitively empowered 6,916 unemployed youth and women graduates 
who indicated interest in becoming agricultural entrepreneurs. Fadama project has proved to be a reliable platform for 
implementing rural based intervention and activities that could target the poor and the vulnerable with sufficient national 
spread and capacity. There is a National Fadama Coordinating Unit responsible for coordination, technical support, 
monitoring and evaluation to the State Level operation.  A total of 18,650 Business Plans have been prepared and over 
220,551 farmers across 19,469 production groups in 3,051 Production Clusters have received various trainings.  In the 
Conflict affected North East region, Fadama has helped to restore the livelihoods (crops, livestock, fisheries, and non-
agricultural enterprises) of 32,480 farming households with 950,400 man-days of work provided to the beneficiaries. Over 
1,218,824 people have benefited from the Fadama interventions across the country.  
 
11. In many of the States there are SME support Agencies of the State Government and also Ministries of Commerce 
and Industry as well as Ministries of Cooperatives with programs and initiatives on promotion and facilitation of 
household enterprises (micro and small). Some of the Ministry, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) provide small loans 
and grants to registered businesses. Registration and regulations of local firms and enterprises are also managed by the 
MDAs. At the Federal level there is the Government Enterprise and Empowerment Program (GEEP) initiative administered 
by the Bank of Industry exist in all 36 States of the Federation and FCT. The GEEP provides loans of between ₦10,000 ($28) 
and ₦300,000 ($835) to traders, artisans, enterprising youth, and farmers. The program commenced in 2016 and has 
empowered 2.2 million such micro-enterprises with interest-free loans to grow their businesses up to date, making it the 
largest public microcredit program. The majority of these micro-enterprises are in over 2,100 clusters and markets across 
all 36 states of Nigeria, and the capital. As of today, about 5 million GEEP candidates are connected to the Consolidated 
Beneficiary Register for the National Social Investment Program. The number is growing. Candidates can also be served 
on other programs i.e. school feeding, cash transfers, etc. The GEEP program has over 4,300 local agents nationwide to 
verify beneficiaries and perform credit check before loans are disbursed to the beneficiaries’ mobile wallet. Funds can be 
cashed out with minimal intermediation to reduce transaction costs and fraud. The program, in addition to provide quick 
financial intermediation to the needed enterprises, can also serve in more data capture.  Partnership between state MDAs 
supporting household enterprises (micro and small) and GEEP can be a veritable mechanism especially at this time when 
local economy is at the mercy of the health crisis and the economic downturn. 
 



Relationship to CAS/CPF 
 
12. The proposed PforR supports the World Bank Group’s Nigeria CPF for 2020-24 and is aligned with the framework 
of support proposed by the World Bank Africa region and the WBG Social Response Framework. The CPF reflects 
Nigeria’s aspiration for faster, more inclusive, and sustained economic growth in the next decade to help the government 
in its ambition to lift 100 million people out of poverty. This PforR directly supports the CPF’s Pillars on “Investing in human 
capital and social inclusion”, “Fostering Jobs and Economic Transformation”, and “Reducing fragility and building 
resilience”. More specifically, the PFORR: (i) enables the States to continue to build and expand their social protection 
systems to strengthen safety nets and basic services; (ii) prevents disruptions and job losses in agricultural supply chains 
by supporting linkages between farmers and markets; and (iii) helps micro and small enterprises wither the impact of the 
economic crisis by providing support in the form of credits and grants. The PFORR also addresses priorities outlined in the 
2019 Systematic Country Diagnostic for Nigeria by averting further erosion of human capital, supporting private firms and 
microenterprises to stay afloat, and continuing the provision of basic services to the most vulnerable groups. The PFORR 
is also fully aligned with the Africa region’s framework of protecting lives, livelihoods, and the future to address the 
pandemic and the multifaceted action plan proposed in the WBG Social Response Framework of saving lives, protecting 
the poor and vulnerable, securing jobs and the economy, and accelerating a resilient recovery. 
 
Rationale for Bank Engagement and Choice of Financing Instrument 
 

13. The PforR instrument allows the States to access funds for budgeted programs of expenditures and comes at a 
time when the decline in revenues threatens the ability of the government to respond to the crisis. Unprecedented 
decline in oil prices (70 percent since the start of the crisis) has constrained the government’s ability to respond to the 
crisis. 80 percent of Nigeria’s exports, 30 percent of banking-sector credit, and 50 percent of general government revenues 
rely on sales of crude oil. Much of the nonoil industrial and services sectors also rely on foreign-exchange inflows 
generated by the oil industry. With the Nigerian economy expected to contract 5 percentage points below the pre-COVID 
19 economic growth forecast, States will require substantial funds to quickly and effectively respond to the crisis. Some 
of the ₦500 billion funds allocated as the federal government’s fiscal stimulus package will be implemented at the State 
level and would need to be reflected in the State government’s budget. As the PforR is designed for a 2-year emergency 
response, using and strengthening existing programs and platforms also has the added benefit of building capacity of 
those platforms to ensure sustainability beyond the duration of the program. The PforR aims to build strong coordination 
mechanisms between the Federal and State level of the government. Strong level of Federal oversight and support could 
help States lagging in capacity to implement programs to protect livelihoods and food security of poor and vulnerable 
households and facilitate recovery of local economic activities.  The PforR instrument also allows states to quickly access 
funds using existing government programs and systems, reducing the transaction processes. Finally, the program is 
designed to disburse against tangible results and provides flexibility to the States to achieve the results that are best suited 
to their needs.  
 
C. Program Development Objective(s) (PDO) and PDO Level Results Indicators 
 
Program Development Objective(s) 

 
To protect livelihoods and food security of poor and vulnerable families and facilitate recovery of local economic activity 
in all participating states across Nigeria 
 
PDO Level Results Indicators 
 



14. To achieve the development objective, the proposed Program would include the following four result areas: 
  

a. Increased social transfers, basic services, and livelihood support to poor and vulnerable households; 
b. Increasing food security and safe functioning of food supply chains for poor households; 
c. Facilitating recovery and enhancing capabilities of micro and small enterprises (MSEs); 
d. Strengthened institutional support for coordination and delivery; 

 
Figure 1: Proposed Project Development Objective and Program Results Areas for CARES 

 
 
D. Program Description 

 
PforR Program Boundary 

 
15. Results Area 1 aims to address the immediate needs of poor and vulnerable households by providing income 

and consumption support and access to basic services.  Through this results area, the program will support existing 
platforms that provide social transfers to vulnerable groups including the aged, disabled, and chronically ill and support 
income generating opportunities of economically active poor and vulnerable households through cash transfers and labor-
intensive public works. Existing programs that provide services to poor and vulnerable communities through funding of 
basic social and economic infrastructure microprojects will also be eligible for funding support. Selected programs must 
provide clear and measurable criteria to evaluate results that contribute to improved consumption and welfare of poor 
and vulnerable households. 

 
results area, the P4R will support existing platforms that support poor and vulnerable households to increase production 
of food, maintain economic activities along food value chains, and enable safe access to food markets as buyers or sellers. 
The immediate needs to support agricultural livelihoods could include distribution of inputs, provision of services 
(extension, mechanization, animal services), farm agricultural assets, replacement of small ruminants, etc. Similarly, the 
future capacity to produce food could be supported through small-scale irrigation infrastructure, on-farm soil conservation 
measures, etc. Investments to increase food accessibility in future could be supported through sanitary infrastructure in 
wet markets, feeder roads to enable access to markets, increased capacity for small-scale processing, among others. The 
selected program areas must provide clear and measurable results that contribute to increasing food availability, 
accessibility and utilization and can be generated within the 18-24 months’ timeframe. 

 
17. Results Area 3 will support Micro and Small Enterprises (MSEs) intervention programs and initiatives at Sub-

National level in Nigeria. Leveraging existing State-level MSE platforms, the program will support initiatives that eases 
financial constraints on MSEs, provide financing to support operational expenses of existing MSEs to cover a portion of its 
operational cost including salaries of permanent staff and rental expenses, and invest in MSEs’ infrastructure and IT 
(digital) development. Existing platforms that support both formal and informal firms will be eligible. However, targeting 
mechanisms will be supported to identify vulnerable and viable firms with clear timeline to phase out in order to maximize 
the fungibility of the financing resources. 
 
E. Initial Environmental and Social Screening 
 

18. Based on current available information in terms of the scope of the Program, no high Environmental and Social 
risks are anticipated due to proposed program activities. In terms of potential environmental impacts, there could be 
risk of waste management, soil and ground water contamination, pest management, construction related risk and impacts 
including capacity to manage the grant component for MSMEs. There could be moderate risks and impacts posed due to 
small scale land acquisition causing resettlement during rehabilitation / construction of secondary / tertiary irrigation 
canals; rehabilitation of tertiary roads; rehabilitation / construction of agricultural warehouse; upgrading of sanitary 
infrastructures in wet markets. These infrastructure activities could also pose labor risks, GBV and community health risks 
when contractors/labor force are brought into remote areas for certain project activities including potential cumulative 
impacts. These will be further reviewed and assessed during the Environmental and Social Systems Assessment (ESSA) 
that would be prepared prior to appraisal. This current rating would be adjusted accordingly as additional information 
becomes available and based on the outcomes of the ESSA assessment.   
 
 . . 
 
Legal Operational Policies                                  Triggered? 

Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50  

Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60  

 
Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts of the IPF Component 
 




