


































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of
Liberia for the Rural Community Finance
Project



Republic of Liberia

Rural Community Finance Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of Liberia

Executing agencies: Technical Assistance and Supervision Unit (TASU) and
Technical Assistance and Supervision Company
(TASC), and Central Bank of Liberia (CBL)

Total project cost: US$10.86 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 4.01 million (equivalent to approximately
US$5.5 million)

Amount of IFAD grant: SDR 0.38 million (equivalent to approximately
US$0.5 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional: maturity period of 40 years,
including a grace period of 10 years, with a service
charge of 0.75 per cent per year

Contribution of borrower: US$0.54 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$4.39 million including US$3.2 million frombeneficiaries, US$1.1 million from RCFIs and US$0.09
million from CBL

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD




1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of Liberia for the Rural Community Finance Project as
contained in paragraph 45.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Liberia for the
Rural Community Finance Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Despite significant improvements since the end of its civil war, Liberia remains a

fragile state with weak institutions, policies and governance. The outbreak of Ebola
virus disease has further constrained Liberia’s limited institutional capacity and
impacted its economy, threatening post-war gains. Liberia is classified as a Least
Developed Country and a Low-Income Food-Deficit Country,1 and relies heavily on
foreign assistance. The gross national income per capita was US$400 in 20142 and,
according to the 2014 Human Development Index, increased by 68.2 per cent
between 2000 and 2013. With a 2013 Human Development Index score of 0.412,
Liberia ranked 175 out of 187 countries in human development.

2. According to United Nations statistics, the population is estimated at 4.4 million
with an annual growth rate of 2.6 per cent. Liberia has a large youth population: in
2013, 42.9 per cent of the population was estimated to be less than 14 years old.
Poverty is widespread in Liberia, and is particularly acute in rural areas. An
estimated 51 per cent of the population lives in rural areas where poverty is heavily
concentrated, and a high percentage lack access to basic infrastructure and social
services, with poor road conditions leaving many areas inaccessible. Approximately
55 per cent of rural Liberian households are food insecure.3

3. The agricultural sector is the primary source of livelihood for 48.9 per cent of the
active population – mainly in smallholder and subsistence farming. There are also
cash-crop plantations including rubber, cocoa, coffee, palm oil and sugar cane.
Although agriculture is the largest contributor of GDP, small-scale farmers are
among the poorest in the country. Liberia has signed the Comprehensive Africa
Agricultural Development Programme (CAADP) Compact, committing to the Maputo
Protocol goal of 10 per cent national budget expenditure on agriculture by 2017
(the current level is 3 per cent of the national budget). As a result of low
agricultural production and productivity, Liberia imports between 50 per cent and
60 per cent of its staple food requirements, leaving the country vulnerable to price
fluctuations in global markets.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and RB-
COSOP

4. IFAD’s results-based country strategic opportunities programme (RB-COSOP) for
Liberia for the period 2011-2015 is aligned with the CAADP and national policies,
especially the Liberia Agriculture Sector Investment Program. Three
IFAD-supported projects are currently contributing to the RB-COSOP: (i) the
Agriculture Sector Rehabilitation Project; (ii) the Smallholder Tree Crop

1 Low-Income Food-Deficit Countries list for 2014, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
2 World Bank World Development Indicators: gross national income per capita, Atlas Method (Current US$).
3 Liberia Comprehensive Food Security and Nutrition Survey, June 2013.



2

Revitalization and Support Project; and (iii) the support to the Farmers’ Union
Network.

5. As the Liberia RB-COSOP reached its midway point, its performance and relevance
were reviewed to identify the way forward for future IFAD support under the 2013-
2015 performance-based allocation system. The findings of the 2013 review
revealed that the strategic objectives under the RB-COSOP continue to be relevant,
with the provision that the transition from an emergency situation to a development
approach is realized. The needs and priorities of smallholder farmers and their
organizations are changing. Their growing interest in investing in agriculture and in
other microenterprises and small business is generating greater demand for credit
and will necessitate better access to rural finance. This demand has been
recognized in government efforts to promote growth in the local economy and
reduce poverty in the long term. The Government’s interest in building the rural
finance sector has been mirrored by the CBL. With the current RB-COSOP set to
end in 2015, the new RB-COSOP will require a stronger focus on rural finance.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
6. Project area. The project will facilitate the creation of new rural community

finance institutions (RCFIs) in selected areas throughout the country. RCFI locations
will be identified through feasibility studies and criteria including the degree of
commitment by host communities, absence of banking facilities and viability. CBL’s
strategic goals and objectives will also be taken into account. Priority will be given
to locations with significant business potential, including central towns with high
demand for financial services. The project area will also include all locations with
existing RCFIs.

7. Although the project will be nationwide in scope (excluding urban Montserrado
county), its coverage may initially be divided into implementation clusters. At the
district or county level, the following criteria will be used to identify suitable
communities: (i) social, poverty and demographic indicators for identifying
vulnerable communities with high potential; (ii) complementarities with ongoing
and planned initiatives; (iii) the potential for commercial activity, including the
production of cocoa and coffee, and value addition; (iv) the potential for poverty
reduction and employment creation; (v) the potential for mobilization of shares and
savings; and (vi) demand for financial services, particularly among low-income
groups.

8. Target group. The primary target group will be the economically active rural
population: petty traders, smallholder farmers, food processors, local transporters,
craftsmen, artisans and ex-combatants. Special attention will be given to reaching
women and youth, and small-scale entrepreneurs, especially women. As a project
designed to improve access to rural finance, targeting will be inclusive: by virtue of
the fact that the RCFIs will be community-owned, access to the financial services
will be open to the entire community. The project will directly target 24,000
shareholders, at least 50 per cent of them women, and 25 per cent of them young
men and women.

9. The proposed project will complement ongoing initiatives through partnerships to
maximize the impact on the target group. This includes partnerships with farmers’
organizations supported by existing projects that show interest in financial services.

B. Project development objective
10. The overall development goal of the project is to reduce rural poverty and

household food insecurity on a sustainable basis by facilitating access to finance for
at least 24,000 rural individuals and their families. The project’s development
objective is to improve access to rural financial services on a sustainable basis,



3

enabling the development of the rural sector. This project development objective
will be assessed through three indicators, namely that at least: (i) 20 per cent of
the adult rural population (over 16 years) in the project area uses the financial
services of RCFIs supported by the project; (ii) 50 per cent of RCFI shareholders
have received at least one loan; and (iii) 75 per cent of RCFIs supported by the
project achieve 100 per cent operational self-sufficiency (OSS) by the project end.

C. Components/outcomes
11. This five-year project will aim to enhance access to sustainable and affordable rural

financial services in Liberia. The three main outcomes of the project are that: (i)
RCFIs deliver demand-driven and efficient financial services to their clients; (ii)
professional and efficient technical support and supervision services are provided to
RCFIs by an apex body – the Technical Assistance and Supervision Unit/Technical
Assistance and Supervision Company (TASU/TASC)4 and; (iii) a more conducive
regulatory and supervisory environment promotes the rural financial sector. The
project will comprise three components: (i) Rural financial services; (ii) Enabling
environment for rural finance; and (iii) Project management and coordination.

12. Rural financial services. This component includes three subcomponents:
(i) direct support in the creation of 10 RCFIs and extended support to nine existing
RCFIs with support from CBL and a commercial bank; (ii) creation of a TASU/TASC
within CBL to implement the subcomponent 1.1 and support RCFIs; and (iii) a
country-specific grant to mitigate the impacts of the Ebola virus disease outbreak.
Given negative impacts of Ebola virus disease on household incomes, earning
capacity, financial and other reserves, and saving capacity, IFAD will support the
recovery of existing RCFIs and the establishment of new ones with US$0.5 million.

13. Enabling environment for rural finance. This component will provide technical
assistance to CBL for developing a sound regulatory framework for deposit-taking
and credit-only financial institutions. There will be a focus on rationalizing Liberia’s
the regulatory environment, including policies and reporting formats for RCFIs,
microfinance institutions (MFIs) and credit unions. This will be achieved in an open
manner that ensures stakeholder participation.

14. Project management and coordination. Component 3, comprising
project-related coordination, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), reporting, financial
management and procurement oversight, will be undertaken by the programme
implementation unit (PIU) operating under the supervision of the programme
management unit (PMU) within the Ministry of Agriculture. The PMU is responsible
for the coordination and harmonization of all donor-funded agricultural projects.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
15. The institutional design of the project is simple: the existence of a centralized PIU

for all Ministry of Agriculture projects supported by IFAD makes it possible to
coordinate the rural finance activities assigned to TASU/TASC and CBL. The main
institutional responsibilities comprise: (i) implementation of all grass-roots activities
under component 1 by TASU/TASC; (ii) implementation of component 2 activities,
which are related to CBL’s core mandate, by CBL; (iii) PIU implementation of all
activities related to its mandate (see paragraph 19); and (iv) guidance on major
issues, which will be provided by a project steering committee (PSC).

4 The TASU will be established within the Central Bank of Liberia and will develop over time until
deemed sufficiently strong for transformation into an independent company (TASC), providing services
to member institutions in exchange for a fee.




4

16. TASU/TASC and CBL will share responsibility for implementation. This complies with
the international consensus that central banks’ project interventions should be
limited to activities clearly related to their primary mandates. In this case,
regulation and supervision of financial institutions fall under the mandate of CBL.
Memorandums of agreement will be signed by the PIU, TASU/TASC and CBL.
Memorandums of agreement will also be signed by TASU/TASC and each affiliated
RCFI.

B. Organizational framework
17. The project will operate under the guidance of a PSC composed of representatives

from the Ministry of Agriculture, the Ministry of Finance and Development Planning,
and CBL. The PSC will provide project oversight, approve all manuals and revisions,
approve the annual workplan and budget before its submission to IFAD, receive
draft annual reports and decide on major issues. According to PIU implementation
guidelines, all sector-specific projects must have their own PSC with the necessary
technical requirements and expertise.

18. The PMU was established under the supervision of the Ministry of Agriculture and is
affiliated with that ministry’s Department of Planning and Development . The PMU is
a shared unit in charge of implementing all donor-funded projects in the agricultural
sector. The PMU is responsible for overall coordination of activities and information
exchange among partners, ministries and other stakeholders, and for ensuring
synergy among the project implementation units of the various donors.

19. Within the PMU, the IFAD PIU in Monrovia is responsible for the implementation of
all IFAD-funded projects in Liberia related to agriculture. The mandate of the PIU
comprises: project accounting, withdrawals, consolidating annual workplans and
budgets, preparing annual reports, corresponding with government authorities on
issues related to the financing agreement (excluding technical implementation),
documentation, procurement, submitting reports to IFAD and other agencies, M&E,
supervision of support and midterm review (MTR) missions, impact assessment and
end-of-project evaluation.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

20. A system to integrate planning, M&E, and knowledge management will be
developed at start-up to: (i) provide stakeholders with the data required to steer
implementation; (ii) provide the Ministry of Agriculture and other stakeholders with
information on progress in order to measure the project’s success in increasing
access to finance and other indicators; (iii) support coordination and synergies with
other development projects; (iv) monitor the project’s success in building
participatory processes that ensure the full involvement of rural poor people;
(v) provide participating communities and RCFIs with regular feedback and
analytics; and (vi) provide information on the achievement of RB-COSOP targets.
The PIU will manage this system in collaboration with partners.

B. Financial management, procurement and governance
21. Country context and risk rating. The inherent risk in Liberia is assessed as

medium. Liberia’s Corruption Perceptions Index score has decreased slightly from
41 in 2012 to 38 in 2013 and to 37 in 2014. According to the latest IMF Public
Expenditure and Financial Accountability Assessment conducted in 2012, Liberia’s
Government has made significant improvements since the 2007 assessment, but
the overall state of the public financial management remains somewhat weak. As
part of the project design, a financial management assessment of the PIU
responsible for implementing existing IFAD projects was undertaken. The
assessment found that the existing PIU’s financial management arrangements and
capacity are adequate to meet IFAD requirements. However, since the financial




5

management arrangements of the main implementing partner TASU/TASC are not
yet in place, the initial risk rating was determined to be medium.

22. Financial management. The main responsibility for the project’s financial
management will rest with the PIU. The PIU will maintain a full set of accounts
according to IFAD’s requirements and internationally accepted accounting
standards. The PIU will prepare periodic interim financial reports and annual project
financial statements according to accounting standards acceptable to IFAD. All
financial management arrangements will be detailed by the PIU in a financial
procedures manual or equivalent guideline to be approved by the Fund.

23. Flow of funds. There will be two designated bank accounts in United States dollars
held by CBL – one for the IFAD loan and one for the IFAD grant. In addition, two
operating accounts in United States dollars in a commercial bank acceptable to
IFAD will receive funds from the designated accounts. There will also be an
operating account to receive government counterpart funds. Once the IFAD
financing has entered into force, IFAD will make an initial deposit into the
designated accounts equal to the requirements of six months of implementation
(authorized allocation). IFAD financing will be disbursed following certified
withdrawal applications in accordance with IFAD disbursement procedures, which
will be specified in the letter to the borrower.

24. Procurement. Procurement for the project will be carried out according to national
procedures as long as they comply with IFAD guidelines. By default, the project will
utilize the procurement committee established within the Ministry of Agriculture’s
PIU.

25. Audit arrangements. The PIU will appoint independent auditors acceptable to
IFAD under terms of reference cleared by IFAD and in line with IFAD’s guidelines for
project audits. An audited annual consolidated financial statement for the entire
project together with a management letter on audit observations of internal
controls shall be submitted to the Fund within six months of each fiscal year end.

D. Supervision
26. The project will be directly supervised by IFAD. Annual supervision missions,

including follow-up missions whenever needed, will be organized with the
participation of the Ministry of Agriculture, the Ministry of Finance and Development
Planning, CBL, TASU/TASC, RCFIs and beneficiaries. Supervision will not be
conducted as general inspections, but as opportunities to assess achievements and
lessons learned, and to reflect on how to improve implementation and impact.
Missions will be an integral part of the knowledge management cycle, with mission
members supporting project and implementing agencies’ staff.

IV. Project costs, financing and benefits
A. Project costs
27. The total investment and incremental recurrent costs, including price and physical

contingencies, are estimated at US$10,860,000; contingencies account for
3 per cent of these costs. The foreign exchange component is estimated at
US$3,006,000 (28 per cent). Taxes represent US$404,000. The total base cost is
US$10,426,000 while price and other contingencies account for US$434,000.
Significant contributions will be made by beneficiary communities (purchase of
shares), RCFIs (contributions to operating costs of RCFIs and TASU/TASC) and CBL
(staff time). The total costs by component and subcomponent are summarized by
financier in table 1 below.

28. The base cost of component 1 – Rural financial services – represents an investment
of US$9.7 million (93 per cent of the total base cost) while component 2 – Enabling
environment for rural finance, accounts for US$313,000 (3 per cent of the total





6

base cost). Project management and coordination under component 3 account for
4 per cent of the base cost, or US$417,000.

Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component
Government IFAD IFAD grant RCFIs Liberia Beneficiaries Total
Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1.  Rural financial
services

i. RCFIs 239 3.3 2 693 36.8 - - 1 139 15.6 - - 3 240 44.3 7 310 72.2

ii. TASC 114 4.9 2 108 91.1 - - - - 92 4.0 - - 2 313 22.9
iii. Grant for

economic
recovery
after
Ebola virus
disease 8 1.7 - - 490 98.3 - - - - - - 498 4.9

Subtotal 361 3.6 4 800 47.4 490 4.8 1 139 11.3 92 0.9 3 240 32.0 10 121 93.2
2.  Enabling

environment for
rural finance
i  Technical

assistance
to CBL 5 1.8 277 98.2 - - - - - - - - 364 2.6

3.  Project
management
and coordination 31 6.7 426 93.3 - - - - - - - - 591 4.2

Total 400 3.7 5 500 50.6 490 4.5 1 139 10.5 92 0.8 3 240 29.8 10 860 100.0

B. Project financing
29. The project will be financed by the Government, IFAD, CBL, RCFIs and their clients.

IFAD will finance 55 per cent of the project costs through a loan on highly
concessional terms to the Government of US$5.5 million and a grant of
US$0.49 million. The RCFI contribution to operating costs is estimated at
US$1.1 million (11 per cent) and the shareholders’ contribution to share capital is
estimated at US$3.2 million (30 per cent). For the first 30 months, CBL will house
the TASU/TASC and provide a manager, with a total cost of US$0.09 million
(1 per cent). The Government’s contribution will be in the form of waived taxes and
duties on imported and local goods and services as per standard regulations for
IFAD funding (US$0.4 million, representing 4 per cent of the total cost). Total cost
financing arrangements by category of expenses are summarized in the table 2
below.




7

Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure
category

Government IFAD IFAD grant RCFIs Liberia Beneficiaries Total Foreign (Excl.
Duties

and
Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % exch. taxes) taxes

I. Investment
costs

A. Consulting
services - - 467 95.3 23 4.7 - - - - - - 521 3.7 490 - -

B. Workshops
and training 129 6.8 1 667 87.6 108 5.7 - - - - - - 2 494 17.9 190 1 585 127

C. Works 39 5.6 667 94.4 - - - - - - - - 1 020 7.3 106 565 35
D. Vehicles

equipment
and material 112 14.2 611 77.5 66 8.4 - - - - - - 1 036 7.4 568 110 110

E. Grant - - - - 140 100 - - - - - - 140 1 - 140 -
F. RCFI

capitalization - - - - - - - - - - 3 240 100 4 210 30.1 - 3 240 -
G. Rural

finance
facility - - 111 100 - - - - - - - - 111 1.1 - 111 -

Subtotal I 280 3.8 3 522 47.7 336 4.6 - - - - 3 240 43.9 7 378 67.9 1 354 5 751 273
II. Recurrent

costs

A. Salaries - - 1 222 48.0 124 4.9 1 139 44.7 61 2.4 - - 2 546 23.4 1 273 1 273 -
B. Operating

costs 120 12.8 756 80.8 29 3.1 - - 31 3.3 - - 935 8.6 468 354 114

Subtotal II 120 3.5 1 978 56.8 153 4.4 1 139 32.7 92 2.6 - - 3 482 32.1 1 741 1 627 114

Total 400 3.7 5 500 50.6 490 4.5 1 139 10.7 92 0.8 3 240 29.8 10 860 100 3 095 7 379 387

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
30. The project will generate a wide range of direct benefits for: (i) approximately

24,000 shareholders and users, and their household members; (ii) RCFIs; and
(iii) the economies of the communities where RCFIs will be located. At the macro
level, the project will bring informal financial transactions into the formal sector and
make decentralized rural financial institutions more viable. The Government will
benefit from additional tax revenues payable by the RCFIs. The entire country will
benefit from a strengthened network of financial institutions, through which
remittances and transfers can be made from within and outside the country. Finally,
the country will benefit from higher confidence in the financial sector, especially in
rural areas, as a result of the improved regulatory framework and supervisory
systems under the guidance of the CBL. Other macro-level benefits are not
quantifiable using classical methods of economic and financial analysis, such as
increased deposits in formal financial institutions, higher confidence in the formal
financial sector and a larger network for transfers and payments.

31. Total project benefits are expected to increase from US$50,050 in year 1, to
US$2.71 million in year 5, and will remain at approximately US$2.8 million during
years 7-15. The economic analysis shows that the project will generate an
economic rate of return (ERR) of 17 per cent over a 15-year period, with a net
present value of US$5.5 million. Given that many of its benefits are not
quantifiable, the actual ERR will likely be higher. Sensitivity analysis shows that in
the event of adverse factors, the ERR is relatively robust with regard to higher
costs, lower benefits and time lags.

32. The highest contribution to the ERR derives from investments made by borrowers
from RCFIs. The number of investments is constrained by the number of RCFIs
created. The number of RCFIs that can be created through the project is likewise





8

constrained by the funding available for financial and technical support. There is a
potential to increase the number of new RCFIs beyond the 10 for which funding is
available. If additional funds are provided, the ERR will be higher than the projected
17 per cent.

D. Sustainability
33. The project will support the creation of 10 new RCFIs and consolidate the nine

existing ones. The detailed projections, which are based on conservative
assumptions, show that the new RCFIs will break even in years 3 or 4 without
project support, and in years 1, 2 or 3 with project support. Two years are needed
to mobilize a sufficient number of shareholders and depositors, an adequate volume
of shares and deposits, and to disburse a sufficient number of loans with good
repayment performance. The learning curves for administrative procedures (in the
first three months) and loan management (in months six to twelve) are expected to
be steep. The sustainability of access to financial services will also improve as
RCFIs mature since they are likely to attract more customers over time. This will
create additional benefits for the economy.

34. The projections for this project compare well with the results of the Rural Finance
and Community Improvement Programme, a similar initiative in neighbouring
Sierra Leone that is also based on the Rural Community Finance Project concept.
Out of the 51 financial service associations created, 41 (or 80 per cent) had an OSS
of 100 per cent at project end. Out of 17 newly created community banks, 14 (82
per cent) had an OSS of 100 per cent at project end.

35. The projections for TASC show that this apex body of RCFIs will be able to generate
income from audit services and from fee-based support services. The resulting
income will cover related operating expenses in a progressive manner, from
0 per cent in year 1 to 26 per cent in year 5. This result will largely depend on the
quality of services, which in turn depends on the volume of shares and deposits,
and the number of RCFIs included in the TASC. If the number of RCFIs increases,
the sustainability of TASC will improve accordingly. However, this depends on the
availability of funding.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
36. The main risks related to project implementation include: (i) competition from

subsidized credit programmes; (ii) caps on interest rates; (iii) a lack of interest
from local communities; (iv) the reluctance of CBL to delegate supervision authority
to TASC; and (v) weak cooperation from the microfinance sector in efforts to
improve regulatory frameworks. Adequate risk mitigation measures have been
introduced, and the residual risk ratings after risk mitigation are rated as low or
moderate.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
37. The project design is aligned with IFAD’s: (i) Strategic Framework 2011-2015;

(ii) Policy on Targeting Policy (2006); (iii) Policy on Gender Equality and Women’s
Empowerment; (iv) Rural Finance Policy; (v) Private-Sector Strategy; (vi) Rural
Enterprise Policy; (vii) Policy on Supervision and Implementation Support;
(viii) Climate Change Strategy (2010); (ix) Environment and Natural Resource
Management Policy (2012); and (x) Environmental and Social Assessment
Procedures.

B. Alignment and harmonization
38. Strategy for financial inclusion. With its 2009 Liberian Strategy for Financial

Inclusion (2009-2013), the Government aims to create an inclusive financial
environment by enabling open access to financial services. The overall objective of
inclusive finance is to establish viable microfinance providers that facilitate




9

micro-entrepreneurs’ sustained access to a diverse range of financial services. In
order to enhance sustainability, efficiency, outreach and good governance, financial
service providers will receive assistance from various actors, including CBL. The
strategy for financial inclusion will work at three levels: (i) establishing sustainable
microfinance providers at the micro level; (ii) building a supportive infrastructure at
the intermediate level; and (iii) creating an enabling policy and regulatory
environment at the macro level.

39. CBL has recently begun drafting the new Liberian Strategy for Financial Inclusion
2014-2018. Its vision is to build a sustainable financial sector that provides access
to and enhances the use of a wide range of affordable financial services in Liberia.
Its objectives are to: deliver financial services; enhance access to finance,
particularly credit; integrate the informal sector into the formal economy; improve
the environment for small and medium-sized enterprises; enhance financial
literacy; and improve consumer protection. These objectives have been
consolidated in a plan of action, which places the responsibility for establishing
RCFIs with CBL, the Ministry of Finance and Development Planning, and one
commercial bank.

C. Innovations and scaling up
40. Several of the approaches adopted by this project are innovative: the creation of a

new type of financial institution in Liberia builds on the experience of several other
West African countries. Other innovations include the creation of an apex body to
support RCFIs, the biometric identification of shareholders in order to offer new
products at reduced costs, and the emulation of indigenous rural finance practices.
The project is in itself part of IFAD’s scaling-up process in West Africa following the
Rural Finance and Community Improvement Project in Sierra Leone. Upon the
successful trial of the implementation model, it will be possible to increase the
number of RCFIs beyond those created in Liberia through this project.

D. Policy engagement
41. Liberia’s microfinance sector does not have the clear regulations needed for its

development. One project component (under CBL supervision) is exclusively aimed
at developing a new legal framework for this sector and training actors on the new
regulations and reporting formats.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
42. A project financing agreement between the Republic of Liberia and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as
appendix 1.

43. The Republic of Liberia is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

44. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.




10

VII. Recommendation
45. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Republic of Liberia in an amount equivalent to four million ten thousand
special drawing rights (SDR 4,010,000), and upon such terms and conditions
as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions
presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
Liberia in an amount equivalent to three hundred fifty-eight thousand special
drawing rights (SDR 358,000) and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President

























































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the
Republic of Turkey for the Göksu Taşeli
Watershed Development Project

Republic of Turkey

Göksu Taşeli Watershed Development Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of Turkey

Executing agency: Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Livestock

Total project cost: US$25 million

Amount of IFAD loan: EUR 15.95 million (equivalent to approximately
US$17.89 million)

Amount of IFAD grant: EUR 0.35 million (equivalent to approximately
US$0.4 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Ordinary: Maturity period of 18 years, including a grace
period of 5 years, with an interest rate per annum equal
to 100 per cent of the IFAD reference interest rate

Contribution of borrower: US$3.85 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$2.86 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: IFAD




1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to Republic of Turkey for the Göksu Taşeli Watershed Development
Project, as contained in paragraph 32.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Turkey for
the Göksu Taşeli Watershed Development Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development, and poverty context
1. Socioeconomic background. Turkey is an upper-middle-income country with a

population of 74.9 million and a GDP of US$822 billion in 2013 (according to the
World Bank). It is a European Union accession candidate and a member of the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) and the G20.
Turkey is an increasingly important donor of bilateral official development
assistance and has a functioning market economy.

2. Poverty has declined in Turkey. In the last decade alone, the poverty rate was
halved, from 44 per cent in 2002 to 21 per cent in 2011; however, regional income
disparities remain. Imbalances persist in socioeconomic structures and income
levels across both rural and urban settlements, and across regions. Since 2000, the
regional development policy of Turkey has evolved to include enhancing the
competitiveness of regions, strengthening economic and social cohesion, and
reducing regional disparities. The Tenth Development Plan (2014-2018) aims at
directing public investments to areas that prioritize reducing regional development
disparities and utilizing their potential for regional development, particularly within
the Anatolia region.

3. Agriculture is no longer Turkey’s main driver of economic growth: in 2012, it
contributed only 9 per cent of the country’s GDP. Yet it is still important for rural
development, employment (particularly for women, who account for 44 per cent of
the labour force), export and manufacturing. In Turkey, farmers fall into two
categories: (i) commercialized farmers who use the latest technologies, have links
to a wide range of domestic and international information sources, are acutely
aware of global trends and consumer preferences, are interested in innovation and
are integrated into national and international markets; and (ii) resource-poor
farmers who practise subsistence or semi-subsistence farming, and are not
business-oriented. The major constraints facing smallholder agriculture are land
fragmentation, a lack of input technology, weak producers’ organizations and
limited access to markets.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
results-based country strategic opportunities programme
(RB-COSOP)

4. Turkey’s transition to upper-middle-income country status has not ended poverty in
the country. In fact, even in relatively prosperous provinces, pockets of poverty
remain, particularly in the uplands. For years, the public and private sectors have
neither been interested nor able to address the constraints facing smallholder
agriculture in upland areas. The proposed project aims to support the Government’s
efforts to reduce degradation in the upland areas of the Göksu sub-catchment and
improve the natural resource base as a means of improving income and livelihoods
in upland villages. The project area has suffered from low investment in all sectors,




2

and continuing low standards of living have resulted in rural outmigration. IFAD’s
focus on poor and vulnerable farmers in less advantaged areas is therefore highly
relevant.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
5. The proposed project will be implemented in selected villages within 9 districts in

the Konya and Karaman provinces of central Anatolia. These districts are located in
the Göksu sub-catchment, one of the four sub-catchment areas in the east
Mediterranean watershed. There are 32,000 households living in the project area’s
202 villages, with a total population of 114,151 situated in the mountainous zones
of these 9 districts. The elevation in this area varies from 600 to 1,800 metres. The
majority of the population is engaged in producing fruit and field crops on
166,536 hectares. On average, these farmers each cultivate about 3.5 hectares of
fragmented cropland and keep goats (between 30 and 50 heads each). Cultivation
is either totally rainfed (the most prevalent) or mostly rainfed, with some irrigated
patches (about 15 per cent).

6. The target group. The project will target 32,000 households consisting of
productive smallholder farming households, poor households and nomadic
households. Productive smallholders include men and women who reside
permanently in the uplands and who practise mixed farming, with a marginal to
adequate surplus for marketing. Poor households consist of youth and women in
search of livelihood opportunities to avoid migration. This group will benefit from
direct targeting mechanisms guided by quotas for livelihood support to women in
participating in farmers’ organizations (FOs) and value chains. The poorest
households are nearly landless, not engaged in agricultural production and rely on
social assistance. The approximately 120 nomadic households in the project area
live on rangelands and engage in small ruminant production and small-scale milk
processing for household consumption and sale.

B. Project development objective
7. The overall goal of the project is to reduce rural poverty by supporting economic

diversification. The development objective is to increase farmers’ incomes through
improved agricultural production and marketing activities, and strengthen resilience
to climate shocks. The project will also improve the living standards of the nomadic
tribes in the Taurus Mountains by improving natural resource management.
Outcomes will include: (i) sustainably increased farm productivity; (ii) higher
product prices received by smallholder producers; and (iii) climate-resilient natural
resource management practices adopted.

C. Components/outcomes
8. The project has three components:

(a) Component 1. Agricultural productivity and natural resource
management will improve overall agricultural productivity and profitability by
sustainably managing land and water resources in upland areas through good
agricultural practices and climate-smart investments that reduce external
shocks.

Subcomponent 1.1. Improved agricultural productivity and quality will
focus on promising crops upstream in the value chains to bridge critical gaps
in order to improve the productivity and quality of cherries, grapes,
strawberries and medicinal and aromatic plants (MAPs). Crop selection is
based on: (i) local production capacities; (ii) comparative advantages; (iii) the
seasonality of supply and demand; (iv) market access and productive
potential in different locations; and (v) indigenous knowledge and traditions.
Project support will include the introduction of: (i) new crop varieties;




3

(ii) modern growing techniques (e.g. production in plastic tunnels and a
high-wire training system for vineyards); (iii) water-saving irrigation
techniques supported by solar energy use (e.g. on-farm drip irrigation); and
(iv) agronomic practices that increase production and improve quality.
On-farm investments will be provided through the matching grant
programme.

Subcomponent 1.2. Natural resource management will promote best
practices and introduce adaptation measures for climate-resilient investments
in agricultural and grazing lands. The project will assist beneficiaries in
developing participatory grazing plans that integrate input from herders. It
will also support investments in overnight shelters to protect shepherds from
wild animals and inclement weather, scratch posts, salt licks and portable
mobile solar panels to provide energy in highland rangelands.

(b) Component 2. Market access enhancement will: increase farmers'
incomes through higher farm-gate prices; improve market knowledge and
linkages; reduce post-harvest losses; and enhance farmers’ ability to meet
market demand for quality, volume, regularity, homogeneity, packaging and
branding.

Subcomponent 2.1. Capacity-building for marketing will improve the
knowledge and skills of small farmers and FOs such as development
cooperatives and producers’ associations, and raise awareness of the
importance of post-harvest activities. Training will be provided on food
hygiene and safety, drying and sorting practices to reduce waste and improve
quality, and accounting and marketing. Producers' access to commercial
extension will be facilitated.

Subcomponent 2.2. Value chain development will finance downstream
investments by beneficiaries to support marketing of improved produce under
component 1 through the matching grant programme. Enterprises that add
value to farm produce and service providers in the value chains will be eligible
for project support. With the participation of the beneficiaries and their
associations, strategic investment plans (SIPs) will be prepared for each value
chain. These plans will serve as an investment framework that guides support
to beneficiaries at different stages in the value chain. The SIPs will be
developed in full collaboration with farmers, FOs and small and
microenterprises for cherries, grapes, strawberries and MAPs. SIPs will guide
investments – on- and off-farm – in the following: (i) post-harvest treatments
for hygiene and food safety of all value chain products; (ii) drying, grading,
sorting and packaging of dried grapes and MAPs; (iii) labelling and branding of
newly introduced value chain crops such strawberries and MAPs; and
(iv) re-cooling for cherries and cooling for strawberries.

(c) Component 3. Project management.

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

9. The project will be implemented over seven years. As part of a programmatic
approach, the project will be the first of two phased over two overlapping cycles of
the performance-based allocation system cycles. The approach is also in line with
multi-year government plans and programmes. The value chain approach will be
adopted as a means of strengthening the long-neglected links between productive
poor farmers and markets (given the focus of both the public and the private sector
on more prosperous, resource-endowed and less ecologically challenging areas).
The project will use the SIP approach, which was introduced in the 2005
Sivas-Erzincan Development Project and has since been used in the Diyarbakir,
Batman and Siirt Development Project and the Ardahan-Kars-Artvin Development



4

Project. The proposed project will enhance the SIP approach by selecting pro-poor
value chains with strong potential to benefit from upstream and downstream
investments and become replicable and scalable models.

Organizational frameworkB.
10. The Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Livestock will be the lead implementing

agency. The overall management responsibility will rest with this ministry’s General
Directorate of Agricultural Reform in Ankara, where a central project management
unit (CPMU) will be established. Two provincial project management units (PPMUs)
will be set up within the ministry’s provincial directorates in Konya and Karaman,
and will be responsible for day-to-day project management and implementation.

Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning andC.
knowledge management

11. The investments will be implemented on the basis of annual workplans and budgets
(AWPBs) prepared in consultation with beneficiaries, with inputs from SIPs for the
identified value chains. Each farmer support team will prepare an annual workplan
in collaboration with project beneficiaries in their villages. The PPMUs will review
implementation and develop consolidated provincial-level AWPBs. The consolidated
provincial AWPBs will be reviewed and incorporated into a project-level AWPB by
the CPMU. The AWPBs will be finalized according to procedures agreed upon with
IFAD and detailed in the project implementation manual. The AWPBs will be
submitted to the General Directorate of Agricultural Reform by the project manager
for review and approval by the steering committee, and presented to IFAD on a
no-objection basis.

12. Continuous learning and knowledge management will be integrated into the project
and mainstreamed into implementation at all levels. The project’s knowledge
management framework will inform the project learning agenda, including the
outputs, outcomes and impacts defined in the logical framework. The Ministry of
Food, Agriculture and Livestock already has a computerized management
information system in place for tracking the inputs, beneficiaries and productivity of
the Government’s agricultural support programme; this system will be linked with
the project’s monitoring and evaluation system. Thematic knowledge products
generated through the project – and knowledge management tools such
as capacity-building activities, communities of practice and South-South
Cooperation initiatives – will be developed and disseminated.

Financial management, procurement and governanceD.
13. Financial management. The CPMU will be responsible for financial management,

with support from the PPMUs in Konya and Karaman. The project will adopt
accounting procedures and policies consistent with international accounting
standards and with IFAD and government requirements. The Government of
Turkey’s Public Expenditures System, developed by the Ministry of Finance, will be
used to execute all payments from government counterpart contributions and IFAD
loan and grant.

14. Disbursement arrangements and flow of funds. Separate designated accounts
denominated in euro will be opened at the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey
for the IFAD loan and grant with an authorized allocation of approximately
12 months of project expenditure. The designated accounts will be replenished
using the imprest modality. Withdrawal applications will be prepared by the CPMU
every three months or when 30 per cent of the advance has been depleted –
whichever occurs first. Details of the disbursement arrangements, including the
amounts advanced to the designated accounts, will be specified in the project
implementation manual and stated in the letter to the borrower/recipient.

15. Audit. Annual project financial statements will be audited by the Treasury
Controller, who currently carries out external audits for all externally financed




5

projects in accordance with International Standards on Auditing and under terms of
reference cleared by IFAD.

16. Governance and financial management risks. A financial management risk
assessment of the proposed project and its fiduciary arrangements has concluded
that the project’s financial management arrangements and internal control systems
satisfy IFAD’s minimum requirements to: (i) provide accurate and timely
information on the progress of project implementation; and (ii) guarantee the
separation of functions through multiple independent controls. The assessment
rated the residual control risk after the implementation of appropriate risk
mitigation measures as low. Fiduciary risk might arise from an initial lack of
financial management capacity within the CPMU and the geographical spread of
project activities. Mitigation measures include strengthening the internal audit
function to include reviews of the use of funds at the village level, recruitment of an
experienced senior accountant in the CPMU and finalization of the project
implementation manual. The latter two are conditions for disbursement of project
funds.

17. Grace period. As per the Government’s request, the grace period is five years
instead of the standard three-year grace period for loans on ordinary terms.

SupervisionE.
18. The project will be supervised directly by IFAD. Supervision and implementation

support will be based on IFAD’s operational modalities and practices, including
those for loan and grant administration, and project implementation support.

IV. Project costs, financing and benefits
A. Project costs
19. The project cost is estimated at US$25 million, of which US$18.21 million

(or 72.8 per cent of the total) will be used to finance component 1: agricultural
productivity and natural resource management; US$4.74 million (or 18.9 per cent
of the total) will finance component 2: market access enhancement; and
US$2.05 million (or 8.2 per cent) will finance component 3: project management.
Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries Borrower/ counterpart Total

Component Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount
1. Agricultural

productivity and
natural resource
management 12 474.17 68.5 83.62 0.5 2 226.23 12.2 3 427.53 18.9 18 211.55

2. Market access
enhancement 3 962.47 83.7 41.22 0.9 632.64 13.4 100.50 2.1 4 736.83

3. Project
management 1 453.36 70.8 275.16 13.4 323.11 15.7 2 051.62

Total 17 890 71.6 400 1.6 2 859 11.4 3 851 15.4 25 000

B. Project financing
20. The total investment and incremental recurrent costs, including physical and price

contingencies, will be financed over a seven-year period as follows: IFAD financing
will comprise a loan amounting to US$17.89 million and a grant of US$400,000.
The Government’s contribution will be in the form of a budgetary allocation of
US$3.24 million and US$0.61 million in foregone taxes. Project beneficiaries will
contribute an estimated US$2.86 million in cash.




6

Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries
Borrower/

counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Civil works 977.30 37.8 220.55 8.5 1 386.65 53.6 2 584.49

2. Equipment and
materials 1 067.30 33.5 467.68 14.7 1 653.86 51.9 3 188.84

3. Goods, services and
inputs 7 100.91 79.6 1 538.00 17.2 280.35 3.1 8 919.26

4. Consultancies 397.39 63.8 124.84 34.8 100.50 16.1 622.73

5. Training 3 410.76 92.5 275.16 7.5 3 685.93
6. Workshops 126.85 84.8 22.83 15.3 149.68
7. Grants and subsidies 3 742.78 84.1 632.64 14.2 75.83 1.7 4 451.25

8. Salaries and
allowances 709.40 70.8 292.85 29.2 1 001.90

9. Vehicles 89.79 84.8 16.60 15.3 105.95

10. Other operating Costs 267.87 92.4 22.11 7.6 289.98

Total 17 890 71.6 400 1.6 2 859 11.4 3 851 15.4 25 000

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
21. The overall project analysis resulted in an economic internal rate of return of

17 per cent over 20 years. The project’s contribution to economic welfare is derived
from: the increased quantity and quality of market-oriented production; better
market access; and higher prices resulting from investments in branding and
employment along the value chains. The sensitivity analysis shows that the
economic internal rate of return remains robust at 10 per cent in the event of a
10 per cent reduction in benefits or a two-year delay in benefits.

D. Sustainability
22. The project is designed to ensure producers’ sustainable access to markets through

integration into existing and new value chains while maintaining the focus on good
agricultural practices and natural resource management. This includes enhancing
the quantity and quality of target crops, and providing assistance with modern
marketing (including branding) and market information. The introduction of farming
as a business for the producers will result in the optimization of land, water and
labour resources in the project area. Strengthening FOs through training and
capacity-building will enable longer-term and more stable contractual relationships
with collectors, processors and exporters. These impacts are expected to last
beyond the seven-year project period. Partnerships between producers’ groups and
the private sector will also be strengthened as a result of improved knowledge
management.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
23. At the macro level, the main risks relate to a reduced emphasis on poverty in

Turkey and macroeconomic instability. All of the Government’s development
priorities as outlined in the national and regional development plans and its
programmes are aimed at reducing income disparity over the long term. The
project area particularly suffers from such disparities; however as a politically
stable upper-middle-income country, the prospects for continuing economic growth
in the country are sound. Turkey continues to move towards European Union
accession and measures to meet standards for trade are being adopted along with
stringent environmental protection protocols. The project team has mitigated any
risk that the implementing agencies will lack capacity to provide market-oriented
information and build capacity by planning for the long-term contracting of a



7

marketing consultant. The consultant will be tasked with enhancing the
private-sector orientation of all stakeholders, including government staff at the
central and provincial levels.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

24. The project was designed in line with the IFAD Strategic Framework (2011-2015)
and IFAD’s policies on targeting, gender and environment, and natural resource
management. In addition, the 2012 Technical Note on Matching Grants and the
Private-Sector Strategy have been utilized to ensure that the project makes the
best use of all financial, technical and knowledge products available to IFAD.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
25. Turkey is a member of OECD and is chairing the G20 in 2015. The country is an

increasingly important donor of bilateral official development assistance. In a large
upper-middle-income country like Turkey, IFAD’s overall development contribution
could seem marginal, particularly considering the size of its considerable
development assistance as a donor. There has been demand for IFAD to
demonstrate new models, approaches, knowledge products and services, and global
reach to mobilize required expertise. New models and approaches used by previous
IFAD projects are being mainstreamed by the Ministry of Food, Agriculture and
Livestock, including SIPs, which were introduced by the Sivas-Erzincan
Development Project in 2005, and also used in the Diyarbakir, Batman and Siirt
Development Project and the Ardahan-Kars-Artvin Development Project. The
matching grant programme, originally developed by the World Bank for the Village
Based Participatory Investments Program in 2004 and mainstreamed by the
Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Livestock in 2006, was enhanced by IFAD to make
it a pro-poor instrument. Through its knowledge management agenda, this project’s
CPMU will contribute to better harmonization of donor-funded and government
programmes for rural development.

Innovations and scaling upC.
26. IFAD’s recent focus on value chains is being integrated into the project as a means

to strengthen the links between poor farmers and markets (as a consequence of
both the public and private sectors’ focus on more prosperous, resource-endowed
farmers in less ecologically challenging areas). The project further develops the SIP
approach in rural Turkey with the selection of pro-poor value chains. Given the low
level of investment in the agricultural sector, the project will promote private-sector
investment through the matching grant programme, which facilitates public-private
partnerships though a service provider for marketing. It is expected that the
business models and innovations proven to be successful through this project will
be scaled up with government or other donor support.

27. Producers' climate adaptation capacity will be improved by training in agronomic
practices and awareness-raising on natural resource management geared to
maximize their incomes within the prevailing climate. Innovations such as
integrated pest management, vegetable production under cover, drip irrigation,
solar energy, efficient methods for water harvesting and training in natural resource
management will improve climate resilience.

Policy engagementD.
28. Turkey does not have a significant bilateral donor presence and IFAD’s relatively

limited investment does not entail strong policy engagement at the macro level.
IFAD’s investment has been strategically applied to engage in policy dialogue aimed
at influencing the Government's allocation of resources in impoverished areas.
Greater strategic focus is needed on the links between poverty reduction and the
sustainable management of fragile ecosystems. The establishment of IFAD’s




8

country office in Ankara will be an opportunity to enhance its role in aid
effectiveness.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
29. A project financing agreement between the Republic of Turkey and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as
appendix I.

30. The Republic of Turkey is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

31. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
32. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Republic of Turkey in an amount equivalent to fifteen million nine hundred
and fifty thousand euros (EUR 15,950,000) (equivalent to approximately
US$17.89 million), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
Turkey in an amount equivalent to three hundred and fifty thousand euros
(EUR 350,000) (equivalent to approximately US$0.4 million) and upon such
terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms
and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President
























































President's report

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of
El Salvador for the National Programme of
Rural Economic Transformation for Living
Well - Rural Adelante

Republic of El Salvador

National Programme of Rural Economic Transformation
for Living Well - Rural Adelante

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of El Salvador

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock

Total programme cost: US$18.69 million

Amount of IFAD loan: EUR 10.85 million (equivalent to approximately
US$12.13 million)

Amount of Adaptation for Smallholder
Agriculture Programme (ASAP) grant: SDR 3.56 million (equivalent to approximately

US$5.0 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Ordinary: Maturity period of 18 years, including agrace period of 3 years, with an interest rate per
annum equal to 100 per cent of the IFAD reference
interest rate

Contribution of the borrower: US$500,000

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$1.06 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD




1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation on the proposed
financing to the Republic of El Salvador for the National Programme of Rural Economic
Transformation for Living Well - Rural Adelante, as contained in paragraph 46.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of El Salvador
for the National Programme of Rural Economic
Transformation for Living Well - Rural Adelante

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. El Salvador has the highest population density in Latin America, with an area of

just 20,742 km² and a population of 6,279,783 (2014). Demographic growth was
0.5 per cent per annum during the period 2001-2013, the lowest rate in Central
America and one of the lowest in Latin America as a whole, owing to negative
migratory flows and a low gross birth rate.

2. El Salvador is a middle-income country. The economy has transitioned from an
agrarian model to a model based on services, consumption, and nontraditional
agricultural and industrial exports. Real GDP grew 1.9 per cent per annum and GNI
per capita 1.19 per cent per annum during the period 2001-2013. Inflation in 2013
stood at 0.76 per cent compared to a high of 7.26 per cent in 2008. Low growth
results in part from low levels of investment – leading in turn to insufficient
employment that is poor in quality and limited income growth for the population.
The low level of economic growth is directly related to poor productivity both
overall and by sector, in addition to insecurity and crime.

3. Poverty in El Salvador is associated with both historic internal issues – the civil
war, the economic and market model and natural disasters such as the earthquake
in 2011 – and, more recently, a series of external shocks such as falling coffee
prices, the global recession and higher oil prices, all of which have contributed to
low economic growth and slow progress on social indicators. Poverty affects in
particular vulnerable and traditionally excluded population groups such as
indigenous peoples, children, young people, women and seniors. Among rural
young people between the ages of 18 and 35, 38 per cent live in poverty and are
seriously impacted by crime and violence. Among rural women, many of whom are
subject to unemployment and family violence, 42 per cent are poor. Although there
are no exact figures on the number of indigenous people in El Salvador, Ministry of
Health estimates indicate that in the Eastern region alone there are 32,725
indigenous people (2014), the vast majority of whom are living in poverty. This
population group has historically been marginalized, until 2014 when the
Legislative Assembly issued official recognition.

4. During the period 2000-2013 poverty declined in the country. The percentage of
households living in poverty fell from 38.8 per cent to 29.6 per cent with the
reduction in rural poverty of 18 per cent. Urban poverty also posted a slight decline
from 29.9 per cent to 26.2 per cent.

5. Despite the reduction in poverty overall and the decline in rural poverty, growth in
the agriculture sector has stagnated, as a result of the crisis in the traditional
export agriculture model, low levels of domestic and foreign private investment and
increasing environmental vulnerability. High price volatility within the agriculture
sector, for both inputs and products, has increased uncertainty and reduced
incentives to invest in agriculture. The sector's contribution to GDP fell slightly



2

during the period 2001-2013, from 10.12 per cent of GDP in 2001 to 10 per cent in
2013.

6. Climate change and increasing climate volatility pose one of the greatest
challenges to agriculture given the magnitude and frequency of extreme events,
which have caused significant losses and economic damage in recent decades. El
Salvador is one of the most climate change-vulnerable countries in the world. The
country's exposure to intense rainfall in the North-east and recurring drought in the
Eastern region, within the dry corridor, results in losses – particularly for
smallholder farmers.

7. The Government of El Salvador launched the Five-year Development Plan 2014-
2019 to spur economic and social growth. This document sets out a roadmap to
achieve equitable and inclusive development that will translate into living well for
the population. The plan highlights three priorities: productive employment, under
a model of sustained economic growth; education with inclusion and social equity;
and effective citizen safety. The plan also recognizes that environmental policy and
risk mitigation are a social and economic imperative. These priorities are geared to
achieve, within five years, a human development index of 0.7, associated with
countries at a higher level of human development.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and RB-
COSOP

8. National and sector policy priorities call for a number of actions to generate
opportunities for living well for the population as a whole, while recognizing the
different needs of various population groups. IFAD's priorities and interests in the
country are aligned with government policies: areas of complementarity include
economic development; developing human potential; inclusion and equity,
especially for young people, women and indigenous people; sustainable production
with adaptation to climate change; government consultation with society by
promoting dialogue and citizen participation; and promoting results-based
management.

9. In addition, the programme is fully consistent with IFAD's strategic objectives as
outlined in the new results-based country strategic opportunities programme (RB-
COSOP) for El Salvador, which are as follows: (i) improve family farmers’ access to
resources, technologies and information to enable them to develop more
sustainable agriculture and adapt better to climate change; (ii) promote economic
empowerment of youth, rural women and indigenous peoples; and (iii) contribute
to the Government’s efforts to make public spending and investments in rural
areas more efficient, effective and equitable.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
10. During the first stage, the programme area will include the four departments

comprising El Salvador's Eastern region – La Unión, Usulután, San Miguel and
Morazán – and the 87 municipalities that lie within them. In view of their condition
of poverty and climate change vulnerability, first priority will be given to the
municipalities located in the region's north and central areas, followed by those
located in the south, in accordance with national and sector priorities. The eastern
region forms part of the dry corridor and is subject to cyclical drought, which is one
of the main causes of social, environmental, productive and economic crisis and
catastrophe.

11. The target group includes rural people living in poverty in the eastern region who
have productive and associative potential. The programme will pursue three
strategies to reach the target population: (i) a value chains-based strategy; (ii) a
targeting strategy based on selection by participating organizations; and (iii) a
social targeting strategy based on selection of families and people in the most
excluded groups: women, youth and indigenous people.


12. Through their participation in organizations, and on an individual basis in the case
of young people and adults participating in the technical training programme, a
total of 8,300 families will benefit directly and an estimated 32,000 people will
benefit directly and indirectly. Direct beneficiaries will be mainly women or men
heads of household, young people and women, acting as representatives for
purposes of the programme. Indirect beneficiaries will be members of the direct
representatives' families, estimated at four people per family.

13. Women account for 40 per cent of all direct beneficiaries of Rural Adelante, young
people 20 per cent and indigenous people 5 per cent. In the case of young people,
equal numbers of men and women are included to continue encouraging egalitarian
participation by both groups and the creation of a more equitable new generation
ready to take over.

B. Programme development objective
14. The development objective of Rural Adelante is to sustainably increase the incomes

of poor rural families in the departments of San Miguel, Usulután, La Unión and
Morazán and facilitate their adaptation to climate change. The programme will have
achieved its objective when at least 8,300 families (33,200 beneficiaries) have
received services under the project, 5,900 families with business plans have
improved their incomes1 and 5,000 producers (20,000 beneficiaries) have been
provided with more climate change-resilient organizational business plans.

C. Components/outcomes
15. The programme is structured in four interrelated components:

(a) Capacity-building for sustainable production adapted to climate
change. The objective of this component is to improve research, extension,
education and training services to develop priority value chains under a
climate change adaptation approach. The component seeks to generate
knowledge by: (i) setting up a climate information service; (ii) conducting
technology research and innovation; (iii) developing climate change
adaptation plans; and (iv) strengthening human talent. The latter includes
two actions: (i) developing training for producers linked to value chains; and
(ii) designing and implementing a technical training programme for young
people and adults.

(b) Competitive, sustainable and inclusive value chain development. The
objective of this component is to promote sustainable market access by
target groups – smallholder farmers, women, youth and indigenous people –
as a way of raising the incomes of poor rural families. To this end, a
competitive, inclusive and sustainable value chains approach will be
promoted, based on market demand. The expected outcome is for
organizations to make the necessary improvements to sell high quality
products demanded by the market. The programme will encourage value
chain actors – input suppliers, technical assistance and training providers,
financial service providers, private and public collection and
commercialization centres and marketers – to achieve more efficient
coordination and enter into strategic partnerships to strengthen links and
support services.

(c) Strengthening the public policy framework for rural development. The
objective of this component is to strengthen the institutional and policy
framework for rural development. This will be based on policy analysis,
formulation and implementation in connection with selected value chains –
with policies on gender, rural youth and indigenous peoples, the environment
and climate change adaptation. To this end, support will be provided for the
functional capacities of the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock (MAG), the
National Youth Institute (INJUVE), municipalities, and associations of

1 Measured by gross income increased by 100 per cent for one or more years, taking into account diversified income sources associated
with the programme.




producers, rural youth, women and indigenous peoples. The expected
outcome is strengthened capacities of women, rural youth and indigenous
peoples, to improve their participation in the rural development public policy
cycle.

(d) Programme management and M&E. This component covers programme
management and administration, and includes M&E.

III. Programme implementation
A. Approach
16. The programme approach is based on three pillars promoting sustainable action:

competitiveness, inclusion and sustainability. These provide the frame of reference
or approach guiding the strategic and operational decisions to be taken to achieve
the objectives and expected outcomes, i.e. they provide the elements that
determine whether a programme action can be included in accordance with these
three pillars.

17. Competitiveness refers to increased capacity on the part of organizations, families
and people to participate in markets for goods and services around selected value
chains with the required quality, quantity and frequency. Inclusion, besides
covering differences in gender, culture and economic sector of provenance, seeks
to create and defend a level playing field – equal conditions and opportunities for
all in accessing resources, opportunities, and participatory and decision-making
platforms under the programme. Sustainability calls for directing all programme
actions to respect and guarantee environmental quality, in order to avoid
environmental degradation, conserve and protect natural resources, promote the
generation and use of climate change adapted technologies, and employ mitigation
measures to address natural disasters and risk management, resulting in a
population with greater resilience to environmental risks.

B. Organizational framework
18. Responsibility for programme implementation will reside with Ministry of

Agriculture and Livestock. Setting up the programme management unit (PMU),
which will have functional autonomy but report to the Ministry of Agriculture and
Livestock, will be the responsibility of the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock as
the implementing agency, through the Rural Development Directorate (DGDR). The
PMU will be headed up by programme management. Implementation will also
involve the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) as the agency
administering resources and specialized service providers, which will include among
its activities a capacity-building strategy for the Ministry of Agriculture and
Livestock in procurement.

19. The PMU will have a structure comprising a general manager, five advisory units
(administrative and financial; communication; capacity-building; inclusion, gender
and planning; and M&E and knowledge management). In addition, there will be
three specialists in thematic areas performing a coordination role: environment and
climate change adaptation, rural business and public policy. The PMU will have, as
part of financial administration, an administrator, an accountant, a procurement
specialist, an accounting assistant, a financial assistant responsible for the
integrated financial administration system (SAFI) and a logistics officer.

20. To implement the programme and its components, the PMU will enter into the
necessary agreements with local, national, public and private entities. To this end,
selection and accreditation processes will take place for service providers based on
value chain needs and strategies, organizational business plans and other
initiatives.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

21. The programme will design and implement a planning and monitoring system to
serve as a management instrument to facilitate platforms for learning, exchange of
experiences, best practices and results dissemination, and generate updated
relevant information on programme performance, with an emphasis on results
measurement (outputs, outcomes and impact).

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
22. The DGDR of the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock, through the PMU

administrative and financial unit, will be responsible for the programme's financial
management – including the annual workplan, flow of funds, disbursements,
internal controls, accounting, financial reporting and audit. In addition, to improve
funds management, the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock will sign an
agreement with UNDP, which will support the programme in resource
administration and procurement. The programme will record accounting
transactions in SAFI.

23. Flow of funds. The borrower/recipient, through MAG, will open a designated
account exclusively for the loan proceeds and another designated account
exclusively for the ASAP grant proceeds at the Central Reserve Bank of El Salvador.

24. Procurement. Procurement of goods and contracting for works and consulting
services under the programme will be conducted in accordance with the guidelines
on the procurement of goods and contracting of works and services for IFAD
projects (IFAD guidelines).

25. UNDP will support the programme in procurement processes, and the agreement
between the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock and UNDP will cover capacity-
building activities to strengthen the procurement area within the Ministry of
Agriculture and Livestock.

26. Audit. The annual consolidated financial statements will be audited each year by
an independent auditor in accordance with IFAD guidelines on project audits. All
project accounts will be audited, including those designated for loan funds, grant
funds and national counterpart funds. The audit reports will be delivered to IFAD
six months after the end of each fiscal year.

D. Supervision
27. IFAD will provide direct supervision of the programme. Implementation support will

be provided from the outset of the programme to prepare properly for start-up.
IFAD and the borrower will perform a midterm review following year three.

IV. Programme costs, financing, benefits
A. Programme costs
28. The programme will have a total cost of approximately US$18.69 million, including

contingencies. Component 1 will involve an expense of US$3.64 million, equivalent
to 19 per cent, and component 2 will cost US$10.46 million, representing 56 per
cent of total investment. Component 3 will involve an expense of approximately
US$1.22 million, representing 7 per cent of the total. Finally, component 4 will cost
approximately US$3.37 million, or 18 per cent.



Table 1
Programme costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan ASAP grant Beneficiaries
Borrower/

Counterpart Total

Component Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Capacity-building for sustainable
production adapted to climate
change

3 642 100 3 642 19

2. Competitive, sustainable and
inclusive value chain development

8 195 78 1 203 12 1 062 10 10 460 56

3. Strengthening the public policy
framework for rural development

992 81 155 13 72 6 1 219 7

4. Programme management and
M&E

2 940 87 428 13 3 368 18

Total 12 127 65 5 000 27 1 062 5 500 3 18 689 100

B. Programme financing
29. The combined programme financing breaks down as follows by financier: the

borrower will contribute US$500,000 (3 per cent), the IFAD loan will provide
approximately US$12.13 million (65 per cent), the ASAP grant will provide US$5.00
million (27 per cent), and the beneficiaries will contribute approximately US$1.06
million (5 per cent) in cash and in kind.

Table 2
Programme costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD loan ASAP grant Beneficiaries
Borrower/

counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Vehicles, equipment and materials 456 91 42 9% 498 3

2. Technical assistance/ institutional
agreements

497 1 2404 83 2 901 16

3. Technical assistance/ service
agreements

3 248 93% 155 4 72 2 3 475 19

4. Subsidies/ rural business 5 712 64 2 203 25 1 062 12 8 977 48

5. Salaries/ operating costs 2 214 78 238 8 386 14 2 838 15

Total 12 127 65 5 000 27 1 062 6 500 3 18 689 100

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
30. The cost-benefit methodology was used for the economic analysis, based on a

calculation of the flow of net incremental annual benefits for the selected 10-year
period. The cost-benefit or profitability analysis was done using the internal rate of
return (IRR) and net present value (NPV). The IRR was calculated on the basis of
the economic flow of funds generated by Rural Adelante (economic IRR). Generally
a project is considered economically viable if the IRR exceeds the opportunity cost
of capital, 12 per cent in the case of this programme. In calculating the IRR,
economic benefits and costs for a 10-year period were taken into account.

31. The financial IRR for the programme overall is 20 per cent with an NPV of US$6.40
million, and US$22.20 million if the NPV is calculated for a 20-year period.

D. Sustainability
32. Since the Rural Adelante approach was put forward, plans have called for actions

and innovations to remain in place beyond the programme implementation period.
Specifically, sustainability is expected to be achieved once the target population is
able to replicate what is being proposed or implemented, and to go even further
upon achieving the capacity to continue developing innovations – i.e. the target
group has the potential to innovate by consciously making adjustments and
changes for their own benefit in the organizations and value chains in which they
participate. Equally, sustainability will have been achieved once the Ministry of


7

Agriculture and Livestock is replicating, improving upon and making adjustments to
innovations.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
33. The programme implementation risks identified have a low to medium probability

of occurring and little potential impact on achieving the objectives and expected
outcomes.

34. Among the main risks are: (i) natural and climate phenomena having a severe
impact on the eastern region; and (ii) an escalation of crime and violence in the
programme area.

35. Measures to mitigate these risks could include: (i) undertaking concrete risk
management actions to address natural and climate phenomena by Rural Adelante
and other IFAD projects operating in the region; and (ii) maintaining contingency
plans and clear safety regulations for programme staff and an ongoing dialogue
with the relevant authorities in the programme area.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
36. The programme proposal falls within the overarching goal of IFAD's Strategic

Framework 2011-2015 and contributes to achieving the strategic objectives to
improve access to services that contribute to poverty reduction and to promote
economic and natural assets that strengthen the resilience of disadvantaged rural
populations. In addition, the programme approach and implementation strategies
are aligned with IFAD's policies and strategies on policy dialogue, targeting rural
poor people, gender equality and women's empowerment, engagement with
indigenous peoples (including matters relating to free, prior and informed consent),
natural resource management and the environment, climate change, social,
environmental and climate evaluation procedures, rural finance and business
management risk, and knowledge management and innovation.

B. Harmonization and alignment
37. IFAD's priorities and interests in the country are aligned with the policies of the

Government of El Salvador. Areas of complementarity include economic
development; developing human potential; inclusion and equity, especially for
youth, women and indigenous people; sustainable production adapted to climate
change; government consultation with society by promoting dialogue and citizen
participation; and promoting results-based management.

38. Within the sector, IFAD is consistent with the priorities of promoting food
sovereignty and security; production development through value chains;
environmental sustainability and adaptation to climate change; developing family
farming; reactivating cooperatives and modernizing institutions.

39. In addition, the programme will directly address the strategic objectives of the RB-
COSOP 2015-2019.

C. Innovation and scaling up
40. For the Government of El Salvador and IFAD, this new operation offers an

opportunity to capitalize on the experiences of recent years around rural
development and rural poverty reduction in the eastern region. These experiences
include the Rural Development Project for the North-Eastern Region (PRODERNOR)
and the Rural Development and Modernization Project for the Eastern Region
(PRODEMORO) and, more recently, the Rural Territorial Competitiveness
Programme (Amanecer Rural) – in addition to participation in regional programmes
on, inter alia, gender, policy dialogue and remittances. IFAD's loans and grants
operations have generated significant human and social capital that is fundamental
to the qualitative leap the country intends to take in reactivating productive and
entrepreneurial capacity in rural areas by strengthening profitable economic
initiatives.


41. A new intervention in the eastern region is based on transforming the traditional
economic, social and environmental model, whereby the intention is to bring about
change with the following innovative elements: (i) targeting territory, organizations
and people coordinated under a single platform with a value chain orientation,
rather than on the isolated initiatives traditionally undertaken; (ii) competitiveness
and market demand driving value chains to generate income and permanent
quality employment and improve wellbeing; (iii) promoting collective participation
around a single chain in which various groups and actors come together as a
function of the market and strengthening business and financing criteria, such as
sustainability considerations; (iv) IFAD financing acting as a catalyst, distributed in
different proportions according to the expenditure category in the business plan
and the type of organization; (v) linking the target population with financial
services to reduce their dependence on nonreimbursable transfers, inculcating a
sustainable business rather than a welfare-based culture; (vi) developing value
chain businesses under an approach that protects natural resources, the
environment and adaptation to climate change; (vii) promoting inclusion and
equity in participation by young people, women and indigenous people as actors
that require support for their development.

D. Policy engagement
42. The programme will demonstrate experience with integrating public policy dialogue

around value chains at the regional level with other platforms for dialogue already
existing in the country, and with support for implementing public policies in support
of climate change adaptation and mainstreaming rural women, youth and
indigenous people.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
43. A financing agreement between the Republic of El Salvador and IFAD will constitute

the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower/
beneficiary. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as an
appendix.

44. The Republic of El Salvador is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD and the Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme (ASAP) Trust
Fund, through IFAD in its capacity as Trustee of the ASAP Trust Fund.

45. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Lending Policies and Criteria for IFAD.

VII. Recommendation
46. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Republic of El Salvador in an amount equivalent to ten million eight hundred
fifty thousand euros (EUR 10,850,000) and upon such terms and conditions
as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions
presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that, under the Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture
Programme (ASAP), the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of El
Salvador in an amount equivalent to three million five hundred sixty thousand
special drawing rights (SDR 3,560,000) and upon such terms and conditions
as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions
presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President






















































President’s report

Proposed grant to the Republic of Burundi for
the Value Chain Development Programme –
Phase II (PRODEFI-II)


Republic of Burundi

Value Chain Development Programme – Phase II
(PRODEFI-II)

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Recipient: Republic of Burundi

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock

Total programme cost: US$44.8 million

Amount of IFAD Debt Sustainability
Framework (DSF) grant:

SDR 26.1 million (equivalent to approximately
US$36.6 million)

Amount of IFAD Adaptation for
Smallholder Agriculture Programme
grant:

SDR 3.51 million (equivalent to approximately
US$4.9 million)

Contribution of Government: US$3.1 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$0.3 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD


Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
grant to the Republic of Burundi for the Value Chain Development Programme –
Phase II (PRODEFI-II), as contained in paragraph 64.

Proposed grant to the Republic of Burundi for the Value
Chain Development Programme – Phase II (PRODEFI II)

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Rural development and poverty. Burundi is among the world’s poorest countries,

ranking 178th of 187 according to the Human Development Index. In 2013, despite a
growth rate of 4.5 per cent, GDP per capita (US$298) was lower than in 1990
(US$497). The incidence of poverty remains high, with 67 per cent of the population
living below the poverty line.

2. More than 90 per cent of people living in Burundi derive their livelihoods from
agriculture. Family farming, which provides 95 per cent of the food supply, does not
meet nutritional needs, and the rate of self-sufficiency in food production1 is
estimated at just over 42 per cent. Malnutrition affects 70 per cent of children in
poor households, mainly in rural areas.

3. Most rural poor people are smallholders – mainly women and orphan heads of
household – cultivating plots of less than one hectare and subsisting on the food
crops they grow. Their poverty is attributable mainly to low productivity as a result
of: (i) extremely small landholdings, hence the need to intensify production; (ii) poor
soil fertility in the absence of livestock and manure, and soil degradation from
erosion; (iii) a lack of equipment and technical and financial capital; (iv) a lack of
inputs such as seed and fertilizer owing to limited purchasing power; (v) a lack of
technical knowledge; (vi) prolonged dry periods in recent years and reduced periods
of rainfall; (vii) the lack of water management systems; (viii) poor processing and
marketing capacity countrywide; (ix) emerging farmers organizations that have not
yet developed profitable activities to ensure sustainability; and (x) poorly managed
markets.

4. Policy, governance and institutions, political and economic issues. Burundi’s
economy is characterized by structural weaknesses, in particular isolation, poor
diversification, uncompetitive agricultural products and high demographic growth.

5. The Government undertook, in its Vision 2025, to lower the rate of demographic
growth to 2 per cent and, in the National Agricultural Investment Plan (PNIA), to
boost growth in the agriculture sector to 6 per cent per annum. In 2013, the country
joined the Scaling Up Nutrition movement and the Multi-sector Food and Nutritional
Security Platform in order to achieve the first Millennium Development Goal.

6. The electoral process now under way risks slowing expected progress as a result of
putting in place policies and regulatory frameworks, both at the macro-economic
level and in implementing programmes and projects.

1 Source: PNIA, "The food deficit for the year 2010 is evaluated at 471,884 tonnes of grain equivalents (GEs), out of total
estimated needs of 817,000 tonnes of GEs nationally, representing an unmet basic needs rate of close to 58 per cent".



2

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities
7. PRODEFI is the cornerstone of the country programme in that it encompasses

common implementation functions at the central and regional level, such as
procurement and financial management.

8. Needed action includes: (i) completing activities2 under PRODEFI and replicating
them on a larger scale to achieve sufficient production volume (milk and rice), to
facilitate structuring the value chains; and (ii) better supporting actors throughout
the value chain by linking activities under the rural youth employment component
with core programme activities.

9. In view of the agriculture sector’s vulnerability to climate change, IFAD proposes to
provide a complementary grant under the Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture
Programme (ASAP).

10. Nutritional considerations will be introduced into PRODEFI-II to raise awareness
around adopting best practices in diet and hygiene.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
11. The PRODEFI-II programme area will be identical to that of the first phase, i.e. the

provinces of Bubanza, Cibitoke, Gitega, Karusi, Kayanza, Muramvya and Ngozi, as
well as the province of Muyinga. The programme interventions will be implemented
in communes adjacent to those covered by the Agricultural Intensification and Value-
enhancing Support Project (PAIVA-B).

12. This decision is fully aligned with the strategy adopted by IFAD on geographical
concentration around managed wetlands to enhance the visibility and scale of
impact.

13. Targeting will be simultaneously by activity, by province and by commune. The
priority target group of PRODEFI-II will be smallholders, crop and livestock farmers,
women and rural young people promoting economic initiatives upstream, within and
downstream of the rice and milk value chains and other secondary value chains such
as bean, maize, plantain and banana.

B. Programme development objectives
14. Overall objective. The overall objective of PRODEFI-II will be to promote increases

in incomes and improvements in food security for poor households in the programme
area.

15. Development objective. The specific PRODEFI-II objectives are as follows:
increase physical productive capital by building the resilience of production systems
to climate change; intensify crop and livestock farming to improve nutritional status
and, ultimately, structure the milk and rice value chains, inter alia, to promote youth
employment and strengthen capacity of the actors.

C. Components/outcomes
16. The programme is structured around three main components:

Component 1: Sustainable growth in productive capital and institutional
capacity-building for value chain actors

17. The activities implemented under subcomponent 1.1 – Hydro-agricultural
improvements and infrastructure – will be as follows: (i) development of 2,330 ha of
new wetlands on nine sites; (ii) rehabilitation of 147 km of tracks over nine sections
of access roads to open up access to the new wetland sites identified and one stretch
of track for a developed wetland straddling the provinces of Karusi and Ngozi; (iii)
development of 23,300 ha of watersheds around the new wetland sites identified and

2 This will also provide an opportunity to complete PAIVA-B activities in shared intervention areas.



implementation of the second phase of watershed development in 17 wetlands,
undertaken under IFAD projects (10 PRODEFI sites and seven PAIVA-B sites), of
which close to 10 per cent are financed under ASAP; and (iv) capacity-building for
four communal land registration offices to accelerate the issuance of 5,000 titles.

18. Subcomponent 1.2 – Adaptation to climate change – will be divided into three
sections: (i) integrated protection of investments against climate risk at the
watershed level, over 1,000 ha (Ruvubu watershed); (ii) adaptation of rural
engineering designs to climate variability by setting national technical standards;
and (iii) building the resilience of erosion control structures and crops to climate
change by intensifying forage and legume crops.

19. Activities under subcomponent 1.3 – Agricultural intensification – will be as follows:
(i) input supply (e.g. quality seed, fertilizer and manure, phytosanitary products);
(ii) strengthening the community livestock solidarity chain (3,000 cattle) by
promoting small livestock among young people; and (iii) building the capacities of
crop and livestock farmers with farmers field schools (FFS) (39, 112 and 100 FFS for
rice, food crops and livestock, respectively). A climate early warning system will be
developed using ASAP financing.

20. Activities under subcomponent 1.4 – Inclusive community organization and
institutional linkages – will be as follows: (i) capacity-building for Burundi public and
private institutions such as the community development committees (CDC) and
communal community development committees (CCDC); (ii) development of a
gender equality strategy for IFAD-funded projects in Burundi; and (iii) awareness-
raising around fundamental women’s rights, adult functional literacy, support for
organizing and financing solidarity groups, legal and psycho-social support for
victims and post-traumatic reconstruction, and reduction of women’s workload.

21. Subcomponent 1.5 – Combating chronic malnutrition – will include the following
activities: (i) training 2,000 people in the home nutritional learning (FAN) method for
preventing chronic malnutrition; (ii) setting up 350 FAN; (iii) awareness-raising for
community leaders, including 200 rural development actors; and (iv) implementation
of 350 microprojects in livestock (pigs, chickens, rabbits, goats) and market
gardening (kitchen gardens).

Component 2: Value-addition and strengthening of value chains

22. Support provided under subcomponent 2.1 – Organizational framework and value
chain financing – will cover the following activities: (i) development of financial
instruments adapted to the programme area to finance production cycles and
storage and processing cycles; and (ii) professionalization of dairy cooperatives, rice
growers cooperatives and the three cooperatives operating in the maize value chain,
to enable them to provide services to their members.

23. Subcomponent 2.2 – Support for priority value chains – will have two sections.

24. Dairy value chain. Support will be provided to: (i) complete the installation of
facilities to secure milk (refrigerated tanks and milk collection centres in areas where
dairy livestock is already kept; (ii) promote the installation of sales points with a
target of one or two per milk collection centre; (iii) install two mini-dairies in areas
with high dairy potential (Gitega and Ngozi); and (iv) establish partnerships with
private actors.

25. Rice value chain. Support will be provided to: (i) install drying infrastructure
(7,800 m² of new drying areas) and storage infrastructure (2,600 m² of new
warehouses); (ii) set up two improved husking units and two mini-rice mills for
quality rice marketing; and (iii) strengthen the consultative platform for value chain
actors.

26. Secondary value chains. Support will be provided to: (i) lift constraints on
segments of the major value chains (bean, maize, banana) in the event of



bottlenecks, such as the lack of healthy varieties of banana, the lack of bean
varieties tolerant of higher temperatures; and (ii) install storage infrastructure and
processing equipment.

27. Under component 2.3 – Improving sustainable and decent employment for rural
young people – the following activities will take place: (i) put in place an enabling
institutional environment for youth employment; (ii) strengthen specialized
proximity structures (research, innovation and training centres) to enable them to
provide employment-related services to young people; and (iii) create jobs for 150
young entrepreneurs, and income-generating activities for 1,500 rural young people.

Component 3: Organizational support, knowledge management and
facilitation.

28. This component calls for good coordination and sound and transparent management
of the programme.

29. Subcomponent 3.1 calls for: (i) providing the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock,
specifically the provincial departments of agriculture and livestock (DPAE), including
at the communal level, with monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and planning
assistance to contribute to participatory planning of programme activities,
monitoring of implementation and dissemination of results; and (ii) capacity-building
for regional coordination units.

30. Under subcomponent 3.2: (i) overall coordination and administrative, financial and
procurement functions will be centralized in Bujumbura; (ii) technical functions will
be decentralized to facilitate the implementation and close monitoring of activities by
regional coordination units; and (iii) the PRODEFI programme facilitation and
coordination unit (PFCU) will manage the programme at the national level and two
regional facilitation and coordination units will manage it at the regional levels, one
in the centre covering Gitega, Karusi and Muramvya and one in the north covering
Kayanza and Ngozi.

III. Programme execution
A. Approach
31. The intervention will be based on the following approach: (i) expansion of activities

in the PRODEFI area such that the technical package is implemented in its entirety;
(ii) development of new wetland sites; (iii) gradual implementation of nutritional
activities in areas where dairy, rice, legume and food production has increased under
PRODEFI; (iv) implementation of rural employment activities in areas where
PRODEFI has successfully set up milk collection centres and dehusking units; and (v)
implementation of activities to intensify and develop forage crops under an ASAP
grant in areas where PRODEFI was first active. The aim is to consolidate PRODEFI
activities and gradually expand the intervention area to the new wetlands identified.

B. Organizational framework
32. Programme oversight and steering. The Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock will

continue to oversee PRODEFI-II. The strategic steering committee, which will provide
general steering and coordination, and the technical steering committee, which will
report to the Government on programme implementation and general
administration, will continue to be the supervisory bodies, one at the strategic level
and the other at a more technical level.

33. Organization and management. The regional coordination units will be set up by
redeploying the PRODEFI branch office heads, including two regional coordinators,
and the other branch office heads will be assigned to M&E or regional components.
Part of the PRODEFI technical staff will also be redeployed to regional coordination
units and additional staff will be recruited in the regions as needed.


C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

34. Monitoring and evaluation. The M&E manual used during the first phase of
PRODEFI will be updated to include a limited number of files. In addition, steps will
be taken to address the constraints encountered in the last phase, such as the lack
of centralized data, poor data analysis and insufficient capacity for information
systems management. The overall organization of M&E arrangements will be based
on the information provided by DPAE and communal technicians providing
government functions at the local level.

35. Learning, capitalization and knowledge management. The knowledge
generated by the M&E system, beneficiaries and exchanges of experience between
IFAD projects and those funded by other technical and financial partners will be
capitalized on. PRODEFI-II will draw on lessons learned during implementation of the
first phase of PRODEFI and of PAIVA-B, particularly in terms of organizing value
chains.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
36. Capacity-building will be provided for the PRODEFI financial management team to

ensure better use of the TOM2PRO software (multi-site model) on all financial
matters: accounting, commitments, financial statements, budgetary monitoring, etc.
The PFCU will be responsible and accountable to the Government and to IFAD for
using the programme resources in compliance with the financing agreement signed
with IFAD. The accounting system will be consistent with internationally accepted
accounting principles and standards set by the Government of Burundi. The PFCU
will draw up quarterly statements of the accounting and financial situation and
transmit them regularly to the Government and to IFAD. The unit will also prepare
consolidated financial statements each year on the programme operations, resources
and expenditures. The financial management risk for PRODEFI is deemed moderate.

37. Procurement. The works, goods and specialized or consulting services required to
implement the programme and funded under the financing agreement, as amended
where applicable, will be provided in accordance with the procurement code
prevailing in Burundi. A procurement plan based on the AWP/B and stipulating
procurement methods, estimated costs and timelines will be prepared each year at
the national and regional levels.

38. Governance. To apply the principles of good governance and transparency in
programme implementation, the decentralized territorial collectivities will take part
in the planning process and in the monitoring of results.

39. M&E tools in the form of feedback and participatory evaluation workshops will be
built into the planning and M&E system to ensure beneficiaries transparency and
opportunities for continual feedback and to ensure that their recommendations are
taken into account in implementation.

E. Supervision
40. The programme will be supervised jointly by IFAD and the Government of Burundi.

One or two supervision missions will take place each year, in addition to missions in
support of implementation as activities are carried out. In addition, four internal
management control mission (quarterly audits) will be held each year at the central
and regional levels. A midterm review will be conducted jointly by IFAD and the
Government at the end of year three.

IV. Programme cost, financing, benefits
A. Programme cost
41. PRODEFI-II is being financed by a DSF grant from IFAD in the amount of US$36.6

million and an ASAP grant in the amount of US$4.9 million, cofinancing from the


Government of Burundi in the amount of US$3.1 million and a contribution in cash
and in kind from beneficiaries in the amount of US$0.3 million. Investment
expenditures are US$40.9 million, or 91.5 per cent of total cost, and recurring
expenditures are US$3.8 million, or 8.5 per cent of total cost. This is attributable to
the fact that the PRODEFI team already in place will be responsible for implementing
the second phase.
Table 1
Programme cost by component and by financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD grant ASAP Beneficiaries
Borrower/

counterpart Total
Component Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount

1. Sustainable
improvement in
productive capital
and capacity-
building for value
chain actors 26 578 4 926 - 2 584 34 087

2. Value-addition and
strengthening of
value chains 4 849 - 285 222 5 356

3. Organizational
support, knowledge
management and
facilitation 5 214 - - 334 5 548

Total 36 641 4 926 285 3 140 44 991

B. Programme financing
42. The DSF grant provided by IFAD represents 81.8 per cent of the total investment

and the ASAP grant 11 per cent. Cofinancing from the Government is estimated at
approximately 6.5 per cent of total investment, mainly in the form of tax waivers
and a contribution to the monitoring costs of the programme.

43. The beneficiaries will make a financial contribution to certain investments, including
those intended to add value to agricultural products. They will also contribute to
some development work such as levelling. The contribution of beneficiaries
represents 0.6 per cent of total additional costs.




Table 2
Programme cost by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category
IFAD grant ASAP Beneficiaries

Borrower/
counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount
1. Civil and rural

engineering 10 794 71 1 635 11 8 0.6 2 750 18 15 277
2. Transportation

equipment 4 588 95 73 1.5 156 3.2 4 816
3. Studies, training,

technical assistance
and service agreements 7 573 86 1 231 14 19 0.2 8 823

4. Support fund 9 886 82 2 060 17 114 1 12 060
5. Operating and

maintenance 761 76 216 .24 977
6. Salaries 3 039 100 3 039

Total 36 641 81.8 4 926 11 285 0.6 3 140 6.5 44 992

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
44. Benefits. Development of paddy production in wetlands. Crop intensity with

and without the programme is 0.7 and 1, respectively. Rice generates annual
revenues of US$169 per ha, or US$0.46 per day on average, with economic value
addition of labour equal to US$3.04 per day worked. In total, an average plot of 0.28
ha generates US$67.92 per ha per year without the programme compared to
US$88.3 in the scenario with the programme. Additional paddy production will be
about 10,000 tonnes annually.

45. Development of paddy transformation. Two improved huskers are to be
installed. The quantity of paddy that could be processed by the two huskers planned
is 8,000 tonnes per year, with a maximum of 15 per cent broken grains. The huskers
to be installed with the new financing will have a theoretical production capacity of
5,205 tonnes of superior quality rice per year (realistic scenario), reduced by 20 per
cent to come closer to reality in financial and economic analysis. This represents a
total increase in capacity for paddy transformation of 6,000 tonnes per year. The
husking units will generate net annual revenues of US$140,550, for an annual
increase of US$122,746.

46. Increase in milk production. The new financing will make it possible to purchase
and put to work 3,000 cattle by the end of the programme in 2021. Total milk
production will be about 4,000 tonnes per year – 40 per cent for self-consumption
and 60 per cent for sale.

47. Development of milk marketing. Four 1,000 litre capacity and two 500 litre
capacity milk collection centres will be created with the new financing. This new
financing will therefore make it possible to increase collection and storage capacity
by four tonnes per day, or 1,460 tonnes of fresh milk per year.

48. Employment benefits. Agricultural intensification will enable a high proportion of
small and medium-sized farmers to increase their incomes. Intensification will also
result in increased labour needs for these farms. The increase in work days will
initially reduce underemployment at the family level and then at the local level, as
wage workers are hired.

49. Improvements in employment and incomes for women and young people.
PRODEFI-II proposes to reach women and young people at the rate of at least 30
per cent for women, including women heads of household (widows), as a priority,
and 30 per cent young entrepreneurs/ farmers, including those who are landless, for
marketing activities and to take employment in marketing agricultural products or
providing services.



50. The programme will provide representatives of farmers organizations with training
and technical support, particularly in the organization and management of wetlands
and watersheds. Better structuring of farmers organizations will ensure sustainability
of the programme impact.

51. Economic and financial analysis (2016-2021). Based on the general
assumptions and financial models used, the financial internal rate of return (FIRR)
for this second phase is 18.5 per cent, which is high for an integrated agricultural
development programme implemented in marginal areas with land and infrastructure
protection problems. Based on the general assumptions and assumptions of pricing
and economic benefits, the economic internal rate of return (EIRR) for the second
phase is 17.3 per cent. Both the FIRR and the EIRR are highly satisfactory as all
financial and economic costs have been taken into consideration while some of the
benefits have not been quantified, such as those relating to ASAP-funded activities
that will bring results over the long term.

D. Sustainability
52. The community and participatory development approach is a guarantee that the

beneficiaries will take ownership of the programme initiatives and achievements.
They will set up management committees responsible for maintaining and properly
managing the investments under the supervision of local authorities, supported in
turn by the programme to enable them to monitor activities following programme
completion.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
53. The risks to PRODEFI-II during implementation include: (i) an uncertain political

situation; (ii) limited capacity of actors to implement the hydro-agricultural
improvements; (iii) structuring and professionalization of organizations, which could
take more time than the programme duration; (iv) the random nature of the quality
of administrative and financial management; (v) deficiencies in terms of financial
reporting; and (vi) the lack of an internal audit function. Risk mitigation measures
are as follows: (i) adoption of a programme approach to recycle programme teams
already familiar with IFAD financial procedures; (ii) strengthening of long-term
international technical assistance for high-cost activities (hydro-agricultural
improvements); (iii) continuity and complementarity between old and new financing
in the same provinces, to develop value chains and build capacity among
organizations; (iv) organized redeployment of the team between the central and
regional levels; (v) establishment of a culture of communicating financial information
to ensure monitoring of management processes, specifically disbursements (reports
generated by accounting software); and (vi) creation of an internal audit unit to be
shared by all IFAD projects in the country to ensure compliance with procedures.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
54. PRODEFI-II is aligned with IFAD’s Strategic Framework 2011-2015, in particular with

the objectives of achieving “a natural resource and economic asset base for poor
rural women and men that is more resilient to climate change, environmental
degradation and market transformation” and “access for poor rural women and men
to services to reduce poverty, improve nutrition, raise incomes and build resilience in
a changing environment”.

55. In addition, PRODEFI-II is aligned with the objective of “poor rural women and men
and their organizations able to manage profitable, sustainable and resilient farm and
non-farm enterprises or take advantage of decent work opportunities”.

56. The programme is aligned with IFAD’s policy on rural finance in that it will promote
access by beneficiaries and cooperatives to financial instruments, and with the policy
on gender equality and women’s empowerment as women and young people will



benefit from the same services as men. It is also aligned with the policy to improve
access to land and land tenure security in providing support for communal land
registration offices to issue land titles.

B. Alignment and harmonization
57. This second phase will also gradually harmonize IFAD-funded project and

programme structures, such as PFCUs, and will take another step towards setting up
the five regional facilitation and coordination units following the first phase of
creating two regional coordination offices as part of implementing PNSADR-IM (one
in the west for the provinces of Bubanza and Cibitoke and one in the east for the
provinces of Cankuzo, Rutana and Ruyigi). PRODEFI-II will be the third programme,
after PAIVA-B (additional financing) and PNSADR-IM, to align itself with the IFAD
country programme approach.

C. Innovation and scaling up
58. Innovations introduced under PRODEFI warrant scaling up during this second phase

and beyond. Among them are integrating nutritional activities and linking them to
agricultural intensification, and integrating rural youth employment activities with
value chain development. These two innovations, as well as those under the Project
to Accelerate Achievement of the Millennium Development Goals (PROPA-O) relating
to nutrition, could be integrated systematically in future projects and programmes
and lay the groundwork for drafting national legislation.

D. Policy engagement
59. The main contribution by PRODEFI-II to policy engagement will be through

implementation of subcomponent 1.2, which calls for establishing design standards
for infrastructure (hydro-agricultural improvements, tracks and storage
warehouses).

60. Moreover, PRODEFI-II will contribute to operationalizing the national youth
employment strategy developed under the rural youth employment component and
adopted by Parliament.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
61. A financing agreement between the Republic of Burundi and IFAD will constitute the

legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the beneficiary country. A
copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as an appendix.

62. The Republic of Burundi is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

63. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Lending Policies and Criteria.

VII. Recommendation
64. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a grant under the Debt Sustainability
Framework to the Republic of Burundi in the amount of twenty-six million one
hundred thousand special drawing rights (SDR 26,100,000), and upon such
terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant under the Adaptation
for Smallholder Agriculture Programme (ASAP) to the Republic of Burundi in an
amount equivalent to three million five hundred ten thousand special drawing
rights (SDR 3,510,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President























































President’s report

Proposed loan to the Republic of Madagascar
for the Project to Support Development in the
Menabe and Melaky Regions – Phase II
(AD2M-II)


Republic of Madagascar

Project to Support Development in the Menabe and
Melaky Regions – Phase II (AD2M-II)

Financing summary

Initiating institution: Ministry of Agriculture

Borrower: Republic of Madagascar

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture

Total project cost: US$56.7 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 24.5 million (equivalent to approximately
US$34.4 million)

Amount of IFAD Adaptation for
Smallholder Agriculture Programme
(ASAP) Trust Fund grant:

SDR 4.2 million (equivalent to approximately
US$6.0 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional: 40 years, including a grace
period of 10 years, with a service charge of 0.75 per
cent per annum

Cofinancier(s): OPEC Fund for International Development (OFID)

Amount of cofinancing: US$7.5 million

Terms of cofinancing: 100 per cent loan

Contribution of borrower: US$7.7 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$1.2 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/115/R.8

1

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
loan to the Republic of Madagascar for the Project to Support Development in the
Menabe and Melaky Regions – Phase II (AD2M-II), as contained in paragraph 45.

Proposed loan to the to the Republic of Madagascar for
the Project to Support Development in the Menabe and
Melaky Regions – Phase II (AD2M-II)

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. The agricultural sector is the backbone of Madagascar’s national economy,

accounting for 30 per cent of GDP (2009),1 generating 30 to 40 per cent of exports,
and employing 80 per cent of Malagasy families on approximately 2.5 million family
farms. The three subsectors – agriculture, livestock and fisheries – are key to
reducing poverty and enhancing food security; they support 75 per cent of the
country’s population, accounting for 86 per cent of all jobs and 60 per cent of youth
employment. Rice production is the leading economic activity, generating the
income of approximately 10 million inhabitants. Rice is grown by 86 per cent of
households, covering 40 per cent of cropland in use and accounting for 37 per cent
of agricultural cash income.

2. With an annual average growth rate of 1.5 per cent, sector performance remains
weak and is among the major causes of rural poverty. Other causes include
fragmented production, low productivity, rural insecurity, overuse of natural
resources, vulnerability to natural hazards such as cyclones, droughts and floods,
and limited access to economic and commercial opportunities due to isolation,
aging infrastructure and difficulty accessing agricultural markets and rural finance.

3. The 2009-2013 crisis had negative socioeconomic impacts, resulting in increased
poverty and, in particular, extreme poverty. The effects of the crisis were
exacerbated by the suspension of foreign aid, which represented half of the
country's overall budget. Five years of transition and political instability led to a
decline in agricultural productivity, further aggravated in 2012 and 2013 by the
locust infestation, which destroyed as much as 50 per cent of food crops, and
severe drought, which impacted negatively on agricultural production in most
regions. In 2012, the national poverty line2 was, at US$0.67 per person per day,
significantly below the international threshold of US$2. According to the 2015-2019
United Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF), the poverty rate
remains high, with 71.5 per cent of people living below the poverty line in 2012.

4. In 2010, 35 per cent of Malagasy households were food insecure, against 25 per
cent in 2005. Acute malnutrition affects 8.6 per cent of children under 5 years of
age, of whom 1.4 per cent are affected severely. Madagascar is among the four
countries in the world with the highest prevalence of chronic malnutrition (47.3
per cent) and ranks fifteenth in terms of the number of children affected (2 million).

1 Source: Economist Intelligence Unit, Country report, December 2009.
2 According to the National Institute for Statistics (INSTAT 2013).



EB 2015/115/R.8

2

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

B. Rationale and alignment with Government priorities and
RB-COSOP

5. The proposed second phase of the Project to Support Development in the Menabe
and Melaky Regions (AD2M) is justified on three grounds: (i) macroeconomic
considerations; (ii) sector-specific considerations; and (iii) as a tool for achieving
development goals.

6. With regard to the performance of AD2M, agro-economic opportunities and
potential, as yet undeveloped. Key actions include: (i) scaling up good practices;
and (ii) consolidating project benefits through financial allocations under the
2013-2015 performance-based allocation system (PBAS) cycle. Phase II satisfies all
of the criteria required to receive financing from IFAD.

7. Given the risks posed by unpredictable rainfall patterns to the production systems
and populations of Menabe and Melaky, the Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture
Programme (ASAP) Trust Fund will support AD2M Phase II (AD2M-II) by
implementing a strategy focused on the governance of climate risks, and provide
added value to the resilience and adaptation activities to be developed during the
second phase.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
8. AD2M-II will target the same geographical area as the first phase of the project,

namely the Menabe and Melaky regions, due to: (i) the existence of significant
agro-economic potential yet to be developed; (ii) the weak coverage of communes3
in these regions during the first phase of the project; and (iii) the desired
economies of scale in terms of approach and project costs. The scope of the project
will be broadened, from 19 to 44 communes, in 7 districts (see appendix II).

9. The target group will be as follows: (i) 35,000 new direct beneficiary households
belonging to one of the three categories of family farm; and (ii) 22,000 households
that already benefited from the first phase and will benefit further from cross-
cutting consolidation activities. A total of 57,000 households will benefit from the
activities to be implemented under the project, comprising small agricultural
producers and rural promoters of economic initiatives operating within the
production poles and the communes linked to them. The number of beneficiaries is
estimated at 342,000, or 58 per cent of the total population (approximately
586,000 people) living in the 44 project area communes.

B. Project development objectives
10. The objectives of AD2M-II are consistent with those of the 2015-2019 country

strategic opportunities programme (COSOP). The overall objective is to sustainably
improve incomes and food security in the productive areas of Menabe and Melaky.
Its specific objectives are to: (i) scale up effective and climate change resilient
family farm production systems; and (ii) enhance producers’ access to
remunerative markets in priority value chains.

C. Components/outcomes
11. The updated technical components of the project comprise: (i) the promotion of

effective and climate change resilient production systems; and (ii) support for
access to markets and economic opportunities.

12. The major outcomes expected are improved water management and water balance
on plots through the redevelopment of 9,120 hectares of hydro-agricultural
schemes and the development of 6,470 hectares of new land, which will result, in
the 44 communes of the project area, in accelerated uptake of various improved
and resilient practices and significant increase in yields and production.

3 Phase I of AD2M covered 19 out of the 88 communes in the two regions.



EB 2015/115/R.8

3

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

13. In terms of land tenure security, the expected results are the establishment of
long-term land tenure administrative authorities and structures at the commune or
inter-communal level (20 land offices, a land tenure information and resource
centre, etc.) and safeguards for the land rights of small agricultural producers, so
as to increase investment and improve production methods, yields and incomes.

14. Expected outcomes in terms of input supply and small agricultural equipment
include the production of 250 tons of seed by new seed multiplier famers through
viable businesses integrated into regional and national seed networks, as well as
the provision of effective inputs and equipment to meet the needs of family farms.

15. In terms of marketing, 48 producers’ groups will be organized in order to negotiate
and fulfill production contracts, and 30 per cent of production will be sold on the
basis of written or oral contracts.

16. In terms of rural finance, eight new operational credit unions will be established
and 8,800 people will benefit from credits, including at least 1,000 from credit with
training, 3,200 for shared village granaries, and 4,000 for productive credit.

17. Farmers’ organizations will be operational and provide members with services they
could not obtain individually, especially in collective input supply.

18. Nutrition education sites and family vegetable gardens will be established, helping
at least 1,000 vulnerable farming families with children under 5 years of age to
access a more balanced diet.

19. Four hundred microprojects targeting the most vulnerable households involved in
the management of natural resources and communal village land will be
implemented, scaling collective actions to combat deforestation and environmental
degradation to the village community level so as to foster participatory natural
resource management.

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

20. The adoption of the so-called “production poles” approach, in widespread use since
the AD2M midterm review, is fully justified in the project area. These should evolve
into “agricultural development poles”, which will form the centrepiece of the second
phase. This approach will comprise the concentration4 of productive investments,
support to agricultural services and efforts to enhance market access focused in
priority areas. It is in line with the project rationale as fine-tuned during the first
phase, incorporating the development of productive infrastructure and the
expansion of arable land, promoting more effective and market-oriented
smallholder farming as well as the organization of producers. Efforts to build the
resilience of cropping systems to climate change must be strengthened in the
second phase. The approach will remain participatory and inclusive.

21. The ASAP grant financing will be used to consolidate the agricultural resilience
benefits of AD2M and to provide the missing link in all poles by securing long-term
investments. The ASAP financing will support in particular production- and
productivity-building activities that are most likely to withstand the impacts of
climate change over the long term while generating immediate socio-economic
benefits.

B. Organizational framework
22. The project will remain under the authority of the Ministry of Agriculture as the lead

implementing agency. The bodies responsible for the coordination and guidance of
the project will remain the same: (i) the National Steering Committee (NSC), which
will ensure project alignment with national strategies; and (ii) the regional
orientation and monitoring committees, which will ensure in particular the

4 This in the context of a large and isolated project area with high potential, taking into account limited financial resources.



EB 2015/115/R.8

4

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

alignment of annual work plans and budgets (AWPBs) with the regional priorities in
Menabe and Melaky. The existing Project Management Unit (PMU) will continue
coordination and management, and its staff will be strengthened to take account of
the constraints of expansion into new communes (isolation, poles, etc.). The
performance of both project staff and staff of locally-based partner NGOs will be
evaluated annually against the functions and objectives as set out in the AWPB.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

23. The PMU will consolidate AWPBs, prepared in accordance with established standards
and on time. It will be responsible for project implementation and for organizing
and administering the meetings of the regional orientation and monitoring
committees and the NSC. The AWPB will be approved by the NSC and transmitted
to IFAD for approval before the first disbursements are made from the ASAP grant
and IFAD loan.

24. The monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system will comprise: i) continuous
systematic internal monitoring, not only to track the implementation of activities
planned in the AWPB but primarily to ensure the attainment of various outcomes
contained in the new project logical framework. A climate change adaptation
specialist with expertise in geographic information system (GIS) and participatory
farmers’ field schools will be recruited (with ASAP financing) to serve as a key
resource throughout the project. Participatory mapping activities involving farmers’
field schools will provide system inputs. The baseline survey for the second phase
of the project will also serve as the impact survey for the evaluation of the first
phase.

25. An M&E plan will be developed to improve the coordination and implementation of
activities. The project M&E manual will be revised to reflect the new provisions and
various improvements to be made to M&E. Monitoring will be participatory so as to
facilitate the transfer and building of development self-management capacities
among the population.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
26. The manual of administrative, financial and accounting procedures developed

during the first phase will be reviewed and updated. Existing procedures will remain
in place, to be supplemented where necessary. The financial management and
accounting of the project will respect the existing rules and practices applicable to
all IFAD-financed project in Madagascar. The existing accounting software will be
updated and accounting staff will undergo training. Aspects relating to financial
management and flow of funds are detailed in appendix 7 of the project design
report, “Financial management and disbursement systems”.

27. During the second phase, the procurement procedures will be identical to those
already used by AD2M, respecting the applicable rules and general provisions in
this area in Madagascar and IFAD.

E. Supervision
28. The East and Southern Africa Division of IFAD will directly supervise the project.

IFAD and the Government of Madagascar will jointly conduct a midterm review at
the end of the third year. The supervision plan is provided in appendix 6 of the
project design report.

IV. Project costs, financing and benefits
A. Project costs
29. The total project cost, including material and financial contingencies, for the

2016-2022 period is estimated at US$56.7 million.

30. Component 1: Promotion of effective and climate change resilient production
systems, will cost approximately US$40.8 million (72 per cent of the total project



EB 2015/115/R.8

5

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

cost); component 2: Support for access to markets and economic opportunities, will
cost US$7.0 million (12 per cent); and the coordination, management and
monitoring and evaluation system will cost US$8.9 million (16 per cent).

Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Millions of United States dollars)

IFAD loan ASAP grant OFID Beneficiaries Government Total
Component Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount
1. Promotion of effective and climate change

resilient production systems 20.2 5.8 7.5 1.2 6.1 40.8
2. Support for access to markets and

economic opportunities 6.1 1.0 7.0
3. Project management and monitoring and

evaluation 8.1 0.2 0.5 8.9
Total 34.4 6.0 7.5 1.2 7.6 56.7

B. Project financing
31. The project will be financed by: (i) an IFAD loan of US$34.4 million (60.7 per cent);

(ii) an ASAP grant of US$6 million (10.6 per cent); (iii) OFID cofinancing of
US$7.5 million (13.2 per cent); (iv) a Government of Madagascar contribution of
US$7.7 million (13.5 per cent); and (v) a beneficiary contribution of US$1.2 million
(2 per cent).

Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Millions of United States dollars)

Expenditure category
IFAD loan ASAP grant OFID Beneficiaries Government Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount
1. Consultations 9.9 87.7 0.7 6.6 - - - - 0.7 5.8 11.3
2. Construction 11.3 42.0 7.7 6.5 7.5 27.9 1.2 4.3 5.2 19.3 26.9
3. Equipment and

materials 5.2 62.6 1.7 20.3 - - - 1.4 17.1 8.3
4. Training 2.6 60.5 1.7 39.5 - - - 0 4.3
5. Salaries/allowances 4.0 95.7 0.1 3.3 - - - - 0.04 0.9 4.2
6. Operating costs 1.4 80.0 - - - - - 0.30 20.0 1.7

Total 34.4 60.7 6.0 10.6 7.5 13.2 1.2 2.0 7.7 13.5 56.7

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
32. Based on projections, the economic internal rate of return (EIRR) of the project will

be 14.75 per cent. This EIRR, which is well above the opportunity cost of capital
(8.2 per cent), is satisfactory given that some additional benefits have not been
taken into account, including those generated by support activities (construction,
equipment, training) and those deriving from technical assistance, training,
information and awareness-raising support. Furthermore, the benefits of improving
land tenure security have not been fully reflected since they are difficult to
quantify; these include investments linked to local land tenure plans, socio-land
tenure analysis, land tenure mediation for the allocation of new plots;
strengthening land offices, partner capacities and training on offer; reducing
transaction costs by improving access to financial services and technology; and
improving living standards, hygiene and nutrition among the project target group.

33. In conclusion, the EIRR is robust with respect to changes in costs or benefits, and
remains satisfactory given that it does not take a number of direct and indirect
benefits into account. The sensitivity analysis, calculated over an extended
economic lifecycle of 20 years, assesses the risks that may constrain AD2M-II
implementation as a result of adverse changes in economic or financial conditions,
including increased prices. Under conditions favourable to the project, such as
increased benefits or reduced costs, the EIRR would further exceed the base rate of
14.75 per cent.



EB 2015/115/R.8

6

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

D. Sustainability
34. From the outset of AD2M-II, the PMU will develop an exit strategy, which it will

implement, transferring responsibilities to project-supported structures, including
communes and farmers’ organizations. The sustainability of the strategy depends
on the assumption of responsibility by producers. The sustainability of land tenure
security will be guaranteed by its inclusion in a proactive national policy and by the
institutionalization, at all territorial levels, of decentralized structures and specific
implementation modalities. It will remain, nonetheless, dependent on the
sustainability of such structures, especially land offices. The sustainability of
hydro-agricultural developments will depend primarily on the management and
maintenance of irrigation networks. The simple gravity model chosen for irrigation
networks takes into account the weak technical capacity of the management
structure, which relies primarily on users through water users’ associations; such
associations should be involved in the project from the outset, strengthened,
supported and ultimately transferred responsibility for managing irrigation
schemes.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
35. The major risks relate to governance, the severity of the climate, the destructive

effects of climate change on social and production capital of small producers, locust
infestation and physical insecurity, especially cattle rustling. Administrative and
financial management risks are considered low, relating primarily to the lack of an
operational internal audit system for IFAD projects in Madagascar. A detailed table
of risks and mitigation measures is presented in chapter III, F and in appendix 4 of
the project design report.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

36. AD2M-II project design is aligned with IFAD’s mandate and Strategic Framework
2011-2015. Project activities are aligned with IFAD’s Madagascar COSOP
2015-2019, in particular strategic objective 1: the widespread adoption of effective
and climate change resilient production systems.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
37. The AD2M-II objectives are aligned with: (i) the General Government Policy,

adopted in May 2014; (ii) the 2015-2019 National Development Plan; (iii) the
2015-2025 Agriculture, Livestock and Fishery Sectoral Programme, based on the
priorities and commitments agreed upon by the main sector stakeholders under the
National Pact, which marked Madagascar’s official accession to the Comprehensive
Africa Agriculture Development Programme; and (iv) the National Policy to Combat
Climate Change. The AD2M-II objectives are consistent with the 2015-2019 UNDAF
objectives, since the project will contribute substantively to the five pillars of
economic and social development.

Innovations and scaling upC.
38. The first phase of the project resulted in the adoption of numerous innovations in

the project area. The results have been satisfactory and the following innovations
will be scaled up during the second phase: i) farmers’ field schools; ii)
agro-ecological techniques recently introduced and popularized by the project
through farmers’ field schools; iii) off-season growing for vulnerable smallholders
with no irrigated land; and iv) the taxation, identification and certification combined
operation approach in project-supported land offices.

39. The learning process will continue, in particular by capitalizing on experiences and
instituting systematic exchanges with other rural development stakeholders,
especially projects financed by IFAD and other technical and financial partners
(such as the Japan International Cooperation Agency Central Highlands Rice
Productivity Improvement Project and the World Bank Emergency Food Security



EB 2015/115/R.8

7

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

and Social Protection Project). The project will benefit from knowledge built in
similar areas by other successful projects in the country: i) access to markets and
marketing (the Rural Income Promotion Programme and the Support Porgramme
for Rural Microenterprises and Regional Economies); and ii) agricultural advisory
services and the strengthening of professional organizations.

40. Climate change adaptation is also among the key themes. The ASAP financing will
help strengthen activities aimed at building farmers’ resilience to the effects of
climate change: hydro-agricultural development, including spate-irrigated areas,
reforestation, agro-ecology and natural resource management approaches in
general. Project implementation will thus provide the knowledge base and solid
expertise to replicate and expand the application of alternative activities to build
resilience to climate change.

Policy engagementD.
41. AD2M-II is anchored in the economy and the institutional environment at the

communal and regional levels. It promotes decentralization and the organization of
stakeholders at the local level so as to ensure the sustainability of investments. The
project incorporates activities relating to policy consultation, capacity-building,
farmers’ organizations, land tenure security, rural finance and knowledge
management.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
42. A project financing agreement between the Republic of Madagascar and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as appendix 1.
session.

43. The Republic of Madagascar is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD.

44. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
45. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
Republic of Madagascar in an amount equivalent to twenty-four million five
hundred thousand special drawing rights (SDR 24,500,000), and upon such
terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms
and conditions presented herein.

FURTHER RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
Madagascar through the Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme in
an amount equivalent to four million two hundred thousand special drawing
rights (SDR 4,200,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President























































President’s report

Proposed loan to the People’s Republic of
Bangladesh for the National Agricultural
Technology Programme – Phase II Project


People’s Republic of Bangladesh

National Agricultural Technology Programme – Phase II
Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: World Bank

Borrower: Ministry of Finance

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture

Total programme cost: US$214 million (net of beneficiary contributions)

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 17 million (equivalent to approximately US$23.8
million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional: Maturity period of 40 years,
including a grace period of 10 years, with a service
charge of 0.75 per cent per annum

Cofinancier(s): Government of Bangladesh, World Bank, United States
Agency for International Development (USAID)

Amount of cofinancing: World Bank loan: US$176 million
USAID grant: US$7.4 million

Contribution of borrower: US$6.7 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$6.5 million

Appraising institution: World Bank

Cooperating institution: World Bank



EB 2015/LOT/P.15

1

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
loan to the People’s Republic of Bangladesh for the National Agricultural Technology
Programme – Phase II Project, as contained in paragraph 55.

Proposed loan to the National Agricultural Technology
Programme – Phase II Project for the People’s Republic
of Bangladesh

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Building on its remarkable social and economic performance over the past 20

years, the People’s Republic of Bangladesh aims to become a middle-income
country by 2021; achieving this will require that the Government of Bangladesh
overcome considerable challenges in agricultural development and rural economic
growth. The country’s annual GDP growth averaged about 6 per cent between 2000
and 2013, accompanied by a decline in the national poverty headcount rate from
48.9 to 31.5 per cent over the first decade of the century, effectively lifting some
16 million people out of poverty.

2. Bangladesh, a country of over 160 million inhabitants, has also made noteworthy
gains in education and health, and is well set to achieve most of the Millennium
Development Goals. Despite these gains, it remains a poor country, with a 2013
GDP per capita of about US$1,000. Bangladesh is regularly hit by natural disasters
that severely impact the economy, disproportionally affecting the infrastructure
and agriculture sectors, as well as vulnerable groups. Nutrition outcomes have not
kept pace with the progress achieved with most social and economic indicators.

3. Agriculture covers about three quarters of the country’s scarce land and supports
the majority of the population’s livelihoods. While overall poverty has significantly
declined over the last decade, the poverty headcount in rural areas (still around 35
per cent) has not declined as fast as in urban settings; and the proportion of
people living in extreme poverty in rural areas is still three times higher than in
urban areas.

4. Agriculture’s contribution to the country’s economic output has declined over the
past decade, but crops, livestock, forestry and fisheries still account for 17 per cent
of GDP. Some 67 per cent of the population live in rural areas and over 43 per cent
of the country’s total labour force are engaged in agriculture. Therefore, achieving
further socially and environmentally sustainable economic growth and poverty
reduction will require policies and investments conducive to lasting
transformational changes in rural areas – including through technological
innovation in agriculture.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and RB-
COSOP

5. While the performance of the National Agricultural Research System (NARS) has
been impressive in contributing to food security (particularly with rice), research in
some key subsectors (e.g. livestock, fisheries) has yet to reach its potential
productivity in terms of releasing a sufficient stream of useful innovations
(including a range of new climate-smart technologies for production and post-
harvest). The proposed National Agricultural Technology Programme (NATP) – the
second phase of three projects initially planned – will seek to overcome some of



EB 2015/LOT/P.15

2

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

the key constraints still holding back the NARS, and to add greater value to the
output of the agricultural sector.

6. The NATP phase two (NATP-II) project is fully aligned with the government’s
priorities, in particular with: (i) the Perspective Plan 2010-2021 outlining the
strategy for achieving food security, making adequate infrastructure available and
pursuing environmentally friendly development; (ii) the Sixth Five-Year Plan (6th
FYP) identifying focal sectors for pro-poor growth, including agriculture, livestock,
community-based fisheries and rural finance; (iii) the policy framework of the
National Agricultural Extension Policy (NAEP, 2012); and (iv) the Bangladesh
Agricultural Research Council (BARC, 2011).

7. Being agriculture-centric, the NATP-II project will complement the ongoing IFAD-
funded portfolio in Bangladesh and is fully aligned with the country strategic
opportunities programme’s (COSOP) objectives of achieving: (i) better adapted
livelihoods of poor people in vulnerable areas to climate change; (ii) greater
market access and improved value chains for small producers and entrepreneurs;
and (iii) economic and social empowerment for marginalized groups, including poor
rural women.

II. Programme description
A. Project area and target group
8. Project area. The three-phase programme will cover all of the 64 districts by the

third phase. In this context, NATP-II will cover 57 districts (including the 25
covered by NATP-I) and span a broad range of agroecological zones across
Bangladesh. The project will be implemented over a six-year period in up to 270
subdistricts (or upazillas); this includes 120 already covered under NATP-I, plus up
to 150 new upazillas. New upazillas will be selected following the multicriteria
approach successfully applied under NATP-I (including poverty incidence, high
prevalence of marginal farmers and agroecologically stressed areas).

9. Target group. In compliance with government policies and strategies, the primary
target group for NATP-II will be smallholder farmers: particularly small, marginal
and landless farmers. Special emphasis will be placed on targeting women.

B. Programme development objective
10. The development objective of this project is to increase agricultural productivity of

smallholder farms and improve smallholder farmers’ access to markets in selected
districts. This will be achieved by: (i) strengthening the capacity of the NARS and
the extension services to generate and diffuse agricultural technologies aimed at
increasing farm productivity and reducing post-harvest losses; and (ii) promoting
the sustainability of existing and newly created farmer groups and producer
organizations by facilitating their linkages with markets.

C. Components/outcomes
11. Component 1: Enhancing agricultural technology generation. Component 1

will improve the performance of NARS through the support to agricultural
technology development, and the strengthening of agricultural research institutions
(institutional and human capacity). Research will be funded through competitive
grants. The component will also finance a number of activities (including specific
studies, policy notes, training, research-extension linkages, and others) in support
of the implementation of the 2012 BARC Act approved under NATP.

12. To scale up NATP achievements, the project design includes – embedded in the
different project components – an agricultural innovation fund (AIF). The AIF is at
the core of the NATP-II scale-up strategy; it aims to provide grant funding for
eligible research and microproject proposals to be implemented by potential project
beneficiaries. The AIF is fully aligned with the holistic approach to agricultural
innovation promoted by the project. In order to effectively contribute to achieving



EB 2015/LOT/P.15

3

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

the project development objective, the AIF includes the following three funding
windows: (i) AIF-1 (US$26.2 million) will promote agricultural technology
generation through a programme-based research initiative (AIF-1 PBRG) and a
competitive research grant programme (AIF-1 CRG); (ii) AIF-2 (US$17 million),
through matching grants, will promote farmers’ adoption of innovative technologies
generated by the research community; and (iii) AIF-3 (US$4.6 million),
through matching grants, will support private operators in developing business and
market opportunities for farmers, as well as in providing relevant private services
to farmers. NATP-II will use calls for proposals, scientific and technical peer-
reviewing and transparent selection mechanisms for the allocation of all grants
under the AIF; disbursement against the AIF is subject to the Bank’s approval of an
AIF Manual of Operational Guidelines and Procedures. NATP-II will explore
synergies between its AIF and the access to rural financial services promoted under
IFAD’s new project for Promoting Agricultural Commercialization and Enterprises
(PACE).1

13. Component 2: Supporting crop development. Component 2 will increase farm
yields, diversify agricultural production, and improve market linkages for
smallholder farmers by: (i) improving the outreach and quality of crop extension
and advisory services by strengthening the skills of public extension workers from
the Department of Agricultural Extension; (ii) promoting information and
communication technology (ICT) in agricultural extension services and supporting
farmer-to-farmer extension; (iii) developing farmers’ skills to scale up the
dissemination of good agricultural practices including those developed under NATP,
as well as identifying technologies for a sustainable production of safer food;
(iv) promoting farm and off-farm mechanization to increase crop productivity, farm
output and diversification, as well as to increase efficiency in crop handling, reduce
post-harvest losses and support processing; (v) facilitating stronger collaboration
with the private sector for agribusiness development on agroprocessing, market
access for smallholders, as well as for the establishment of machinery hire-
services; and (vi) strengthening institutions involved in the crop sector, through
capacity development and selected investments in infrastructure.

14. Component 3: Supporting fisheries development. Component 3 will promote
productivity, quality and output increases through technology transfer, as well as a
better access to market opportunities for fish farmers. NATP-II will provide support
for the sustainable development of inland culture fisheries (small-scale aquaculture
ponds) and inland capture fisheries (open water fisheries in beels [a lake-like
wetland with static water] and haors [a hoar may host several beels]) by (i) scaling
up NATP good aquaculture practices for the production systems prevailing in the
project area; (ii) promoting community-based fisheries management; (iii)
supporting the participation of fisheries common interest groups (CIGs) and
partner organizations (POs) in value chains; (iv) reinforcing research-extension-
farmer linkages; and (v) strengthening the capacity of fisheries institutions. NATP-
II will explore linkages with fishery activities under the ongoing IFAD-supported
operations in the haors.

15. Component 4: Supporting livestock development. Component 4 will promote
productivity and output increases through enhanced technology transfer, service
delivery, as well as better access for livestock farmers to markets. Activities under
this component will cover dairy farming, goat rearing, beef fattening, and poultry
farming, and focus on: (i) strengthening livestock institutions, improving livestock
extension services, and reinforcing the linkages between research, extension and
livestock farmers; (ii) scaling up outreach programmes to a larger number of

1 PACE aims to enhance the livelihoods of rural women and men by improving profitable business opportunities for
microentrepreneurs, and creating wage employment for extreme and moderatly poor people. PACE will provide NATP-II
finance groups with business planning/development services to prepare business plans for funding through PACE's
microenterprise loan programme. In addition, crop, fisheries and livestock farmers unable to access NATP-II matching
grants could be referred to PACE loan schemes.



EB 2015/LOT/P.15

4

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

farmers; and (iii) facilitating the participation of smallholder farmers in selected
livestock markets.

16. Component 5: Project management. Activities under this component will:
(i) ensure that the project is carried out in line with the provisions in the official
project documents, in particular all fiduciary and governance aspects; (ii) establish
liaison mechanisms between the World Bank and the project, and between the
project and the Government of Bangladesh, and (iii) coordinate the implementation
of selected overarching project activities with the support of external technical
assistance.

III. Programme implementation
A. Approach
17. NATP-II will build on and scale up successful interventions and address important

lessons learned from NATP-I. The integrated approach to reaching the project
development objectives will include a foundational component that contributes
towards decentralized, demand-driven agricultural research, as the basis for an
enhanced agricultural technology system. The project will include a further three
subsector components (crops, livestock and fisheries) to address a range of
constraints to technology generation, technology transfer and adoption at farm
level, and farmers’ access to markets. This approach is expected to lead to an
enhanced linkage between agricultural research, extension, and production – an
area regularly reported under NATP as requiring further improvement.

B. Organizational framework
18. The representative of the borrower is the Ministry of Finance. NATP-II will be

implemented under the responsibility of the Ministry of Agriculture (lead
implementing agency) and the Ministry of Fisheries and Livestock. It will be fully
integrated into the Government of Bangladesh administration, and project
implementation is designed to promote the use of existing government structures
at the central level and, when available, at decentralized levels.

19. A joint steering committee, composed of senior representatives from the
agencies under the Ministry of Agriculture and Ministry of Fisheries and Livestock
involved in project implementation, as well as representatives from the farmers
and private sector, who will provide strategic guidance, approve annual budget and
activity plans, monitor overall implementation progress, facilitate interagency
coordination and resolve any outstanding issues requiring high-level decisions.

20. Project management unit. A small project management unit (PMU) will be set up
to oversee implementation of project activities, carry out day-to-day project
management functions, facilitate coordination among components, and liaise with
the World Bank on all project implementation-related aspects. The PMU will also be
in charge of project monitoring and evaluation, producing a project implementation
manual (PIM) that is acceptable to the development partners, detailing the
operational, financial and administrative procedures of NATP-II. The PMU will also
be responsible for the implementation of component 5.

21. Project implementation units. All other project components will be integrated in
the corresponding line department (or agency); each department/agency will set
up a component-specific project implementation unit (PIU). Under the Ministry of
Agriculture, BARC and the Department of Agricultural Extension will each set up a
PIU; BARC for the implementation of component 1 (agricultural technology
generation) and the Department of Agricultural Extension for component 2 (crops).
Under the Ministry of Fisheries and Livestock, the Department of Fisheries will set
up a PIU for the implementation of component 3 (fisheries) and the Department of
Livestock Services will set up a PIU for component 4 (livestock). Using project
funds, the Department of Fisheries, Department of Livestock Services and BARC
will recruit service providers (e.g. international institutions, agro-consulting firms,



EB 2015/LOT/P.15

5

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

academia or others) to deliver the technical assistance needed for strengthening
their institutional capacity and supporting their PIUs with the implementation of
component-specific activities.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

22. Planning. The PMU will be responsible for preparing the annual work plan and
budget, getting it approved by the Ministry of Finance and cleared by the World
Bank. The plan will include planned activities along with targets and expenditures
and will reflect the general project targets and activities.

23. Monitoring and evaluation. NATP-II will have a multi-tier results monitoring and
impact evaluation system that will inform on the progress made towards achieving
the development objective. Results will be sex-disaggregated reported as much as
possible to capture the gender dimension of NATP-II.

24. Learning and knowledge management. Knowledge sharing and learning is a
key activity throughout all of NATP-II’s components. The project will utilize ICT for
extension and capacity-building purposes, and further aims to build an agriculture
knowledge repository and a knowledge platform under its ICT initiative. Another
important tool will be the farmers information and advisory centres that will serve
as fully equipped agricultural technology and knowledge-sharing centres.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
25. A fiduciary assessment of NATP-II was carried out during design, and follows World

Bank procedures. The fiduciary assessment rated the risk in financial management
(FM) as “substantial”, due to (i) the involvement of multiple PIUs and accounting
centres; (ii) the timeliness of consolidation of FM reports; and (iii) compliance with
the requirements of multiple donors. Risk-mitigating measures have been
incorporated into the design of the FM implementation arrangements, and a
number of additional measures will be taken to ensure overall FM capacity and
performance.

26. NATP-II will hire an experienced consultant for the PMU (a senior financial
management specialist), with qualifications acceptable to the Bank and IFAD, to
lead and coordinate FM activities. The consultant will support the project in
strengthening budgeting practices, internal controls, fund reconciliations, and other
relevant financial functions, including coordination with the FM staff at the PIUs.
The current manual system of accounting will be enhanced within 12 months of
project effectiveness by a computerized FM information system to facilitate easy
and timely access to financial information and its consolidation. In order to ensure
that clear practices are harmonized across the project, the PIM will include all the
relevant parts of FM operations, donors’ compliance and financial disclosure. Prior
to effectiveness, the project will also adopt an online, off-the-shelf, web-enabled
accounting software. Annual external audits of all project components will be
conducted by the Foreign Aided Project Audit Directorate and will be supplemented
by additional internal audits from an independent audit firm (twice in the project
lifetime).

27. Flow of funds. Financing from the International Development Association (IDA),
IFAD and a USAID trust fund will be disbursed through three separate designated
accounts. These will be opened and operated by the PMU. All PIUs will maintain a
designated operating account to receive funds from the PMU. The IFAD loan will be
administered by the World Bank under a cooperation agreement with IFAD. An
initial advance will be provided and will be replenished based on regular statements
of expenditure. The same method will be applied between the PMU and PIUs. After
the first year of implementation, the Bank will review the FM performance and, in
consultation with IFAD, may recommend converting the disbursement modality to



EB 2015/LOT/P.15

6

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

one based on interim unaudited financial reports, including a six-monthly forecast
of fund requirements.

28. Project-related transactions relating to all funding sources (IDA, USAID, IFAD and
the Government of Bangladesh) will be accounted for separately in the PMU
following double-entry bookkeeping principles and on a cash basis. The key project
accounting functions for which the PMU will be responsible are as follows:
(i) budget preparation and monitoring; (ii) payments for eligible project
expenditure to third parties; (iii) disbursement of project funds to various agencies,
as per approved work plan; (iv) maintenance of books and bank accounts; (v) cash
flow management; (vi) financial reporting to the Government of Bangladesh, the
World Bank, IFAD and other stakeholders; (vii) preparation of withdrawal
applications to claim funds from the World Bank and IFAD; and (viii) assistance to
the external auditor and ensuring appropriate follow-up of audit. Details on the
proposed FM and disbursement arrangements can be found in annex 3 of the World
Bank’s Project Appraisal Document.

29. Procurement. Procurement financed under the project will be carried out in
accordance with the World Bank’s “Guidelines: Procurement of Goods, Works and
Non-Consulting Services under IBRD Loans and IDA Credits and Grants by World
Bank Borrowers” dated July 2014 (Procurement Guidelines) and “Guidelines:
Selection and Employment of Consulting Services under IBRD Loans and IDA
Credits and Grants by World Bank Borrowers” dated July 2014 (Consultant
Guidelines), and the provisions stipulated in the financing agreement. The
procurement method will depend on the nature of the expenditure and the value of
the contract. The PMU and all PIUs will preserve all procurement records and
documents in accordance with provisions of the Public Procurement Act 2006 (PPA
2006).

30. Procurement under NATP-II will be guided by the World Bank-approved
procurement plan and processed through pooled procurement by the PMU for
selected goods and services (e.g. ICT equipment and peripherals, furniture and
office equipment, consultant services to be provided across various components,
and others) under component 5, and by the four PIUs and the PMU for all other
component-specific goods, works and services. To mitigate procurement risks from
low in-house capacity, the project will contract six procurement specialists
(consultants): two for the PMU and one for each PIU. An acceptable procurement
plan covering the first 18 months of project implementation is available.
Institutional procurement approval will be provided by the respective Head of
Procurement Entities (HOPE) or his/her delegate as per delegation of financial
powers of the four agencies (departments’ Director General and BARC Chairman);
the HOPE for the PMU is the Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture (lead
implementing agency).

31. Audit. The Foreign Aided Projects Audit Directorate of the Comptroller and Auditor
General will conduct an audit of the project’s annual financial statements within six
months from the end of the fiscal year. The project director will be responsible for
audit follow-up and taking remedial actions. Internal audits will include prepayment
audits and independent appraisals of the financial, operational and control activities
in the sector. The responsibilities of the internal auditors will further include
reporting on the adequacy of internal controls, the accuracy and propriety of
transactions, the extent to which assets are accounted for and safeguarded, and
the level of compliance with financial procedures and government laws and
regulations. The first audit will be due by the end of the second year of
implementation.

32. Governance. Lessons learned over the last five years to improve project
implementation and safeguard against potential governance issues have been
incorporated in the project design, implementation arrangements and monitoring



EB 2015/LOT/P.15

7

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

procedures. The project design allows for full and distinct accountability with a
single line agency (BARC, Department of Fisheries and Department of Livestock
Services) for each component. Project monitoring and impact evaluation will be
carried out in collaboration with the PMU and the PIUs by an independent entity
recruited competitively and operating with national and international consultants.
An independent assessment (technical and financial audit) of the AIF will be carried
out for project midterm review to improve the grant system’s performance
accordingly. Beneficiaries’ feedback will be obtained through IT apps tailored to the
project’s needs and channelled directly to the NATP-II management information
system’s area coordinated by the third-party monitoring firm. The project will also
set up project-level grievance redress mechanisms with local communities being
consulted early in the process. In addition, in line with the Bank’s Disclosure Policy
and the country’s Right to Information Act, all information in the project shall be
made public.

33. Several risks and risks mitigation measures related to procurement, financial
management, and environmental and social safeguards compliance have already
been described in the corresponding parts of the project appraisal document. In
order to further minimize governance and corruption risks, NATP-II will follow a
Governance and Accountability Action Plan (GAAP). This plan outlines a framework
for action, institutional arrangements, specific responsibilities, and additional
measures to facilitate effective and appropriate use of project funds. It is based on
the Bank’s and IFAD’s experiences in addressing governance and anticorruption
issues. The GAAP will be adjusted as necessary during implementation to reflect
governance issues that may emerge and/or to strengthen or add actions.

E. Supervision
34. The IFAD loan will be administered and supervised by the World Bank.

IV. Programme costs, financing, benefits
A. Programme costs
35. The total estimated cost of NATP-II amounts to US$214 million (net of beneficiary

contribution), inclusive of contingencies and taxes.

B. Programme financing
36. Of the total cost of US$214 million, US$23.8 million will be financed through an

IFAD loan on highly concessional terms. The World Bank will be providing a loan of
US$176 million and USAID will contribute a grant of US$7.4 million. The
contribution of the Government of Bangladesh, in the form of parallel cofinancing,
will cover all vehicles purchased for NATP-II, as well as the salaries of civil servants
assigned to work full-time on the project, and other expenses.2 The financing of
taxes on eligible expenditures will be permitted with IFAD funds, to harmonize with
IDA practice and simplify the project’s accounting and disbursement procedures.

2 As per the table, the Government of Bangladesh contribution reported amounts to US$6.65 million (or 3 per cent of
project costs). This is likely to be underestimated, as it does not include the hiring by DOF and DLS of upazilla-level
extension staff. However, since this process is underway and has not yet been submitted to the Manpower Committee
(Finance Division/Ministry of Finance), the final number of staff that actually will be recruited is not yet known. Hence, the
exact amount to be added to the reported government contribution is not yet available.



EB 2015/LOT/P.15

8

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Table
Programme/project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Millions of United States dollars)

Expenditure
category

IFAD loan World Bank loan
USAID Gov't of

Bangladesh Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Goods, works,
services and
operating costs

19.0 11.5 140.0 84.5 6.7 4.0 165.7

2. AIF-13 2.3 8.8 16.5 63.0 7.4 28.2 26.2
3. AIF-2 2.0 11.8 15.0 88.2 17.0
4. AIF-3 0.5 10.9 4.0 87.0 4.6
5. Project
preparation
advance (World
Bank)

0.5 100.0 0.5

Total 23.8 11.1 176.0 82.2 7.4 3.5 6.7 3.1 214

37. In addition, beneficiaries will be required to provide cash contributions towards the
matching grants. Beneficiary contribution is expected to amount to US$6.5 million.

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
38. Project benefits. It is estimated that over one million farming households will

directly benefit from project activities, including from improved extension services,
stronger linkages with research, on-farm demonstrations of new technologies,
capacity enhancement through training and skills development, as well as
cofunding productive assets. Based on previous experience, significant spillover
effects and knowledge transfer to farmers who are not members of groups
supported by NATP (the CIGs) can be anticipated. Therefore, all members of the
supported farming communities will potentially benefit from the technologies
generated, the improved extension services provided, as well as from the market
linkages developed. Up to three million farmers in the project area are expected to
benefit from NATP-II. The project will promote gender mainstreaming and women’s
empowerment to ensure that a significant proportion of direct beneficiaries is
female.

39. Economic analysis. The parameters used in making these projections were based
on the NATP-I experience and impact. On this basis, the NATP-II internal rate of
return is calculated at 28 per cent, the project’s economic rate of return (ERR) at
31 per cent, and the corresponding net present value at US$49.9 million. This ERR
remains robust under hypothetical scenarios of a 10 per cent decrease in expected
net revenues and/or a 10 per cent increase in project costs.

D. Sustainability
40. To ensure the durability of the model for technology transfer and delivery of

advisory services to farmers, NATP-II will promote a pluralistic extension system
that supports various complementary elements (e.g. public extension staff, local
private extension agents, lead farmers, Farmers’ Information and Advice Centres,
ICT connectivity, gender focus).

41. Improved access to knowledge, markets, market and price information and
financial services will help contribute to the sustainability of CIGs and POs
supported by the project. To further increase smallholders’ voices and economic
strength in the selected value chains, NATP-II will establish producer organizations
for farmers. In addition, bankable CIGs and POs will be linked up with financing
institutions involved in other programmes/projects supporting access to finances.

3 For explanation of AIF-1, AIF-2 and AIF-3 see para. 12.



EB 2015/LOT/P.15

9

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

42. The sustainability of NATP-II outcomes will further be supported by the institutional
capacity and skills development agenda of the project.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
43. The overall risks of NATP-II not achieving the project development objectives and

targets, and for NATP-II activities to have a negative impact on the people and the
environment are considered substantial.

44. The substantial risks identified with regard to policies and sector strategies refer to
the potential for lack of operationalization of the Bangladesh Agricultural Research
Council Act; delays in hiring public extension workers by the Ministry of Fisheries
and Livestock; and the lengthy approval process for the validation of the NAEP.
Under NATP-II, these will be addressed through: (i) strengthening the BARC
institutional capacity in the area of research management by hiring an international
service provider; (ii) expanding the use of private community-based extension
agents for livestock and fisheries with the aim of developing sustainable models for
private extension (e.g. scaling up fee-based services for livestock, promoting
additional sources of revenues for local extension agents for fisheries; and
(iii) adopting in NATP-II some of the core pillars of the NAEP (e.g. promoting a
group approach, complementary farmer-to-farmer extension; promoting private
extension services, etc.).

45. The substantial risk identified with respect to institutional capacity for
implementation refers to the challenges in coordinating four line agencies from two
different ministries and their capacity to implement the respective components. As
shown in the previous project, the coordination challenge can be adequately
addressed through a neutral PMU that has strong leadership. The recruitment of a
senior project director and a team of technical experts (consultants only, no civil
servants) at the PMU level will be a key factor for the successful coordination
across line agencies. An important mitigation measure in the implementation
arrangements for NATP-II (different from the previous project) is the support from
service providers recruited internationally for each line agency.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
46. NATP-2 is fully aligned with the IFAD Strategic Framework 2011-2015 and with the

current RB-COSOP for Bangladesh, focusing on market access and value chains,
and on the economic empowerment of marginalized people. The project design
adheres to IFAD policies on private sector participation, environment, targeting and
gender. It further complies with the World Bank’s safeguards on indigenous people.
In terms of environmental impacts, the project is classified as “B”.

B. Alignment and harmonization
47. The project, whose design has seen the close involvement of the Government of

Bangladesh, will support the Government’s strategic priorities in agriculture, i.e.
increasing production, achieving food security, supporting adaptation to climate
change, and enhancing nutrition through safer and more diversified food. NATP-II
will support the decentralization process already under way for agricultural
research and extension services.

48. Project implementation will be done through existing government structures at
central level and, when available, at decentralized levels.

49. NATP-II will be cofinanced by the World Bank and USAID. It benefits from the
experience of all three partners and will link up with existing and relevant projects,
such as the IFAD-supported PACE project and the Haor Infrastructure and
Livelihood Improvement Project.



EB 2015/LOT/P.15

10

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

C. Innovations and scaling up
50. With the Agricultural Innovation Fund, NATP-II offers a tool to promote research

efforts for new and innovative technologies. The AIF is at the core of the NATP-II
scaling-up strategy; it aims at providing grant funding for eligible research and
microproject proposals to be implemented by potential project beneficiaries. The
AIF promotes a competitive research grant programme; farmers’ adoption of
innovative technologies generated by the research community; and will support
private operators in developing business and market opportunities for farmers and
by providing relevant private services to farmers (through matching grants).

D. Policy engagement
51. With its contributions to the agricultural technology development, NATP-II is

expected to support policies that create an enabling environment for smallholder
farmers. This work will include commodity-specific market and value chain
analyses, and the preparation of sector policy notes for senior decision makers.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
52. A programme financing agreement between the People’s Republic of Bangladesh

and IFAD will constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing
to the borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as
appendix I.

53. The People’s Republic of Bangladesh is empowered under its laws to receive
financing from IFAD.

54. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
55. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms
to the People’s Republic of Bangladesh in an amount equivalent to seventeen
million special drawing rights (SDR 17,000,000) and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President
























































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to Nepal for
Samriddhi – Rural Enterprises and
Remittances Project

Republic of Nepal

Samriddhi – Rural Enterprises and Remittances Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of Nepal

Executing agency: Ministry of Industry

Total project cost: US$68.2 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 15.50 million (equivalent to approximately
US$21.8 million)

Amount of IFAD Debt Sustainability
Framework grant:

SDR 11.95 million (equivalent to approximately
US$16.8 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: 40 years, including a grace period of 10 years, with a
service charge of three fourths of one per cent
(0.75 per cent) per annum

Amount of cofinancing: US$13.7 million

Terms of cofinancing: The private-sector contribution will mostly consist of
cost-sharing of capacity-building and outreach
promotion by financial institutions

Contribution of borrower: US$9 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$6.6 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/114/R.13

1

Recommendation for approval
The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of Nepal for Samriddhi – Rural Enterprises and
Remittances Project, as contained in paragraph 42.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Nepal for
Samriddhi – Rural Enterprises and Remittances Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Nepal has a population of 26.6 million people, of whom 56 per cent are 20-40

years of age. It is a low-income country with a per capita GDP of US$642, which is
the second lowest in South Asia. Since the end of the decade-long internal conflict
in 2006, insecurity and political instability have contributed to relatively slow GDP
growth. The majority of the population still lives on low-input/low-output
agriculture that provides limited income. Thus wage labour and widespread
migration have obligated 3 million Nepalese, mostly from rural areas, to be
employed abroad. The development of the service sector is partly due to a boom in
migration remittances, which have multiplied by a factor of six since 2003-2004,
now reaching 25 per cent of GDP, to about 55 per cent of rural households and still
increasing. Additionally, the poverty incidence decreased from 42 per cent in 1996
to 25 per cent in 2010, primarily due to the impact of remittances.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

2. Samriddhi1 – Rural Enterprises and Remittances Project has been developed in line
with the 2013-2018 results-based COSOP (RB-COSOP) and the Government of
Nepal’s request to harness remittances in support of entrepreneurship.

3. In line with Nepal’s National Development Plan, Industry Policy and Agriculture
Development Strategy, the project will diversify the range of economic activities
accessible to poor rural households and unemployed young men and women
through two main avenues. First, it will promote self-employment and small
businesses and microenterprises that can generate better incomes and jobs –
through both on farm and off-farm activities. Second, it will promote vocational
training and apprenticeship in direct connection with gainful job placement. In
addition, the approach to rural enterprises and remittances (RER) will develop
mechanisms specifically targeting migrant households and returnees, so they can
make the best possible use of their remittances.

4. Samriddhi will contribute to all three RB-COSOP strategic objectives. It will be the
first IFAD project to scale up Financing Facility for Remittances good practices into
an investment project, as well as the first to promote a comprehensive set of
mechanisms fostering remittance investment in livelihood development in Nepal.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
5. The project will be implemented in 16 districts of the Eastern and Central

Development Regions. It will use a corridor approach that links districts along the
main roads running south to north to facilitate the connection of hill districts to
larger markets in the terai (plains). Samriddhi will target a total of some 179,000

1 ‘Samriddhi’ is a Nepali word meaning prosperous or economically well-off.



EB 2015/114/R.13

2

primary beneficiaries, which will include existing rural micro/cottage and small
enterprises (RMSEs), poor households, returnee migrants and small enterprises.
The secondary target group will include medium and large enterprises as well as
service providers, who will be harnessed to provide support to the primary target
group through the development of business partnerships, vocational training,
apprenticeship packages and job placement. The project will also provide financial
education to 244,800 people to support financial inclusion.

6. Samriddhi will adopt an inclusive approach in which all existing micro-cottage and
small enterprises and all potential entrepreneurs – involved in both farming and
non-farming activities – will be eligible to access project-sponsored services in the
target districts. However, project support will vary according to the size of
enterprises, with a higher proportion of project grant funding provided to family-
based enterprises and the poorest groups, and a lesser proportion extended to
small enterprises. In addition, the project will ensure that poorer households,
women and other disadvantaged groups have access to project services and that
these are adapted to their needs.

B. Project development objective
7. The project goal is to contribute to reducing poverty and achieving sustainable

peace through employment-focused, equitable and inclusive economic
development. The development objective is that viable RMSEs, in both farm and
off-farm sectors, provide sustainable sources of income to poor households,
migrant families and returnees. Main indicators are: (i) 57,500 rural entrepreneurs
expand their existing business or create a new one; (ii) 30,000 rural youth access
job placement services; (iii) 34,500 enterprises are supported by Samriddhi
(22,500 new and 12,000 existing); and (iv) 21,000 vocational trainees and
apprentices are supported by Samriddhi, of which no less than 33 per cent are
women.

C. Components/outcomes
8. The project has three components: Component 1 – Promotion of RMSEs aims to

(i) provide micro and small entrepreneurs with sustainable access to adapted
business development services, so they can expand existing businesses or create
new ones; and (ii) assist members of poor households in building their skills and
securing gainful wage employment in RMSEs. Activities will be driven by an
assessment of markets, business opportunities and available services and by an
inventory and classification of existing RMSEs through a validation process.
Enterprise Service Centres (ESCs)2 will facilitate RMSE linkages with financial and
non-financial service providers, provide counselling services and information,
promote business partnerships and manage a system for the qualification,
capacity-building and quality monitoring of service providers.

9. Component 2 – Productive investment aims to (i) support the access of
RMSEs, migrants and remittance recipient households to responsive and suitable
financial services; and (ii) facilitate the financial inclusion of migrants and their
families, support their access to reintegration and peer-counselling services and
harness remittances for productive investment in rural enterprises. It will develop
innovative financial instruments designed to offset major constraints faced by
RMSEs in affordably accessing investment loans and to stimulate migrants’ savings
and investment in small business development. This will include: a risk-sharing
scheme to address RMSEs lack of collateral; a performance-based matching grant
scheme for family and microenterprises with insufficient cash flow to borrow money
in the initial stages of microenterprise development; and a departure loan buy-
back scheme targeting migrants. Capacity-building will be provided to financial
institutions in target districts, and in particular to savings and credit cooperatives

2 In Nepali: ‘samriddhi ko dhoka’ – the door to well-being.



EB 2015/114/R.13

3

(SCCs) and to Small Farmers Cooperatives Limited, to deliver responsive services
to the target population.

10. Component 3 – Institutional support and project management aims to
promote a favourable policy and institutional environment supporting the
development of RMSEs and the contribution of migration to sustainable
development. To this effect, Samriddhi will finance policy studies and research, as
well as activities enabling selected stakeholders representing the interests of
RMSEs or of migration stakeholders to participate in policy dialogue with the
Government. Additionally, Samriddhi will support capacity-building of institutions
that play a key role in creating a conducive environment for small businesses and
microenterprises and for migrants’ reintegration. Finally, it will assist in setting up
a multi-stakeholder platform on migration and development (MPMD), which will
provide a venue for policy dialogue on the integration of migration into the
development agenda and for developing policy measures to facilitate migrant
reintegration and to promote their economic initiatives in the country.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
11. The project strategy is driven by a primary concern that existing RMSEs need

support at national and local levels to develop, increase family income, generate
economic activities and improve employment. In addition, the promotion of RMSEs
must rest on sustainable structures and on mechanisms allowing continued access
of entrepreneurs to commercially-oriented services even beyond project
completion. Thus the project is designed as a temporary intervention aiming to
prepare public and private stakeholders to take over the responsibilities and costs
of securing continued RMSEs access to financial and non-financial services.

B. Organizational framework
12. The set-up of Samriddhi is based on public/private partnerships geared to support

inclusive and sustainable rural economic growth. While the Government retains
overall implementation and facilitation responsibility, non-governmental players will
have a key role in providing business development and financial services to target
groups for the creation and expansion of RMSEs and for maximizing the
development impact of migrant remittances through business investment.
Implementation arrangements also take stock of the long-lasting and strong
partnership between the Government and the Federation of Nepal Chambers of
Commerce and Industry, which is already implementing several initiatives
supporting RMSEs and rural producers.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

13. The integrated monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and knowledge management (KM)
system will be developed in accordance with government frameworks and with
IFAD guidelines. It will have three main objectives: steer project implementation;
support economic decisions and policymaking; and share knowledge and scale up
good practices.

14. The M&E/KM cycle will start with the preparation of the annual workplan and
budget (AWP/B). All Samriddhi stakeholders will have an active and important role
in identifying and reporting data. M&E officers at all levels will ensure that women
are adequately represented in this process and that they are supported in voicing
their specific concerns. To guarantee an inclusive M&E/KM system, Samriddhi will
provide capacity-building to the project management team (PMT), corridor teams
and ESC staff.

15. The purpose of knowledge management is to ensure that knowledge generated
within the project is systematically identified, analysed, documented and shared.



EB 2015/114/R.13

4

Particular attention will be given to documenting: innovative models; information
to be shared with and discussed by the MPMD with a view to assessing progress
and discussing measures to improve performance; and Learning Routes, which will
be organized to support the exchange of knowledge and good practices among
ESCs.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
16. Financial management will be governed by Ministry of Finance regulations and

will be in line with IFAD guidelines on financial management. The financial
management system will be under the overall responsibility of the Samriddhi
project manager and the accounts officer. A finance and administrative officer will
also be competitively hired from the open market. The draft project
implementation manual (PIM) – established at final design and to be approved by
IFAD – includes a financial management section describing IFAD procedures for the
withdrawal application process, flow of funds, accounting and financial reporting
and audit requirements. A complete financial management assessment was
undertaken and the residual risk was found to be ‘medium’, to be mitigated
efficiently through the following measures: professional software-based
accounting; stringent reporting requirements; accountability; internal audit
provision; and a detailed finance manual. Two designated accounts in United States
dollars will be opened at the Nepal Rastra Bank (central bank), through which
advance resources from the loan and grant will be channelled respectively. The
Government’s Financial Administration Regulations will be used as the basis for
accounting and appropriate controls over financial transactions, and will be
supplemented by separate ledgers, registers and reporting formats to record and
report IFAD expenditures by categories, components, subcomponents and
activities. Consolidated project financial statements will be prepared in accordance
with internationally recognized accounting standards.

17. Internal control and audit. The PMT accounts officer will be responsible for
tracking project expenditure, managing assets and procurement and monitoring
fiduciary aspects of district- and corridor-level project activities. The project will
continue the existing practice of internal audit by the District Treasury Control
Office, in line with government financial rules and regulations. With regard to
external audit, the Office of the Auditor General is considered an independent body
under the respective government offices and is responsible for final project audit.
Audits shall be carried out in accordance with International Standards on Auditing
and IFAD’s Guidelines on Project Audits.

18. Procurement. The procurement of goods, works and services financed from
resources provided or administered by IFAD will be undertaken in accordance with
the provision of the Public Procurement Act and associated regulations, Public
Procurement Rules and the provisions of IFAD’s Procurement Guidelines and
Handbook. Goods and services (non-consulting) procured using national
competitive bidding, national shopping and direct contracting will follow the
procedures and processes defined in the PIM to be approved by the project
steering committee (PSC) and IFAD. The selection of individual consultants and
individual service providers will also be defined in the PIM, which will provide
details of the selection method to be applied.

E. Supervision
19. Annual supervision missions will be organized by IFAD jointly with the Government,

in close collaboration with field-level implementers and project stakeholders.
Supervision will not be conducted as an inspection, but will rather offer an
opportunity to assess achievements and lessons jointly, to review innovations and
to reflect on improvement measures.



EB 2015/114/R.13

5

IV. Project costs, financing, benefits
A. Project costs
20. Total project investment and recurrent costs are estimated at US$68.2 million over

seven years, including physical and price contingencies. Total baseline costs are
US$57.60 million.

Table 1
Indicative project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries

Private
sector -

financing
institutions

The
Government Total

Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount

A. Promotion of rural micro-cottage and small
enterprises

Mapping and setting up capacities at district and
regional levels

2 266 4 257 - 364 1 124 8 012

Services for RMSE promotion and development 10 314 758 1 836 - 1 929 14 837

Vocational training and apprenticeships 3 931 1 342 - 209 3 489 8 972

Subtotal promotion of rural micro-cottage and
small enterprises

16 511 6 357 1 836 573 6 542 31 821

B. Productive investment

Rural finance 1 534 5 258 4 800 13 175 219 24 987

Mobilizing migrant resources and skills 367 514 - - 1 476 2 356

Subtotal productive investment 1 901 5 772 4 800 13 175 1 695 27 343

C. Institutional support and project management

Policy and institutional development 404 1 942 - 1 410 2 757

Project management 2 979 2 744 - - 501 6 224

Subtotal institutional support and project
management

3 383 4 686 - 1 911 8 981

Total costs 21 795 16 815 6 636 13 749 9 148 68 145

Table 2
Indicative project costs by expenditure category and financier*
(Thousands of United States dollars)

* Final disbursement categories will be decided during negotiations based on IFAD’s procedures, which will include a
maximum of five cost categories for reasons of efficiency.



EB 2015/114/R.13

6

B. Project financing
21. The Government of Nepal, IFAD, the private sector and beneficiaries will finance

the project. IFAD total financing amounts to US$38.61 million, equivalent to
56.7 per cent of total project financing (24.7 per cent under the form of a Debt
Sustainability Framework grant and 32 per cent through a highly concessional
loan). The Government would finance taxes, duties and salaries, and is further
expected to contribute to the cost of the salary of one staff member for each ESC
and to vocational training, for a total of US$9.1 million. The private sector
contribution is estimated at US$13.7 million. Overall beneficiaries’ contributions are
estimated at US$6.6 million.

22. Taxes and duties will not be financed by IFAD.

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
23. Samriddhi will target a total of some 179,660 primary beneficiaries:

60,000 entrepreneurs; 89,660 people who will access jobs generated by the newly
created and expanded RMSEs; and about 30,000 people, mostly youth, who will
benefit from vocational training and apprenticeship.

24. Additionally, the project will provide financial education in-country and abroad to
213,100 people, mostly migrants and migrants’ households. An estimated
10 per cent of these will access other project services.

25. The secondary target group will include: (i) medium and large enterprises and
service providers, who will extend support to the primary target group; and
(ii) 22,500 enterprises (from category B to medium and large), who will benefit
from capacity-building to make the best use of apprenticeships.

26. Furthermore, project investments will lead to indirect benefits for RMSEs and poor
households beyond the target area.

27. The base-case scenario for a 20-year period of analysis shows an economic rate of
return of 26 per cent and a net present value of US$37.7 million.

D. Sustainability
28. Samriddhi strategy and activities are driven by the primary concern that, by the

end of project implementation, sustainable mechanisms will ensure continued
RMSE access to financial and non-financial services. This will be attained through:
(i) public/private partnerships that provide target groups with sufficient returns and
include capacity-building and expansion opportunities; (ii) financial sustainability of
RMSEs and ESCs through sound business plans, with incentives to support start-
up, cost-recovery mechanisms, capacity-building of key players, linkages to
performing financial service providers (SPs) and resource mobilization; (iii) use of
local resources to develop entrepreneurship, expand the range of business
development services SPs and generate jobs; and (iv) promotion of business
partnerships between the smallest enterprises and value chain aggregators, which
will facilitate continued RMSEs access to services and markets and promote their
growth beyond initial project-financed support.

29. The second interim review, planned for the end of the fifth year, will make
recommendations with regard to key measures required to secure the sustainability
of project achievements, based on which the PMT will prepare a detailed exit
strategy.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
30. Most risks associated with this project remain medium or low, and mitigation

measures have been identified for all risks. The three risks remaining high are
given below.



EB 2015/114/R.13

7

31. Risks associated with the project related to the Government or other development
organizations paying protracted subsidies and in-kind support to entrepreneurs to
establish their businesses, which will be mitigated by sharing implementation
modalities and successful achievements with the MPMD and government partners
to foster harmonization. In addition, Samriddhi and ESCs will negotiate
coordination agreements at the district level to ensure that subsidies do not
undermine the Samriddhi approach to sustainability.

32. The risk that the volume of service business will not be sufficient to generate an
adequate income for full-time SPs will be mitigated by project support to several
mechanisms facilitating sustainable SP access.

33. The risk that public/private migration stakeholders fail to take responsibility for the
operation and financing of the MPMD will be mitigated by project interventions to:
(i) set up the platform and develop plans and tools; (ii) finance the MPMD
secretariat and operations; (iii) draft a law to institutionalize the platform; and
(iv) support migrant organizations in developing advocacy skills.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

34. The design of Samriddhi was guided by IFAD’s policies and strategies on: targeting,
gender and private-sector engagement. The project is in line with IFAD’s specific
objectives on remittances, which aim to: enhance market development and
financial access through the identification, replication and scaling up of innovative
remittance transfer systems; promote financial inclusion among migrants and
remittance-recipient families in rural areas through better use of remittances; and
create an enabling environment that promotes public/private partnerships for
effective remittance development strategies.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
35. A PSC will be set up at the national level to: provide overall guidance and

oversight; ensure that Samriddhi programming is aligned with national-sector
priorities; and offer a venue for sharing Samriddhi good practices and for
channelling policy issues to the appropriate policymaking bodies. The PSC will also
approve annual AWP/Bs and annual progress and financial reports.

36. Samriddhi will rely on existing district industry promotion committees to: develop a
dialogue among stakeholders involved in RMSE development; discuss RMSE
constraints and value chain bottlenecks; agree on measures required to free them;
and identify policy gaps and provide guidance to ESCs. It will ensure that ESC
activities are inclusive of women and poor people, and that gender equality and
social inclusion issues are addressed as part of their regular agenda.

Innovations and scaling upC.
37. The PMT and business development services technical assistance will assist ESCs in

developing innovative modalities for service delivery, such as: (i) developing
systems alternative to price (commissions or mark-ups) that link payment to actual
results/impact on business; (ii) promoting SPs that have an existing business and
do not rely solely on service provision to make a living, including cooperatives or
producers’ associations; and (iii) assisting SPs in developing businesses in
conjunction with RMSEs promotion (for example, large farmers buying agricultural
products from serviced farmers). Innovative models will be thoroughly documented
with support from corridor teams and will be shared across target regions and
through multistakeholder platforms at the district industry promotion committee
level, regional (Eastern Business Forum) and national levels (National Business
Forum, the project steering committee).



EB 2015/114/R.13

8

Policy engagementD.
38. The project will support selected stakeholders representing the interests of RMSEs

or of migrants to participate in policy dialogue with the Government. Samriddhi will
finance studies and research enabling such stakeholders to: (i) develop policy
positions; (ii) organize policy consultations of members at regional and national
levels; and (iii) acquire advocacy skills.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
39. A financing agreement between the Republic of Nepal and IFAD will constitute the

legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower/recipient. A
copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as an annex.

40. The Republic of Nepal is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

41. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
42. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Republic of Nepal in an amount equivalent to fifteen million five hundred
thousand special drawing rights (SDR 15,500,000), and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
Nepal in an amount equivalent to eleven million nine hundred and fifty
thousand special drawing rights (SDR 11,950,000) and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President



























































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the
Argentine Republic for the
Goat Value Chain Development Programme


Argentine Republic

Goat Value Chain Development Programme

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Argentine Republic

Executing agency: Unit for Rural Change

Total programme cost: US$25.45 million

Amount of IFAD loan: US$12.30 million

Amount of IFAD grant: US$1.02 million

Terms of IFAD loan: Ordinary: Maturity period of 18 years, including a grace
period of three years, with an interest rate per annum
equal to 100 per cent of the IFAD reference interest rate

Contribution of borrower: US$7.00 million

Contribution of provincial governments: US$2.97 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$2.16 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/LOT/P.18/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval
The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed loan
and grant to the Argentine Republic for the Goat Value Chain Development
Programme, as contained in paragraph 33.

Proposed loan and grant to the Argentine Republic for
the Goat Value Chain Development Programme

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country, rural development and poverty context
1. Argentina is one of the largest economies in Latin America and one of the world's

major producers of agricultural commodities, especially soybeans, maize and beef.
In addition, there are some 251,000 family farms in the country. Many of these are
run by poor families, the majority of whom live in the greater north region. In
addition, Argentina is home to about 950,000 indigenous peoples. In 2010, 18 per
cent of the rural population and 22 per cent of rural dispersed households had
unmet basic needs. About 46,000 farms are raising goats, principally smallholders.

2. Poverty is especially severe in farming families, indigenous communities, rural
working families and large families without fixed incomes. Youth unemployment is a
serious problem in rural areas, and outmigration of young rural women is common.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

3. The Government of Argentina aims to reduce rural poverty through income
generation based on sustainable agricultural production. The Unit for Rural Change
(UCAR), of the Ministry of Agroindustry (MAI), has demonstrated the capacity to
improve the performance of IFAD's portfolio, which is implemented within its
country programme as an instrumental part of public policy to support family
farming. Specialized technical institutions cooperate with UCAR in this task.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
4. The programme leverages public policy priorities, lessons learned in the IFAD

country programme and opportunities within the country to reduce rural poverty by
integrating family farming into value chains. Its design is based on the insertion of
smallholder goat breeders into value chains, following participatory planning by
producers’ organizations within goat production basins. Value chains include:
(i) meat; (ii) fibre, especially mohair and cashmere; and (iii) milk products. The
chains are not very developed, with limitations faced by family farmers and
processing companies.

5. The programme area includes the five provinces of Chaco, Formosa, Neuquén,
Mendoza and Santiago del Estero, which include some 60 per cent of the total
number of goats in the country.

6. Beneficiaries will include men and women producers (including indigenous
communities) engaged in goat breeding and organized in producers’ organizations.
The programme will prioritize existing organizations and promote incorporation of
vulnerable groups, especially indigenous peoples, women and youth.



EB 2016/LOT/P.18/Rev.1

2

B. Programme development objective
7. The programme’s development objective is to raise the incomes of goat-breeding

families through their sustainable integration into value chains. The six-year
programme aims to reach 8,000 families.

C. Components and outcomes
8. The programme has three components:

 Component 1: Development of markets and sectoral policies. This
component will strengthen development of emerging value chains by creating
a conducive commercial environment, including marketing, policy and
normative aspects. To develop markets for goat products, it will support
market analysis and promotion, exploration of foreign markets and technical
assistance to processing companies. It will also promote product
standardization conforming to official normative rules, and creation of a
natural-resource monitoring framework for sustainable goat management.
Moreover, it will develop human resources by supporting technical exchange
visits and basic financial education.

 Component 2: Productive, organizational and commercial
development. To improve the functioning of value chains, the programme
will provide the following territorial support to participating organizations:

(a) Goat basin identification, the creation of goat basin forums and
participatory planning and monitoring of market-based sectoral
development.

(b) In the pre-investment phase, it will support preparation of participatory
rapid appraisals of producers’ organizations, institutional strengthening
and eventually the formulation of business plans in the framework of
business alliances in accordance with goat basin plans.

(c) In the investment phase, it will finance implementation of approved
business plans – including physical assets, training, technical assistance
and working capital – through revolving funds for credit administered by
producers’ organizations. Additionally, the programme will finance
guarantee funds to facilitate operating capital loans from financial
institutions to the associated lead companies in the value chains.

 Component 3: Programme management. This component includes
programme management by UCAR and provincial management units. It will
include the adaptation of systems for planning, monitoring and evaluation,
and also for knowledge management, with a special focus on South-South and
triangular cooperation (SSTC).

III. Programme implementation
ApproachA.

9. The programme’s operational strategy will be based on: (i) sector-wide investments
in goat product markets and policies; (ii) participatory goat basin plans; and
(iii) business plans as the principal instruments of producers’ organizations’ for
training, investment, technical assistance and operating capital.

Organizational frameworkB.
10. MAI, through the UCAR, will be responsible for programme implementation and will

directly execute the activities in components 1 and 3. Provincial governments will
be responsible for implementing component 2 through provincial management
units, based on provincial financing agreements with MAI. Beneficiary organizations
will be responsible for developing and executing business plans through
participatory processes.



EB 2016/LOT/P.18/Rev.1

3

11. Beneficiary participation is central to the programme. Producers’ organizations will
participate in goat basin forums to prepare and monitor basin plans. They will be
responsible for planning and implementing business plans, including procurement.
Finally, they will monitor and evaluate implementation of their business plans,
which will provide the programme’s system with data.

Planning, monitoring and evaluation, learning and knowledgeC.
management

12. Planning will be based on defined goals and objectives. The programme’s annual
planning exercise will provide the flexibility needed for implementation, in
coordination with provincial authorities. Goat basin plans will be prepared with the
participation of provincial authorities, producers’ organizations, private enterprises
and public institutions.

13. For the programme’s data and knowledge system, UCAR will apply results-based
management methods using an organizational matrix to manage the development
of goat basin and business plans. The system will be integrated into UCAR’s existing
management system, allowing monitoring of physical progress based on data
entered at the provincial level. A tracking sheet will facilitate analysis of information
critical to measuring results. For impact evaluation, implementers will collect
information from beneficiary households using a family questionnaire that includes
IFAD’s Results and Impact Management System (RIMS) survey. Institutional
advancement will be tracked by monitoring the participating producers’
organizations. Thematic studies will be carried out to analyse experiences in
programme implementation.

Financial management, procurement and governanceD.
14. Financial management. MAI, through UCAR, will be responsible for financial

management of all programme resources, including flow of funds, disbursement,
internal controls, accounting, financial reporting and audit. UCAR has been the
implementing agency of IFAD programmes since its creation in 2009. It has
extensive experience and adequate systems and procedures. For programme
implementation, UCAR will use its existing accounting system, which is satisfactory
to IFAD. Funding for start-up costs may be used for early programme expenditures.

15. Flow of funds. IFAD loan and grant resources will be disbursed to a receiving
account in United States dollars in the Central Bank of Argentina. Funds will then be
transferred to the two designated accounts in United States dollars in the Banco de
la Nación Argentina, to two designated accounts in United States dollars in the
central bank of Argentina. The accounts will be used exclusively for the proceeds of
the loan and grant, respectively. From each designated account, funds will flow to
the respective operational account denominated in Argentine pesos, which will be
managed by UCAR. Provincial-level implementation units will open provincial
operational accounts in Argentine pesos.

16. Procurement. The programme will follow national procurement regulations to the
extent these are compatible with IFAD’s procurement guidelines. UCAR, the
provincial management units and producers’ organizations will carry out
procurement on the basis of agreed procurement plans. Procurement of works,
goods and services in the framework of business plans, and accounting for these
expenditures, will be the responsibility of producers’ organizations, in line with
IFAD’s community-based procurement directives, with support from provincial
units.

17. Audit. The programme’s consolidated financial statements will be audited annually
by the national auditor general in accordance with IFAD’s Guidelines on Project
Audits. All programme accounts will be audited, including all sources of funding.
The scope of the audit will include visits to producers’ organizations. Annual audit
reports will be submitted to IFAD within six months of the end of each fiscal year.



EB 2016/LOT/P.18/Rev.1

4

SupervisionE.
18. The programme will be supervised directly by IFAD in accordance with the

methodology agreed by IFAD and UCAR. Initial supervision tasks include support for
rapid programme start-up and set-up of the accounting, planning, and monitoring
and evaluation systems.

Exception to IFAD’s General Conditions for AgriculturalF.
Development Financing and operational policies

19. With respect to retroactive financing, expenses related to goat basin forums and to
SSTC for activities begun as of the date of negotiations will be considered eligible
up to US$500,000 under the expense categories “Goods, services and inputs for
beneficiaries” and “Consultancies (technical assistance)” from both the loan and
grant accounts. Activities to be financed by retroactive financing and their source of
funding will require prior “no objection” from IFAD to be considered eligible. For
expenses for reimbursement to be recognized, the borrower/recipient must submit
them to IFAD once disbursement conditions have been met.

IV. Programme costs, financing, benefits
A. Programme costs
20. The total cost for six years of implementation will be US$25.5 million, including

contingencies, of which: US$2.7 million relates to component 1; US$19.0 million to
component 2; and US$3.8 million to component 3. Management costs make up
15 per cent of programme costs. Costs include 6 per cent for contingencies with
respect to price escalation for goods, services and operating expenses, and
0.001 per cent for physical contingencies with respect to goods and services.

B. Programme financing
21. The programme will be financed by: (i) the central government, with a contribution

of US$7.0 million to cofinance business plans of producers’ organizations and
management costs; (ii) provincial governments, with a contribution of
US$3.0 million to cofinance business plans and provincial management costs;
(iii) IFAD, through a loan of US$12.3 million and a grant of US$1.0 million for
SSTC; and (iv) beneficiaries, with in-kind contributions of US$2.2 million to
cofinance business plans. Programme costs by component and expenditure
category are presented in tables 1 and 2.

Table 1
Programme costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant
Central

government
Provincial

government Beneficiaries Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Development of markets and
sectoral policies 1 796 67 882 33 - - - - - - 2 678 11

2. Productive, organizational
and commercial development 10 377 55 - - 5 807 31 643 3 2 160 11 18 987 75

3. Programme management 127 3 135 4 1 192 32 2 329 62 - - 3 783 15

Total programme costs 12 300 48 1 017 4 7 000 28 2 972 12 2 160 9 25 448 100



EB 2016/LOT/P.18/Rev.1

5

Table 2
Programme costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant
Central

government
Provincial

government Beneficiaries Total
Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Grants (capitalization of
producers’ organizations) 9 390 52 - - 5 807 32 643 4 2 160 12 18 000 71

2. Goods, services and inputs 123 100 - - 10 3 338 97 - - 472 2
3. Consultancies (technical

assistance) 1 725 81 402 19 - - - - - - 2 126 8
4. Training 662 52 615 48 - - - - - - 1 277 5
5. Credit and guarantee funds 400 100 - - - - - - - - 400 2
6. Salaries and allowances - - - - 989 39 1 523 61 - - 2 512 10
7. Operating costs 0 - 0 - 193 29 467 71 - - 660 3

Total programme costs 12 300 48 1 017 4 7 000 28 2 972 12 2 160 9 25 448 100

C. Benefit summary and economic analysis
22. The programme will serve some 8,000 rural families (approximately 40,000

people), including 5,600 smallholder families and 2,400 indigenous families. Small-
scale producers, organized in approximately 160 producers’ organizations, including
48 indigenous communities, will generate the programme’s expected benefits.

23. The financial and economic evaluation indicates the activities’ viability at farm and
programme levels. The internal rate of return is 23.3 per cent, and the net present
value US$19.6 million.

D. Sustainability
24. The programme’s sustainability will be ensured by: (i) collaboration of producers’

organizations with processing companies in the goat basin forums; (ii) support to
beneficiary organizations that will continue operating after programme completion;
(iii) sector-wide support provided in component 1, including the vegetation
monitoring system and SSTC activities; (iv) environmental, climate change
adaptation and commercial support measures to be integrated into business plans;
and (v) linkage of participating companies to commercial financial institutions.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
25. The programme’s potential adverse impacts and risks of failing to achieve its

objectives are limited. The main risks include: (i) political and institutional risks,
which are low in view of the country’s stable poverty-reduction policy framework
and UCAR’s track record in implementing poverty reduction programmes;
(ii) possible delay in incorporating participating provinces into the programme,
which has been mitigated by their identification and participation in programme
design; (iii) companies’ difficulties in joining the programme, which will be reduced
by inviting them to participate in the goat basin forums, and by technical assistance
and loan guarantees; (iv) market risks, which are already low by virtue of observed
demand for goat products, will be further reduced by addressing supply and
marketing constraints; (v) technological and climatic risks, which will be mitigated
through local technical assistance and support to integration of climate-proofing
measures into business plans and participating companies’ operations; and
(vi) fiduciary risk: based on a 2015 Transparency International Corruption
Perceptions Index score of 32, and IFAD experience in the country, the
programme’s fiduciary risk has been rated as medium. However, the solid
experience and systems of UCAR, along with close implementation support from
IFAD, are considered sufficient to mitigate fiduciary risk.



EB 2016/LOT/P.18/Rev.1

6

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

26. The programme approach and implementation modalities are consistent with IFAD
strategies and policies. They specifically support IFAD’s fiduciary compliance and
are aligned with the IFAD Strategic Framework 2016-2025 and the policies on rural
finance, indigenous peoples, environment and natural resource management,
gender equality and women’s empowerment, and targeting.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
27. The programme is in line with government objectives and the Federal and

Participative Agri-food and Agribusiness Strategic Plan, 2010/2016 (PEA2). It is also
consistent with the recommendations of IFAD’s 2010 country programme
evaluation in seeking a programme approach, expanding the range of financial
services and introducing the use of grants to boost knowledge management.

Innovations and scaling upC.
28. The programme’s innovations include: (i) focusing on specific value chains with a

high incidence of poverty and sound commercial potential; (ii) bringing together
smallholder producers, companies and public administration in forums to plan the
development of goat value chains; (iii) integrating sector-support activities such as
market analysis and promotion and policy support; (iv) introducing systematic
natural resource monitoring; (v) widening the spectrum of rural financial services,
including financial education and loan guarantees for participating companies; and
(vi) SSTC to support market and policy development activities.

Policy engagementD.
29. The programme will support development of public policies to promote sustainable

smallholder goat breeding in Argentina and beyond by generating and
communicating evidence of the value chain development approach it applies. Best
practices will be learned and disseminated in the framework of the SSTC
programme.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
30. A financing agreement between the Argentine Republic and IFAD will constitute the

legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower/recipient. A
copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as appendix I.

31. The Argentine Republic is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

32. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
33. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Argentine Republic in the amount of twelve million three hundred thousand
dollars (US$12,300,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Argentine
Republic in the amount of one million seventeen thousand dollars
(US$1,017,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially
in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President





















































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the
Cooperative Republic of Guyana for the
Hinterland Environmentally Sustainable
Agricultural Development Project

Cooperative Republic of Guyana

Hinterland Environmentally Sustainable Agricultural
Development Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Cooperative Republic of Guyana

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture

Total project cost: US$11.15 million

Amount of IFAD loan: US$7.96 million

Amount of IFAD grant: US$0.5 million

Terms of IFAD loan: Blend: Maturity period of 25 years, including a grace
period of five years, with a fixed interest rate of 1.25 per
cent per annum plus a service charge of 0.75 per cent
per annum.

Contribution of borrower: US$2.43 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$270,000

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to Cooperative Republic of Guyana for the Hinterland Environmentally
Sustainable Agricultural Development Project, as contained in paragraph 59.

Proposed loan and grant to the Cooperative Republic of
Guyana for the Hinterland Environmentally Sustainable
Agricultural Development Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Situated on the northern coast of South America, Guyana borders the Atlantic

Ocean, Brazil, Suriname and Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela; it belongs to the
Guiana Shield region, part of the Amazon Biome. Guyana hosts a vast expanse of
primary tropical forest, freshwater resources and a unique savannah ecosystem. It
covers an area of 215,000 km2 with a population of 747,883. Indigenous peoples
account for more than three quarters of the population in regions 8 and 9
(75.9 per cent and 89.2 per cent, respectively) and about two thirds of the
population in region 1 (62.2 per cent).

2. The World Bank estimates that Guyana’s GDP, based on the Atlas Method, was
US$3,763 in 2014. According to the Economist Intelligence Unit, economic growth
is expected to reach 3.2 per cent in 2016 and 3.7 per cent in 2017 as substantial
new gold mining projects are launched.

3. Agriculture and rural development. Agriculture is a significant contributor to the
country’s development. It is predominantly undertaken by small-scale farmers and
indigenous people farming less than 5 ha of land. Cultivated crops include rice
(90,000 ha), sugar (48,000 ha) and coconut (25,000 ha); non-traditional crops
occupy between 30,000 and 40,000 ha while 158,473 ha are used for livestock.
Agricultural products, excluding forest products, make up approximately
31 per cent of total exports; the main exported commodities are rice and sugar.

4. Poverty, nutrition and food security. According to the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), since 1992, the proportion of households living
in moderate poverty (on US$2 per day) has declined from 43 per cent to
36.3 per cent, and extreme poverty has dropped from 28.7 per cent to
19.1 per cent. The outlook remains far less favourable for indigenous peoples,
77 per cent of whom are poor, and inhabitants of the hinterland, where three out of
four people are poor.

5. Studies show that household food security in hinterland region 9 is compromised;
the situation worsens during drought and flood seasons. A rising dependence on
remittances, driven by migration towards mining and logging areas, is negatively
affecting consumption patterns in indigenous areas. Changes in indigenous peoples’
diets (which include increased consumption of refined carbohydrates, processed
foods, sweetened and calorie-dense foods) are likely responsible for the rise in
chronic diseases in this region.

6. Main natural resource constraints for agriculture and rural people in
regions 1 and 9. Agriculture and rural livelihoods in regions 1 and 9 are affected
by increased variability in rainfall patterns. In region 9, severe floods and prolonged
dry spells, coupled with a lack of adequate water-management technologies and



EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1

2

low fertility of the savannah soil, are major challenges for agriculture and livestock.
In region 1, salt water intrusion is a major impact of climate change, which over
time will affect arable land and freshwater resources in coastal areas. Climate
change is affecting the sustainability of established production patterns in both
regions, and the transition to new production patterns needs to involve greater
adaptability to changing climatic and economic conditions. This will require access
to knowledge, investment and technologies for natural resource management,
which are currently lacking.

7. Economic constraints in regions 1 and 9. The remoteness of regions 1 and 9
remains a challenge for the generation of business and income-generation
opportunities. Poor transportation and telecommunication networks limit market
access and hinder these regions’ integration into the national economy. There is
also a lack of access to information, technology and energy needed to support
investments in productive activities, and promote adaptation to changing economic
and environmental conditions.

8. Main challenges. Persistent poverty and climate change are severely straining the
target group’s resilience and social cohesion. The capacity of hinterland
communities to respond to new economic and environmental challenges is further
limited by a lack of incentives for investments that reduce economic and climate
risks.

9. Opportunities to improve livelihoods of indigenous people and small
farmers in the project area. Despite these challenges, both regions offer
opportunities for improving the livelihoods of the target group and generating
income from agriculture and related activities.

10. In the long term, the Ministry of Agriculture intends to strengthen hinterland
agriculture by moving production away from traditional export products and from
coastal areas that are vulnerable to salinization. In the short term, consultations
and field visits in regions 1 and 9 have confirmed that these regions offer: (i) high
levels of human capital, including education, skills, motivation and entrepreneurial
attitude; (ii) widespread awareness of the need to improve livelihood strategies to
adapt to economic, environmental and climate challenges; (iii) appreciation of the
value of ecosystems and biodiversity; (iv) common land titles, strong community
governance and familiarity with participatory planning approaches; (v) local
markets and local public procurement, which provide opportunities for small and
medium-sized agricultural producers (with little competition from large businesses);
and (vi) producer groups (including women’s associations) that have established
partnerships with NGOs and local government agencies.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and the
COSOP

11. The favorable conditions highlighted above provide an opportunity for the project to
support rural households and communities in identifying and developing value
chains that generate new income opportunities and contribute to rural livelihood
diversification. Both regions offer viable opportunities to increase the
competitiveness, inclusiveness and sustainability of local value chains through
improvements in natural resources management, production, processing, storage,
quality-enhancing technologies and smallholder market access. Preliminary
consultations have identified the following value chains as possible targets for
development: cassava and its main by-products farine and cassava bread; peanuts,
fruit and livestock in region 9; and spices such as ginger, turmeric and black pepper
in region 1.

12. The project strategy will combine decentralized participatory community
development, natural resource management and value chain approaches to
strengthen livelihood resilience by increasing income-generating opportunities,



EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1

3

access to resilience-building assets and food and nutrition security. This strategy
will also support an inclusive participatory planning process that strengthens the
organizational capacities of communities and producer groups, and enhances
institutional coordination among national and local institutions.

13. The project is aligned with IFAD’s strategy for Guyana as defined in the country
strategy note. Previous IFAD projects in Guyana mainly operated in the coastal
region, focusing on strengthening producers’ capacity and expanding opportunities
to develop small-scale enterprises. The proposed project applies experience gained
in previous projects to remote hinterland areas largely populated by indigenous
peoples. Through this strategy, IFAD supports the Government of Guyana in its
efforts to bridge the coast-hinterland divide and reduce poverty in isolated rural
communities.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
14. The project will be carried out in all sub-regions of region 9 and in the Mabaruma

and Moruca sub-regions of region 1. Beneficiaries will be located in approximately
80 of the 128 communities in regions 1 and 9 (60 communities in region 9 and 20
communities in region 1). Considering the remoteness, vastness and low population
density of region 9, a phased implementation approach will be adopted for this
region. The project will initially focus on North Rupununi in order to capitalize on
government efforts to exploit this sub-region’s significant agricultural potential.
Lessons learned from project implementation in North Rupununi will later be applied
to Central and South Rupununi. The target group will include 6,000 poor
households, equivalent to 94 per cent of all poor households in the project area. At
least 15 per cent of these households (900) will be headed by women, reflecting
the overall proportion of women-headed households in the project area.

15. These 6,000 households represent approximately 30,000 direct and indirect
beneficiaries, comprising men and women of different age groups. At least
75 per cent of project beneficiaries will be from indigenous groups. At least
30 per cent will be between 15 and 44 years old, and at least 50 per cent will be
women. As a result of the project’s phased approach, figures for the target
population may be revised at the midterm review.

B. Project development objective
16. The development objective of the project, responding to the priorities identified in

the country strategy note, is improved livelihood resilience through income
generation, access to assets, improved nutrition and adaptation to climate
variability.

17. Livelihood resilience will be strengthened by the following activities:

(a) Increasing income-generating opportunities through the identification of
commodities drives the inclusion of small farmers in markets, increases local
demand for services and labour, and supports beneficiaries’ inclusive and
informed participation in market opportunities that improve household
income.

(b) Improving access to public goods, knowledge and technologies builds
community resilience and creates an enabling environment for production
through: technology, knowledge and information for better planning and
natural resource management; improved water availability for agriculture and
human consumption; better soil-management practices; diffusion of
information and communications technologies; adoption of renewable energy;
and valuation of agro-biodiversity.

(c) Enhancing food security and nutrition identifies and promotes
commodities, including crops, fish and forest products that sustainably



EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1

4

improve household diets and increase nutrition awareness through nutrition
education and behaviour change activities, including food-based dietary
guidelines.

C. Components/outcomes
18. Component 1. This component aims to support village and community councils

(in region 9), value chain roundtables (in region 1) and regional development
councils in planning and prioritizing investments in local value chains1 and resilient
communities. As a result, communities and producer groups will have strengthened
capacities to identify investment opportunities and manage economic and climate
change risks. The main instruments to be developed through this component are
community production development plans for region 9 and value chain action plans
for region 1. These medium-term plans will be the basis for developing three types
of investment plans to be implemented with project support: public/collective
investment plans (P/CIPs), community training plans (CTPs) and business plans.

19. Component 2. While component 1 will provide training, studies and
capacity-building needed to develop investment plans, component 2 will support
these plans’ implementation. Under component 2, an investment fund will be
established to finance public and common goods and services, through
non-reimbursable mechanisms, to be included in each type of investment plan.
They will comprise: (i) investments that reduce climate and investment risks
(included in P/CIPs); (ii) training, capacity-building and awareness-raising
activities, and related research that contributes to a reduction in climate, economic
and nutritional risks (included in CTPs); and (iii) technical assistance and services
to support the diffusion of knowledge, technologies and capacities that improve
livelihood resilience by reducing climate, economic and nutritional risks (included in
business plans).

20. Component 3. The third component will establish management and administrative
procedures, including accounting and auditing, monitoring and evaluation
mechanisms in accordance with IFAD and national guidelines. Evidence-based
knowledge products will be developed on the basis of project experience in order to
extract lessons and best practices, scale up innovative solutions and achieve better
outcomes and greater impact from development resources.

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

21. The project strategy aims to improve the target group’s livelihood resilience by
addressing major risks arising from contextual challenges in the project area. Since
natural resources and local governance systems are threatened by these economic
and environmental risks, in order to strengthen the resilience of target
communities, the prioritization of opportunities and the planning of investments and
activities will be carried out through a participatory process, which will include local
actors and governing bodies.

B. Organizational framework
22. The lead agency for the implementation of the hinterland project will be the

Ministry of Agriculture through its Agriculture Sector Development Unit (ASDU). For
activities such as consultative village planning, agricultural technology transfer,
technical assistance, natural resource management and regional investment
planning, the Ministry of Agriculture will be assisted by the Ministries of Indigenous
People’s Affairs, Natural Resources, Communities and Business, other government
agencies, NGOs, community-based organizations, academia and individual service
providers.

1 In region 1, there is also significant potential for developing linkages to international markets; this is particularly true for
spices such as ginger and turmeric.



EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1

5

23. The project management unit will comprise an office at the Ministry of Agriculture in
Georgetown and regional offices in regions 1 and 9. A national steering committee
and regional management committees will be established to provide policy
direction, support implementation, advise on annual workplans and budgets, and
encourage collaboration among stakeholders.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

24. The project will provide support to strengthen the capacity of the Ministry of
Agriculture’s Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) Unit and ensure that project
monitoring is linked to the Ministry’s performance monitoring and Agriculture
Strategy indicators. M&E will be conducted using a participatory approach; data
collection will be kept simple and brief, focusing on the reliability and usefulness of
collected data. Evidence-based knowledge products will be developed to extract
lessons and best practices from project experiences, replicate innovative solutions,
maximize outcomes and impact from development resources, and disseminate
knowledge to support national, regional and local decision-making and policy
processes. A baseline study will be carried out immediately following the approval
of the financing agreement and before implementation.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
25. Financial management. Financial management and procurement for the project

will be undertaken by ASDU, which has adequate capacity, an appropriate
accounting system and extensive experience in implementing internationally funded
projects, including the IFAD-funded Rural Enterprise and Agricultural Development
Project. A qualified finance officer will be recruited through a competitive process as
a condition of disbursement for the loan and grant. Due to the remoteness of
project areas, an administrative/finance officer will be recruited at each regional
office through a competitive process and will be responsible for performing
administrative and basic accounting functions.

26. Flow of funds. The borrower will open a designated account in United States
dollars in the Central Bank of Guyana exclusively for the loan and grant, in which
advance funds will be deposited and from which funds will be transferred to the
project operational account in Guyanese dollars.

27. Retroactive financing. As an exception to section 4.08(a)(ii) of the General
Conditions for Agricultural Development Financing, specific eligible expenditures
incurred from the date of approval by the Executive Board until the date of entry
into force of the financing agreement will be considered eligible up to the amount of
US$300,000 in accordance with and as specified in the financing agreement. These
eligible expenditures will consist of the costs related to: the detailed value chains
study for spices in region 1; a state of food and agriculture study in the Mabaruma
and Moruca sub-regions of region 1; and the hiring of personnel.

28. Procurement. Procurement of goods and services will be carried out by ASDU in
line with national regulations, IFAD’s Project Procurement Guidelines and the
provisions of the financing agreement. A procurement officer, exclusively assigned
to the hinterland project, will be hired by ASDU.

29. Audit. Annual consolidated financial statements for the project will be
independently audited pursuant to the agreed terms of reference and in accordance
with International Standards on Auditing and IFAD's guidelines on project audits. In
line with the 2004 Guyana Audit Act, the Auditor General shall be responsible for
conducting financial, compliance, performance and value-for-money audits of the
accounts of all projects funded by loans or grants from any foreign state or
organization. The Guyana Auditor General Audit Office will audit the project
financial statements. Annual audit reports will be submitted to IFAD within six
months of the end of each fiscal year.



EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1

6

E. Supervision
30. IFAD will directly supervise the project, complemented by implementation-support

missions. One supervision mission will be planned each year. The first supervision
mission, undertaken approximately six months after project effectiveness, will
monitor progress against the timeframe defined in the implementation plan, and
will assess fiduciary aspects, expenditures, counterpart contributions of funds and
compliance with the financing agreement. Implementation-support missions will be
planned to cover the issues recommended by supervision missions.

IV. Project costs, financing, and benefits
A. Project costs
31. The total cost of the project is US$11.14 million over a period of six years. Of this

total, US$10.54 million (95 per cent) are baseline costs and US$610,000 (5 per cent)
are physical and price contingencies.
Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component

IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries
Borrower/

counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Strengthening of
community's and
producer groups'
investment planning 2 142 71 247 8 637 21 3 025

2. Implementation of
investment plans 4 755 77 265 4 1 139 18 6 159

3. Project and
knowledge
management, and
coordination 1 055 54 253 13 650 33 1 959

Total 7 952 71 500 4 265 2 2 426 22 11 143

B. Project financing
32. The project will be financed by: (i) the Government, which will provide

US$2.43 million in cash and in-kind – equal to 22 per cent of the total cost;
(ii) IFAD in the amount of US$8.45 million (total performance-based allocation
system (PBAS) allocation 2016-2018), 76 per cent of the total cost, including a loan
of US$7.95 million and a grant of US$500,000; and (iii) beneficiaries, who will
contribute US$270,000 – 2 per cent of the total cost. Some of the categories of
expenditure indicated in table 2 below may be merged in the financing agreement.
Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries
Borrower/

counterpart Total Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Vehicles and equipment 188 84 36 16 224 2
2. Training 614 84 117 16 731 7
3. Consultancy services 2 904 66 500 11 982 22 4 385 39
4. Grants (for sub-projects) 3 202 78 265 6 660 16 4 128 37
5. Salaries 534 50 534 50 1 068 10
6. Operating expenses 510 84 97 16 607 5

Total 7 952 71 500 4 265 2 2 426 22 11 143 100



EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1

7

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
33. Financial analysis. To verify the financial viability of project activities, the flow of

annual incremental net benefits was calculated over a period of ten years, both for
rural households’ agricultural production and for producer groups’ enterprises. All
models confirmed increases in benefits, family net income, sales and labour.
Financial viability was positive in all models, with financial internal rates of return
between 23 per cent and 312 per cent.

34. Economic analysis. Economic viability indicators are positive, with an economic
internal rate of return of 21 per cent and an expected net present value of
US$6.97 million. Viability indicators are not highly sensitive to the reduction of
benefits and to delays in obtaining them; these indicators are moderately sensitive
to cost increases.

D. Sustainability
35. Political and institutional sustainability. The project is aligned with the national

policy framework, which: highlights the development of hinterland agriculture;
seeks to reduce the poverty and isolation of indigenous communities; and supports
the adoption of environmentally sustainable development. Coordination between
national government agencies and local authorities is already taking place in region
9, and the project will contribute to dialogue and coordination between government
agencies, indigenous communities, international donors and civil society
organizations operating in hinterland areas.

36. Sustainability, upscaling and replication. Previous IFAD projects in Guyana
mostly concentrated on coastal areas and communities. This project builds upon
and adapts IFAD’s approach to the unique conditions in the hinterland, and paves
the way for replication and scaling up in other remote areas of the country with
similar conditions. Of particular relevance is the phased implementation approach
adopted for region 1, where a state of food and agriculture study will be conducted
in the first year of the project. The knowledge and lessons learned in Mabaruma
and Moruca sub-regions can be used to replicate the project in other areas of
region 1. Using a participatory planning approach, the project will build upon the
planning capacity developed in villages that have already established community
development plans, and it will strengthen skills and capacities for climate- and
nutrition-sensitive planning.

37. Food security and nutritional quality. Awareness-raising activities and training
materials on nutritional quality will also be created through the project.

38. Environmental sustainability. The adoption of climate-resilient measures such as
the identification of drought-tolerant and climate-resilient crop varieties, and the
definition of climate-proof agricultural technologies will sustain productivity and
quality improvements. The state of food and agriculture study in region 1 will fill
the knowledge gap on environmental and socio-economic conditions in the region,
thus contributing to better planning.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
39. The risks identified during the project design include economic risks,

climate-change risks, social risks and institutional risks.

40. Economic risks include excessive specialization and competition for labour from
other sectors. These risks will be mitigated through training and support activities
that build awareness of specialization risks and help communities and producers’
groups to integrate new income-generating activities into diversified livelihood
strategies. The project will promote the strengthening of local value chains and
increase access to information needed for target households’ equitable participation
in agricultural markets. It will also provide technical assistance and investment
incentives to maximize incomes and employment.



EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1

8

41. Climate-change risks will be addressed through support for investments in public
and collective goods included in P/CIPs and CTPs that increase access to
knowledge, technology and information for improved water and natural resource
management. The project will promote the adoption of good natural resource
management practices and measures for adapting to climate change within
business plans. Business plans will also include mitigation strategies to reduce the
negative effects of productive specialization on climate change resilience and
nutrition through the use of agro-biodiversity and the diversification of livelihoods.

42. Social risks will be reduced through the adoption of free, prior and informed
consent plans, and by strengthening participatory community planning. The
participation of vulnerable groups, including women and youth, will be promoted
through the targeting strategy, the inclusion of skills development and training for
youth and women in CTPs, and by prioritizing business plans that involve vulnerable
groups.

43. Risks to nutrition and food security will be addressed through training and technical
assistance that strengthens the links between income generation and nutrition
quality in order to: (i) help households to make more informed dietary choices;
(ii) increase the adoption of dietary recommendations; and (iii) increase the
richness, variety and nutritional quality of the local food system.

44. Institutional risks relate to limited regional coordination among stakeholders and to
the weak organizational capacities of communities and producer groups. The
project will strengthen national and regional coordination through its national
steering committee and regional management committee, facilitating linkages
among ministries, other government agencies and programmes, NGOs and other
projects.

45. Based on Guyana’s 2015 Transparency International Corruption Perceptions Index
score of 29 and public financial management assessments, the project’s fiduciary
risk has been rated as medium. The measures highlighted in section III.D of this
report are considered sufficient to mitigate any fiduciary risks.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

46. IFAD’s target group comprises rural people living in poverty and experiencing food
insecurity; IFAD proactively strives to reach extremely poor people (in line with
Sustainable Development Goal 1) with the potential to benefit from improved
access to agricultural production and rural income generation. In the case of
Guyana, poor people principally live in hinterland areas. Therefore, the geographical
focus of this project is in regions 1 and 9 – hinterland areas where indigenous
peoples constitute the majority of the population. Targeting will be monitored using
participatory monitoring and evaluation, and will be assessed at mid-term review.

47. To meet the requirements of IFAD’s demand–driven and consultative targeting
approach, participatory mapping of resource use and economic activities will be
carried out under component 1. IFAD will work with the Government and other
stakeholders to establish a shared understanding of the causes poverty and
exclusion in hinterland areas.

48. Compliance with IFAD policies for environment and natural resource
management. The project complies with IFAD’s Climate and Natural Resources
Management Policy, specifically principles 3 and 4, and will adopt an integrated
climate-smart approach. Local value chains will be identified through participatory
processes to ensure that their development contributes to increasing community-
and household-level resilience to climate change. Priority will be given to initiatives
that promote climate-related disaster risk reduction and management, and the
establishment of agroecological systems. The project will also provide technical



EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1

9

assistance for the incorporation of technologies and good practices for better
national resource management and climate-change adaptation into investment
plans.

49. Compliance with IFAD’s Policy on Gender Equality and Women’s
Empowerment. The hinterland project is aligned with IFAD’s Policy on Gender
Equality and Women’s Empowerment through a participatory approach designed to
ensure that the voices of different rural population segments are equally heard and
valued. Specific gender actions to ensure gender equity have been included in the
project design and budget. By working with entire households, the project will
leverage the complementary knowledge and skills of women and men (in line with
Strategic Objective 2).

50. Compliance with IFAD’s Nutrition Action Plan 2016-2018. The project is
nutrition sensitive as defined in the IFAD Nutrition Action Plan 2016-2018. It
contributes to families’ improved food and nutrition security by linking local food
production with the improved nutritional quality of diets.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
51. The project is aligned with the national policy framework, which highlights the

development of hinterland agriculture; reduction of poverty and isolation in
indigenous communities; and adoption of environmentally sustainable development
strategies to mitigate increased threats from climate change.

52. In region 9, the project will harness complementarities with the Inter-American
Development Bank (IDB) Sustainable Agricultural Development Project. This project
aims to increase the productivity of the agricultural sector while maintaining the
sustainable and climate-resilient use of natural resources in regions 5, 9 and 10.
IDB will support the Ministry of Agriculture in the preparation and implementation
of an extension strategy that includes incentives for small farmers to adopt
technologies for cassava, peanuts, livestock, orchards and pastures. To enhance
synergies and improve national and regional coordination, the two projects will use
the same national steering committee and regional management committee in
region 9. Collaboration will also be sought with IDB to utilize information and
communication technologies in rural areas.

53. The project will be harmonized with the IDB multilateral investment fund project
Leveraging Natural Capital in the Rupununi Region (region 9). This project aims to
create and strengthen environmentally sustainable local-level initiatives, and
enhance market access for community-based enterprises. It will be also
harmonized with Guyana’s Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest
Degradation Plus Investment Fund, which aims to invest in low-carbon approaches
identified in the Low Carbon Development Strategy. In addition, collaboration will
be sought with the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)
on the state of food and agriculture study in region 1, and to support
implementation of the Integrated Sustainable Agriculture Development Strategy for
region 9 2015-2020 (developed by the Ministry of Agriculture, FAO and
Conservation International).

Innovations and scaling upC.
54. Previous IFAD projects in Guyana were concentrated in coastal areas. This project

builds upon and adapts IFAD’s approach to the unique conditions in the hinterland,
and paves the way for replication and scaling up in other remote areas of the
country with similar conditions.

Policy engagementD.
55. The project, which will be mainly implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture, is

aligned with government decentralization strategies involving local governments
and indigenous peoples’ institutions through the Ministries of Communities and



EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1

10

Indigenous Peoples’ Affairs (in partnership with other government agencies,
international donors and international NGOs). Coordination between national
government agencies and local authorities is already taking place in region 9; closer
cooperation will be sought throughout the project to strengthen capacities within
the Government and civil society for natural resource management, nutrition- and
climate-sensitive planning.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
56. A project financing agreement between the Cooperative Republic of Guyana and

IFAD will constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached in
appendix I.

57. The Cooperative Republic of Guyana is empowered under its laws to receive
financing from IFAD.

58. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
59. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on blend terms to the
Cooperative Republic of Guyana in the amount of seven million nine hundred
and sixty thousand United States dollars (US$7,960,000), and upon such
terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms
and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Cooperative
Republic of Guyana in the amount of five hundred thousand United States
dollars (US$500,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President
















































President’s report

Proposed grant to the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic
Strategic Support for Food Security and
Nutrition Project – Global Agriculture and
Food Security Program (GAFSP) funds


Lao People’s Democratic Republic

Strategic Support for Food Security and Nutrition Project
– Global Agriculture and Food Security Program (GAFSP)
funds

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Recipient: Ministry of Finance

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry

Total project cost: US$38.8 million

Amount of Global Agriculture and Food
Security Program (GAFSP) grant funds:

US$24 million
(supervised by IFAD)

US$6 million
(supervised by the World Food Programme [WFP])

Amount of cofinancing: Private sector: US$459,000

Contribution of recipient: US$5.4 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$2.9 million

Appraising institutions: IFAD and the GAFSP steering committee

Cooperating institutions: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
grant to the Lao People’s Democratic Republic for the Strategic Support for Food
Security and Nutrition Project, as contained in paragraph 37.

Proposed grant to the Lao People’s Democratic Republic
for the Strategic Support for Food Security and Nutrition
Project – Global Agriculture and Food Security Program
(GAFSP) funds

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Over the last two decades, the economy of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic

has experienced an average annual growth rate of 7 per cent, sustained by
macroeconomic liberalization, market-based reforms and large flows of foreign
direct investment into natural resource-based industries (such as mining and
hydroelectricity) and agriculture.

2. While the gross domestic product (GDP) share of agriculture declined from
53 per cent to 27.5 per cent between 2000 and 2014, this sector remains the
largest source of employment, with more than 70 per cent of the population
deriving its livelihoods from agriculture. This indicates that economic growth has
created few jobs in other sectors. The agriculture sector’s annual growth rate
averaged nearly 5 per cent at the end of the 1990s, but declined to just 2 per cent
in 2012. Much of the country’s growth has resulted from the expansion of
cultivation areas to accommodate a rural workforce that is growing by 2.5 per cent
per year. But overall productivity is still low in the farming sector and per capita
income is less than half the national average. Most of the country’s
650,000 farming households are engaged in subsistence and low-productivity
agriculture.

3. Economic growth has resulted in a steady decline of the national poverty index,
which dropped from 46 per cent of the population in the mid-1990s to 23 per cent
in 2012. Poverty and extreme poverty are most common in mountainous regions,
where the majority of the country’s indigenous peoples live. In upland areas, the
national poverty rate is as high as 43 per cent, compared with 28 per cent in the
lowlands. The country moved from a rice deficit in 1996 to surplus production in
2006. However, accessibility to rice and protein sources is highly contingent upon
geography and income. Malnutrition is high, with 44 per cent of children under 5 in
rural areas suffering from stunting (chronic undernutrition). The communities most
prone to undernutrition live in upland areas, where household economic activities
are increasingly constrained by unsustainable farming practices, large-scale land
concessions, limited adaptation to climate change and a lack of financing, access to
markets and support services.

4. In June 2015, the Global Agriculture and Food Security Program (GAFSP) – a multi-
donor financing facility – approved a US$30 million proposal presented by the
Government of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic in support of food security and
nutrition. IFAD was selected as the supervising entity for the investment and the
World Food Programme (WFP) was chosen as the supervising entity for technical
assistance.



EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

2

5. According to the provisions of the GAFSP Trust Fund transfer agreement entered
into by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) (as
trustee) and IFAD, IBRD shall transfer to IFAD the funds approved by the GAFSP
steering committee for project implementation. These funds shall be used by IFAD
in accordance with its policies and procedures, and in line with the decisions of the
GAFSP steering committee as specified in the approved project document.

6. In line with the transfer agreement, IFAD shall enter into an agreement with the
Government of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic in accordance with the policies
and procedures of the Fund.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
results-based COSOP

7. The GAFSP grant for the Strategic Support for Food Security and Nutrition Project
(SSFSNP) is designed to pilot new approaches and technologies, and scale up
existing technologies and systems to accelerate the Government’s progress towards
national food security and improved nutrition. The SSFSNP is one of the first
development projects in the country to comprehensively address the agricultural
constraints to improved nutrition within the framework of the convergence
approach, as stipulated in the National Nutrition Strategy to 2025 and Plan of
Action 2016-2020 (NNSPA).

8. Project interventions will focus on the implementation of four nutrition-sensitive
agricultural activities among the NNSPA’s 22 priority interventions. Other
development partners’ projects and government programmes are addressing the
remaining interventions. The project will focus on building an enabling environment
for sustainable market-led improvements in nutrition-rich and diverse agricultural
production, and rural employment through: (i) participatory, bottom-up
village-level public investment planning and implementation; (ii) the empowerment
of women to improve family diets, especially during the first 1,000 days of life;
(iii) the development of farmer organizations linking men and women farmers to
markets; (iv) the application of a demand-driven extension approach emphasizing
decentralized farmer-to-farmer and enterprise-to-farmer extension; and (v) support
for private agribusiness investment, seeking business models that are clearly
aligned with both development and growth objectives. In addition, the project will
promote “green technology”, with all interventions having a neutral or positive
impact on communities’ ability to adapt to climate change.

9. The financing for SSFSNP is in line with the country strategic opportunities
programme (COSOP) 2011–2016, which comprises three strategic objectives:
(i) community-based access to and management of land and natural resources;
(ii) access to advisory services and inputs for sustainable, adaptive and integrated
farming systems; and (iii) access to markets.

II. Project Description
A. Project area and target group
10. Project area: The project will be implemented in 12 districts and approximately

400 villages in the four provinces of Oudomxay, Phongsali, Xiangkhouang and
Houaphan in the northern part of the country. The villages will be selected based
on: (i) poverty data; (ii) potential for agriculture-led growth, including expansion of
the agriculture and forest resource base, irrigation development and market
access; (iii) commitment of village leadership; (iv) an assessment of climate
change vulnerability; and (v) opportunities for convergence with other ongoing or
planned projects.

11. Target population: The target group will comprise poor rural households in the
400 selected villages. To ensure that women have equal and priority access to
project benefits, SSFSNP will include measures to increase women’s participation



EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

3

and influence in their communities, including equal gender representation in
SSFSNP village development committees.

B. Project development objective
12. The goal of the project is to reduce extreme poverty and malnutrition in the poorest

communities. The development objective is to ensure that improved and diversified
agricultural production and household nutrition enhance livelihoods and well-being.

C. Components/outcomes
13. The project has three main components as well as a component for project

management:

Component 1: Strengthened public services. This component will underpin the
development of government capacities, procedures and technical skills to support –
and converge – community implementation of selected national nutrition strategy
interventions. It comprises: (i) the establishment of a tiered project planning,
supervision, monitoring and knowledge management system within the Ministry of
Agriculture and Forestry; and (ii) strengthening the capacities of district
departments of agricultural extension, district technical service centres and the
National Agriculture and Forestry Research Institute to deliver sustainable
climate-adapted and nutrition-sensitive agriculture and natural resource
management technologies and training.

Component 2: Community-driven agriculture-based nutrition interventions.
This component will be supervised by WFP. It has two subcomponents:

(i) Planning for improved nutritional outcomes. This comprises support for
multi-sector convergence planning at the district level to accelerate the
implementation of the NNSPA. It includes the mapping of various
stakeholders’ programmes and infrastructure assets to identify development
gaps at the village level. Simultaneously, the project will support improved
village development planning by building the capacity of village stakeholders
to lead the development process in their communities. The preparation of
three-year multi-sector, nutrition-sensitive village development plans (VDPs)
will be supported by experienced community planning service providers.

(ii) Women-led improvement in household nutrition. This encompasses the
rollout of a social behavioural change communication programme jointly
supported by SSFSNP and the World Bank-financed Health Governance and
Nutrition Development Project in all project villages. It aims to encourage
nutrition-enhancing behaviours that maximize the benefit of the project’s
investments in the four NNSPA agriculture interventions. The project will
support the establishment of monthly village-level “farmer nutrition schools”
to balance agricultural production, wild food collection and food purchase
throughout all seasons of the year. It will enable villages to increase the
availability of food for improved dietary diversity.

Component 3: Sustainable and inclusive market-driven partnerships. This
component includes two subcomponents:

(i) Profitable investment in nutrient-sensitive, climate-adapted
agriculture. The project will identify commodities that have investment
potential and that comply with the provincial socioeconomic development
plans. Commodities will be selected based on: their potential for commercial
production of nutritious food for export or import substitution; and the
likelihood of poor rural households to invest in increasing their production and
expanding employment. Strategic investment plans will be prepared in all
selected communities. These plans will inform the VDP process and provide a
framework for forming agriculture production groups and inviting
entrepreneurs to invest in the project area. Based on this exercise, the project



EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

4

will co-finance VDP-identified communities’ and farmer organizations’
investments in profitable and sustainable, nutrient-sensitive agricultural
production through a village development fund.

(ii) Linking Farmers to markets. With support from the Ministry of Planning
and Investment, and the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry, the project will
include a review of the current contract farming programme in the project
area and propose amendments to government legislation, regulations and
implementation procedures underpinning contract farming agreements. The
aim is to establish more equitable and productive agreements that benefit
farmers and investors alike. This will include technical assistance in support
of improved contract farming policies. Based on this experience, the project
will pilot the use of public-private partnership funding to promote investments
and job opportunities among rural enterprises and households.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
14. The SSFSNP will be implemented over a six-year period. Nutrition has been

mainstreamed into all three project components, and each activity will contribute to
improved nutrition. Simultaneous actions on food, childcare and feeding practices,
access to quality health care and water and sanitation will be undertaken for
greatest impact. The management structure will be based on the lessons learned
through previous IFAD projects in the country and the region, and will avoid parallel
management systems while implementing transparent mechanisms for financial
management and fund transfer.

B. Organizational framework
15. A national project steering committee will be responsible for overall direction of the

project and for the convergence of SSFSNP activities with those of other
development partners. This committee will comprise representatives from the
Ministries of Agriculture and Forestry; Finance; Planning and Investment; and
Health and from the National Chamber of Commerce and Industry, in addition to
the four provincial governors or vice-governors. It will be co-chaired by the Vice-
Ministers of Agriculture and Forestry, and Health. Steering committees will also be
established at the provincial level. Through its Department of Planning and
Cooperation, the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry will be the lead agency, with
overall responsibility for project implementation. This ministry will delegate
responsibilities to district administrations and to the national project coordination
office (NPCO) based in Vientiane. The NPCO will be supported by an internationally
recruited chief technical advisor.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

16. Planning, monitoring and evaluation. The project’s monitoring and evaluation
system will: (i) guide project implementation through the assessment and analysis
of project outputs, outcomes and impacts on poor households’ nutrition and
livelihoods; and (ii) share knowledge by capturing lessons learned, good practices
and successful innovations, and publishing them on knowledge platforms. The
system will monitor both operational and financial aspects of the project.

17. Learning and knowledge management. The project’s knowledge management
and learning processes will: identify, analyse, document and share knowledge,
support innovation dissemination; identify issues for advocacy with policymakers;
and provide information to support scaling up. This will include: (i) study tours,
discussions and workshops for project and ministry staff at the national and district
levels to promote nutrition-rich upland agriculture initiatives; and (ii) various



EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

5

formats for dissemination of results, including farmer-to-farmer and enterprise-to-
farmer extension.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
18. Financial Management. As custodian of funds in the project account, the NPCO

will be responsible for project financial management. The NPCO will also be
accountable to the Government and IFAD for the proper use of funds in line with
the legal agreements and contractual arrangements for service providers. It will
provide detailed financial statements of project operations, resources and
expenditures for each fiscal year in accordance with standards and procedures
acceptable to IFAD. The financial management assessment of the project rated the
fiduciary risk as high. Mitigation measures will include close supervision, support
and oversight from the IFAD subregional office for: (i) the installation of
professional accounting software; (ii) the recruitment  of competent and qualified
financial management staff; (iii) the development of a financial manual integrating
controls linked to operations; (iv) bi-annual supervision missions from the
subregional office; and (vi) a control framework integrating periodic internal audits
and independent external audits.

19. Flow of funds. Project funding will flow from the GAFSP account to IFAD and WFP
in accordance with their assigned roles and established legal agreements. For
IFAD-managed funds (GAFSP grant), the Ministry of Finance shall open a
designated account denominated in United States dollars in the Central Bank of the
Lao People’s Democratic Republic. The designated account will be maintained and
managed by the Ministry of Finance. IFAD will advance funds to the designated
account in accordance with imprest account modalities.

20. The NPCO shall open and maintain a designated account denominated in Lao kips
(LAK) for project operations. The NPCO will submit replenishment requests to IFAD
through the Ministry of Finance with appropriate supporting documentation.

21. Procurement. The procurement of goods, works and consulting services financed
through this project will be carried out in accordance with IFAD Procurement
Guidelines. For component 2, WFP’s procurement rules will apply. National
procurement procedures and regulations will be applied provided that they are
consistent with IFAD’s guidelines.

22. Governance. The NPCO will prepare a project framework for investment
transparency and publicity. This framework will include provisions to ensure that
procurement (whether carried out by the districts or by the NPCO) is carried out in
accordance with IFAD rules and specifications. Measures will include: (i) the
publication of all procurements, calls for proposals, contract awards and business
partnership details in local newspapers and at district and provincial offices;
(ii) participation of end user representatives in bid assessments; and (iii) prompt
communication with bidders. The framework will also include an internal code of
conduct to be signed by all staff engaged in project implementation.

E. Supervision
23. The project will be jointly supervised by IFAD and WFP. WFP will focus on

component 2 while IFAD will supervise the remaining components and provide
overall financial management. A joint midterm review will be organized by the
government, IFAD and WFP before the end of 2018.



EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

6

IV. Project costs, financing, and benefits
A. Project costs
24. The total cost for the project is estimated at US$38.8 million as indicated in Table 1.

Table 1
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(In thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

GAFSP
IFAD

GAFSP
WFP

Government–
parallel

investment Private sector Beneficiaries Government Total
Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Civil works 318 86.1 - - - - - - 51 13.9 370
2. Vehicles 1 089 100 - - - - - - - - 1 089
3. Equipment 477 100 - - - - - - - - 477
4. Agricultural inputs 865 58.9 73 5 - - - - - - 531 36.1 1 469
5. Matching grant 13 881 72.9 1 800 9.5 459 2.4 2 900 15.2 - - 19 040
6. National technical

assistance 2 176 47.2 1 775 38.5 - - - - - - 658 14.3 4 608
7. International technical

assistance 362 26.5 1 003 73.5 - - - - - - - - 1 364
8. Capacity-building and

learning 1 714 35.2 3 150 64.8 - - - - - - - - 4 864
9. Salaries and

allowances 1 292 42.0 - - - - -- - 1 787 58.0 3 078
10. Other operating costs 1 827 75.0 - - - - - - 609 25.0 2 435

Total 24 000 61.9 6 000 15.5 1 800 4.6 459 1.2 2 900 7.5 3 635 9.4 38 794

B. Project financing
25. The project will be financed by a GAFSP grant of US$30 million. The private sector

is expected to contribute US$459,000 and beneficiaries will provide US$2.9 million.
The Government’s contribution is estimated at US$5.4 million comprising taxes,
duties, infrastructure, land use registration and project management staff costs. Of
the total US$30 million in GAFSP funding, IFAD will manage US$24 million
(components 1 and 3) and WFP will manage US$6 million (component 2 and
technical assistance under component 1). See table 2 for costs by component and
financier.
Table 2
Project costs by component and financier
(In thousands of United States dollars)

GAFSP
IFAD

GAFSP
WFP

Government
– parallel

investment
Private
sector Beneficiaries Government Total

Component Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount
1. Strengthened public

services 3 285 1 003 -- -- - 265 4 552
2. Community-driven

agriculture-based
nutrition interventions - 4 997 - - - 444 5 441

3. Sustainable and
inclusive market-
driven partnerships 16 167 - 1 800 459 2 900 525 21 851

4. Project
management 4 548 - - - - 2 402 6 950

Total 24 000 6 000 1 800 459 2 900 3 635 38 794

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
26. The cost-benefit analysis of the project is based upon the connections among

nutrition, education and income. The analysis compares the discounted stream of
incremental expected lifetime income to the discounted stream of SSFSNP costs. It
is assumed that the project interventions will impact beneficiary children’s ability to
complete school and earn higher wages in their adult lives. The overall project



EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

7

economic rate of return is 8.7 per cent. The cost-benefit ratio of 2.92 indicates a
return of approximately US$3 for every US$1 invested. The sensitivity analysis
indicates a robust economic internal rate of return.

27. The project will target at least 400 villages – or 34,000 households. Assuming a
60 per cent success rate, the SSFSNP will lift approximately 20,400 households out
of poverty by project end. Direct benefits are expected to include diversification of
homestead food production, investments in agricultural production infrastructure,
and improved farming system productivity. These improvements will include: the
introduction of small and micro-irrigation; the introduction of forage and cash crops
into crop rotations; improved upland and lowland rice production; the introduction
of livestock enterprises such as fish and pigs; and expanded harvesting and
processing activities.

D. Sustainability
28. The project emphasizes capacity-building of public institutions from the village to

the national levels. This investment in public capacity will enable sustainable food
and nutrition security activities to remain embedded within the country’s civil
service and the society it serves. Once developed, public-sector capacity can be
expanded throughout the country as systems improve in the target provinces and
districts. The project will also emphasize the development of self-sustaining
community-based organizations and village users’ groups, which will play an
important role in the implementation and ongoing management of project activities.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
29. The main risks to this project’s success are in the areas of institutions, markets and

policy. Institutional risks include the prolonged approval processes and weak
technical capacities of public agencies. Mitigation measures include the
establishment of clear criteria and formats for all planning processes, and the
rollout of annual capacity-assessment and capacity-development plans. Market
risks include volatile commodity prices and difficulties in forging public-private
partnerships because of the dispersed and small-scale nature of poor farmers’
production. To mitigate these risks, the project will promote diversified production
and the delivery of market information at the local level, and provide training for
communities and farmer groups in order to aggregate production and improve
quality. Policy risks include the limited application of national contract-farming
frameworks and limited awareness of climate-change policies. Mitigation comprises
continuous policy dialogue at the national and provincial levels, with an emphasis
on practical approaches for contract farming arrangements and climate-change
adaptation.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
30. The project design is guided by the IFAD’s policies and strategies on targeting,

gender, indigenous peoples, environment and natural resource management, and
private sector engagement. In terms of environmental impact, the majority of
activities fall under Category C, while a limited number are classified under
Category B. The project is also in line with the 2011-2015 COSOP for the Lao
People’s Democratic Republic.

B. Alignment and harmonization
31. As noted above, the SSFSNP will be fully aligned with government priorities and

GAFSP targets, and implemented in the context of IFAD’s COSOP for the country. In
addition, the project will be aligned with regional and national development projects
including: the Lao People's Democratic Republic – Upland Food Security
Improvement Project; the Health, Nutrition and Population Global Practice; the
Poverty Reduction Fund Project and the Health Governance and Nutrition



EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

8

Development Project, all supported by the World Bank; and the IFAD-supported
Food and Nutrition Security and Market Linkages Programme and Soum Son Seun
Jai Programme; the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA)-supported
Project for Enhancing Capacity in PIP Management; the European Union-supported
Global Climate Change Alliance programme; WFP’s Mother and Child Health and
Nutrition project, and Food Assistance for Assets programme; and several NGO-led
initiatives.

C. Innovations and scaling up
32. The most important innovation promoted by the SSFSNP is the convergence

approach, which aims to consolidate the impacts of complementary government
and development partner-implemented programmes for improved nutrition. This
approach, which addresses all 22 interventions in the Government’s nutrition
strategy, can be replicated and scaled up throughout the country. Good practices
will be identified and shared within the SSFSNP and with other projects by
developing linguistically and culturally appropriate learning approaches that take
into account beneficiaries’ low literacy.

D. Policy engagement
33. IFAD is the co-chair on the Agriculture and Rural Development Sector Donor Group.

While the investment made through this project is unlikely to influence national
policy, IFAD’s collective project experience will form the basis for ongoing policy
engagement by the IFAD Country Office and the subregional hub. Focus areas of
policy dialogue will include participatory decentralized planning, public-private
partnership frameworks, contract farming and mainstreaming of nutrition into
agricultural production. The Sector Group is one important platform where these
issues will be raised.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
34. A project financing agreement between the Lao People’s Democratic Republic and

IFAD will constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached in appendix I.

35. The Lao People’s Democratic Republic is empowered under its laws to receive
financing from IFAD.

36. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
37. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a grant under the Global Agriculture
and Food Security Program to the Lao People’s Democratic Republic in the
amount of twenty-four million United States dollars (US$24,000,000) upon
such terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the
terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President


























































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of
Uzbekistan for the Agriculture Diversification
and Modernization Project


Republic of Uzbekistan

Agriculture Diversification and Modernization Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Uzbekistan

Executing agency: Rural Restructuring Agency (RRA)

Total project cost: US$159.6 million

Amount of IFAD loan: US$46.2 million

Amount of IFAD grant: US$300,000

Terms of IFAD loan: Blend: 25 years, including a grace period of 5 years
starting from the date of approval by the Executive
Board, with a fixed interest rate equal to 1.25 per cent
per annum and a service charge of 0.75 per cent per
annum

Financing gap: US$47 million

Cofinanciers: Beneficiaries, Government and PFIs

Contribution of borrower: US$27.0 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$19.5 million

Contribution of participating financial
institutions (PFIs):

US$19.5 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval
The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of Uzbekistan for the Agriculture Diversification and
Modernization Project, as contained in paragraph 42.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Uzbekistan
for the Agriculture Diversification and Modernization
Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Uzbekistan is a 447,400 km2 landlocked country in Central Asia bordering

Kazakhstan, Tajikistan, Kyrgyzstan, Afghanistan and Turkmenistan. It had a
population of 31.8 million in 2016, of which approximately 60 per cent is rural.
With a per capita gross domestic product of US$2,130 in 2015, Uzbekistan is a
lower-middle-income country. Data suggest that its economic growth has been
broad based and inclusive.

2. Agriculture provides approximately 25 per cent of the country’s employment and
its share of the gross domestic product was estimated at 17.6 per cent in 2014.
Approximately 40 per cent of Uzbekistan’s rural population is directly engaged in
agriculture-related activities. Food imports meet the country’s growing demand and
the population’s enhanced purchasing capacity is increasingly applied to high-value
goods, particularly meat and dairy products. In 2015, Uzbekistan’s agricultural
imports totalled 11.5 per cent of the country’s total imports (US$1.3 billion)
according to the Economist Intelligence Unit.

3. Poverty declined from 27.5 per cent in 2001 to 14 per cent in 2015. This was
attributed to rapid economic growth, creation of new small businesses and
employment, public investments in education, health and infrastructure, increases
in public-sector salaries and increased remittances. In 2015, the poverty rate in
rural areas was 17 per cent compared with 11 per cent among the urban
population. The country’s low agricultural productivity, high tax burden among the
rural population, high dependency within households, regional disparities and lack
of formal rural labour markets are drivers of rural poverty. A lack of access to
productive assets, infrastructure, energy, land and water, technical and financial
services contribute to poverty and limited productivity, especially among rural
women and young people. Other vulnerable groups include families with many
children, people with disabilities, unemployed people and those with lower
education levels.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

4. Diversification, modernization and import substitution of agricultural production is a
government policy priority as stipulated in Presidential Decree No.2460 on
agriculture sector reforms and development for 2016-2020, and the Welfare
Improvement Strategy (2013-2015). Diversification of products, particularly
horticultural crops, livestock and related sub-sectors is expected to enhance rural
families’ incomes and reduce the number of low-income households. IFAD’s
experience with the value chain approach in the region suggests that private-sector
actors are crucial for smallholder producers to participate in value chains. Traders,
buyers, aggregators, processors, exporters and other private players shape how



EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

2

value chains perform. From the viewpoint of smallholder producers (Dekhan and
small private farmers), conducive partnerships with the private sector present a
major opportunity for sustained income generation. The project integrates
private-sector operators willing to invest time and resources to increase value
chain competitiveness in a way that enhances the benefits for smallholder
producers and supports their efforts to strengthen their businesses. This also
makes value chains more inclusive of smallholder producers.

5. The project will work with selected value chains, providing holistic and coordinated
support to all actors in order to improve their performance. Agribusinesses and
other qualified entities will be invited to take the role of leading entity, with a focus
on those willing to develop sound business models through productive partnerships
with their suppliers. Smallholder producers, who are the project’s primary target
group, will be targeted in each selected value chain in order to enhance their
inclusiveness and improve their returns from agriculture. The project’s targeting
strategy will therefore incorporate the principles of smallholder inclusiveness.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
6. Geographical target. The project will be implemented in the Fergana Valley in the

regions of Andijan, Fergana and Namangan. The country strategic opportunities
programme highlights the challenges experienced in the Fergana Valley due to high
population density; Namangan registers the second lowest per capita gross
domestic product in the country. Women make up half the population, with
women-headed households comprising 18 per cent of the total. Approximately
20 per cent of youth are unemployed.

7. Target groups. The project’s main target groups are: (i) rural low-income
households on Dekhan farms, who are striving to increase income from agriculture
through active participation in project-supported value chains; (ii) small private
horticulture and livestock farmers with a farm size of up to 5 hectares; (iii)
agribusinesses with existing or potential linkages with groups (i) and (ii); and
(iv) rural youth. Special attention will be paid to ensure the participation of
women-headed Dekhan and private farming households, and young women.

8. Beneficiaries. The project is expected to directly reach 75,000 households and
approximately 21,000 indirect beneficiaries. These include 11,000 households
benefitting of loans and training, and approximately 54,000 incremental suppliers
of the leading entities benefitting from project loans. In addition, 10,000 full-time
jobs will be created by the leading entities’ incremental economic activities. In its
first phase, the project is expected to reach out directly to 30,000 households, and
about 10,000 indirect beneficiaries. These include 5,000, households benefitting
from loans and training, plus approximately 20,000 incremental suppliers of the
leading entities (LEs) benefitting from ADMP loans, and some 4,000 ful-time
equivalent incremental jobs created by the LEs’ incremental economic activities.

B. Project development objective
9. The project’s goal is to improve the incomes and livelihoods of rural people in the

target area. Its development objective is to increase the inclusiveness and
profitability of selected value chains through enhanced productivity, market access
and improved natural resource management.



EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

3

C. Components/outcomes
10. The project will have three interrelated components; a fourth component will

support project management and implementation. The components are:
(i) inclusive value chain development; (ii) inclusive rural finance; (iii) climate-
resilient rural infrastructure; and (iv) project management.

11. Component 1: Inclusive value chain development. The outcome of this
component will be enhanced capacity for sustainable and efficient performance of
targeted stakeholders, and an enabling business environment for agribusinesses in
selected value chains, with strong backward linkages with smallholder producers.
This component aims to strengthen the capacities of farmers and other
stakeholders in targeted value chains. Three activities will be implemented to
create an enabling business environment for agribusinesses: (i) value chain
mapping exercises based on rapid market assessment results for small ruminants,
fisheries, sericulture and honey prepared during the design; (ii) rapid market
assessments of additional sub-sectors; and (iii) preparation of value chain
development plans, which will be roadmaps for LEs.

12. Component 2: Inclusive rural finance. The outcome of this component will be
increased productivity and efficiency among targeted smallholders, enabling value
chain actors to increase their investments in profitable value chains. The project
will support the State Fund for Support of the Development of Entrepreneurial
Activity in providing credit guarantees to smallholders and rural entrepreneurs who
lack acceptable collateral by offering partial coverage of lending risks. It will also
work with banks interested in lending to farmers in the target regions (and that
meet the project’s eligibility criteria) to facilitate farmers’ and agricultural
businesses’ access to financing. Finally, this component will establish a credit
window for youth who lack access to affordable and flexible lending products.
Banks will be free to set their own interest rates, allowing them to serve project
beneficiaries in a sustainable manner. These banks will be selected through a
competitive process to ensure that those offering the best conditions are chosen.
The outcome will be measured by the following indicator: PFIs’ portfolio risk is
below 5 per cent.

13. Component 3: Climate-resilient rural infrastructure. This component aims to
remove bottlenecks to a reliable irrigation water supply, which inhibit Dekhans and
small farmers from enhancing the diversification and efficiency of agriculture in the
selected value chains. This will be achieved through modernization of the inter-
farm irrigation network operated by water consumer associations (WCAs). It will
enable targeted farmers’ groups to: (i) diversify agricultural production from low-
value to high-value crops; (ii) increase land productivity; (iii) address the
challenges of drought due to climate change; and (iv) increase the capacity of
WCAs and the Basin Irrigation System Administration in efficient water resource
management and irrigation system operation and maintenance. The outcome of
this component will be improved farmland productivity resulting from modernized
irrigation infrastructure, as measured by the following indicator: at least 1,000
farmers report improved supply of irrigation water and increased productivity.

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

14. The project will promote a demand-driven value chain approach. This approach will
focus on analysing each step of the value chain and investing in those needs that
have the potential to improve the productivity, profitability and competitiveness of
value chain players, especially Dekhan farmers.

15. The project will promote the upgrading of selected value chains and will include
actions taken by producers, processors, input suppliers and traders at various
points in the value chain to increase future productive capacity and



EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

4

competitiveness. The leading entities with successful value chain development
plans prepared through component 1 will be considered for receiving loans from
PFIs through component 2. While loan applications will be assessed individually,
the project will provide support to their business operations through the provision
of technical assistance and training to farmer suppliers and other actors, and
access to improved infrastructure under component 3 to enhance value chains’
competitiveness and efficiency. The project will also promote coordination with
projects funded by other donors, especially those managed by the Rural
Restructuring Agency (RRA) – based on smooth information flow and open dialogue
– in order to ensure synergies and avoid duplication of efforts.

B. Organizational framework
16. The Ministry of Agriculture and Water Resources will have overall responsibility for

managing the project on behalf of the Government. Daily oversight will rest with a
project management unit (PMU) under the RRA, a state entity within the Ministry of
Agriculture and Water Resources. Overall management oversight will rest with an
inter-agency council for cooperation with international financial institutions, foreign
governments and donor countries implementing large-scale investment projects.
This council will provide guidance and direction to the project implementing
agency; the project manager will act as secretary to the council.

17. The PMU will be led by a project manager and be composed of: a chief accountant;
procurement officer; rural finance/youth officer; administrative
assistant/translator; and driver. The project will utilize legal staff from the Dairy
Value Chains Development Project. In addition, the project will rely on the services
of national and international specialists in various fields. A project implementation
team will be established in one of the project regions in year 1 (the region will be
determined by the Government, but will most likely be Namangan). The team will
comprise a: regional coordinator (value chain and business specialist); three rural
finance and youth officers; engineer; a monitoring and evaluation (M&E) specialist
and a driver. Regional coordinators will be recruited to coordinate project activities
in the remaining regions. The project implementation team will be responsible for
daily implementation of all aspects of the project, except for financial
administration and procurement, which will be managed by the PMU within RRA.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

18. The project results framework will form the basis for the results-based M&E
system, including performance monitoring and impact assessment. The PMU/M&E
officer will be responsible for all internal M&E of the project. The PMU will submit
progress reports in English to the Ministry of Agriculture and Water Resources, the
Ministry of Finance and IFAD. A mid-term review will be carried out towards the
end of the project’s third year. During the final year of project implementation, as
part of the preparation of the project completion report and impact assessment
required by IFAD, the M&E data collected over the project implementation period
will be used in a thorough assessment of project achievements. This assessment
will focus on changes in beneficiaries’ livelihoods as a result of project activities,
and the sharing of lessons learned and experiences.

19. Learning and knowledge management. To ensure that the experiences gained
are captured, comprehensive provisions have been made for M&E. The project’s
knowledge management programme will be an essential tool for meeting project
objectives. Two approaches will be used: (i) a knowledge management programme
for supporting within- and between-project learning; and (ii) support for a broader
knowledge management programme aimed at informing government decision
makers and influencing policies. The project will also support efforts to broaden
information dissemination through: development of farmer networks (to share
knowledge on successful adaptation); farmer-to-farmer extension approaches



EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

5

(to facilitate technology transfer); development of private technical services
(e.g. private veterinarians); and strengthening linkages among universities,
research and development institutions, and farmer networks to ensure the
relevance of the technology.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
20. In accordance with IFAD guidelines, a financial management assessment was

undertaken. The inherent risk was assessed as high. In order to mitigate this risk,
a stand-alone PMU will be established within RRA with separate financial
management arrangements. This system is already in place for ongoing IFAD
projects and some World Bank projects, and the quality of financial management
has been largely assessed as satisfactory. As a result, the new project will be able
to draw on the capacities already established and working satisfactorily as part of
the ongoing IFAD projects. The ongoing IFAD project, the Horticultural Support
Project, has also shown strong disbursement rates with regards to credit lines.

21. Financial Management. The PMU, with support from the RRA finance unit, will be
responsible for the financial management of the project, including budgeting,
accounting, preparing withdrawal applications, monitoring implementing partners,
preparing consolidated financial reports and internal and external audit
arrangements.

22. Accounting and financial reporting arrangements. The accounting, financial
reporting and audit arrangements have already been established under the ongoing
IFAD projects. Accordingly, all project transactions will be recorded in customized
accounting and financial software on a cash basis in accordance with International
Public Sector Accounting Standards, and quarterly financial reports will be prepared
in formats agreed with IFAD. The project's consolidated financial statements will be
audited annually by an independent audit firm in accordance with internationally
accepted auditing standards and IFAD’s Guidelines on Project Audits.

23. Disbursement arrangements and flow of funds. IFAD financing will be
disbursed in accordance with IFAD disbursement procedures to be specified in the
programme implementation manual and letter to the borrower. Two separate
designated accounts denominated in United States dollars (US$) will be opened for
the IFAD loan and grant in a commercial bank, and will not be mingled with other
funds. From the designated accounts, the funds will flow to the project account
denominated in Uzbek sum (UZS) to finance eligible project expenditures. From the
designated loan account and the project loan account, funds (US$ or UZS) will be
transferred to incremental credit accounts (one account in US$ and one in UZS)
maintained by the PFIs in the form of credit to finance sub-projects undertaken by
beneficiaries. Transfers to the rural guarantee facility will be made using the direct-
payment method to a separate account maintained in US$ in a commercial bank,
and IFAD funds will not be mingled with other funds. Specific conditions for
disbursement will be included in the financing agreement to ensure that proper
safeguards are in place before transferring any funds to the PFIs and the
Guarantee Facility and remedies will be applied in case of non-compliance.

24. Procurement. As part of the detailed project design, IFAD assessed the public
procurement systems and institutions in Uzbekistan for the purpose of identifying
an entity to handle procurement. Despite recent efforts to modernize and
strengthen Uzbekistan’s public procurement system, there are critical gaps in
compatibility with IFAD’s procurement guidelines and procedures. However, the
capacity of RRA to conduct procurement was found to be in line with IFAD
procurement regulations and procedures.

25. Anti-corruption policy. IFAD applies a zero-tolerance policy towards fraudulent,
corrupt, collusive or coercive actions in all projects financed through its loans and
grants. IFAD’s anticorruption policy and whistleblowing procedures will be included
in the project implementation manual.



EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

6

E. Supervision
26. Supervision and implementation support. A supervision plan covering the

period until the mid-term review will be agreed at project start-up. The project will
be supervised directly by IFAD. This will include annual risk-based financial
management supervision by a financial management specialist and operational
reviews covering a random sample of project activities, to be carried out in project
years 2 and 4 by independent auditors and under terms of reference acceptable to
IFAD. Details of financial management supervision are provided in appendix 7 of
the project design document. The timely completion of a baseline survey in line
with the project’s outcome and output indicators is fundamental to effective project
supervision.

IV. Project costs, financing, and benefits
A. Project costs
27. The main assumptions underlying the derivation of project costs, estimated project

costs and financing plan are that: (i) project costs are based on September 2017
prices; (ii) the project will be financed over a six-year period; and (iii) the official
annual inflation rate of 5.7 per cent is taken as constant for the duration of the
project period (2018-2023). The international inflation rate is set at 2 per cent per
year in line with medium- to long-term projections of the Economist Intelligence
Unit and the World Bank Group (Commodity Market Outlook, January 2017) for the
United States dollars. Further to the devaluation of the UZS on 5 September 2017,
the base exchange rate for this analysis was set at UZS 8,092 to US$1 as the
official exchange rate prevailing at the end of the final design mission. Project costs
are presented in both UZS and US$; conversions from current US$ values into UZS
use constant purchasing power exchange rates. A 20 per cent value-added tax will
be levied on all imported and locally procured goods and services. For directly
recruited local staff, the project will cover the social insurance rate of 25 per cent.

28. Project costs. The total investment and incremental recurrent project costs,
including physical and price contingencies, are estimated at approximately
US$159.6 million (UZS 1,291 billion). Physical and price contingencies are 1 per
cent of the total project cost. This is largely due to the fact that investments
associated with rural finance (lump sum with no contingency) comprise
approximately 88 per cent of the total project costs. The foreign-exchange
component is estimated at US$112.4 million or 70 per cent of the total project
cost. This is due to the fact that most of the project financing is in the form of
credit lines which will be used by the beneficiaries to purchase assets for local
production and also for financing the export of their produce. The Government's
contribution, mainly in the form of taxes, represents 17 per cent of the total cost,
or US$27.0 million. The project management cost is approximately 1.4 per cent of
the total project cost (US$2.2 million). Table 1 provides a summary of the project
financing plan by component.



EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

7

Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant Financing gap Government PFIs Beneficiaries Total
Component Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %
1. Inclusive Value Chains
Development
1.1 Enabling business
environment for inclusive value
chains 52 14.8 82 23.3 159 45.2 59 16.7 - - - - 352 0.2
1.2 Capacity development for
value chain stakeholders 3 918 37.4 125 1.2 4 519 43.1 1 911 18.2 - - 7 0.1 10 480 6.6
Subtotal 1. Inclusive value chain
development 3 970 36.7 207 1.9 4 678 43.2 1 969 18.2 - - 7 0.1 10 831 0.1
2. Inclusive rural finance
2.1 Rural guarantee facility 1 000 10.1 - - 6 935 69.8 2 000 20.1 - - - - 9 935 6.2
2.2 Agriculture diversification and
modernization credit lines 33 712 28.3 93 0.1 26 538 22.3 19 869 16.7 19 543 16.4 19 466 16.3 119 214 74.7
2.3 Credit line for youth 5 000 41.7 - - 5 000 41.7 2 000 16.7 - - - - 12 000 7.5
Subtotal 2. Inclusive rural finance 39 712 28.1 93 0.1 38 473 27.3 23 869 16.9 19 543 13.8 19 466 13.8 141 149 88.5
3. Climate-resilient rural
infrastructure
3.1 Modernization of irrigation
systems 1 109 21.2 - - 3 260 62.2 874 16.7 - - - - 5 243 3.3
3.2 Increasing capacities of WCAs 37 37.3 - - 46 46.0 17 16.7 100 0.1
Subtotal 3. Climate-resilient rural
infrastructure 1 146 21.5 - - 3 305 61.9 890 16.7 - - - - 5 342 3.3
4. Project management
4.1 Project management unit 800 62.9 - - 275 21.6 198 15.5 1 273 0.8
4.2 Project implementation team 572 59.9 - - 269 28.2 114 11.9 955 0.6
Subtotal 4. Project management 1 372 61.6 - - 544 24.4 312 14.0 2 228 1.4

Total 46 200 29.0 300 0.2 47 000 29.1 27 041 16.9 19 543 12.2 19 466 12.2 159 550 100.0

B. Project financing
29. The project will be financed through multiple sources, including an IFAD loan, an

IFAD grant, the Government, beneficiaries and PFIs. The IFAD loan from the
2016-2018 performance-based allocation system (PBAS) totalling US$46.2 million
will cover 29 per cent of project costs, contributing to: 37 per cent of the inclusive
value chains development component (component 1, totalling US$10.8 million);
28 per cent of the inclusive rural finance component (component 2,
US$141.8 million); 21 per cent of the climate-resilient rural infrastructure
component (component 3, US$5.3 million); and 62 per cent of the project
management component (component 4, US$ 2.2 million). In addition, IFAD will
provide a grant of US$300,000 to cover part of the international technical
assistance and training provided under component 1, and technical assistance to
Ministry of Agriculture and Water Resources under component 2. The Government
will waive all taxes related to project expenditures, including all those associated
with goods and services procured with the loans generated by the project’s funded
credit lines, and the social fund associated with personnel. The Government's
contribution,  mainly in the form of taxes, represents 17 per cent of the total cost
or US$27.0 million. PFIs are expected to contribute US$19.5 million to match the
funds made available by the project. Beneficiaries will contribute at least
US$19.5 million. The financing gap of US$47 million may be sourced by
subsequent PBAS cycles (under financing terms to be determined and subject to
internal procedures and subsequent Executive Board approval), or by cofinancing
identified during implementation.



EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

8

Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant Financing gap Government PFIs Beneficiaries Total

Category Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Equipment and goods 2 448 39.4 - - 2 718 43.8 1 035 16.7 - 7 0.1 6 208 3.9

2. Civil works 1 513 26.0 3 192 54.8 1 123 19.3 - - - 5 828 3.7

3. Vehicles 82 75.0 27 25.0 109 0.1

4. Technical assistance

International TA 494 43.0 46 4.0 418 36.4 192 16.7 - - 1 150 0.7

National TA 600 20.5 254 8.7 1 486 50.8 500 17.1 85 2.9 2 925 1.8
Subtotal Technical Assistance
and Studies 1 094 26.8 300 7.4 1 904 46.7 692 17.0 85 2.1 4 075 2.6

5. Training 251 36.8 317 46.5 114 16.7 682 0.4

6. Inclusive value chain financing

Guarantee Finance 1 000 10.1 6 935 69.8 2 000 20.1 9 935 6.2

Credit Line for AMD 33 712 28.4 26 444 22.2 19 815 16.7 19 458 16.4 19 458 16.4 118 888 74.5

Credit Line for Youth 5 000 41.7 5 000 41.7 2 000 16.7 12 000 7.5
Subtotal Inclusive Value Chain
Financing 39 712 28.2 38 379 27.3 23 815 16.9 19458 13.8 19458 13.8 140 823 88.3

Total Investment Costs 45 100 28.6 300 0.2 46 510 29.5 26 805 17.0 19 543 12.4 19458 12.3 157 725 98.9

7. Salaries 746 68.9 337 31.1 1 084 0.7

Operations & Maintenance 111 54.8 58 28.6 34 16.7 203 0.1

Operating Costs 243 45.0 95 17.6 202 37.4 539 0.3

Total Recurrent Costs 1 100 60.3 490 26.8 235 12.9 1825 1.1
Total 46 200 29.0 300 0.2 47 000 29 27 041 16.9 19 543 12.2 19 465 12.2 159 550 100.0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
30. The project is expected to generate substantial net incremental benefits for farming

households, Dekhan farmers, commercial farmers, agri-firms and rural
entrepreneurs. These include: (i) at least 80 per cent of project beneficiaries
reporting at least a 20 per cent increase in income; (ii) at least 75,000 households
receiving services promoted or supported by the project; (iii) at least 10,000
full-time jobs (or equivalent) created; and (iv) at least 70 per cent of supported
smallholder producers, including Dekhans, reporting a 20 per cent increase in sales
along their value chains

31. Economic rate of return. On the basis of the above assumptions, the economic
analysis of the project indicates that the total investment gains are significant and
robust in economic terms. The analysis results in an internal economic rate of
return of 16.5 per cent and a net present value of US$33.7 million over 20 years
based on quantifiable benefits that relate directly to the activities undertaken by
the project.

D. Sustainability
32. The sustainability of the project’s results is based on: (i) the value chain-champion

business and technical capacity-building activities to be promoted; (ii) the
demand-driven nature of the intervention; and (iii) the preparation of value chain
development plans as the basis for all investments, which should lead to inclusive
and more equitable and profitable value chains. The project’s sustainability is also
based on an exit strategy that comprises: (i) ensuring the ownership by
beneficiaries of the financed activities; (ii) the participatory development of
demand-driven technology; (iii) integration along value chains, including input



EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

9

suppliers and service providers; and (iv) limited project operational, staff and
recurrent costs.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
33. The major risks are: (i) a distortive policy environment; (ii) a lack of stakeholder

participation; (iii) market-related risks including potential exchange rate
fluctuations; (iv) a failure of communication; (v) deteriorating financial
performance of some PFIs; and (vi) the outbreak of transboundary animal disease,
(vii) complex flow of funds, as well as (viii) relatively large financing gap. Mitigation
measures include: regular supervision, and preparation of a detailed project
implementation manual; separate US$ accounts for IFAD financing and procedures
to manage foreign exchange risks, in-depth, participatory analysis of production
and business opportunities; intensive training for farmers on how to position their
products; establishment of proper contracts; training on business management;
regular project monitoring; annual assessment of banks against minimum eligibility
requirements; upgrading critical competencies in active disease surveillance and
reporting from the field; and ensuring that there are veterinary field staff capable
of sharing information and specimens with the Government’s veterinary disease
diagnostic laboratories. Moreover, specific conditions related to disbursement and
audit will be included in the financing agreement to ensure that proper safeguards
are in place with regards to funds being transferred to the PFIs and the guarantee
facility. The PFIs also will also be subject to strict monitoring measures, as well as
compliance based disbursement procedures. As the financing gap will mainly
finance credit lines, the project will still be able to function, even if the additional
financing does not materialize.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

34. The project design is aligned with all relevant IFAD strategies and policies,
including the: (i) Strategic Framework (2016-2025); (ii) Policy on Targeting;
(iii) Policy on Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment; (iv) Rural Finance
Policy; (v) Private-Sector Development and Partnership Strategy; (vi) Rural
Enterprise Policy; (vii) Environment and Natural Resource Management Policy; and
(viii) Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures. Given the nature
and extent of the likely environmental impacts, the project is classified as a
category B in line with IFAD’s environmental assessment procedures. The potential
negative environmental impacts are assessed to be within controllable limits.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
35. The project is closely aligned with and supports the Government’s priorities for

diversification and modernization of the agriculture sector, as expressed in the
Welfare Improvement Strategy (2013-2015) and Presidential Decree No.2460 on
agriculture sector reforms and development for 2016-2020, which stresses the
need to gradually shift from cotton and wheat to value-added commodities, and
introduce resource-saving technologies.

36. Seeking to avoid the duplication of efforts and foster complementarities while
taking advantage of business-related best practices and technological innovations,
the intervention strategy will be based on: (i) building partnerships with the
country’s private commercial sector, and related stakeholders; (ii) local research
institutions and industry associations, particularly for expanding technical
assistance services and market channels; (iii) harmonization with the initiatives of
development partners present in the country such as ADB, the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the World Bank; and (iv) the
principles of the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness.



EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

10

Innovations and scaling upC.
37. The project has two main innovative features. First, it will introduce a rural

guarantee facility that will leverage up to five times the value of the facility; the
US$9.9 million invested will help to attract US$49.5 million into Uzbekistan’s
agricultural sector. IFAD will be a pioneer among international financial institutions
by investing in the State Fund, and will document and disseminate its experiences
among other funders to attract more resources to the State Fund. In addition, the
adoption of the specialized automated Cash-flow Linked Agri-Risk Assessment tool
for loan analysis and management will build the capacity of participating banks to
lend to the agricultural sector and manage their agricultural loan portfolios more
efficiently.

Policy engagementD.
38. Successful policy engagement will depend on the capacity to generate analytical

evidence at the outcome and impact levels. To capture experience gained, two
approaches are envisaged: (i) a knowledge management programme within the
project to support within- and between-project learning; and (ii) support for a
broader programme of knowledge management aimed at informing government
decision-makers and influencing policy. Considering the relatively recent IFAD
experience in the country and collaboration with the ADB and the World Bank, IFAD
is transitioning to a more integrated, strategic, and programmatic dialogue to
identify barriers to a conducive business environment.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
39. A project financing agreement between the Republic of Uzbekistan and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as appendix I.

40. The Republic of Uzbekistan is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD.

41. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
42. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on blend terms to the Republic
of Uzbekistan in an amount equivalent to of forty-six million two hundred
thousand United States dollars (US$46,200,000) and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
Uzbekistan in an amount equivalent to three hundred thousand United States
dollars (US$300,000) and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Gilbert F. Houngbo
President





































President’s report on a proposed loan and
grant to the Lebanese Republic for
Harmonized Actions to Enhance Livestock
Production and Processing

Lebanese Republic

Harmonized Actions to Enhance Livestock Production and
Processing

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Lebanese Republic

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture

Total project cost: US$12.5 million

Amount of IFAD loan: US$4.9 million

Amount of IFAD grant: US$0.6 million

Terms of IFAD loan: Ordinary terms: 18 years, including a grace
period of 3 years, with an interest rate equal to
the reference interest rate per annum as
determined by the Fund semi-annually.

Amount of financing gap: Facility for Refugees, Migrants, Forced
Displacement and Rural Stability: US$5 million

Contribution of borrower: US$1.8 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$0.2 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2017/LOT/P.11

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Lebanese Republic for Harmonized Actions to Enhance Livestock
Production and Processing, as specified in paragraph 64.

Proposed loan and grant to the Lebanese Republic for
Harmonized Actions to Enhance Livestock Production
and Processing

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country rural development and poverty context
1. Real GDP growth in Lebanon for 2016 was estimated at 1.8 per cent, reflecting the

impact of regional turmoil.

2. According to the Ministry of Social Affairs and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), Syrian refugees are concentrated in specific
pockets: 87 per cent of persons displaced from the Syrian Arab Republic and
67 per cent of the poorest Lebanese live in 251 out of a total of 1,653 cadastral
zones in the country.

3. Nearly 95 per cent of Syrian refugees are food insecure, 71 per cent are living
below the minimum poverty line of US$2.4 per day, and 41 per cent have
inadequate shelter.

4. Using these poverty lines, 28.6 per cent of Lebanese households were found to be
poor; and, of these, 8 per cent were considered extremely poor or below the lower
poverty threshold.

5. Currently, the Ministry of Social Affairs claims that the highest poverty rates are in
Mount Lebanon, North Lebanon and Bekaa; and these zones account for about
77 per cent of all poor people in the country. In 2014, 12 per cent of Lebanon's
population was estimated to be rural.

6. Compared to Lebanon's overall poverty rate of 8 per cent, over 20 per cent of
households engaged in agriculture are living below the low poverty threshold.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

7. The IFAD country strategy note for Lebanon (October 2016) identified the following
two strategic objectives (SOs) for IFAD’s short-term engagement: (i) SO1:
increase opportunities and improve living conditions for communities that depend
on dairy livestock, through improved production, capacity development, access to
veterinary services, and policy dialogue; and (ii) SO2: support rural enterprise
development for dairy processing through small and medium-sized enterprises and
community-based organizations, including cooperatives, producer associations and
private-sector entities.

8. On this basis, IFAD’s short-term engagement in Lebanon includes contributions
towards: (i) assisting the Government of Lebanon to strengthen the livestock
sector; (ii) supporting rural communities hosting Syrian refugees by promoting
initiatives that generate income and employment opportunities; and (iii) triggering
grant resources upon government request to urgently respond to the influx of
refugees into the region.



EB 2017/LOT/P.11

2

9. The priorities of the Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) strategy match those of the IFAD
Strategic Framework 2016-2025, as well as IFAD’s strategic partnership with
Lebanon. Both frameworks relate to supporting smallholder agriculture and rural
development programmes, thus building the capacity, productivity and market
participation of poor rural people.

10. Theory of change. There is strong demand for good-quality dairy products
obtained through small-scale processing of fresh milk. Consumers are willing to pay
a premium price for quality. Small dairy producers are currently unable to
penetrate this rewarding market, however. Not only do they pay a high price for
animal feed, but they also produce and process low-quality milk and dairy
products. Reducing the cost of animal feed and improving animal health, together
with higher productivity per head and hygienic processing to add value to good-
quality raw milk, would sustainably increase incomes among smallholder dairy
producers and processors and enhance food security both at the household level
and countrywide. This would make the Lebanese dairy sector far more profitable at
the smallholder level and lift smallholder dairy farmers and processors out of
poverty. The same theory of change would apply to the Syrian refugees engaged in
dairy production and on-farm processing, whether now as refugees in Lebanon or
when they eventually return to the Syrian Arab Republic.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
11. The Harmonized Actions to Enhance Livestock Production and Processing (HALEPP)

project would be national in scope and cover seven governorates: Mount Lebanon,
North Lebanon, Akkar, Bekaa, Baalbek-Hermel, Nabatieh and South Lebanon. It
would mainly target the Lebanese communities who are among the poorest and the
most affected by the influx of Syrian refugees, as well as the refugees themselves,
by implementing its actions in the 251 poorest of a total of 1,653 cadastral zones
in the country. The 251 cadastral zones are home to 67 per cent of the poorest
Lebanese people and 87 per cent of the Syrian refugees.

12. The project would target about: (i) 2,400 smallholder cattle farmers and 1,600
small ruminant farmers. It is estimated that this would encompass nearly
30 per cent of all farmers owning up to seven cows, and 21 per cent of all small
ruminant farmers with herds of up to 200; (ii) 1,500 smallholder on-farm
processors, mostly women; (iii) 80 small-to-medium off-farm processors; and
(iv) 500 young Lebanese in host communities affected by the Syrian crisis, and
Syrian refugees, seeking employment in agriculture and agroprocessing and rural
infrastructure. All project interventions would have a strong focus on women, who
represent a specific IFAD target given their traditional importance in livestock
production, their growing social and economic responsibility, and their vulnerable
position in societies. Up to 30 per cent of the project target population would be
Syrian refugees.

B. Project development objective
13. The project’s overall goal is to contribute to the reduction of rural poverty among

resource-poor Lebanese rural households, including Lebanese host communities
affected by the Syrian crisis and the Syrian refugees living in these areas.

14. The development objectives are to: (i) increase the income of smallholder dairy
producers and processors; and (ii) increase employment opportunities for young
Lebanese in communities affected by the Syrian crisis and for young Syrian
refugees living in these communities.

C. Components/outcomes
15. The project will have three core components that display a number of

complementarities between initiatives and subcomponents.



EB 2017/LOT/P.11

3

16. Component 1: Enhancing the competitiveness of smallholder dairy
producers. The expected outcomes of this component are enhanced smallholder
dairy farming productivity and an increased supply of quality milk; this will be
achieved through outputs delivered under two activities:

(i) Improving the capacities of targeted smallholder dairy farmers; and

(ii) Improving animal management and productivity in cattle dairy herds and
small ruminant flocks.

17. Component 2: Improving small-scale value addition and market access.
The expected outcome of this component is better nutrition, resulting from higher
consumption of dairy products, better-quality dairy products at the household level,
strengthened and competitive small and mid-size dairy processors, and reduced
post-harvest milk losses. This will be achieved mainly by training producers and
processors in best practices. The outputs will be structured under three
subcomponents:

(i) Supporting aggregation and value addition. A training program will be
designed to raise awareness on issues of milk hygiene, handling and
processing, targeting women household members in charge of milking
animals and milk processing at home. The focus will be on the introduction
and use of simple innovations and technologies that result in higher yields
and better-quality products;

(ii) Improving access to finance. Subcomponent outcomes include increased
formal financial-sector lending to the smallholder dairy sector. The objective
of the subcomponent is to demonstrate the viability of sustainable inclusive
finance in the rural smallholder dairy market; and

(iii) Supporting a dairy stakeholder platform for inclusive policy dialogue.
This activity will have three main outcomes: [a] an inclusive national policy
dialogue platform is established/strengthened and plays an active advocacy
role on behalf of the smallholder dairy sector; [b] seven regional innovations
platforms are established, addressing technical constraints at the local level
and ensuring an upward flow of information; and [c] consensus based
self-regulation mechanisms (for quality, price, etc.) are established.

18. The third component involves project management and support.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
19. Based on previous and ongoing experience with the implementation of

IFAD-supported projects, and given the limited capacity in the MoA, HALEPP
implementation would combine making use of relevant MoA directorates and
outsourcing to qualified institutions (universities and international organizations,
NGOs and private service providers). The latters’ involvement would be arranged
through calls for proposals and performance-based memoranda of understanding.
Many NGOs have been active in supporting smallholder farmers and rural women in
technology transfer, agricultural extension and access to markets.

B. Organizational framework
20. A specially created project management unit (PMU) with competitively recruited

and qualified staff will coordinate the project. The PMU office will be physically
located in the MoA, reporting directly to the Office of the Minister. The PMU’s core
staff will include a full-time project director and full-time professional and support
staff to oversee the day-to-day operations of the project, namely: financial
manager, procurement officer, accountant, monitoring and knowledge management
and community mobilization-targeting/gender officer, administrative assistant, and
two drivers. In addition, the relevant staff from the Animal Resources Directorate



EB 2017/LOT/P.11

4

and Education and Extension Service will be involved in management of the project
part-time.

21. In line with the practice for IFAD-funded projects in Lebanon, a project steering
committee (PSC) will be set up to provide policy direction for the project; review
and approve annual workplans and budgets (AWP/Bs); and oversee the project
management team to ensure its effectiveness. Membership of the PSC will include:
representatives of MoA, the General Directorate of Cooperatives, Ministry of Social
Affairs, Office of the Ministry of State for Displaced Persons’ Affairs, microfinance
institutions, etc.

C. Planning, M&E, learning and knowledge management
22. A key planning instrument will be the AWP/B, the first of which will be prepared as

part of the final design report, together with the procurement plan for the first 18
months of the project; and it will be presented for discussion during the start-up
workshop for submission for IFAD’s no objection. The subsequent AWP/Bs should
be prepared, discussed and approved no later than sixty days before the fiscal
year-end. If required, the PMU, through the PSC, can propose adjustments in the
AWP/B during the relevant project year, which will become effective upon IFAD
clearance.

23. The monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system is designed to offer comprehensive
and reliable information to improve planning and decision-making for results-based
management. The monitoring and evaluation of HALEPP achievements and
knowledge management will be the responsibility of the PMU. An M&E specialist will
be responsible for collecting relevant data on activities, outputs and outcomes.

24. The logical framework will be used for results-based M&E and will include an initial
list of indicators to track progress and achievements. This will be done through
accounting for progress against AWP/B targets, routine and periodic assessments
of movement towards beneficiary impact. The project’s draft M&E matrix will be
prepared in a participatory manner as part of the start-up activities in line with the
logical framework. Several studies/surveys will be conducted as part of the M&E
system.

25. Baseline study. The project’s baseline is a critical element in its M&E system. It
will include the target group and a control group which will be essential for
attributing results to project activities. At the start of implementation, a baseline
survey will be conducted in selected locations to assess the physical and
socioeconomic status of the target group and define its benchmark status.

26. Midterm review. An external evaluation will be performed towards the middle of
the HALEPP implementation period, i.e. in year 3. It will assess operational aspects
such as project management and the implementation of activities, as well as the
extent to which the objectives are being fulfilled. It will also identify the corrective
actions needed for the project to achieve its impact.

27. Project completion survey (impact evaluation). This will include the same set
of questionnaires used for the baseline, to enable comparison against baseline
results. In addition, a panel of households will be interviewed to provide a thorough
analysis of the project’s impact. Analysis will also be conducted by type of
beneficiary, region and gender of household head.

28. The Results and Impact Management System (RIMS), developed by IFAD
since 2004, will be fully incorporated into the project’s M&E system. A systematic
methodology will be used, together with a set of common indicators across
programmes and regions, to measure and report on the performance and impact of
projects. The RIMS report for the level 1 and level 2 indicators will be prepared at
each fiscal year-end and reported to IFAD before 31 January.



EB 2017/LOT/P.11

5

29. Georeferencing. All HALEPP activities will be georeferenced at the village level.
This will permit monitoring of the coverage of project actions and the concentration
of certain activities in specific areas. All extension sites, processing facilities
supported by HALEPP and microfinance institutions participating in the project will
be georeferenced.

30. Beneficiary database. The database will be developed for all project
beneficiaries. Details on each beneficiary to be contained in the database include:
physical address, national identification, age, sex, and activities participated in. The
database will make it possible to track beneficiaries and activities, and provide a
sampling vehicle for data collection and visits during supervision missions.

31. The learning process will be part of the regular M&E activities. Lessons learned will
be prepared and reported for all component activities. The learning and knowledge
management activities will include regular monitoring mechanisms, progress
reports, midterm review, and an impact assessment evaluation at the end of the
project. There will be a special focus on preparing a learning note on dairy
extension and dairy product labelling, which are innovations in the Lebanese
context.

32. As part of the preparation of the IFAD-required project completion report/impact
assessment during the final year of HALEPP implementation, the M&E data
collected over the implementation period will be used to make a thorough
assessment of its achievements. In particular, it will compare changes in the
livelihoods of beneficiaries, which are attributed to HALEPP, relative to the baseline
situation. Innovations and best practices at the village level will be documented for
future replication and scaling up.

33. The Facility for Refugees, Migrants, Forced Displacement and Rural Stability
(FARMS) specific results and achievements will be mainstreamed into IFAD's M&E
systems. The results achieved by the Facility will be reported as per current IFAD
reporting practice, coupled with a separate annual meeting on FARMS results and
progress to be organized for donors and key stakeholders. Knowledge management
and learning will aim to generate lessons learned and best practices, which can
feed back into the activities of the Facility and IFAD's broader portfolio.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
34. The PMU, under the MoA, will assume overall responsibility for managing the

projects' fiduciary performance and all financial management activities.

35. A financial management assessment has been made as part of the project design.
The country’s inherent risk is rated as high, as also is the project’s initial risk
rating. However, following implementation of the identified mitigation actions, the
risk rating is expected to drop to medium during the first or second year of
implementation.

36. The PMU will conduct a competitive selection process to hire a qualified finance
manager and a project accountant. The PMU will keep its accounts in accordance
with International Public-Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS) cash-based
accounting. The project transactions will be recorded in an accounting software to
be procured as part of the project start-up and kept by the PMU.

37. As regards the flow of funds, government procedures will be applied to IFAD
funding in the same way as to other donors including the World Bank. Accordingly,
IFAD financing will be disbursed against duly certified withdrawal applications,
through the Borrower's treasury accounts to two separate designated accounts,
denominated in US dollars and held at the Central Bank of Lebanon. There will also
be a separate counterparty account for the government contribution. The Ministry
of Agriculture, through the PMU, will appoint an independent private audit firm,
acceptable to IFAD and under terms of reference cleared by it, to audit the project
in accordance with International Standards on Auditing and IFAD Guidelines for



EB 2017/LOT/P.11

6

Project Audits. An audited annual consolidated financial statement for the entire
project, together with a management letter setting out audit observations on
internal controls, will be submitted to the Fund within six months of the fiscal
year-end.

38. The assessment undertaken by IFAD showed that the Ministry is observing the
procurement rules and regulations currently applicable in the country. Nonetheless,
due to the aforementioned weaknesses in the current system, goods, works and
services procurement financed by the IFAD loan and grant and FARMS funds will
abide by IFAD Project Procurement Guidelines. Any changes that may occur during
implementation will be agreed upon with IFAD.

39. Appropriate thresholds that can maximize procurement efficiency will be specified
in the letter to the borrower and in the approved procurement plan. Whenever
possible, goods and works procurement will be bulked into sizeable bid packages to
attract adequate competition, thus resulting in cost-effective and efficient
procurement. The procurement packages that are envisaged vary between low and
high value items with procedures to be implemented using international or
competitive bidding and a large number of requests for quotations.

40. As part of the PMU, a Procurement Officer will be recruited competitively and hired
on a performance-based contract. In order to establish a sound procurement
management system in the project, and given the current country experience,
intensive capacity development will be needed for PMU staff. Two Procurement
Assistants seconded by the Government will join the PMU during the first two years
of the project, to assist in the daily procurement activities which are expected to be
enormous, based on the initial 18-month procurement plan developed for the
project.

E. Supervision
41. IFAD will directly supervise the project at least once a year and focus on fiduciary

and implementation support functions in collaboration with the country programme
management team. A financial management specialist will participate in annual
missions to supervise and provide implementation support to the project and follow
up the identified risks and mitigation actions. In addition, and given the difficult
political situation currently prevailing, compounded by institutions with limited
capacity and the heavy presence of Syrian refugees, close technical supervision
and implementation support missions will be jointly carried out by IFAD and the
donor of the FARMS grant, at least once a year but also on demand.

IV. Project costs, financing, and benefits
A. Project costs
42. The total cost of the project, over a six-year period, is estimated at

US$12.5 million. All costs have been estimated on the basis of prices prevailing in
Lebanon in April 2017. The base cost amounts to US$11.8 million (90 per cent of
total costs). Investment costs represent 76 per cent of total costs and recurrent
costs 24 per cent. Physical and price contingencies account for about 9.5 per cent
of total costs.



EB 2017/LOT/P.11

7

Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component

IFAD loan IFAD grant
Financing gap

FARMS Beneficiaries
Borrower/

counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Enhancing the
competitiveness of
smallholder dairy producers 1 800 30.8 - - 3 100 55.1 - - 800 14.1 5 700

2. Improving small-scale value
addition and market access 1 900 52.1 300 8.4 1 300 35.4 200 4.1 - - 3 700

3. Project management and
support 1 200 40.2 300 8.7 600 19.2 - - 1 000 31.9 3 000

Total 4 900 39.4 600 4.6 5 000 40.5 200 1.2 1 800 14.2 12 500

B. Project financing
43. The project will be financed by an IFAD loan of US$4.9 million (covering

39.4 per cent of total costs), an IFAD grant of US$600,000 (4.6 per cent). It is
anticipated that a FARMS grant of US$5 million (40.5. per cent) will also be
provided from supplementary funds. The Government will contribute US$1.8 million
(14.2 per cent) and beneficiaries US$200,000.
Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure
category

IFAD loan IFAD grant
Financing gap

FARMS Beneficiaries
Borrower/

counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Vehicles 300 65.2 - - - - - 200 34.8 500
2. Equipment and

materials 700 28.8 - 1 500 64.8 200 6.4 - - 2 400
3. Technical

assistance 1 200 29.6 - 2 700 70.4 - - - - 3 900
5. Studies and

workshops 600 49.0 600 51.0 - - - - - - 1 100

6. Training 800 53.0 - 700 47.0 - - - - 1 600

7. Salaries 900 40.6 - - - - - 1 400 59.4 2 300

8. Incentives 200 100.0 - -- - - - - 200
9. Operation and

maintenance 300 53.4 - - - - 200 46.6 500

Total 4 900 39.4 600 4.6 5 000 40.5 200 1.2 1 800 14.2 12 500

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
44. The economic internal rate of return (EIRR) on the investments made in the

HALEPP project area over a 15-year period is estimated at 15.6 per cent. The
project’s net present value (NPV) is positive (US$27.9 million) and the benefit-cost
ratio is 3.7. The economic analysis suggests that the HALEPP project is feasible.
With an opportunity cost of capital of 9 per cent, these indicators establish the
project’s economic feasibility. Profitability sensitivity tests suggest that the project
is robust and worthwhile.

45. Eleven models relating to dairy farming and support for dairy value-chain activity
models have been considered in the analysis. The livestock models included
encompass sheep, goat, and cow models, as well as models combining cattle and
small ruminants.

46. Eleven models reflecting different agroecological conditions in Lebanon are
analysed. Six models deal specifically with producers who pay a rent for accessing
rangelands and sell milk directly to Hallab (milk collectors) while four are
processing unit models.



EB 2017/LOT/P.11

8

47. The models show an increase in net annual income per animal of around
50 per cent from production and processing. Good financial performances in terms
of financial internal rate of return (FIRR) and financial net present value (FNPV) are
achieved despite the relatively high cost of inputs, including the feed cost per
animal and labour costs.

48. The IRRs for the two small ruminant models are 14.7 per cent and 19.8 per cent
respectively; and the dairy processing models report an average FIRR of
15.2 per cent. Employment opportunities created in the livestock and processing
unit models show that around 12,600 jobs will be created with 85 per cent in the
livestock farming system (models M1 to M7), while 25 per cent will be created
through processing models (models M8 to 11).

49. Models M2, M3, M5, and M10 are the most influential models in HALEPP. Livestock
fertility and lactation are the most influential parameters in the project; and
greater attention should be paid to them to ensure its profitability.

D. Sustainability
50. The various vocational and extension training activities for dairy production and

processing and for other skill improvement will be designed to be relevant for
women, youth and smallholders for job creation, self-employment and upgrading
agriculture and dairy production and processing. All investments in dairy
processing will be based on a clear plan for their ownership, operation and
management.

51. The creation of a stakeholder platform with participation by smallholder dairy
producers and processors will provide a good opportunity for this group to voice
their concerns vis-à-vis the dairy industry and regulatory processes.

52. The project will seek to connect the target group to the formal financial sector for
dairy sector financing. A product will be developed and tested by three to five
competitively selected financial institutions, with technical support from the
project.

53. Project support to innovative renewable energy sources and dairy farm waste
treatment (biogas production) will contribute to lower production costs and
pollution abatement.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
54. The main risks include the possibility that Syrians may lose their refugee status

(which allows them to work in the agricultural sector) and “fall out” of ongoing
project activities; potential delays in project implementation, uncontrolled dairy
imports from the Syrian Arab Republic; a continuation of the influx of Syrian
refugees into rural communities thereby forcing up dairy product prices, leading to
unregulated importation of cheaper milk products; disease outbreaks
(foot-and-mouth disease and ovine rinderpest, etc.); and the effect of climate
change on natural resources.

55. HALEPP will adopt mitigation measures starting with policy dialogue with
government authorities to prevent beneficiaries from dropping out; avert delays in
project implementation and ensure intensive training for PMU staff and the use of
NGOs and service providers. The project will assist the Government of Lebanon to
improve rural infrastructure and increase milk productivity. The project will partner
with international and national institutions and NGOs to leverage support for the
communities hosting Syrian refugees and control the unregulated importation of
cheaper milk products. The project will support the MoA's initiative to ensure
regular frequency in the organization of fora for smallholder farmers and
small-scale processors, and facilitate participation by targeted stakeholders. The
project will assist in building national capacity to mitigate disease risks. The project
will educate participating dairy farmers on forage conservation techniques, as well



EB 2017/LOT/P.11

9

as investment in pasture improvement and conservation at farm level. The project
is expected to promote investments in climate-resilient and low-carbon
post-harvesting procedures, drying/cooling, processing and value addition, to
reduce product losses and increase incomes among farmers and rural laborers.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
56. The project is aligned with the IFAD Strategic Framework 2016-2025, the country

strategic note for Lebanon, and IFAD policies. The project’s activities,
implementation arrangements and M&E system have been designed in compliance
with the IFAD Targeting Policy and IFAD Policy on Gender Equality and Women’s
Empowerment; and they are aligned with the approaches outlined in the
Framework for Gender Mainstreaming in IFAD’s operations. The project is designed
to be consistent with IFAD’s Private Sector Development and Partnership Strategy,
its Rural Finance Policy and the associated Decision Tools for Rural Finance. The
Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) report
confirmed the project’s environmental and social classification as B; and it rated
climate risk as “Moderate”, given that the project approach will promote the use of
climate-resilient technologies (e.g. solar energy and biogas technologies), along
with improved management of animal husbandry and dairy processing. Last but
not least, the HALEPP project is fully aligned to the FARMS policy.

B. Alignment and harmonization
57. HALEPP is consistent with the Government’s 2015–2019 agricultural development

strategy (ADS), the National Poverty Targeting Programme (2011) (NPTP) and the
Lebanon Crisis Response Plan (LCRP). The ADS aims to develop institutional
capacities and increase MoA preparedness to meet agricultural-sector challenges
through partnerships and collaboration between relevant stakeholders. It defines
eight courses of action: improve food safety and enhance the quality of locally
produced and imported products; increase the productivity and competitiveness of
Lebanese agricultural products; improve governance and the sustainable use of
resources; strengthen agricultural extension and education; strengthen agricultural
research and laboratories; develop the cooperative sector and mutual funds;
develop MoA capacities; and mitigate the impacts of climate change. The strategy
identifies several targets, including: increasing the share of agriculture to 6 per
cent of GDP from the existing 4 per cent; reducing the current agriculture trade
deficit by 15 percentage points; raising the value of agricultural production by
30 percentage points: in addition to increasing public spending in the sector,
raising farming household incomes and creating jobs in agriculture.

58. The development objective of the NPTP for Lebanon is to expand the coverage and
enhance the NPTP social assistance package for Lebanese people affected by the
Syrian crisis and all Lebanese households living below the extreme poverty line.
Actions in the LCRP are aligned to national policies and strategies, and seek to
complement and build on other international assistance in the country. The LCRP is
organized around seven strategic sectors, including one on food security. The MoA
leads the food security sector along with the Food and Agriculture Organization and
the World Food Programme.

C. Innovations and scaling up
59. To assist the target group in reducing energy costs and explore opportunities for

private-sector engagement in renewable energy, the project will support three pilot
models using renewable energy in the dairy sector, for later scaling up:
(i) solar-powered on-farm milk cooling technology; (ii) solar-powered water
heating for milk processing; and (iii) biogas production from dairy cattle dung.



EB 2017/LOT/P.11

10

D. Policy engagement
60. The project will have three main outcomes in terms of policy dialogue and

engagement: (i) an inclusive national policy dialogue platform is
established/strengthened and plays an active advocacy role on behalf of the
smallholder dairy sector; (ii) seven regional innovation platforms are set up, to
address technical constraints at the local level and ensure an upward flow of
information; and (iii) consensus-based self-regulation mechanisms (for quality,
price, etc.) are established.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
61. A project financing agreement between the Lebanese Republic and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as
appendix I.

62. The Lebanese Republic is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

63. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
64. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Lebanese Republic in an amount equivalent to four million nine hundred
thousand United States dollars (US$4,900,000), and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Lebanese
Republic in an amount equivalent to six hundred thousand United States
dollars (US$600,000) and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Gilbert F. Houngbo
President


























































President’s Report

Proposed Loan and Grant under the Debt
Sustainability Framework to the Togolese
Republic for the Shared-risk Agricultural
Financing Incentive Mechanism Support
Project


Togolese Republic

Shared-risk Agricultural Financing Incentive Mechanism
Support Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower/recipient: Togolese Republic

Executing agency: Ministry of Economy and Finance

Total project cost: US$35.07 million

Amount of IFAD loan: EUR 3.3 million (US$3.75 million)

Amount of IFAD grant (under the Debt
Sustainability Framework):

EUR 3.3 million (US$3.75 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional terms, interest-free but coupled
with a service fee of 0.75 per cent per year, and a
repayment period of 40 years (unless a shorter period is
requested by the borrower), including a grace period of
10 years. Amortization of the loan principal shall be at
the rate of 4.5 per cent for the first 20 years (11 to 30),
followed by 1 per cent for the subsequent years
(31 to 40)

Cofinancier: Private sector (financial institutions)

Cofinancing amount: US$6.31 million

Contribution of borrower/recipient: US$3.80 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$1.80 million

Financing gap: US$15.66 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: IFAD



EB 2018/LOT/P.25

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for proposed
financing to the Togolese Republic for the Shared-risk Agricultural Financing
Incentive Mechanism Support Project (ProMIFA), as set forth in paragraph 55.

Proposed Loan and Grant under the Debt Sustainability
Framework to the Togolese Republic for the Shared-risk
Agricultural Financing Incentive Mechanism Support
Project (ProMIFA)

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. The West African country of Togo had approximately 7.6 million inhabitants in

2016, 77 per cent of them living below the poverty line and 75 per cent aged under
35. The country's economy is highly dependent on exports of phosphates and
agricultural products. The agriculture sector provides 60 per cent of employment
and contributes 41 per cent of GDP. Agriculture consists essentially of subsistence
family farms – with an average size of four hectares per household – with low levels
of producer integration into value chains and the market economy.

2. Although agriculture is the main sector of employment for thousands of young
people and women, financial sector operators hesitate to lend to them because of
perceived high risk. Investments and promotion of initiatives in the sector are
therefore limited. Just 0.2 per cent of financial sector resources go to agriculture,
and only 32 per cent of rural people have access to financial services. Use of
banking and financial services is very limited, with only 18 per cent of the country’s
population nationwide having a bank account. In 2017, the International Monetary
Fund indicated that the banking system lacked liquidity to provide financing to
private lenders, since the latter were funding public deficits.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and the
results-based country strategic opportunities programme

3. The Government of Togo has just adopted a new Five-year National Development
Plan (PND) for the 2018-2022 period, with the objective of achieving strong,
sustainable and resilient growth that will provide decent livelihoods and generate
social progress and well-being. The PND also aims to achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals, in particular SDG1 (no poverty), SDG2 (no hunger),
SDG8 (good jobs and economic growth) and SDG17 (partnerships for the goals).

4. Development of the agriculture sector has a central role within the PND, and the
Government has adopted specific sectoral strategies and policies, based on a
sustainable increase in productivity of organized agropastoral value chains, the
organization and professionalizing of value chain stakeholders, and facilitating
access to financial and non-financial services tailored to the needs of the small
producers and small and medium-sized enterprises in the value chains. To that end,
the Government introduced the Agricultural Financing Incentive Mechanism (MIFA)
and requested technical and financial support for it from IFAD.

5. Lessons learned. Togo is classified among the countries experiencing conditions of
fragility, particularly with regard to issues of governance, accountability and
institutional organization. The Shared-risk Agricultural Financing Incentive
Mechanism Support Project (ProMIFA) will capitalize on lessons learned from other
rural development projects in Togo and the subregion, in particular with regard to



EB 2018/LOT/P.25

2

the implementation of projects in countries with fragile situations. Performance of
the IFAD portfolio in Togo – and in particular its fiduciary aspects – have posed
challenges due to the weak capacities for implementation and results-based
management on the part of the participating parties. Greater attention to the
fiduciary aspects will be ensured, in particular through sustained capacity-building
and close monitoring through project oversight and the IFAD country team in Accra.

II. Project description
A. Objectives, project area and target group
6. The overall objective of ProMIFA is to contribute to poverty reduction, sustainable

and inclusive rural economic growth, and the creation of sustainable and decent
employment in rural areas, through organized and well-functioning value chains in
Togo.

7. Its development objective is to facilitate sustainable access to financial and non-
financial services tailored to stakeholders in organized, successful value chains.

8. Project area. ProMIFA will be aligned with the nationwide coverage adopted by the
Government’s incentive mechanism for agricultural financing (MIFA). Nevertheless,
its roll out in each region will be undertaken on a differentiated basis depending on
demand. For greater impact on the target group, namely women and youth,
ProMIFA will first support a limited number of key agropastoral value chains
(rice, market gardening, maize and poultry raising), which will be selected taking
into account: (i) their contribution to improving food and nutritional security of the
rural communities; (ii) the existence of demand for grains, vegetables and poultry
products from urban markets; (iii) the outlook for financial and economic cost-
effectiveness; and (iv) their potential for job creation – particularly for youth and
women – and for income generation.

9. Target group. ProMIFA will target: (i) smallholder farmers and their organizations
(cooperatives, unions and federations); (ii) vulnerable farm households; (iii) rural
small businesses and microenterprises and other actors upstream and downstream
involved in the production and distribution of inputs, marketing, processing,
handicrafts, the setting up and maintenance of farm equipment, and the provision
of other services.

10. ProMIFA seeks to reach at least 300,000 direct beneficiaries, or around 50,000 rural
households, especially rural young people (18 to 40 years of age), employed or
unemployed; and women who are producers or are active in the other segments of
the targeted value chains. Targeting and gender equality strategies will ensure that
young people of both sexes represent at least 40 per cent of the beneficiaries, and
adult women at least 30 per cent. Thus girls and adult women will account for
nearly half of ProMIFA beneficiaries.

B. Components/outcomes
11. ProMIFA’s activities will be organized into three components, namely:

Component 1: Technical support for value chain development and market
access

a) Technical support to the producers and other actors in the agropastoral value
chains: (i) overview of the selected value chains and inventory of service
providers; (ii) building of the technical/technological capacities of producers
and their organizations and of other value chain actors; and (iii) capacity-
building in financial literacy and business development services.

b) Support to the structuring of the value chains and market access:
(i) partnership strengthening within the links in the value chains; (ii) support
to interprofessional organizations; and (iii) support to the quality approach to
market access.



EB 2018/LOT/P.25

3

Component 2: Support for the development of financial products and
services

12. In order to meet the demand generated by the ongoing support under component
1, ProMIFA will help facilitate access to financial services for rural communities by
increasing loans to smallholder farmers – individually or in groups – and to small
and medium-sized rural enterprises; and by improving the quality of the
agricultural credit portfolio of ProMIFA’s partner financial institutions and the
operational and financial sustainability of these institutions.

13. These results will be achieved through the following measures: (i) technical
assistance to support establishment of a financing and risk mitigation mechanism,
and the development of new products; (ii) improvement in the quality of financial
services through capacity-building of the financial institutions and development of
tailored products; and (iii) effective establishment of the financing and risk
mitigation arrangements.

Component 3: Institutional support to MIFA; coordination and
management of ProMIFA

a) Institutional support to MIFA, with a view to its consolidation: the project will
finance the support needed (technical assistance, training programmes, study
tours, learning routes, monitoring and evaluation, etc.) for the
operationalization and consolidation of MIFA and its strategic planning within
the agricultural finance environment;

b) Coordination and management of ProMIFA will be undertaken by a simplified
project coordination and management unit (PCMU) working alongside MIFA –
and closely linked to it and to the MIFA Board of Directors (BoD).

Strategy for project implementation and phasing

14. ProMIFA will be implemented in two phases, following a staggered implementation
plan. Phase 1, with a duration of two years, is the preliminary phase of preparation
for implementation and phase 2, with a four-year duration, constitutes the
implementation and consolidation phase. The midterm review will make it possible
to review progress made, as a condition for passing from phase 1 to phase 2, which
will be launched subject to confirmation of the following six performance indicators:
(i) four key need and market studies finalized; (ii) at least two financial products
pre-identified in the studies, ready to be implemented; (iii) at least five financial
institutions having signed a partnership agreement with MIFA looking to finance the
actors in the selected value chains, with a multiplier effect; (iv) at least one
cofinancier committed to joining the Government and IFAD in support of MIFA;
(v) MIFA’s decision-making bodies in place and operational, in accordance with
Presidential Decree No. 2018-090 dated 25 April 2018 or any subsequent
amendments to it, the members of the BoD have been identified, the Director
General has been named and the key personnel have been put in place and trained;
and (vi) the financial management system is in place and MIFA’s capacity is in line
with the parameters defined by IFAD.

15. Confirmation of these indicators will occur at the time of the midterm review, which
is foreseen from the end of the second year. Unless all of the above-mentioned
performance indicators are confirmed, the project may not move forward to the
next phase, and suspension or even early closure of the project and withdrawal of
support to MIFA could be envisaged by IFAD.

C. Theory of change
16. The change envisaged by ProMIFA will make it possible to solve two major

problems for agricultural and rural development in Togo: (i) suboptimal value
chains with bottlenecks, poorly structured producers’ organizations and other issues
that discourage risk-taking by the financial sector; and (ii) very poor access on the



EB 2018/LOT/P.25

4

part of the rural population and micro-, small and medium-sized agricultural
enterprises to the financing needed for the development of their economic
activities.

17. The project rationale lies in strengthening the resilience and productivity of family
farms. The holistic and inclusive approach adopted – that of enabling family farms
to perform better and increase resilience and become true market-oriented
enterprises – will generate economic growth. Indeed, all categories of relevant
public and private stakeholders will participate in the project. ProMIFA’s activities
will address all links in the value chain, from production to marketing, while
integrating measures for sustainable natural resource management and climate
change adaptation.

D. Alignment, ownership and partnership
18. Alignment. ProMIFA is aligned with IFAD’s Strategic Framework 2016-2025, which

encourages inclusive and sustainable rural transformation and with the strategic
commitments of the Eleventh Replenishment of IFAD’s Resources (IFAD11), while
taking into account the priority themes of nutrition, gender equality, youth and
climate change. ProMIFA is also aligned with IFAD engagement in Togo, as
described in the country strategy note 2018-2019, which focuses on two strategic
objectives, to: (i) facilitate access to employment and improve incomes for rural
youth and women through their greater inclusion in agropastoral value chains
within the structured framework of “agro-hubs”; and (ii) improve sustainable
access for the rural population (young people and women) to financial services
tailored to the development of agropastoral value chains and rural small businesses
and microenterprises.

19. Ownership. The Government is fully committed to MIFA; the latter is in fact a
central mechanism for implementation of its economic development strategy. There
is high demand for financial and in-kind support among producers, their
organizations and rural small businesses and microenterprises, which explains their
readiness to contribute payment for such services. The financial institutions are also
committed to MIFA, since it will contribute to mitigation of the risks associated with
financing the value chains.

20. Partnerships. By promoting the financial literacy of small producers and of other
actors in the agropastoral value chains and their access to short-term seasonal
loans, ProMIFA will encourage partnership-building between their organizations and
private sector actors operating upstream and downstream of production. ProMIFA
will focus on the capacity-building of the various parties involved (MIFA, the
financial institutions, the private banks and other institutions), assisting
beneficiaries in drafting business plans, and supporting financial institutions in
providing financial products that meet the needs of agropastoral value chain
stakeholders, thus enabling their access to financing over the medium term.

21. ProMIFA will also collaborate with the other initiatives under way in support of the
agricultural sector, within the framework of the National Plan for Agricultural
Investment and Food and Nutritional Security and entrepreneurship for women and
young people. A special partnership will be instituted with the National Programme
for the Promotion of Rural Entrepreneurship (PNPER), cofinanced by IFAD, which
targets young rural entrepreneurs. Other partners will also be sought, notably in
the private sector.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
22. ProMIFA’s will follow a “faire-faire” and “faire-avec” approach which places the

beneficiaries at the centre of activities and gives them responsibility, particularly for
forming financial relationships with the financial institutions. Once the business plan



EB 2018/LOT/P.25

5

is drawn up and completed, with the support of the service provider, ProMIFA will
leave the project sponsor with responsibility for submitting and justifying the
project with the financial institutions. Once the funds have been obtained, ProMIFA
will provide the project sponsor with support to mobilize consultancy services for
project management within a contractual framework with the support provider,
based on a memorandum of understanding with ProMIFA.

23. To ensure that stakeholders have access to quality agricultural consultancy support,
business management services will be promoted by creating a network of skilled
rural young people interested in investing in business consultancy activities,
including keeping accounts and producing financial statements.

24. A key part of the project exit strategy will be the establishment of interprofessional
frameworks for dialogue and a mechanism to build organizational and institutional
capacity to provide quality services to members.

B. Organizational framework
25. ProMIFA will be implemented by a PCMU, which will be set up on the premises of

MIFA and will be linked to its BoD. This unit will have administrative and financial
management autonomy; it will be composed of a coordinator, an administrative and
financial manager and bookkeeper, a procurement specialist, a manager for
targeting/women/youth issues, a monitoring and evaluation specialist, a secretary
and two drivers.

26. Eventually the PCMU should close, with its functions absorbed within MIFA. The
midterm review, to be held towards the end of the second year of ProMIFA
implementation, will make it possible to assess the situation and propose a plan for
the transfer of functions to MIFA, based on: (i) MIFA’s charter and composition;
(ii) its level of organizational and operational maturity; (iii) its performance in
implementation of its workplan and the level of achievement of the expected
outcomes; and (iv) its management capacity, in particular in relation to fiduciary
management, and the quality of the human resources and management
instruments (manual of administrative, financial and accounting procedures manual
and integrated management system).

C. Planning, monitoring/evaluation, learning and knowledge
management

27. Planning. The preparation of the annual workplan and budget (AWP/B) will be
carried out with the MIFA team on the basis of a critical review of the previous year
and of the progress made. All stakeholders, in particular those in the Presidential
Delivery Unit (CPES), will participate in the preparation, thereby translating it into
coherent activities that are allocated the needed resources and linked to the
objectives of the logical framework and its performance measurement framework.
The AWP/B will be approved by the Board of Directors of MIFA not later than
30 November of each year, before being submitted to IFAD for its no objection
before 31 December. The project’s progress over the course of the year will be
assessed based on the rate of progress, outputs achieved and the disbursement
rate of the activities set out in the AWP/B.

28. Monitoring/evaluation. The system will draw on internal monitoring and on
periodic internal and external evaluations, which will be carried out with the
participation of the stakeholders. Information will be collected and analysed on:
(i) progress towards the expected outcomes, as described in the project’s logical
framework, and in the performance of all the actors involved in implementing the
activities set out in the AWP/B; (ii) assessment of the relevance of implementation
approaches and strategies and specific mechanisms for coordination and monitoring
of the various components and activities; (iii) assessment of the participation of the
beneficiaries at the various stages of implementation; (iv) the relevance and
effectiveness of the targeting and the attention given to cross-cutting aspects



EB 2018/LOT/P.25

6

(nutrition, gender, youth and climate change); and (v) annual surveys to assess
impact on the beneficiaries since the midterm review. A baseline survey will be
carried out at project inception and an impact assessment is planned at completion.

29. The PCMU of ProMIFA will work closely with the MIFA monitoring/evaluation unit
and the CPES in support of periodic analyses and documentation of the dashboard
indicators, which will serve as learning and decision support tools. The teams will
benefit from IFAD’s training programmes (AVANTI and Prime).

30. Learning and knowledge management. Knowledge management is an essential
function in the continuous improvement of performance and results; it aims to
capitalize on the knowledge and lessons derived from implementation experience,
so as to generate corrective measures in planning and implementation. It will be
based on (i) identification, documentation, building on and dissemination of
knowledge and (ii) networking among the practitioners, knowledge holders and
other participating parties. The monitoring and evaluation database, activity reports
and self-assessment sessions will all provide opportunities to pool the innovations
and good practices and disseminate them. Knowledge exchanges relating to
FIDAFRIQUE, recently given a new boost, will be actively promoted.

D. Administrative and financial management
31. ProMIFA’s financial management risk is deemed high prior to the establishment of

mitigation measures. The project will focus on the competitive recruitment of
qualified staff to set up an organizational, accounting and financial management
framework, accompanied by a control process and tools for transparent operational
management of the funds. In functional terms, the PMCU will have administrative
and financial autonomy, and the fact that it will initially be separate from MIFA, will
make it possible to hold it increasingly accountable, in line with the governance
principles agreed.

32. The management system described in the procedures manual will specify the
reporting and functional relationships between the officials on the administrative
and financial team. At project inception, an operational management tool will be
put in place in line with: (i) the regulatory accounting rules of the revised
SYSCOHADA accounting system; (ii) IFAD procedures with regard to project
management; and (iii) the national procedures in relation to awarding of contracts
and to personnel management. The manual will contain the management support
needed for implementation.

33. Flow of funds. A designated account will be opened to receive the loan and grant
resources. Three operational accounts will be opened respectively for the
expenditures of the PCMU, the agricultural development financing facility and the
risk mitigation fund.

34. An annual external audit of the financial statements will be carried out, in
accordance with international auditing standards and in observance of the IFAD
guidelines. The audited financial statements will be made public on the official IFAD
site.

35. Although the closing date has passed, the advances provided to the Support to
Agricultural Development Project still need to be accounted for or reimbursed to
IFAD. Definitive resolution of this issue will constitute a prerequisite for
disbursement of ProMIFA funding.

E. Procurement
36. Procurement. Procurement will respect national procedures, and will comply with

standards acceptable to IFAD.



EB 2018/LOT/P.25

7

F. Supervision
37. IFAD and the Government will undertake joint supervision of the project and will

organize at least one mission per year, plus thematic monitoring missions as
needed, so as to formulate recommendations for effective project implementation.

IV. Project costs, financing, and benefits
A. Project costs
38. The total cost of ProMIFA over a six-year period, including provisions for price rises,

comes to US$35.07 million. Its base cost is US$34.032 million. The provisions for
physical and financial contingencies come to US$1.037 million.

39. Project costs by component are as follows: (i) component 1: technical support for
value chain development and market access, US$13.4 million, or 38.3 per cent;
(ii) component 2: support for the development of financial products and services,
US$15.2 million or 43.4 per cent; and (iii) component 3; institutional support to
MIFA; coordination and management of ProMIFA, US$6.4 million or 18.2 per cent.



E
B
 2

0
1
8
/LO

T
/P.2

5

8

Table 1
Project costs by funding source and component
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant Financing gap Beneficiaries Government Private sector Total

Component Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Technical support for value chain development and market access
1.1: Technical support to the producers
and other agropastoral value chain
actors 2 745 22.1 2 745 22.1 4 141 33.4 550 4.4 2 235 18.0 - - 12 416 35.4
1.2: Support for the structuring of the
agricultural value chains and market
access 36 3.5 36 3.5 713 69.5 - - 185 18.0 56 5.5 1 027 2.9
Subtotal 2 781 20.7 2 781 20.7 4 854 36.1 550 4.1 2 420 18.0 56 0.4 13 443 38.3

2. Support for the development of financial products and services
2.1: Technical assistance in support to
development and establishment of the
mechanisms for financing, risk coverage
and new products 110 28.0 110 28.0 102 25.9 - - 71 18.0 - - 392 1.1
2.2: Improvement in the quality of
financial services 13 1.0 13 1.0 1 071 80.1 - - 241 18.0 - - 1 337 3.8
2.3: Mechanisms for financing and risk
mitigation - - - - 6 000 44.4 1 250 9.3 - - 6 250 46.3 13 500 38.5
Subtotal 123 0.8 123 0.8 7 172 47.1 1 250 8.2 311 2.0 6 250 41.0 15 230 43.4

3. Institutional support to MIFA; coordination and management of ProMIFA
3.1: Institutional support to MIFA 438 13.0 438 13.0 1.770 52.5 - - 727 21.5 - - 3 373 9.6
3.2: Coordination and management 407 13.5 407 13.5 1 869 61.8 - - 341 11.3 - - 3 024 8.6
Subtotal 846 13.2 846 13.2 3 638 56.9 - - 1 068 16.7 - - 6 397 18.2

Total 3 750 10.7 3 750 10.7 15 665 44.7 1 800 5.1 3 799 10.8 6 306 18.0 35 070 100



EB 2018/LOT/P.25

9

B. Project financing
40. IFAD will provide EUR 6.6 million (US$7.5 million), or 21.5 per cent of the total

cost, apportioned between a loan (50 per cent) and a grant (50 per cent); the
Government (including through duties) will contribute US$3.8 million (10.8 per cent
of the total cost); the beneficiaries, US$1.8 million (5.1 per cent of the total cost);
and the private sector, US$6.2 million (18 per cent of the total cost). The financing
gap, amounting to US$15.6 million or 44.7 per cent of the total cost, will be
covered by other sources of financing, or by the next IFAD resource allocation cycle
for Togo, over the period 2019 to 2021 (IFAD11).



E
B
 2

0
1
8
/LO

T
/P.2

5

1
0

Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financing source
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD loan IFAD grant Financing gap Beneficiaries Government Private sector Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

Capital expenditure
1. Goods, services, vehicles and
equipment 173 33.2 173 33.2 81 15.6 - - 94 18.0 - - 521 1.5
2. Technical assistance and
studies 1 333 18.6 1 333 18.6 3 168 44.1 - - 1 293 18.0 56 0.8 7 183 20.5
3. Training 1 999 16.7 1 999 16.7 5 119 42.9 550 4.6 2 268 19.0 - - 11 934 34.0
4. Loans - - - - 6 000 44.4 1 250 9.3 - - 6 250 46.3 13 500 38.5

Total capital expenditure 3 505 10.6 3 505 10.6 14 368 43.4 1 800 5.4 3 655 11.0 6 306 19.0 33 138 94.5

Current expenditure
1. Salaries and allowances 152 12.3 152 12.3 935 75.5 - - - - - - 1 239 3.5
2. Operating expenses 93 13.5 93 13.5 362 52.3 - - 144 20.8 - - 692 2.0

Total current expenditure 245 12.7 245 12.7 1 297 67.1 - - 144 7.5 - - 1 932 5.5

Total 3 750 10.7 3 750 10.7 15 665 44.7 1 800 5.1 3 799 10.8 6 306 18.0 35 070 100



EB 2018/LOT/P.25

11

C. Summary of the benefits and economic analysis
41. The economic analysis. Calculation of the financial return from the different

models shows that all of the models chosen (mixed market gardening, upland rice,
lowland rice and free range chickens) show a very attractive financial return. The
financial internal rate of return is positive for all of the models, with indicators of
between 17 per cent and 139 per cent. The net present value is also very positive,
between CFAF 119,000 and CFAF 8.7 million. The project’s internal economic rate of
return stands at 20.3 per cent and the net present value (at the economic
opportunity cost of capital of 6.5 per cent) comes to US$32.26 million. This result is
very satisfactory. The sensitivity analysis indicates that the results obtained are
robust. Even in the event of a decline in revenue of 30 per cent, a rise in costs of
30 per cent or a two-year delay in the appearance of profits, the rate of return
remains greater than the opportunity cost of capital (6.5 per cent), and the
minimum net present value is greater than US$17.4 million.

D. Sustainability
42. Project sustainability will be promoted first by the decision to empower actors in the

agropastoral value chains to be accountable for project activities. The second
measure to guarantee sustainability is the phasing approach that will
simultaneously make ProMIFA a tool to operationalize, consolidate and maintain
MIFA beyond project completion.

43. Among the effective mechanisms developed by ProMIFA are: making beneficiaries
accountable for the activities in which they are involved through their systematic
participation in decisions on the technical support needed to implement their action
plans. This will be realized through a tripartite partnership agreement established
between ProMIFA, the support provider and the beneficiary.

44. The cost-sharing system between the project and the beneficiaries will enable the
producers to contribute to the direct financing of their economically viable activities.
Similarly, with respect to the agricultural development financing facility, a
mechanism will make it possible to provide liquidity to MIFA’s partner financial
institutions for the financing of beneficiaries’ projects. This process will involve the
participation of the three sets of stakeholders: the farmers, ProMIFA and the
partner financial institutions.

45. The differentiated and calibrated support to the producers’ cooperatives and
organizations – by means of action plans that they themselves have designed – will
strengthen their institutional and economic capacity. The establishment of a
commercial relationship between the cooperatives and the market operators, along
with financial intermediation on the part of ProMIFA, will provide the producers with
autonomy. The specific and multifaceted support envisaged for building the
economic capacity of women and youth will contribute to the emergence of strong,
credible and economically promising entreprises led by women and young people.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
46. The project’s main risks are inherent to activities in the agricultural sector and rural

finance, and to markets, climate change and the country’s social and political
situation, in particular: (i) weak technical and management capacity of the
beneficiaries for ensuring the productivity and economic return of their activities;
(ii) low participation of women, due to cultural barriers and to men’s
monopolization of the most profitable links in the value chain; (iii) fluctuation in
prices of staples and the distortion caused by the parallel markets; (iv) disruption
of the markets by government policies to subsidize inputs and foodstuffs; (v) poor
quality of records, entailing drawn-out loan provision processes; (vi) delays in
establishing financing mechanisms, mitigating risks and conducting surveys;
(vii) fiduciary risks; and (viii) climate events that may place a strain on production
and repayment capacities. The project is classified as having moderate climate risk.



EB 2018/LOT/P.25

12

However, it will have many positive effects and is thus classified in environmental
category B.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
47. ProMIFA is in line with IFAD’s Strategic Framework 2016-2025, which aims to

promote inclusive and sustainable rural transformation, and with IFAD’s rural
finance policy. ProMIFA will implement activities aimed at achieving IFAD’s three
strategic objectives: (i) improving the productive capacity of poor rural people in a
sustainable and resilient manner; (ii) adding to the benefits that these communities
draw from their inclusion/participation in the market; and (iii) strengthening
environmental sustainability and increasing the climate resilience of their economic
activities. It is also strongly aligned with IFAD’s planned country engagement as set
forth in the country strategy note for 2018-2019. ProMIFA is also in line with IFAD’s
rural finance policy, which calls for providing financial institutions with capital and
developing financial products tailored to the rural poor, including risk management
mechanisms, without creating distortion within the financial market.

B. Alignment and harmonization
48. ProMIFA will support the implementation of MIFA, a key instrument of the new five-

year PND (2018-2022), which will make it possible to facilitate the funding needed
for rural activities, so as to address the weak performance of agropastoral value
chains and poverty.

C. Innovations and scaling up
49. ProMIFA represents an innovative approach for mitigating risks linked to agricultural

financing, which is based on the scaling up of successful experiences from other
regions within the framework of a South-South partnership with Nigeria. MIFA is a
priority initiative of the President and plays a major role in the country’s
development strategy. It will be the gateway for the private sector, donors and
other partners. Since the beginning of the pilot phase of MIFA, IFAD, by supporting
ProMIFA, has been the only partner that has committed itself alongside the
Government and will benefit from a high level of visibility. IFAD’s direct
participation by providing a grant to strengthen the CPES – a service mechanism of
the Office of the President of the Republic of which MIFA is a priority project – is
also a major innovation whose results are eagerly awaited.

50. ProMIFA will build on and harness the experiences of projects with similar activities,
such as PEA Youth in Cameroon, NIRSAL in Nigeria, the Agribusiness Initiative Trust
in Uganda and the Private Agricultural Support Services Trust in the United Republic
of Tanzania.

D. Policy engagement
51. Since MIFA is a key implementation instrument for the Government’s development

strategy, ProMIFA – in support of MIFA – will contribute to strategic planning on the
key topics of: agropastoral value chains, professionalization of stakeholders and
rural finance. This contribution will be undertaken through mobilization of
specialized technical assistance, the financing of thematic studies, learning from
monitoring and evaluation, and building on and sharing good practices.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
52. The financing agreement between the Togolese Republic and IFAD constitutes the

legal instrument whereby the proposed financing will be granted to the
borrower/beneficiary. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as
appendix I.

53. The Togolese Republic is empowered under its laws to receive funding from IFAD.



EB 2018/LOT/P.25

13

54. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
55. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan to the Togolese Republic on
highly concessional terms in the amount of three million three hundred
thousand euros (EUR 3,300,000), upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

FURTHER RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Togolese
Republic under the Debt Sustainability Framework in the amount of
three million three hundred thousand euros (EUR 3,300,000), upon such
terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms
and conditions presented herein.

Gilbert F. Houngbo
President




















































President’s Report

Proposed Loan and Debt Sustainability
Framework Grant to the Republic of
Sierra Leone for the Agricultural Value
Chain Development Project



Republic of Sierra Leone

Agricultural Value Chain Development Project (AVDP)

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of Sierra Leone

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Food Security

Total project cost: US$60.3 million

Amount of IFAD loan: US$5.9 million

Amount of IFAD DSF grant: US$5.9 million

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional, 40 years, including a grace period
of 10 years, with a service charge of three fourths of
one per cent (0.75 per cent) per annum

Financing gap: US$28.5 million

Cofinancier(s):

Amount of cofinancing:

Terms of cofinancing:

Adaptation Fund, subject to approval

Adaptation Fund: US$9.2 million

Grant

Contribution of borrower: US$8.1million (of which US$1.9 million will be provided
to match IFAD financing of US$11.8 million presented
in the financing agreement)

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$1.4 million

Contribution of private sector US$1.4 million

Appraising institution: International Fund for Agricultural Development



EB 2018/LOT/P.19/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of Sierra Leone for the Agriculture Value Chain
Development Project (AVDP), as contained in paragraph 45.

Proposed Loan and Debt Sustainability Framework Grant
to the Republic of Sierra Leone for the Agriculture Value
Chain Development Project (AVDP)

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. The Republic of Sierra Leone economy has grown substantially since the end of the

civil war in 2002, but it suffered two major shocks in 2014/2015 – the Ebola
epidemic and the collapse of iron ore prices, with GDP shrinking 21 per cent in
2015. However, economic growth resumed following new investments in mining,
agriculture and fisheries, registering GDP growth of 6.3 per cent in 2016 and
5.7 per cent in 2017. Agriculture, the largest sector in the economy, accounted for
59 per cent of GDP in 2016, 62 per cent of the labour force, and 22 per cent of
export earnings. Cash crops produced for export include cocoa and coffee, while
palm oil is produced for domestic consumption and some export.

2. Sierra Leone’s population is around 7.4 million (40 per cent youth) and growing at
2.2 per cent annually. Poverty is widespread but is particularly acute and
concentrated in rural areas, where 59 per cent of the population lives. The rural
poverty headcount of over 66 per cent is double that of urban areas. Women and
youth are particularly vulnerable due to challenges associated with access to land,
skills and capital, as well as customs. About 59.7 per cent of rural households in
Sierra Leone are food insecure, compared with 25.1 per cent in urban areas.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

3. Agricultural development remains key to Sierra Leone’s economic development and
rural poverty reduction, and there is considerable untapped potential for increasing
the production and productivity of both staple and cash crops. The project will
focus on three crops: rice, cocoa and palm oil, though the largest share of the
budget will be devoted to rice production in inland valley swamps, consistent with
the Government of Sierra Leone priorities. The AVDP will promote crop
diversification to provide flexibility and choice to beneficiaries and support
improved nutrition.

4. The AVDP is aligned with the National Agricultural Transformation 2023
Programme, which is currently in development. The AVDP addresses two of the
three priority intervention areas, which are rice self-sufficiency and crop
diversification, notably for palm oil and cocoa. The project aligns with five of the
seven new strategic priorities: (priority 2) Increasing investment in rice production,
processing and marketing, (priority 3) Make youth and women catalysts for
agribusiness development and growth, (priority 4) Invest in catalytic technologies
such as agricultural mechanization, irrigation and water management,
(priority 6) Strengthen sustainable biodiversity management and conservation,
including forest and tree crops, (priority 7) Increase the production of other crops,
such as vegetables, to ensure diversification.



EB 2018/LOT/P.19/Rev.1

2

5. The selection of value chains is consistent with government priorities and pro-poor
approaches to value chain development. The crop mixture addresses increased
availability of the dietary staple (rice), improved nutritional balance (vegetables)
and increased income from all crops.

6. The project development objective and approach are aligned with the two strategic
objectives of the Country Strategy Note 2017-2018, namely (i) improved
smallholder farmers’ access to technical skills and markets; and (ii) improved
access to finance for rural communities.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
7. Due to widespread poverty, the AVDP will in principle be nationwide, though the

concentration and intensity of project interventions will depend on climatic and
agroecological conditions in each of the 16 districts of Sierra Leone.1 While rice and
palm oil are produced throughout the country, cocoa production is localized in
specific districts.

8. The socio-economic profile of the target group will be similar to that of the groups
targeted under the Smallholder Commercialization Program - Global Agriculture
and Food Security Program (SCP-GAFSP), although primarily in other areas of the
country. The majority of the beneficiaries (62.3 per cent) have no education. Only
37.7 per cent of beneficiaries have some formal education, mostly primary or
secondary but very little post-secondary/tertiary. More female beneficiaries
(69.1 per cent) than their male counterparts (40.5 per cent) have no education.
The average monthly income of beneficiaries is at 468,795 leones. Radio and
mobile phones are popular assets that beneficiaries own, as indicated by
49.8 per cent and 41.8 per cent of respondents, respectively. Ownership of other
assets is insignificant. Fully 91 per cent of households experienced hunger in the
12 months prior to the survey, during which they had difficulty providing sufficient
food to feed all members.

9. The project is estimated to target 204,000 direct beneficiaries, equivalent to
34,000 households, over a period of six years, providing assistance to the target
groups and support for greater participation in targeted value chains. The project
aims at reaching at least 40 per cent of both women and youth.

B. Project development objective
10. The project's development objective is to increase the income of smallholder

farmers through the promotion of agriculture as a business.

C. Components/outcomes
11. The project has three components: (i) Climate-resilient and smart agricultural

production; (ii) Agricultural market development; (iii) Project coordination and
management.

12. Component 1: Climate-resilient and smart-agricultural production. The expected
outcome of component 1 is that the volume and value of production is increased
and production systems are made more climate resilient. Component 1 will have
two subcomponents, as follows:

(a) Subcomponent 1.1. Support for smallholder rice production and productivity.
This will support a total of 10,000 rice farmers by providing technical
assistance through farmer field schools and financial support for the
development of inland valley swamps for double or triple cropping of rice and
improved access to quality inputs and mechanized farming services.

1 The project will pursue a strategy of territorial concentration of interventions to facilitate implementation, which in
practice may mean that not all districts are targeted.



EB 2018/LOT/P.19/Rev.1

3

(b) Subcomponent 1.2. Support for tree crop production and productivity. This
will involve work with 13,000 farmers (5,000 cocoa and 8,000 palm oil
producers) receiving technical assistance and support for the establishment of
one-hectare plots on fallow or abandoned agricultural land. No deforestation
is permitted to clear land for the smallholder plantations. No large plantations
will be supported.

13. Component 2: Agricultural market development. The expected outcome of this
component is improved performance and organization of the selected value chains
for increased smallholder production and productivity. The component is composed
of two subcomponents:

(a) Subcomponent 2.1. Market access. This subcomponent will focus on:
strengthening the business skills of Agri-Business Centres, farmers’
organizations; farmer field schools; facilitating value chain organizations; and
deal making through the establishment of provincial multi-stakeholder
platforms.

(b) Subcomponent 2.2. Climate-resilient rural infrastructure. Partly financed
through the Adaptation Fund, this will involve the rehabilitation of
warehouses to improve product drying and storage capacity, provide potable
water and latrines and rehabilitate feeder roads and farm tracks.

14. Component 3: Project coordination and management. This component is divided
into two subcomponents:

(a) Subcomponent 3.1. Project coordination and management.

(b) Subcomponent 3.2. Financing mechanisms for target groups.

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

15. The overall AVDP approach will be market-centred and demand-driven. The main
thrust will be on establishing win-win partnerships between producers and their
organizations, private-sector agribusinesses and rural finance institutions. This will
be achieved through a series of activities, including the provision of technical
assistance by the farmer field schools, as well as the strengthening of farmers’
organizations to better plan production and the purchase of inputs. The availability
of certified seeds will be enhanced through the set-up of seed multiplication plots
that will be linked to private-sector processors. The project will provide matching
grants to facilitate beneficiary investment in production infrastructure to boost
productivity. The matching grants scheme will also increase financial inclusion, as
most producers’ groups will need credit for their investments. Multi-stakeholder
platforms will better integrate the value chains by bringing the different
stakeholders – including representatives of the smallholder farmers – to the table
to find solutions to current obstacles, build trust and facilitate business deals.
Rehabilitated feeder roads will further facilitate market linkages. Additionally, the
project will seek to climate proof the productive investments and ensure relevant
capacity-building.

B. Organizational framework
16. The National Programme Coordination Unit (NPCU) will be responsible for project

planning, financial management, contracting implementing partners for specific
activities and tasks, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), communication and
knowledge management, supervision of project activities at the district level and
facilitating linkage with the Government, private-sector and development
institutions and integrating project experience into policy dialogue.



EB 2018/LOT/P.19/Rev.1

4

17. The NPCU will have approximately 25 technical and support staff at its
headquarters, supplemented with a robust presence at the provincial level with the
out-posting of 4 tree crop officers, 4 inland valley swamp officers, 2 agribusiness
specialists and 4 Community Mobilizers/Targeting Specialists. A matching grant
evaluation committee will be set up to approve grant applications. Staff
implementing AVDP will have an opportunity for training to improve their
performance. At the district level, the district agricultural officer of Ministry of
Agriculture, Forestry and Food Security (MAFFS) will be responsible for
coordinating the implementation of project activities.

18. AVDP will be placed under the technical supervision of the MAFFS. The MAFFS and
the National Steering Committee will provide oversight, direction and advice for
project implementation, and in particular, approve the project’s Annual Work Plan
and Budget (AWPB), as well as its periodic progress reports.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation and learning and
knowledge management

19. The project will prepare an AWPB for approval by the National Steering Committee
and subsequent presentation to IFAD for no objection. The AWPB will serve as the
basis for any work that the project undertakes. The AWPB will be prepared in
consultation with beneficiaries and other stakeholders and build on the project’s
progress.

20. The project’s logical framework will be the main document for supporting results-
based and objective-oriented implementation. The AVDP monitoring and evaluation
system will build on the system developed in the SCP-GAFSP, including its M&E
manual. The M&E system will be in line with the Government of Sierra Leone
requirements, as well as IFAD’s Operational Results Management System and will
generate gender- and age-disaggregated data on project outputs, outcomes and
impacts.

21. AVDP monitoring will be integrated into the existing SCP-GAFSP monitoring and
evaluation framework. The project M&E Unit will include and regularly assess a
number of gender, youth and other group-specific indicators in the programme’s
M&E system at the output, outcome and impact level-in particular, capturing the
improvement of access to outputs, their use by the target groups and these
groups’ satisfaction with them.

22. Knowledge management and learning are key to meeting project objectives, as
reliable information is the basis of results-based management. Priority will be given
to areas where AVDP interventions are recognized as exemplary and expected to
have the greatest impact, though failures are also an important basis for learning.
Best practices and proven concepts will be fed into the MAFFS and regional
knowledge management systems. Lessons learned will also be fed into the
continuous improvement of manuals, concepts and strategies and disseminated to
the various target groups, including the public, using appropriate communication
media.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
23. The inherent risk is assessed as high. As a result, the project will largely follow the

financial management arrangements already established under the ongoing IFAD
projects, which will lower the risk to medium. The financial management
arrangements will include the following: (i) a qualified financial controller and an
accountant will be appointed; (ii) all programme transactions will be recorded in
customized accounting software, in accordance with the International Public Sector
Accounting Standards (IPSAS) cash-basis of accounting, (iii) a designated account
in United States dollars for IFAD financing will be maintained at a commercial bank,
and IFAD funds will not be mingled with other funds, (iv) IFAD financing will be
disbursed in accordance with IFAD disbursement procedures and (v) the NPCU will



EB 2018/LOT/P.19/Rev.1

5

prepare quarterly financial reports in formats agreed upon with IFAD. Furthermore,
the consolidated financial statements will be audited annually by the Audit Service
of Sierra Leone – Office of the Auditor General, in accordance with International
Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions/International Standards of Supreme
Audit Institutions (INTOSAI/ISSAI) standards and IFAD audit requirements. The
audit report, together with the management letter, will be submitted to IFAD within
six months of the end of the fiscal year. The day-to-day financial operations will be
specified further in the relevant section of the project implementation manual.

24. IFAD’s has a zero-tolerance policy toward fraudulent, corrupt, collusive or coercive
actions in all projects financed through its loans and grants. IFAD's anticorruption
policy and whistleblowing procedures will be mainstreamed in the project
implementation manual.

25. A procurement assessment was undertaken as part of the design mission.
According to the assessment, the legal and regulatory framework for public
procurement in Sierra Leone will be used for all AVDP procurement activities, with
the exception of international competitive bidding, for which the World Bank
guidelines and framework will apply. In addition, the procurement plan to be used
by AVDP will be based on the version presented as part of the IFAD Project
Procurement Handbook.

E. Supervision
26. The project will be directly supervised by IFAD. Supervision will be conducted as an

opportunity to assess achievements and lessons jointly and reflect on ways to
improve implementation and impact. Furthermore, a financial management
specialist will participate in missions at least annually to supervise and provide
implementation support to the project and monitor the fiduciary risk at various
levels.

IV. Project costs, financing and benefits
27. The financing gap of US$28.5 million may be sourced by subsequent performance-

based allocation system (PBAS) cycles (under financing terms to be determined
and subject to internal procedures and subsequent Executive Board approval) or by
cofinancing identified during implementation.

A. Project costs
28. The total combined AVDP investment and incremental recurrent costs, including

physical and price contingencies, are estimated at US$60.3 million, disaggregated
by component as follows: component 1, climate-resilient and smart-agricultural
production, is the main investment component, representing US$37.9 million of the
total project costs (63 per cent of total costs); while component 2, agricultural
market development, accounts for US$13.4 million (22 per cent of total costs); and
US$9 million for the project coordination and management component 3,
(15 per cent of total project costs).



EB 2018/LOT/P.19/Rev.1

6

Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component
IFAD loan

IFAD DSF
grant Financing gap

Adaptation
fund Beneficiaries

Borrower/
counterpart Private sector Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount
1. Climate-resilient
and smart agricultural
production
1.1 Support for
smallholder rice
production and
productivity 2 370 10.5 2 370 10.5 11 676 51.7 2 246 10.0 522 2.3 3 385 15 - - 22 569
1.2 Support for tree
crop production and
productivity 447 2.9 447 2.9 7 107 46.2 4 235 27.6 828 5.4 2 305 15 - - 15 369
Subtotal 2 818 7.4 2 818 7.4 18 782 49.5 6 480 17.1 1 350 3.6 5 691 15 - - 37 938
2. Agricultural market
development
2.1 Market access 809 17.0 809 17.0 1 562 32.8 - - - - 694 14.6 881 18.5 4 755
2.2 Climate-resilient
rural infrastructure
and information
systems - - - - 4 456 51.8 2 367 27.5 - - 1 232 14.3 543 6.3 8 598
Subtotal 809 6.1 809 6.1 6 018 45.1 2 367 17.7 - - 1 926 14.4 1 424 10.7 13 353
3. Project
coordination and
management 2 268 25.2 2 268 25.2 3 700 41.1 308 3.4 - - 467 5.2 - - 9 012

Total 5 895 9.8 5 895 9.8 28 500 47.3 9 156 15.2 1 350 2.2 8 084 13.4 1 424 2.4 60 302

B. Project financing
29. The financing plan covers: (i) IFAD financing of US$11.8 million under the

Tenth Replenishment of IFAD's Resources (IFAD10); (ii) a financing gap of
US$28.5 million, which may be sourced by subsequent PBAS cycles, as outlined in
paragraph 27; (iii) an Adaptation Fund grant of US$9.2 million, subject to
approval; (iv) a contribution from the Government of US$8.1 million, which will be
used to finance project duties and VAT, of which US$1.9 million will be provided to
match IFAD financing of US$11.8 million approved under IFAD10; (v) estimated
beneficiary contributions (in-kind and cash) of US$1.4 million; and (vi) a private-
sector contribution of US$1.4 million.

30. Additionally, the AVDP is expected to benefit from an estimated US$10 million in
parallel value chain investments under the World Bank-financed Smallholder
Commercialization and Agribusiness Development Project and an estimated
US$12 million for the rice-seed value chain under the World Bank’s West Africa
Agricultural Transformation Project.



EB 2018/LOT/P.19/Rev.1

7

Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan
IFAD DSF

grant Financing gap
Adaptation

fund
Private
sector Beneficiaries

Borrower/
counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %
I. Investment
costs
A. Civil works 509 5.4 509 5.4 4 178 44.3 2 338 24.8 488 5.2 - - 1 416 15.0 9 438 15.7
B. Goods,
equipment and
vehicles 324 42.5 324 42.5 - - - - - - - - 114 15.0 762 1.3
C. Technical
assistance 1 042 10.1 1 042 10.1 3 237 31.4 2 582 25.0 936 9.1 - - 1 470 14.3 10 310 17.1
D. Grants and
subsidies 2 308 7.1 2 308 7.1 17 662 53.9 4 235 12.9 - - 1 350 4.1 4 917 15.0 32 781 54.4
Total
investment
costs 4 183 7.9 4 183 7.9 25 077 47.1 9 156 17.2 1 424 2.7 1 350 2.5 7 917 14.9 53 290 88.4
II. Recurrent
costs
A. Salaries and
allowances 1 437 25.0 1 437 25.0 2 874 50.0 - - - - - - - - 5 748 9.5
B. Operating
costs 274 21.7 274 21.7 548 43.4 - - - - - - 167 13.2 1 264 2.1
Total recurrent
costs 1 711 24.4 1 711 24.4 3 422 48.8 - - - - - - 167 2.4 7 012 11.6
Total Project
Costs 5 895 9.8 5 895 9.8 28 500 47.3 9 156 15.2 1 424 2.4 1 350 2.2 8 084 13.4 60 302 100.0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
31. The economic analysis shows that the project has the capacity to generate an

economic rate of return (ERR) of 32 per cent over a 20-year period, with a net
present value of Sierra Leonean leone 203 billion (approximately US$23.5 million).
Given the many unquantifiable benefits, the actual ERR will likely be higher.

32. In order to test the robustness of the above results, sensitivity analysis was carried
out, and the results are presented below. The sensitivity analysis investigates the
effect of fluctuations in project costs, benefits and implementation delays on the
net present value and ERR. The results show that the ERR drops to 22 per cent
with a 20 per cent increase in costs, and to 20 per cent with a 50 per cent increase
in costs, still making the project economically viable.

D. Sustainability
33. The project aims at strengthening farmers’ organizations to the extent that they

are able to collectively plan sustainable production, purchase inputs and sell their
produce through stable private-sector engagement. In coordination with the Rural
Finance and Community Improvement Programme, the project also seeks to
ensure that farmer-based organizations are sustainably accessing rural finance for
inputs. Furthermore, productive investments will be climate proofed through the
financing from the Adaptation Fund. Finally, through policy engagement planned as
part of component 3, the project will help keep the Government's focus on the
rural poor and facilitate Government support to the target group after project
completion.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
34. Since governance issues could compromise the expected impact on communities

and increase project costs, the risk is classified as high. Elite capture of outputs,
especially physical assets, which are intended for well-defined target groups, is
another problem associated with poor governance. These governance risks will be
mitigated by complementing the Government’s initiatives with: (i) increased
transparency and publicity about the distribution of outputs; (ii) training for



EB 2018/LOT/P.19/Rev.1

8

implementers at all levels in financial management, procurement, M&E and
reporting procedures; (iii) the implementation of a clear targeting strategy; and
(iv) continued improvement of the grievance mechanism for beneficiaries. The
Good Governance Framework developed for the SCP-GAFSP will be applied during
the implementation of AVDP.

35. Institutional capacity for implementation and sustainability risks are considered
moderate. Failure in project coordination is a risk, especially among and within
non-state actors and private agribusiness. Private stakeholders consistently
indicate that institutions that provide critical support services to private-sector
investors remain weak and coordination among them is fragmented. The project
will mitigate this risk by ensuring that the project implementation unit has clear
mechanisms for effective coordination during project implementation.

36. The AVDP is not expected to have overall negative environmental impacts.
However, since small commercial agricultural activities may produce unexpected
cumulative impacts, careful design of an appropriate monitoring system is critical.
The major concerns are associated with the increased use of fertilizers and
pesticides that might result from wider distribution of these products and their
impact on biodiversity and human health. Training on proper use and disposal,
adoption of the principles of the International Code of Conduct on the Distribution
and Use of Pesticides of the Food and Agricultural Organization of the United
Nations, as well as the design of an environmental monitoring system in
partnership with the Sierra Leone Environmental Protection Agency are considered
sufficient mitigation measures. Based on the above information, the project has
been classified as category B according to IFAD classification standards.

37. The promotion of palm oil is considered to entail limited risks, as only smallholder
oil palm plantations of a maximum of one hectare will be established under the
project. Large-scale plantations will not be supported. Furthermore, new
smallholder plantations will be established only on fallow or abandoned agricultural
land, and no deforestation will be accepted. Moreover, oil palm (Elaeis guineensis)
is endemic to West Africa and is therefore a natural part of the vegetation in
Sierra Leone. The palm oil produced will largely be used for cooking and sold on
the domestic market. Appendix II presents answers to key questions on how the
project will support palm oil production.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

38. The project is aligned with the IFAD11 priorities on a range of parameters. First, it
addresses gender, youth, nutrition and climate change and therefore supports the
IFAD11 mainstreaming agenda. Second, the project has managed to attract
cofinancing from the Adaptation Fund and will therefore contribute to the corporate
cofinancing targets. Third, the project is designed to have a relatively frontloaded
disbursement profile underpinned by substantial investments in equipment and
irrigation systems, as well as road rehabilitation and maintenance in the initial
years, all of which will contribute to an increasing corporate disbursement ratio.
Fourth, the project covers two PBAS cycles and is therefore aligned with the notion
of delivering bigger, better and smarter.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
39. The AVDP is wholly consistent with the Government’s National Agricultural

Transformation 2023 Programme, which is currently in development. The AVDP
addresses two of the three priority intervention areas, which are rice self-
sufficiency and crop diversification, notably for palm oil and cocoa. The selection of
value chains will allow the AVDP to build on and strengthen the results that have
been achieved in Sierra Leone through past and ongoing IFAD-financed projects
operating in the same value chains.



EB 2018/LOT/P.19/Rev.1

9

Innovations and scaling upC.
40. The project scales up and refines the intervention model developed under the

ongoing SCP-GAFSP, but with a range of innovations, including: (i) the
establishment of multi-stakeholder platforms to strengthen integration of the
selected sustainable value chains; and (ii) an increased focus on nutrition and food
security through the promotion of intercropping with food/tree crops and the
creation of vegetable gardens.

Policy engagementD.
41. Policy engagement in the interest of smallholder farmers and the rural poor will be

undertaken through: (i) the organization of periodic stakeholder discussions around
specific policy issues, with the participation of public and private value chain
stakeholders; (ii) the use of provincial commodity platforms as a nexus for
discussing and sharing policy-related concerns with the Government, in line with
national priorities; (iii) support for relevant analytical work related to agricultural
policies and strategies; and (iv) support for capacity-building in selected
government agencies involved in policy-making for agricultural development
(e.g., MAFFS, Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Planning and Economic Development
and Ministry of Trade and Industry).

VI. Legal instruments and authority
42. A financing agreement between the Republic of Sierra Leone and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as
appendix I.

43. The Republic of Sierra Leone is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD.

44. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
45. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Republic of Sierra Leone in an amount of five million nine hundred
thousand United States dollars (US$5,900,000) and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a DSF grant to the
Republic of Sierra Leone in an amount of five million nine hundred thousand
United States dollars (US$5,900,000) and upon such terms and conditions as
shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

Gilbert F. Houngbo
President




















































President’s Report

Proposed Loan and Grant to the Republic of
Liberia for the Tree Crops Extension Project II



Republic of Liberia

Tree Crops Extension Project II (TCEP II)

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of Liberia

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture

Total Project cost: US$47.6 million

Amount of IFAD loan: US$11.9 million

Amount of IFAD grant: US$11.9 million

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional: 40 years, including a grace period of
10 years, with a service charge of 0.75 per cent per annum

Financing gap: US$16.2 million

Contribution of borrower: US$2.5 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$1.8 million

Contribution of private sector US$3.4 million

Appraising institution: IFAD



EB 2018/LOT/P.16

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of Liberia for the Tree Crops Extension Project II (TCEP II)
as contained in paragraph 44.

Proposed Loan and Grant to the Republic of Liberia for the
Tree Crops Extension Project II (TCEP II)

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Despite positive socioeconomic developments since the end of the civil war in 2003,

Liberia remains a low-income, food-deficit country with an undiversified economy. The
country saw initial post-war economic growth in real GDP of 8.9 per cent in 2012; this
fell slightly to 8.1 per cent in 2013. In 2014 and 2015, the Ebola virus disease crisis
crippled economic growth and the GDP growth rate fell drastically, only starting to
recover in 2017 with 2.5 per cent growth. The growth forecast for 2018 is 3 per cent.1

2. As of 2016, Liberia's population was estimated at 4.6 million with an annual growth rate
of 2.6 per cent. In 2015, the United Nations Development Programme ranked Liberia
177th out of 188 countries on the Human Development Index with a score of 0.427. In
2016, approximately 54 per cent of the population lived below the poverty line
(46 per cent live in rural areas). Liberia has an extremely young population:
approximately 90 per cent of its people are under 35 years.

3. A 2015 emergency food security assessment by the World Food Programme (WFP)2
found that food insecurity affects 16 per cent of households, including 2 per cent that
are severely food insecure. Food insecurity is not distributed evenly across the country.
In Lofa County, where the project will be implemented, 11.3 per cent of households
reported moderate to severe food insecurity.

4. Agriculture is the primary livelihood source for more than 60 per cent of Liberia’s
population. Traditionally, tree crops have constituted one of the country’s largest
sources of employment and an integral part of its social fabric and economy. However
during the country’s civil wars, the tree crop sector was devastated and many farmers
were displaced. Abandoned farms and plantations degenerated into forests and their
associated support structures were damaged or destroyed. Market linkages vanished
while exports dropped to near zero. In recent years, there has been increased
investment in rehabilitating smallholder cocoa farms and strengthening
cooperatives. Cocoa production is still small scale, undertaken by approximately 38,000
farmers in the country, of which 30 per cent are in Lofa County with cocoa farm sizes
averaging 1 to 3 ha.3 The sector is expected to grow as farmers continue to reclaim and
rehabilitate farms, and youth are attracted to the cocoa sub-sector with the emergence
of cocoa as a profitable cash crop.

1 http://country.eiu.com/liberia (2018).
2 WFP, Emergency Food Security Assessment: Liberia (2015).
3 Platform for Agricultural Risk Management, Agricultural Risk Assessment Report: Liberia (2017).



EB 2018/LOT/P.16

2

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

5. The project is aligned with the Government’s Pro-Poor Agenda for Prosperity and
Development (PAPD), which has prioritized the agricultural sector for diversifying the
economy, and has identified seven priority value chains, including cocoa. The PAPD
outlines the need to strengthen policy coordination, agricultural research and the
extension system in order to support smallholders and out-grower farmers; these are
the areas to be addressed by TCEP II.

6. The current country strategy note for Liberia (2017-2019) has two strategic objectives:
(i) smallholder farmers’ access to finance, inputs, skills and markets is improved; and
(ii) smallholders’ organizational capacities and access to Ministry of Agriculture
extension services are improved. The project is aligned with the country strategy note
since it aims to support smallholder farmers’ access to inputs, capacity building,
markets and extension services.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
7. While TCEP II will target Lofa County, it will be closely connected with activities in

Nimba County given the: (i) importance of cocoa farming there; (ii) project’s
complementarity with others implemented in Nimba County, including its sister TCEP I
project; and (iii) potential gains from road and track improvement. Other areas may be
targeted during implementation if productive potential is demonstrated and targeting
criteria are met.

8. The project will benefit both producers and other players within the cocoa value chain
such as input suppliers and farm-to-market operators (FMOs).4 It aims to benefit
10,000 cocoa smallholder producers using a self-targeting approach complemented by
tools to ensure that beneficiaries meet project targeting criteria. These beneficiaries will
include members of kuu groups (traditional community-based labour groups), youth
and women. TCEP II will also target cooperatives strengthened through the recently
completed IFAD-financed STCRSP, other cocoa producer groups and potential FMOs.

B. Project development objective
9. The goal of TCEP II will be to increase incomes and improve the livelihoods of poor rural

smallholder cocoa farming households in Lofa County. The project’s development
objective is to improve the incomes and climate resilience of smallholder cocoa
producers in Lofa County.

C. Components
10. The project will have the following components:

11. Component 1: Revitalization of cocoa plantations. The expected outcome of
component 1 will be increased quantity and quality of cocoa sold by smallholders. This
component comprises five subcomponents: 1.1 – Basic rehabilitation and new cocoa
plantations; 1.2 – Improving post-harvest handling and quality;
1.3 – Germplasm garden support; 1.4 – Alternative livelihood activities (crop
diversification through intercropping on existing plantations for food and nutrition
security, shade management and income generation, and on new plantations before
newly planted cocoa trees mature); and 1.5 – Transformation of cocoa waste as an
alternative income source.

12. Component 2: Rehabilitation and maintenance of roads. The expected outcome of
component 2 will be improved and climate-proof access to markets. It contains two
subcomponents: 2.1 – Road construction, rehabilitation and climate proofing; and
2.2 – Maintenance of roads.

4 FMOs are value chain actors who buy products from producers and take them to market or for value addition through processing,
sorting, grading and bagging. They include buying agents, cooperatives and companies.



EB 2018/LOT/P.16

3

13. Component 3: Service provision for value chain development. The outcome of
component 3 will be improved value chain organization and performance. This will be
achieved through a set of concurrent activities in subcomponents: 3.1 – Support to
farmer organizations (including the establishment of business platforms for value chain
players); 3.2 – Improved market linkages through the construction of humidity-
controlled warehouses to store cocoa beans during the wet season when roads are not
passable; 3.3 – Support to extension service development and outreach; 3.4 – Dry
storage; and 3.5 – Implementation support to the Government’s strategy on reducing
emissions from deforestation and forest degradation, and foster conservation,
sustainable management of forests, and enhancement of forest carbon stocks.

14. Component 4: Project coordination, management, monitoring and evaluation (M&E),
and policy. Using the country programme approach, TCEP II will adopt a similar
strategy to that of TCEP I. This will ensure efficient and effective planning,
implementation, M&E and knowledge management while considering environmental and
climate change resilience. In addition, component 4 will involve policy engagement and
will drive gender and social inclusion activities along with dialogue for establishing a
functional road maintenance fund.

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

15. Similar to TCEP I, the Ministry of Agriculture will be responsible for implementing TCEP
II. The same national steering committee will orient the project strategy, oversee
planning, review progress and ensure linkages among stakeholders. Under the
supervision of the project management unit within the ministry, which was established
to coordinate donor-funded projects, the implementation, management and M&E of
TCEP II will be the delegated responsibility of the project implementation unit (PIU).
Staffing requirements for TCEP II will be harmonized with those of TCEP I using the
country programme approach. A county-level PIU will be established in Lofa County
with similar functions to that of STCRSP, but with increased human and physical
resources to coordinate the mobilization of kuu groups, farmer field schools and other
farmer groups, and facilitate the participation of community members and FMOs.
Through the efforts of a value chain specialist and a multi-stakeholder platform,
memoranda of agreement will be signed with private-sector entities and cooperatives in
order to ensure access to markets and services. The Central Agricultural Research
Institute (CARI) will be responsible for increasing the supply of improved planting
material.

Organizational framework.B.
16. A project steering committee will be established to drive the project’s strategy, oversee

planning, measure progress and assess impact. It will also facilitate linkages with
related projects, government services and value chain stakeholders. The Monrovia-
based project management unit will be the secretariat of the project steering
committee, with administration and overall management responsibilities. The
appropriately staffed and equipped country-level PIU at the Ministry of Agriculture office
in Voinjama will facilitate local linkages, provide technical and monitoring support, and
liaise with TCEP I counterparts in Nimba County.

17. The Monrovia-based PIU will coordinate activities in Lofa County with those in
Nimba County so that both can access similar services and jointly acquire seeds,
equipment and other inputs, creating economies of scale through bulk buying or
staggering buying arrangements in order to avoid over-burdening suppliers.

18. TCEP II is aligned with the Government’s PAPD, in which the Government recognizes
the agricultural sector’s potential for job creation and sustainable livelihoods,
particularly though value chain development.



EB 2018/LOT/P.16

4

Planning, monitoring and evaluation, learning and knowledgeC.
management

19. M&E will be undertaken by a team of qualified officers and implemented in line with
guidance developed for TCEP I. The targets included in the logical framework will guide
the project’s pace of implementation.

20. The preparation of the annual workplan and budget (AWP/B) will be a participatory
exercise involving the county-level PIU along with colleagues from the central PIU in
Monrovia, the decentralized local government, other stakeholders and implementing
partners. The central PIU will play a key role in consolidating the AWP/B and will ensure
that project indicators are properly integrated with clear targets.

21. TCEP II will establish a knowledge management plan, including a communication
strategy and plan, which will determine the types of knowledge management products
to be developed based on the intended audience. The knowledge management focus of
TCEP II will be on learning lessons and accumulating best practices through the
collection, sharing and dissemination of information on targeted cocoa value chains,
organizational development and cocoa commercialization.

22. These knowledge services will be tailored to the needs of beneficiaries. The content will
be aimed at women and youth, and all services will target these users. To this end, the
project’s learning and knowledge management strategy will capture and disseminate
knowledge at various levels focused on: (i) generating trust and fostering linkages
between partners; (ii) managing and sharing information, knowledge and experiences;
(iii) improving the private sector’s effectiveness and efficiency in adding value and
innovating; (iv) conducting analyses that can provide an evidence base for policy
dialogue; and (v) creating conditions for replication, scaling up and sustainability.

Financial management, procurement and governanceD.
23. The inherent risk is assessed as high. As a result, the project will largely follow the

same stand-alone financial management arrangements established for ongoing IFAD
projects, which will reduce the risk to medium. The financial management
arrangements will include: (i) the appointment of a qualified financial controller and
accountant; (ii) the tracking of all programme transactions using customized accounting
software in line with the International Public Sector Accounting Standards cash basis of
accounting; (iii) a designated account in United States dollars for IFAD financing in the
central bank of Liberia (IFAD funds will not be mingled with other funds); (iv) the
disbursement of IFAD financing against duly certified withdrawal applications in
accordance with IFAD disbursement procedures; and (v) periodic financial reports
prepared by the PIU in formats agreed upon with IFAD. In addition, consolidated
financial statements will be audited annually by an independent auditor in accordance
with the International Standards on Auditing and IFAD audit requirements. The audit
report, together with a management letter, will be submitted to IFAD within six months
of the end of each fiscal year. Daily financial operations will be detailed in the relevant
section of the programme implementation manual.

24. IFAD applies a zero-tolerance policy towards fraudulent, corrupt, collusive or coercive
actions in all projects financed through its loans and grants. IFAD’s anticorruption policy
and whistleblowing procedures will be included in the project implementation manual.

SupervisionE.
25. The project will be directly supervised by IFAD. Supervision will not be conducted as a

general inspection or evaluation, but as an opportunity to assess achievements and
lessons jointly with the implementation team, and reflect on ways to improve
implementation and impact. A financial management specialist will participate in
supervision missions at least once per year, to providing implementation support and
monitoring fiduciary risks.



EB 2018/LOT/P.16

5

IV. Project costs, financing and benefits
A. Project costs
26. The project is composed of four components, including project coordination and

management, totalling US$42.6 million in base costs and US$47.6 million including
contingencies and taxes over a six-year period. Component 2 (rehabilitation and
maintenance of roads) has the highest budget (at US$22.3 million), representing
47 per cent of total costs, followed by component 1 (revitalization of cocoa plantations)
at a cost of US$14.4 million (30 per cent of total costs). Service provision for value
chain development (component 3) has the lowest budget at US$2.6 million. Project
coordination, management, M&E and policy are estimated at US$8.4 million,
representing 18 per cent of total costs.

Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component
IFAD loan IFAD grant Private sector Beneficiaries

Borrower/
counterpart

Financing gap,
including
climate Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %
1. Revitalization
of cocoa
plantations 3 558 24.7 3 558 24.7 3 252 22.6 1 660 11.5 741 5.1 1 628 11.3 14 396 30.2
2. Rehabilitation
and maintenance
of roads 4 206 18.9 4 206 18.9 - - 123 0.6 1 333 6.0 12 395 55.7 22 263 46.7
3. Service
provision for
value chain
development 140 5.4 140 5.4 129 5.0 - - 21 0.8 2 144 83.2 2 575 5.4
4. Project
coordination,
management,
M&E and policy 4 009 47.7 4 009 47.7 - - - - 392 4.7 - - 8 410 17.7

Total 11 913 25.0 11 913 25.0 3 381 7.1 1 783 3.7 2 487 5.2 16 167 33.9 47 644 100

B. Project financing
27. TCEP II will be financed by IFAD, the Government of Liberia, private-sector partners,

participating farmers and cofinanciers. As the main financier, IFAD will contribute
US$23.8 million, covering 50 per cent of the total costs of all components. Private-
sector partners will contribute approximately US$3.4 million. The Government will
finance taxes and duties on imported goods, and value-added tax for a total of
US$2.5 million (5.2 per cent of the total cost). Beneficiary contributions are estimated
at 1.8 million (3.8 per cent of the total cost). The financing gap of US$16.2 million
includes US$7 million for climate adaptation and mitigation. It should be noted that
TCEP II will absorb the entire US$ 23.8 million allocation for Liberia in IFAD10 through
the performance-based allocation system (PBAS) as a 50 per cent grant and 50 per cent
highly concessional loan. Cofinancing opportunities will be explored in order to fill the
US$16.2 million financing gap. In the event that cofinancing to cover this gap is not
secured, funding will be provided through the country’s next PBAS allocation.



EB 2018/LOT/P.16

6

Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category
IFAD loan IFAD grant

Financing gap,
including
climate Private sector Beneficiaries

Borrower/
counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount
I. Investment cost
A. Works 4 206 19.2 4 206 19.2 12 020 54.9 - - 123 0.6 1 333 6.1 21 888
B. Equipment and

material 416 46.5 416 46.5 - - - - - - 63 7.0 895
C. Consultancies 582 46.5 582 46.5 - - - - - - 88 7.0 1 252
D. Training 1 680 18.0 1 680 18.0 2 750 29.3 1 146 12.2 1 660 17.7 454 4.8 9 370
E. Workshops 1 422 31.9 1 422 31.9 1 397 31.4 - - - - 214 4.8 4 455
F. Services 1 235 25.2 1 235 25.2 - - 2 235 45.5 - - 202 4.1 4 907
TOTAL INVESTMENT
COSTS 9 541 22.3 9 541 22.3 16 167 21.4 3 381 7.9 1 783 4.2 2 354 5.5 42 767
II. Recurrent costs
Salaries and allowances 1 490 50.0 1 490 50.0 - - - - - - - - 2 980
Operational costs 882 46.5 882 46.5 - - - - - - 133 7.0 1 897
TOTAL RECURRENT
COSTS 2 372 48.7 2 372 48.7 - - - - - - 133 2.7 4 877

Total 11 913 25.0 11 913 25.0 16 167 33.9 3 381 7.1 1 783 3.7 2 487 5.2 47 644

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
28. TCEP II will benefit 10,000 smallholder cocoa farmers and 5,000 other beneficiaries

through improved roads and value chain services. Considering the average household
size of 4.289 in the project area, this totals 64,200 household members. An additional
5,000 people will benefit from better roads, stronger cooperatives and market linkages,
the availability of improved planting material and better input-supply systems.

29. Component 1 is expected to lead to an increase in cocoa production, marketing and
exports as a result of: (i) the revitalization of abandoned plantations; (ii) replanting of
new trees; (iii) higher yields for smallholder farmers; (iv) higher farm-gate prices; and
(e) higher-quality cocoa as a result of improved post-harvest handling and marketing.

30. Benefits from component 2 (rehabilitation and maintenance of roads) will include
greater access to markets, reduced time and cost of reaching local markets, and limited
post-harvest losses due to poor transportation conditions. Component 3 (service
provision for value chain development) will enhance the delivery of quality services to
cocoa farmers and guarantee sustainability through improved extension services and
greater access to inputs and markets.

31. The economic results of the project are positive and significant, with an economic
internal rate of return of 17 per cent and a net present value of additional benefits
totalling US$15.2 million over 20 years against a social discount rate of 10 per cent.
The sensitivity analysis indicates that the results are robust to a reduction in the rate of
adoption, but sensitive to an overall reduction in benefits, increased costs and delays in
implementation.

D. Sustainability
32. In view of the project’s targeting of existing and new plantations, rehabilitation of

existing roads, safeguards against indirect deforestation, measures to mitigate
environmental risks posed by the application of agrochemicals and careful monitoring of
negative social impacts, it has been proposed to classify this project as category B –
posing moderate socio-environmental risks. A Social, Environmental and Climate
Assessment Procedures note has been prepared classifying the climate risk as
moderate.



EB 2018/LOT/P.16

7

E. Risk identification and mitigation
33. The project’s main risks include start-up delays, weak governance and institutional

capacities, and vulnerability cocoa price variations. With a 14-month delay between
signature and ratification of the financing agreement for TCEP I under the previous
administration, continuous and results-driven dialogue with the Government on all
critical dimensions of the project will be undertaken to accelerate the start up. In
addition, start-up funds of US$200,000 have been included in the financing agreement.
To mitigate the risk of weak governance and capacities, TCEP II will competitively
recruit staff, harmonize staffing with the country programme staffing arrangements,
use IFAD procurement guidelines and strengthen training and control systems related to
financial management. To mitigate the risk of price variations, the project will support
investments in other food crops for food security, climate resilience and smooth cash
flow.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

34. The design of TCEP II complies with IFAD’s Strategic Framework (2016-2025), with a
clear focus on enabling poor rural women and men to overcome poverty. Specifically,
TCEP II is aligned with Strategic Objective 1: Increase poor rural people’s productive
capacities; Strategic Objective 2: Increase poor rural people’s benefits from market
participation; and Strategic Objective 3: Strengthen the environmental sustainability
and climate resilience of poor rural people’s economic activities.

35. In addition, the project is aligned with the IFAD Policy on Gender Equality and Women’s
Empowerment by promoting economic empowerment that provides rural women with
equal opportunities to participate in – and benefit from – profitable economic activities
in the cocoa value chain.

36. TCEP II is compliant with IFAD’s Private Sector Development and Partnership Strategy
through promoting public-sector facilitation of mutually beneficial 4P involving
smallholder farmers and private market operators in response to clear market
opportunities.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
37. The proposed project is in line with the new administration’s five-year PAPD, which

recognizes the importance of: (i) inclusive and sustainable economic diversification to
achieve structural transformation and growth; (ii) enabling the private sector to play a
leadership role; and (iii) agriculture as an engine of growth. In order to diversify the
economy, the Government has prioritized the agricultural sector and has identified
seven priority value chains for support through the PAPD (2018-2022). These include,
rice, oil palm, horticulture, cocoa, rubber, cassava, and poultry and pig husbandry.

Innovations and scaling upC.
38. TCEP II scales up the recently completed STCRSP and is complementary to TCEP I.

There are additional opportunities for scaling up within the cocoa belt and the proposed
project is closely aligned with government priorities and the interventions of other
donors such as the World Bank. Prospects for scaling up this project include the use of
kuu groups and farmer field schools, youth engagement, tree crop revitalization and
capacity building of partner cooperatives. The benefits of a strengthened cocoa value
chain could be transferred to other commodity value chains.

39. Key innovations in TCEP II as compared to past projects include: (i) the integration of
climate change resilience and institutional capacity building into the approach; (ii) a
focus on the supply chain for new cocoa genetic resources along with post-harvest
activities and cocoa quality; (iii) an emphasis on service delivery by cooperatives to
their members; (iv) the combination of plantation revitalization with the replanting of
cocoa; (v) specific measures to include women and promote their access to benefits;



EB 2018/LOT/P.16

8

and (vi) the use of a long-term capacity-building strategy for cooperatives along with
systematic institutional capacity building and institutional auditing.

Policy engagementD.
40. The proposed project is aligned with government policies including the: (i) PAPD (2018-

2023); (ii) Revised Draft National Aid Policy of Liberia; (iii) National Cocoa Export
Strategy (2014-2018); (iv) Land Rights Act; (v) Agriculture Commodity Regulatory
Authority Act; and (vi) National Adaptation Programme of Action for Climate Change
Resilience. Through its M&E system, the project will provide important feedback to the
Government on project implementation and lessons learned, informing policies for the
sector.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
41. A Project financing agreement between the Republic of Liberia and IFAD will constitute

the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower/recipient. A
copy of the negotiated financing agreement will be tabled at the session.

42. The Republic of Liberia is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

43. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement Establishing
IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
44. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of the

following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to the
Republic of Liberia in an amount of eleven million nine hundred and thirteen
thousand United States dollars (US$11,913,000) and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions
presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a Debt Sustainability Framework
grant to the Republic of Liberia in an amount of eleven million nine hundred and
thirteen thousand United States dollars (US$11,913,000) and upon such terms
and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

Gilbert F. Houngbo
President
























































President’s Report 
 

 

Proposed Loan and Debt Sustainability 
Framework Grant to the Republic of the Niger 
for the Family Farming Development 
Programme in the Diffa Region  


 
Republic of the Niger 

Family Farming Development Programme in the Diffa 
Region  

Financing summary 

Initiating institution: IFAD 

Borrower/recipient: Republic of the Niger 

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture 

Total programme cost: EUR 16.06 million 

Amount of IFAD loan: EUR 5.37 million  

Amount of IFAD Debt Sustainability 
Grant: 

EUR 5.37 million  

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional: Maturity period of 40 years, 
including a grace period of 10 years, interest-free with a 
service charge of 0.75 per cent per annum.  

Cofinancier: Norwegian Development Cooperation Agency 
(NORAD) 

Amount of cofinancing: EUR 3.09 million  

Contribution of borrower/ 
recipient: 

EUR 2.12 million  

Contribution of beneficiaries: EUR 0.12 million  

 



EB 2018/LOT/P.15 

1 

Recommendation for approval 

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed 

financing to the Republic of the Niger for the Family Farming Development 

Programme in the Diffa Region (ProDAF-Diffa), as contained in paragraph 59. 

Proposed loan and Debt Sustainability Framework Grant 
to the Republic of the Niger for the Family Farming 
Development Programme in the Diffa Region  

I. Strategic context and rationale 

A. Country and rural development and poverty context 

1. Poverty and security situation. With a poverty rate of 48.9 per cent, a gross 

national product of US$430 per capita and a very low human development index 

(HDI) of 0.348 in 2015 and 2016, Niger is one of the poorest countries in the 

world, ranking 187
th
 out of 188 countries on the HDI. Attacks by Boko Haram 

terrorists around Lake Chad have exacerbated the poverty of the area’s population, 

whose security is seriously affected. According to government statistics, there were 

252,305 refugees or displaced persons in the Diffa region in October 2017. 

2. Agricultural potential. The Diffa region has real potential for the production of 

irrigated and flood recession crops, having an arable area of 265,000 hectares, 

69 per cent of it in the Lake Chad lakebed, 28 per cent along the Komadougou 

Yobé River et 3 per cent in the oasis basins of Mainé-Soroa and Goudoumaria. 

Rainfed crop development in the agriculture subsector is limited due to low rainfall, 

coupled with low dune-soil fertility and parasite pressure. The main constraints to 

irrigated crop production are the limited financial capacity of farmers to embrace 

irrigated farming, the absence of credit tailored to their needs and the lack of 

effective systems to provide them with inputs and market their produce. 

3. In terms of livestock production, in 2016 the livestock population in the Diffa 

region (all species) was estimated at over 3,750,000 head, corresponding to 

1,637,000 tropical livestock units, or 9.9 per cent of the nation’s stock. Some 

95 per cent of the population engages in livestock production, which accounts for 

55 per cent of the region’s annual gross product, making it the leading activity in 

terms of total export earnings from agro-sylvo-pastoral products. Notwithstanding, 

the livestock subsector in the Diffa region suffers from chronic forage shortages 

(in 10 out of 12 years), poor networking of water points, hindering rational use of 

grazing lands, and poor farmer organization in terms of marketing the animals and 

their subproducts. 

4. Market access. Market transactions in the Diffa region are dominated by the sale 

of livestock and peppers and controlled by Nigerians, who are positioned 

downstream in the value chains as the main buyers but upstream as well, in the 

case of peppers, as the main providers of inputs through crop loans. This model, 

however, has been seriously disrupted by the Boko Haram attacks, which have 

caused most rural markets to shut down and led to the development of informal 

channels of trade. A large portion of the profit margin, therefore, accrues to 

merchants and their intermediaries, while farmers sell around 70 per cent of their 

production at harvest, when prices are at their lowest.  

5. Situation of women and young adults. Limited access to production factors, 

among them land, financing and technical and economic advisory services, exclude 

women from agricultural production activities, leaving them to work in the artisanal 

processing of farm products (small-scale food services, oil, dairy products and flour 



EB 2018/LOT/P.15 

2 

and by-products). In rainfed crop production, women’s participation is observed in 

cowpea harvesting, and in irrigated crop production, in pepper harvesting. In 

recent years, women have shown a keen interest in irrigated market garden crops 

in oasis basins. The banning of motorcycle use due to security issues has seriously 

affected the employment of young men who once provided motorized transport for 

people and merchandize. Agriculture, especially market gardening, could offer 

them an opportunity to re-enter the workforce. 

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and 
RB-COSOP  

6. The Diffa Regional Development Plan (2016-2020) emphasizes: (i) the 

preservation, growth and diversification of agro-sylvo-pastoral and fish production; 

and (ii) the strengthening of community resilience to climate change, crises and 

natural disasters.  

7. The national policy orientations for 2020
1
 include the goal of tripling the 

contribution of irrigated crops to the national grain balance sheet. This strategic 

orientation also applies to the Diffa region, thanks to a greater supply of production 

factors (water-capture works, drainage systems), technical and economic 

agricultural advisory services and the creation of warehousing and processing 

facilities and mechanisms for securing market access for the products supplied by 

the agro-sylvo-pastoral and fish value chains. 

8. The Nigerien authorities’ determination and efforts to fight rural poverty by 

targeting support to young adults and women through agricultural development as 

the primary source of rural employment, strengthening the population’s resilience 

through upstream and downstream production assistance and helping households 

hurt by the security crisis to rapidly recover are the motives behind the preparation 

of this programme.  

9. Concerning refugee populations, the Government is committed to establishing 

mechanisms to support local communities, accommodating displaced persons 

through the development of sustainable agropastoral activities and ensuring the 

social and economic integration of displaced persons in the receiving areas and 

preparing them to return to their country and village of origin once the security 

threats are under control. This vision is supported by the findings of partners 

operating in the area, who state that after years of humanitarian assistance, the 

target groups’ current needs are related more to the demand for economic projects 

that empower them and guarantee their dignity. This demand is consistent with 

IFAD’s intervention framework, grounded in the promotion of family farming to 

eradicate poverty and hunger in rural areas.  

10. Thus, based on the conclusions and measures agreed upon by Niger and IFAD in 

the COSOP 2013-2018 midterm review, the Government has requested IFAD’s 

agreement to finance and extend the Family Farming Development Programme 

(ProDAF) to the Diffa region to capitalize on the achievements of previous and 

current projects in this region. 

II. Programme description 

A. Programme area and target group 

11. The programme will operate in oasis basins, the western and central areas of the 

Komadougou Yobé river valley, the central agropastoral area and the north-

western pastoral area of the region. This area covers the entire communes of 

Goudoumaria, Mainé-Soroa, Chétimari, Diffa, Gueskérou, Foulatariet and N’Guel 

Beyli and the southern part of the N’gourti commune, connecting the Gueskérou 

                                           
1
 (i) The Sustainable Development and Inclusive Growth Strategy 2035 (SDDCI – Niger 2035); (ii) the Economic and 

Social Development Plan 2017-2021; (iii) the Action Plan 2016-2020 of the 3N Initiative "Nigeriens Nourishing Nigeriens"; 
and (iv) the Small-scale Irrigation Strategy in Niger. 



EB 2018/LOT/P.15 

3 

and N’Guel Beyli communes. Operations will be concentrated around five economic 

development poles (EDP): Goudoumaria (including Boudti), Mainé-Soroa, N'Guel 

Beyli/Foulatari, Chétimari and Diffa (including Gueskérou). The N'Guel Beyli EDP 

will focus on agropastoral activities and products, and the other EDPs on activities 

and the products of irrigated and rainfed agriculture and sedentary livestock 

production. 

12. Four criteria were used in selecting the intervention areas: (i) security conditions 

(subject to variation); (ii) the geographical concentration of activities in an EDP 

approach; (iii) potential partnerships and synergies with other actors; and (iv) the 

presence of different types of target groups, addressed through a holistic approach. 

13. The targeting of beneficiaries will take place at two levels: (i) socio-economic 

targeting of vulnerable local or refugee households; and (ii) demographic targeting 

of women and young adults. More particularly, ProDAF-Diffa will target 20,000 

households, or roughly 140,000 people, representing some 16 per cent of the 

population in the Diffa region, 30 per cent of them refugees. Furthermore, at least 

30 per cent of the beneficiaries will be women and 30 per cent young adults, as 

stipulated in the ProDAF strategy for equitable development and empowerment of 

women and youth.  

B. Programme development objective 

14. The programme’s general objective is adapted from the objective of the ProDAF 

programme in the Maradi, Tahoua and Zinder regions, of which this programme is 

an extension. Its purpose is to sustainably ensure food and nutrition security and 

the resilience capacities of rural households in the Diffa region. 

15. The development objective is to sustainably increase the income, adaptation to 

climate change and market access of family farms and promote the social and 

economic integration of refugee or displaced populations into the receiving 

communities. 

16. ProDAF-Diffa operations will be part of the following key actions in the five selected 

EDPs: (i) the development of a wholesale market; (ii) small-scale irrigated farming 

in intermediate areas located near national Route 1; (iii) higher productivity in 

rainfed and irrigated crop production; (iv) protection of intervention basins through 

sand-dune stabilization; (v) the upgrading of pastoral trails and water points; and 

(vi) the social and economic integration of refugee groups. 

17. The expected result is expressed in two outcomes: 

(i) The emergence of sustainable family farms enables 20,000 rural households, 

30 per cent made up of refugees, 30 per cent women and 30 per cent young 

adults, to diversify their production (crops and livestock) and boost their 

yields (30 per cent) and resilience to external shocks, notably those that are 

climate-related. 

(ii) Thirty per cent of the 20,000 rural farmers, 30 per cent of them refugees, 

30 per cent women and 30 per cent young adults, obtain higher income from 

their surplus agro-sylvo-pastoral production thanks to higher sales in the 

markets that supply national consumer centres and cross-border markets. 

C. Components/outcomes 

Component 1: Strengthening of sustainable family farming 

18. The objective of this component is to sustainably boost the productivity of family 

farms. It has three sub-components: (i) structured and productive climate-resilient 

farms; (ii) strengthening of the technical and economic capacity of family farms; 

and (iii) resilience of vulnerable populations.  

19. Component 1 consists of: (i)(a) the development of sub-watersheds 

(3,000 hectares) and promotion of the pastoral water subsector through water and 



EB 2018/LOT/P.15 

4 

soil conservation works and soil protection and restoration, the rehabilitation of 

pastoral corridors and water points and (i)(b) the development of areas for 

irrigated crop production (360 hectares); (ii) the strengthening of agricultural 

technical capacity to enable family farms to diversify their production and increase 

crop yields by 30 per cent, and the improvement of sedentary livestock production 

to boost herd productivity and reduce conflicts over the use of natural resources; 

and (iii) activities preparatory to action on behalf of refugees and the promotion of 

women’s leadership and nutrition security. 

Component 2: Market access 

20. This component has three sub-components: (i) the structural development of 

sustainable market access; (ii) the promotion of rural microenterprises and youth 

employment; and (iii) market access and regional trade integration. 

21. Component 2 consists of: (i) the rehabilitation or building of economic 

infrastructure to improve trade flows in existing markets in the five EDPs; (ii) the 

sustainable management of economic infrastructure through specific social 

engineering; (iii) the promotion of rural microenterprises to benefit local and 

refugee populations; (iv) financing for the vocational training and equipping of 

young adults (30 per cent of them young women) for work in farming-related 

agricultural activities or non-agricultural activities; and (v) actions aimed at 

strengthening the policy dialogue on increasing EDP connectivity through wholesale 

markets and sales platforms in subregional transport corridors. 

Component 3: Programme management and coordination, monitoring and 

evaluation and knowledge management  

22. This component includes the administrative and financial operations, management 

and monitoring and evaluation (M&E) of the programme. 

III. Programme implementation 

A. Approach 

23. ProDAF-Diffa’s implementation will follow the ProDAF principles applied in the 

Maradi, Tahoua and Zinder regions while considering the specific context of Diffa, 

marked by the presence of refugee populations among the beneficiaries.  

24. The programme approach is based on the following intervention principles: 

 The improvement of food and nutrition security, considering the dimensions 

of food availability, accessibility and use through stable mechanisms; 

 Geographical continuity of the interventions through the EDPs, which includes 

the wholesale market connected by rural feeder roads to satellite collection 

points in the production areas, themselves surrounded by watersheds; and  

 The scaling up of ProDAF to benefit the Diffa region. 

B. Organizational framework 

25. The Ministry of Agriculture will be responsible for project oversight and 

implementation. The national steering committee will be responsible for the 

strategic orientation of the programme, ensure compliance with the financing 

agreements and the programme’s alignment with national strategies and approve 

the annual work plans and budgets (AWP/B). It will be presided over by the 

General Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture and consist of representatives of 

government agencies and the beneficiaries. 

26. Programme coordination and management, overseen by the Ministry of Agriculture, 

will be handled by a regional programme management unit (RPMU) based in Diffa 

with technical, administrative and financial autonomy. 



EB 2018/LOT/P.15 

5 

27. ProDAF’s national technical assistance unit, based in Niamey and Maradi, will 

provide ad hoc technical assistance for programme implementation, as needed, 

particularly in the areas of fiduciary, administrative and technical management.  

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation and learning and 
knowledge management  

28. Planning. The RPMU will be responsible for consolidating the AWP/Bs prepared by 

the technical partners in keeping with the regulations and timetables and based on 

targeted discussions at the local level. It will be co-responsible for organizing and 

serving as the secretariat for the national steering committee’s sessions with the 

other RPMUs. The AWP/B will be validated by the national steering committee and 

submitted for IFAD's prior approval. 

29. Monitoring and evaluation. The purpose of the M&E system will be to furnish 
reliable current data on the programme’s implementation and facilitate 
decision-making. It will be linked to ProDAF’s comprehensive M&E system. The 
RPMU in Diffa will take the data collected from forms completed in the field by 

implementation operatives/partners and enter it in ProDAF’s consolidated 

harmonized database. IFAD and the Government will conduct a joint midterm 

review in year three of the programme.  

30. Learning and knowledge management. The purpose of knowledge management 
in ProDAF-Diffa will be: (i) to encourage personnel involved in the implementation 
of programme activities to regularly describe and document the knowledge gained 

during implementation (capitalization); and (ii) to systematically store (either 

manually or electronically) the documentary output (reports, studies, terms of 

reference, notes, etc.) of the various programme actors and facilitate its use 

(as part of knowledge sharing). 

D. Financial management, procurement and governance 

31. The programme’s administrative and financial management, as well as its fiduciary 

aspects, will be based on ProDAF’s existing configuration and mechanisms. 

ProDAF’s financial management risk is considered “moderate.” 

32. Programme funds will be managed according to the terms of the financial 

agreements. The administrative and financial management procedures will be 

detailed in the letter to the borrower and the manual of internal administrative, 

financial, accounting and monitoring procedures. The manual will take the 

distinctive features of the programme into account, specifically the multiple sources 

of financing and the number of intervention regions, as well as the particular risks 

of the Diffa region.  

33. Flow of funds. A dedicated account in CFA francs for the deposit of the respective 

loan and grant funds and an operational account in CFA francs will be opened in the 

name of the programme at a reputable commercial bank. Disbursements from 

these accounts will require two signatures.  

34. The programme coordination unit will prepare quarterly financial and accounting 

statements, which it will transmit to the Government and IFAD, along with the 

financial statements for programme operations, which will be subject to an annual 

external audit.  

35. Pursuant to IFAD guidelines, an external audit of the financial statements will be 

performed annually. It will adhere to the International Standards on Auditing and 

comply with IFAD Guidelines on Project Audits. The audited financial statements 

will be published on IFAD’s official website.  

  



EB 2018/LOT/P.15 

6 

36. Procurement. Procurement is governed by: (i) Law No. 2011/037 of 28 October 

2011, containing the general principles, controls and regulations governing public 

contracts and the outsourcing of public services; (ii) Decree No. 2014-070/PRN/MF 

of 12 February 2014 on a priori supervision of procurement procedures, which is 

exercised by the Directorate for Public Procurement and Financial Covenants; and 

(iii) Decree No. 2016-641/PRN/PM of 1 December 2016 on the code for 

procurement and the outsourcing of public services. 

E. Supervision 

37. Programme supervision will be carried out directly by IFAD and the Government, 

represented by the Ministry of Agriculture, in collaboration with the other 

departments involved, the programme coordination unit and relevant partners, 

notably NORAD. In addition, IFAD will organize implementation support missions, 

as needed.  

IV. Programme costs, financing and benefits 

A. Programme costs 

38. The total programme cost over a six-year period, including provisions for physical 

contingencies and price increases, is estimated at EUR 16.06 million. This cost 

includes an estimated base cost of EUR 14.82 million and provisions for physical 

and financial contingencies in the amount of EUR 1.24 million, or 8 per cent of the 

total programme cost. 

39. The estimated total programme cost by component is as follows: (i) component 1: 

strengthening of sustainable family farming, in the amount of EUR 8.86 million, or 

55.2 per cent; (ii) component 2: market access, in the amount of EUR 3.93 million, 

or 24.5 per cent; and (iii) component 3: programme management and 

coordination, monitoring and evaluation and knowledge management, in the 

amount of EUR 3.27 million, or 20.3 per cent. In terms of total financing, current 

expenditures are established at EUR 1.92 million, or 11.9 per cent. The table below 

shows the breakdown of programme costs by component and sub-component.  



 

 

 

E
B
 2

0
1
8
/
L
O

T
/
P
.1

5
 

7
 

 
Table 1 
Programme costs by component and financier 
(Thousands of euros) 

 

IFAD loan IFAD grant NORAD  Beneficiaries Government Total 

Component Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % 

1. Strengthening of sustainable 
family farming 

            

1.1. Structured and productive climate-
resilient farms  

1 542.8 27.3 1 542.8 27.3 1 676.5 29.7 89.6 1.6 792.7 14.0 5 644.3 35.1 

1.2. Strengthening of the technical and 
economic capacity of family farms 

751.3 29.1 751.3 29.1 761.2 29.5 - - 313.8 12.2 2 577.7 16.1 

1.3. Resilience of vulnerable populations  149.1 23.5 149.1 23.5 257.2 40.5 - - 80.0 12.6 635.4 4.0 

Subtotal 2 443.2 27.6 2 443.2 27.6 2 694.9 30.4 89.6 1.0 1 186.4 13.4 8 857.4 55.2 

2. Market access             

2.1. Structural development of 
sustainable market access  

1 008.1 43.7 1 008.1 43.7 - - - - 291.0 12.6 2 307.3 14.4 

2.2. Promotion of rural microenterprises 
and youth employment  

508.5 44.9 508.5 44.9 - - 33.1 2.9 82.9 7.3 1 133.0 7.1 

2.3. Regional trade integration  225.1 45.7 225.1 45.7 - - - - 42.7 8.7 493.0 3.1 

Subtotal 1 741.8 44.3 1 741.8 44.3 - - 33.1 0.8 416.6 10.6 3 933.2 24.5 

3. Programme management and 
coordination, monitoring and 
evaluation and knowledge 
management 

            

3.1. Monitoring and evaluation and 
knowledge management  

445.8 42.6 445.8 42.6 - - - - 154.2 14.7 1 045.8 6.5 

3.2. Coordination and management 730.3 32.9 730.3 32.9 396.6 17.8 - - 364.9 16.4 2 222.1 13.8 

Subtotal 1 176.1 36.0 1 176.1 36.0 396.6 12.1 - - 519.1 15.9 3 267.9 20.3 

   Total 5 361.1 33.4 5 361.1 33.4 3 091.5 19.3 122.6 0.8 2 122.1 13.2 16 058.5 100.0 

 



EB 2018/LOT/P.15 

8 

B. Programme financing 

40. The programme will receive financing in the amount of EUR 16.06 million, as 

follows: (i) an IFAD Debt Sustainability Framework grant in the amount of 

EUR 5.37 million, or 33.4 per cent; (ii) an IFAD loan of EUR 5.37 million, or 

33.4 per cent; (iii) a grant from Norway for an estimated EUR 3.09 million, or 

19.3 per cent; (iv) a contribution from the Government in the amount of 

EUR 2.12 million, or 13.2 per cent; and (v) a contribution from the beneficiaries 

in the amount of EUR 0.12 million, or 0.8 per cent. The table below shows the 

breakdown of programme costs by expenditure category and financier. 



 

 

 

E
B
 2

0
1
8
/
L
O

T
/
P
.1

5
 

9
 

Table 2 
Programme costs by expenditure category and financier 
(Thousands of euros)  

Expenditure category 

IFAD loan IFAD grant NORAD Beneficiaries Government Total 

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % 

Investment expenditures             

1. Works 1 208.5 31.5 1 208.5 31.5 823.4 21.5 - - 590.8 15.4 3 831.2 23.9 

2. Vehicles 74.8 29.1 74.8 29.1 40.7 15.8 - - 66.8 26.0 257.1 1.6 

3. Equipment and materials 92.7 35.4 92.7 35.4 8.7 3.3 - - 68.2 26.0 262.4 1.6 

4. Training 715.4 45.7 715.4 45.7 - - - - 135.7 8.7 1 566.5 9.8 

5. Consultancies 452.5 22.6 452.5 22.6 776.1 38.7 - - 325.2 16.2 2 006.3 12.5 

6. Goods, services and 
supplies 

1 669.5 33.0 1 669.5 33.0 1 095.4 21.6 89.6 1.8 538.1 10.6 5 062.1 31.5 

7. Grants and subsidies 409.2 43.6 409.2 43.6 - - 33.1 3.5 86.7 9.2 938.2 5.8 

8. Unallocated - - - - 214.4 100.0 - - - - 214.4 1.3 

Total investment 
expenditures 

4 622.6 32.7 4 622.6 32.7 2 958.7 20.9 122.6 0.9 1 811.6 12.8 14 138.1 88.0 

Current expenditures             

1. Salaries and allowances 593.3 38.6 593.3 38.6 101.9 6.6 -  248.4 16.2 1 537.0 9.6 

2. Operating costs 145.2 37.9 145.2 37.9 30.9 8.1 -  62.1 16.2 383.4 2.4 

Total current expenditures 738.5 38.5 738.5 38.5 132.8 6.9 - - 310.5 16.2 1 920.4 12.0 

   Total 5 361.1 33.4 5 361.1 33.4 3 091.5 19.3 122.6 0.8 2 122.1 13.2 16 058.5 100.0 



EB 2018/LOT/P.15 

10 

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis  

41. The analysis of the financial return of the activities shows that for rainfed crops, 

the respective internal rates of return (IRR), net present values (NPV) and cost-

benefit ratios are on the order of: (i) for millet, IRR of 21.20 per cent, NPV of 

FCFA 15,135 and cost-benefit ratio of 1:7; (ii) for sorghum, IRR of 16.3 per cent, 

NPV of FCFA 7,206 and cost-benefit ratio of 1:3; and (iii) for groundnut, IRR of 

23.40 per cent, NPV FCFA 37,772 and cost-benefit ratio of 1:2. 

42. The additional margins for irrigated crops are FCFA 661,697 and FCFA 739,000 for 

peppers and rice, respectively. The IRR for onions is 62.8 per cent, with an NPV of 

FCFA 11 million and a cost-benefit ratio of 2:2. These results show that a farmer 

can handle the additional costs of adopting improved production techniques to clear 

additional income.  

43. Goat raising in these groups is also a profitable venture, with an IRR of 

43.7 per cent, an NPV de FCFA 642,219 and a cost-benefit ratio of 1:3. 

44. The financial analysis of the operating accounts of the various market stakeholders 

(farmers, collectors, warehousers, merchants/wholesalers, communities/ 

municipalities, market management groups) shows a satisfactory return for the 

different types of market investments, with IRRs ranging from 14.2 to 48 per cent.  

45. The programme’s overall economic internal rate of return (EIRR) is 21.6 per cent, 

and the NPV of the net economic cash flow will be US$13 million. This preliminary 

result is satisfactory. With a 10 per cent increase in sales prices, the EIRR is 

around 23.6 per cent. A 15, 20 and 30 per cent drop in the yield of rainfed crops 

reduces the EIRRs to 18.9 per cent, 17.3 per cent and 14.0 per cent, respectively, 

while a 10 per cent increase in costs yields an EIRR of 19.6 per cent.  

D. Sustainability 

46. ProDAF-Diffa employs an approach based on increasing resilience that applies the 

lessons learned in neighbouring regions while tackling the challenges stemming 

from population movements triggered by the security situation. The programme’s 

primary goal is therefore to increase the sustainability of the proposed practices 

and the installations introduced by the programme. The sustainability of the 

interventions will be guaranteed by choosing practices and activities that have 

proven effective over decades, with a high rate of adoption by rural populations. 

47. From a technical standpoint, the activities under components 1 and 2 are based on 

social engineering that links each intervention, from the lowland parcel to the 

subwatershed, to its users through commune management and association 

committees with recognized competencies.  

48. From a social standpoint, the programme approach will be inclusive, and support 

will be provided to all target groups without discrimination. To this end, instead of 

setting up specific organizations for refugee groups, the programme will encourage 

populations to participate in existing or newly created village associations. This 

approach will better integrate the communities to implement the activities and 

capitalize on the opportunities offered. 

49. From an economic standpoint, the increased volume and value of farm production, 

together with greater market opportunities, will be the incentives for beneficiary 

engagement. 

E. Risk identification and mitigation 

50. ProDAF-Diffa’s implementation will face risks associated with the climate and 

security situation in the region, the security risk remaining unpredictable and high. 

The environmental and social risks make it a “Category B” project. Since the region 

is Sahelian, the project is classified as having a “high climate risk” due to the risks 

associated with climate change. The risk assessment was taken into account in the 



EB 2018/LOT/P.15 

11 

Environmental and Social Management Plan. The anticipated mechanisms and 

interventions will mitigate the adverse effects of the risks on the activities. Since 

ProDAF-Diffa is an extension of ProDAF, numerous risks are substantially mitigated 

by the very fact of its institutional integration and the recognized experience of 

ProDAF. Nevertheless, in order to lower ProDAF-Diffa’s risk in the implementation 

phase from “high” to “moderate,” as in the case of ProDAF, the new structure 

includes an internal risk auditor to better control the risks. The main risks and 

mitigation measures put the overall programme risk at the “moderate” level.  

V. Corporate considerations 

A. Compliance with IFAD policies 

51. ProDAF-Diffa is aligned with IFAD’s Strategic Framework 2016-2025, centred on 

inclusive and sustainable transformation of the rural world. ProDAF-Diffa will 

contribute to meeting IFAD’s three strategic objectives, namely: (i) increase poor 

rural people’s productive capacities; (ii) increase poor rural people’s benefits from 

market participation; and (iii) strengthen the environmental sustainability and 

climate resilience of poor rural people’s economic activities.  

52. The activities implemented under ProDAF-Diffa (development of water points, 

pastoral areas, stabilization of dunes surrounding water points, support for 

agricultural inputs) will have a limited, reversible, and easily mitigated 

environmental and social impact. Moreover, they will take place in small areas and 

be on the scale of the activities implemented under ProDAF in the neighbouring 

regions, where the adverse social and environmental impacts were considered 

minimal and very localized. It is therefore proposed that ProDAF-Diffa be classified 

as an environmental and social category “B” programme. 

B. Alignment and harmonization 

53. The programme’s targeting strategy is aligned with IFAD’s targeting policy. 

ProDAF-Diffa is aligned with the Government’s recommendations in favour of the 

interventions in the Diffa context, considering the refugee, displaced and returning 

populations in the country who wish to engage in family farming. The programme 

will also ensure that this aspect will be taken into account in the monitoring of 

programme results and the impact assessment (with data disaggregated by sex, 

age and origin). ProDAF-Diffa is aligned with Niger’s Small-scale Irrigation 

Strategy.  

C. Innovations and scaling up 

54. ProDAF-Diffa is the product of a scaling up of ProDAF’s achievements and approach 

in the neighbouring regions. In particular, it has the following features:  

 The economic development pole (EDP) approach. The EDP approach, 

which consists of concentrating a coherent and complementary group of 

support activities in a production area to amplify their impact, was 

successfully implemented in 2012-2013 in the Project to Support Food 

Security in the Maradi Region (PASADEM) and the Ruwanmu Small-scale 

Irrigation Project (PPI Ruwanmu). It has been employed in current ProDAF 

activities in the Maradi, Tahoua and Zinder regions and is now used as a 

model in the intervention strategies of the government and certain partners. 

This approach will be replicated in this programme.  

 Farmer field schools and water user associations. These tools will be 

promoted by the programme based on the current ProDAF experience. 

 Assisted natural tree regeneration. This simple and inexpensive technical 

innovation for managing the natural regeneration of trees has had a very 

positive impact in projects promoted by IFAD since the 1980s.  



EB 2018/LOT/P.15 

12 

D. Policy engagement  

55. ProDAF-Diffa interventions are aligned with the lines of action in the Plan of Action 

2016-2020 of the 3N Initiative "Nigeriens Nourishing Nigeriens," especially: 

(i) water management for agro-sylvo-pastoral and fish production; (ii) the 

promotion of agro-sylvo-pastoral and fish value chains; and (iii) integrated and 

sustainable natural resource management and environmental protection. These 

lines of action are also part of the Diffa Regional Development Plan (2016-2020) 

and IFAD’s country strategic opportunities programme (COSOP) 2013-2021. 

By focusing its efforts on the problem of assisting refugees, the programme is also 

aligned with the Facility for Refugees, Migrants, Forced Displacement and Rural 

Stability (FARMS), developed by IFAD and its partners to help displaced persons 

become more independent and strengthen the resilience of receiving communities. 

Therefore, the programme will generally support Niger’s Sustainable Development 

and Inclusive Growth Strategy 2035 (SDDCI – Niger 2035). 

VI. Legal instruments and authority 
56. The financing agreement between the Republic of the Niger and IFAD will 

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the 

borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached in 

appendix I. 

57. The Republic of the Niger is empowered under its laws to receive financing from 

IFAD. 

58. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement 

Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing. 

VII. Recommendation 
59. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of 

the following resolution: 

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to 

the Republic of the Niger in the amount of five million three hundred seventy 

thousand euros (EUR 5,370,000) and upon such terms and conditions as shall 

be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented 

herein. 

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a Debt Sustainability 

Framework grant to the Republic of the Niger in the amount of five million 

three hundred seventy thousand euros (EUR 5,370,000) and upon such terms 

and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and 

conditions presented herein. 

 

Gilbert F. Houngbo  

President 

 












































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the
Republic of Benin for the
Agricultural Development and
Market Access Support Project

Republic of Benin
Agricultural Development and Market Access Support Project
Detailed design report

The designations employed and the presentation of the material in this map do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the
part of IFAD concerning the delimitation of the frontiers or boundaries, or the authorities thereof.
Source: IFAD, 2018

IFAD



EB 2018/124/R.23/Rev.1

iv

Republic of Benin

Agricultural Development and Market Access Support
Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower/beneficiary: Republic of Benin

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries

Total project cost: EUR 89.5 million

Amount of IFAD loan:
(Performance-based allocation
system [PBAS]–2016-2018 cycle)

EUR 13.3 million

Amount of IFAD grant (under the Debt
Sustainability Framework):

EUR 13.3 million

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional: Maturity period of 40 years,
including a grace period of 10 years, with a
service charge of 0.75 per cent per annum.

Cofinancier(s): OPEC Fund for International Development (OFID),
private sector, financial institutions

Amount of cofinancing: OFID: EUR 8.6 million
Private sector: EUR 4.8 million
Financial institutions: EUR 1.1 million

Terms of cofinancing: OFID: Loan
Private sector: Loan
Financial institutions: Loan

Contribution of borrower/beneficiary: EUR 8.4 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: EUR 2.8 million

Financing gap: EUR 37.2 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2018/124/R.23/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of Benin for the Agricultural Development and Market
Access Support Project, as contained in paragraph 56.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Benin for the
Agricultural Development and Market Access Support
Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. As a result of the economic and institutional reforms introduced under the

Government Action Programme (PAG) “Revealing Benin”, the Beninese economy
has entered a new era of growth. In 2017, the country reported 5.5 per cent
growth in its GDP, compared with 4 per cent in 2016. Nevertheless, it still faces
significant challenges, with a poverty rate of more than 40 per cent; persistent
social and occupational inequalities to the detriment of women; food insecurity,
which affects 15 per cent of rural populations and 21 per cent of farm households;
and persistent unemployment (2.7 per cent) on top of a high level of
underemployment (72 per cent), largely among young adults. Added to these
constraints are the effects of climate change, which sap the resilience of
populations, especially in rural areas.

2. Agriculture is a strategic sector of the Beninese economy, contributing an average
of 23 per cent of GDP and 75 per cent of export revenues and generating around 70
per cent of the jobs. The National Investment Plan for Agriculture, Food and
Nutrition Security 2017-2021 five-year breakdown, prepared within the framework
of the Strategic Plan for Agricultural Development (PSDSA 2017-2025), is aimed at
maintaining annual GDP growth of at least 6 per cent during the period and
increasing the average annual income of rural households by 7.5 per cent.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and the
results-based COSOP

3. PADAAM was chosen to implement the country strategic opportunities programme
(COSOP) for Benin 2018-2022 and is entirely under the agricultural component of
the PAG 2016-2021. It has two strategic objectives: (i) the productive capacity,
resilience to climate change and food and nutrition security of vulnerable rural
populations are sustainably improved; and (ii) access to agricultural output markets
is improved.

4. The national value-chain promotion strategy focuses on three conventional value
chains – rice, maize and cassava – with a view to improving food security and
increasing the income of rural populations. PADAAM will thus support the three
value chains stipulated in the PAG in order to: (i) bridge the food gap in terms of
the domestic demand for rice, only 56 per cent of which was met in 2017, thus
reducing the country’s dependence on mass imports of rice from the Asian market;
and (ii) maintain and increase the value added of maize and cassava in association
with the private sector, while developing trade with the subregional market.

5. In the conventional value-chain niche, PADAAM will support government efforts to
promote the value chains, ensuring household food security and creating value
added. It will be devoted entirely to supporting the implementation of national
development programmes in the value chains in question.



EB 2018/124/R.23/Rev.1

2

II. Project description
A. Intervention area and target group
6. In the current strategic context, characterized by the promotion of value chains and

“agro-clusters,” PADAAM will intervene in four agricultural development poles
(ADPs) with the potential for production and economic partnership development,
namely: (i) the south of pole 4, covering the department of Collines; (ii) pole 5,
covering the departments of Zou and Couffo; (iii) pole 6, confined to the
department of Plateau; and (iv) pole 7, which stretches to the departments of
Ouémé, Atlantique and Mono.1 The priority production areas in the ADPs will be
selected on the basis of a detailed study conducted prior to project start-up.

7. PADAAM’s target group will consist of the following categories: (i) smallholder
farmers and small rural entrepreneurs engaged in production or processing
activities in the three value chains (rice, maize and cassava); (ii) young adults from
family farms and/or young adults who have graduated and/or have some education
who wish to work in the value chains as first-time entrepreneurs, as well as young
entrepreneurs who are already active in the value chains or wish to take advantage
of the business opportunities they offer; (iii) agroentrepreneurs and downstream
actors in the value chains – for example, processors, merchants and individuals
involved in service activities and organized into small or medium-sized enterprises
or cooperatives; (iv) agricultural professional organizations (APOs) with different
degrees of organization and geographic positioning: grassroots farmers’
organizations, unions, federations, regional collaboration platforms and national
mixed groups of professionals.

8. PADAAM will reach 51,000 households and approximately 255,000 rural people,2
including smallholder farmers, farm youth, agroentrepreneurs and actors
downstream in the value chains, as well as professional organizations. This
approach is designed to target and favour women and young adults (aged 15-35),
who represent 40 per cent and 30 per cent of the beneficiaries, respectively.

B. Project development objective
9. PADAAM’s general objective is to reduce rural poverty in the project intervention

area by including stakeholders, both women and men, in diversified and profitable
value chains.

10. The project’s development objective is to sustainably increase the food and
nutrition security, as well as the income, of smallholder farmers, particularly
women and young adults.

11. Attainment of this objective will be measured by the following indicators:
(i) 204,000 low-income rural people benefitting from upward economic mobility, 40
per cent of them women and 30 per cent of them young adults; (ii) an increase in
the yield per hectare of maize, rice and cassava; (iii) at least a 30 per cent increase
in the income of 80 per cent of the beneficiaries; (iv) more than 400 production
partnerships, bringing together some 1,600 organizations, and close to
50,000 smallholder farmers developed; (v) 80 per cent of supported rural
businesses reporting higher profits; and (vi) 1,100 young adults engaged in
business initiatives in the three targeted value chains.

C. Components/outcomes
12. PADAAM will be implemented over a six-year period (2019-2024) and will have

three investment components: (i) strengthening partnerships and creating value
added (EUR 39.4 million, or 44 per cent of the total cost); (ii) improving agricultural

1 The department of Littoral, included in ADP 7, is not part of the PADAAM intervention area.
2 Average size of households (five individuals) based on the average size of rural households in the
seven departments targeted by the intervention. Source: Cahier des villages et quartiers de ville, INSAE,
August 2016.



EB 2018/124/R.23/Rev.1

3

productivity and production (EUR 40.1 million, or 44.8 per cent of the total cost);
and (iii) coordination and management under the IFAD Rural Intervention
Framework Programme in Benin (ProCar) (EUR 10 million, or 11.2 per cent of the
total cost).

13. Component 1: Strengthening partnerships and creating value added. This
component should result in: (i) the formalization of sustainable economic
relationships between smallholder farmers and the private sector; (ii) an increase in
the volume of raw materials processed in the three value chains and sold on the
domestic and international market; (iii) a significant increase in the income of
smallholder farmers; and (iv) strengthening of the institutional and governance
base of professional organizations.

14. Component 2: Improving agricultural productivity and production. This
component is aimed at increasing the average yield per hectare by around 44 per
cent, with production in the three targeted value chains reaching the volumes
specified in the PSDSA for 2021. Under this component, PADAAM will also
participate in increasing the availability and quality of infrastructure for production
and implementation support, with the following as the main indicators:
2,500 hectares of wetlands improved, 91 storage facilities rehabilitated or built and
250 km of feeder roads built.

15. Component 3: Coordination and management under ProCar (Coordination,
monitoring and evaluation and knowledge management). Implementation of
this component will be based on the programme approach used in the creation of
ProCar and the reforms to the territorialization of agricultural development adopted
by the Government. This framework programme governs the administrative and
fiduciary management of all projects in IFAD’s portfolio in Benin, and supports the
shared functions of monitoring and evaluation, knowledge management,
communication, targeting and youth support.

III. Project execution
A. Approach
16. Geographic approach. Benin has chosen the geographic approach for agricultural

development, and PADAAM will endorse it. This new approach will be implemented
through the ADPs under the new institutional architecture that gives the territorial
agricultural development agencies (ATDA) technical coordination functions that
cover the ADPs and the promotion of value chains, making the departmental
bureaus of agriculture, livestock and fisheries responsible for the regulation of the
interventions and geographic monitoring and evaluation at the territorial level.

17. Value-chain approach. PADAAM supports a change in paradigm centred on the
sustainable creation of value added through the promotion of inclusive economic
partnerships that link smallholder farmers and their organizations with the private
sector and the market in the three priority value chains.

18. Outsourcing approach. The project will employ an inclusive outsourcing approach
to implementing the activities related to partnerships, employing a mechanism
involving different consulting and facilitation firms whose services will be
coordinated by international technical assistance in direct support of project
coordination. This approach will also help to bring young adults into the workforce
through on-the-job training provided by experienced training centres selected for a
customized partnership.

B. Organizational framework
19. PADAAM will be overseen by the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries and

be part of ProCar’s organic framework. ProCar’s National Steering Committee (CNP)
will be expanded to PADAAM with the participation of new stakeholders and/or focal



EB 2018/124/R.23/Rev.1

4

points. Four participatory territorial planning committees will be created in the four
ADPs in question – the south of pole 4, pole 5 and poles 6 and 7).

20. PADAAM’s execution will involve an array of complementary functions divided into
two categories: (i) the country programme functions already established in ProCar
(financial administration and management, procurement, monitoring and
evaluation, communication and knowledge management, gender, young adults and
targeting, etc.); and (ii) specific technical functions, which will be buttressed by
technical assistance.

21. In the ADPs, PADAAM will be implemented by the ATDAs, which will be supported
with technical assistance under a mandate governed by a clear and assured exit
strategy with a three-year horizon, capacity building and the acquisition of
competencies by the ATDAs. ProCar programme functions in the four ADPs will be
guaranteed by two regional support units.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, learning and knowledge
management

22. The planning and budgeting of PADAAM activities will be built on the work
programmes and annual budgets, prepared using a bottom-up approach. The
participatory territorial planning committees will meet in the ADPs each year to
validate the work programmes and annual budget, which will ultimately be
submitted to ProCar for approval during the annual sessions of the CNP.

23. The PADAAM monitoring and evaluation system will be anchored in the ProCar
system and implement a results-based management system, using the programme
approach adopted in 2016 and the monitoring and coordination mechanism of the
National Value-chain Development Programmes fostered by the ATDAs responsible
for their coordination. The system will be buttressed by: (i) monitoring and
evaluation assistants assigned to the regional support units, (ii) the creation of a
data-gathering mechanism and tools to ensure optimal and regular information
about the PADAAM’s chain of results, and (iii) the ProCar database, along with
those of the ATDAs in the ADPs.

24. Learning, knowledge management and communication. PADAAM will base its
learning and knowledge management system on ProCar’s monitoring and
evaluation mechanism. A management plan will be prepared at project start-up to
specify the different communication products and tools that should be developed,
the most suitable formats and support for the different types of users and the
frequency with which these products and tools should be developed.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
25. Financial management. This will be based on the ProCar mechanisms and

procedures for the execution of portfolio operations. Resource management will
follow country and IFAD procedures. ProCar will prepare the financial statements,
which it will regularly transmit to the Government and IFAD.

26. Procurement. The works and supplies, as well as the consulting and advisory
services necessary for the project, will be delivered in accordance with the current
Benin procurement code, insofar as they are aligned with IFAD’s procurement
mechanisms. Within the framework of productive partnerships and rural
microenterprise promotion, the beneficiaries – farmers’ organizations and young
promoters of rural enterprises – will participate in procurement through the specific
modalities defined in the manuals.

27. Governance. PADAAM will apply the principles of good governance: (i) to the
national orientation and monitoring committee’s mobilization and participation
mechanism through Benin’s civil society stakeholders’ platform; (ii) thanks to the
territorial decentralization groups’ involvement in creating facilitating infrastructure
for the implementation of productive partnerships; (iii) through beneficiary



EB 2018/124/R.23/Rev.1

5

participation in the planning and evaluation of investments; and (iv) by overseeing
the implementation of partnership business plans by farmers’ organizations.

E. Supervision
28. PADAAM supervision will consist of two supervision missions per year, organized

and conducted jointly by IFAD, the Government and the principal stakeholders,
notably the members of the CNP and the ADP participatory territorial planning
committees. Supervision will be conducted using the new online Operational Results
Management System, which will facilitate the updating of data and information on
the project’s status. The first supervision mission will essentially support project
start-up by establishing the implementation mechanism at all levels, finalizing the
mandates, and issuing the tender documents for the baseline studies and other
priority activities. The supervision missions will particularly emphasize
implementation monitoring, achievement of the results, outcomes and impacts and
the effectiveness of institutional and technical outcomes intended for consolidation
and replication on a large scale. Specific implementation support missions can also
be organized as needed.

IV. Project costs, financing and benefits
A. Project costs
29. The total cost of PADAAM, including provisions for physical contingencies and price

increases, is EUR 89.5 million. The base cost is EUR 84.1 million. The amount for
physical and financial contingencies is EUR 5.4 million. Taxes, which are included,
come to EUR 8.4 million.

30. Project costs can be broken down into the following components: (i) strengthening
of partnerships and creation of value added: evaluated at EUR 39.4 million, or
44 per cent of the total project cost; (ii) improvement of agricultural productivity
and production: EUR 40.1 million, or 44.8 per cent of the total project cost; and
(iii) coordination, monitoring and evaluation and knowledge management:
EUR 10 million, or 11.2 per cent of the total project cost.



EB 2018/124/R.23/Rev.1

6

Table 1
Project costs, by component and financier
(Thousands of euros)

IFAD loan IFAD grant Financing gap OFID Private sector Banks/SFD
Beninese
Government Beneficiaries Total

Component Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

A. Strengthening of partnerships and creation of value added
Partnership
development

4 390 14.6 4 390 14.6 11 971 39.7 4 807 15.9 628 2.1 1 850 6.1 2 131 7.1 30 167 33.7

Capacity-
building

1 778 19.4 1 778 19.4 5 229 56.9 301 3.3 106 1.2 9 193 10.3

Subtotal 6 168 15.7 6 168 15.7 17 200 43.7 4 807 12.2 628 1.6 2 151 5.5 2 237 5.7 39 360 44
B. Improvement of agricultural productivity and production

Access to inputs,
services, cross-
cutting support

1 936 18.8 1 936 18.8 4 946 48 466 4.5 410 4 600 5.8 10 295 11.5

Infrastructure
development

3 122 10.5 3 122 10.5 9 784 32.8 8 561 28.7 5 243 17.6 29 832 33.3

Subtotal 5 059 12.6 5 059 12.6 14 730 36.7 8 561 21.3 466 1.2 5 653 14.1 600 1.5 40 126 44.8
C. Coordination, monitoring and evaluation and knowledge management

Coordination
and
management

1 514 21.4 1 514 21.4 3 607 50.9 444 6.3 7 080 7.9

Monitoring and
evaluation and
knowledge
management

573 19.4 573 19.4 1 687 57 128 4.3 2 961 3.3

Subtotal 2 087 20.8 2 087 20.8 5 295 52.7 573 5.7 10 041 11.2
Total 13 313 14.9 13 313 14.9 37 224 41.6 8 561 9.6 4 807 5.4 1 094 1.2 8 377 9.4 2 837 3.2 89 527 100

B. Project financing
31. The project financing plan is as follows:

(i) IFAD, for a total of EUR 26.6 million, or 29.8 per cent of the total project cost
(50 per cent in the form of a loan granted under highly concessional terms
and 50 per cent in the form of a grant through the Debt Sustainability
Framework), under the PBAS 2016-2018 cycle;

(ii) OFID, for EUR 8.6 million, or 9.6 per cent of the total project cost;

(iii) The private sector, for EUR 4.8 million, or 5.4 per cent of the total project
cost;

(iv) Financial institutions, for EUR 1.1 million, or 1.2 per cent of the total project
cost;

(v) Beninese Government, for EUR 8.4 million, or 9.4 per cent of the total project
cost; and

(vi) Beneficiaries, for EUR 2.8 million, or 3.2 per cent of the total project cost.

32. This yields a financing gap of EUR 37.2 million, or 41.6 per cent of the total project
cost, which can be filled by future allocations from IFAD (through financing
modalities to be determined, based on internal procedures and approval by the
Executive Board), or any other source of financing to be determined in the course
of project implementation. The financing from the Beninese Government consists
solely of the exemption of duties and taxes on project acquisitions.



EB 2018/124/R.23/Rev.1

7

Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category/financier
(Thousands of euros)

IFAD loan
IFAD

grant
Finaning

gap OFID
Private

sector
Banks/SF

D

Beninese
gover
nment

Beneficiar
ies Total

Categories Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

Works 2 549 10.3 2 549 10.3 8 148 32.8 7 094 28.6 4 465 18 24 803 27.7
Equipment and
matérial a

1 380 18.9 1 380 18.9 2 862 39.0 22 0.3 1 685 23 7 328 8.2

Goods, services
and inputs

1 436 19.7 1 436 19.7 4 030 55.2 12 0.2 365 5 21 0.3 7 301 8.2

Consultancies b 2 056 15.9 2 056 15.9 5 732 44.3 1 330 10.3 1 755 13.6 12 929 14.4
Training c 2 327 20 2 327 20 6 537 56.2 104 0.9 346 3 11 640 13.0
Grants and
subsidies

2 875 12.9 2 875 12.9 8 232 36.8 4 807 21.5 1 094 4.9 2 470 11.1 22 353 25

Operating costs 109 18.5 109 18.5 266 45.1 106 18 591 0.7
Salaries and
allowances

581 22.5 581 22.5 1 420 55 2 582 2.9

Total 13 313 14.9 13 313 14.9 37 224 41.6 8 561 9.6 4 807 5.4 1 094 1.2 8 377 9.4 2 837 3.2 89 527 100
a Including vehicles.
b Studies, including domestic and international technical assistance.
c Including workshops.

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
33. Financial analysis. PADAAM’s financial analysis examined: (i) smallholder maize

and cassava farmers; (ii) small wetlands operations; and (iii) different types of
partnership initiatives between farmers and the private sector in the form of simple
partnerships, public-private-producer partnerships (4P) and co-enterprises. The
analysis was aimed at determining the feasibility of the activities in terms of the
return on investment throughout the project and ensuring that the funds invested
came from the farmer, the project or a credit institution. It consisted, on the one
hand, of evaluating farmers’ capacity to generate net positive results, and on the
other, of analysing their financial situation to ensure that financial equilibrium was
maintained for the continuity of the activity, bearing in mind the conditions of
access to credit in the project area and the cofinancing rules established for the
project. The results, summarized in the table below, indicate that all the models
included have a satisfactory financial return.



EB 2018/124/R.23/Rev.1

8

Table 3
PADAAM economic model summary

Models Cost-benefit Ratio
Financial Internal

Rate of
Return

NPV (8.5%)

FCFA USD
EUR

1. Agricultural production models
Maize/cassava model 2.9 104% 3 881 463 7 255 6 223
Wetlands management type 1 1.2 13% 9 355 186 17 486 14 999
Wetlands management type 2 1.1 13% 11 990 007 22 411 19 224
Wetlands management type 3 1.4 19% 38 169 833 71 345 61 198

2. Models for increasing value added
Creation of ESOPa-Rice 1.2 32% 388 379 283 725 943 622 699
Strengthening of ESOP-Rice 1.3 46% 433 770 696 810 786 695 476
Creation of ESOP-Cassava 1.1 29% 242 930 261 454 075 389 496
4P PIVERTB/ESSORc -Maize 1.1 17% 44 129 563 82 485 70 754
4P PIVERT/ESSOR-Cassava 1.2 26% 103 466 044 193 394 165 890
4P Agribusiness-Maize 1.5 33% 45 872 520 85 743 73 549
Simple contracting–Cassava 1.1 24% 14 007 311 26 182 22 458
Simple contracting-Maize 1.2 22% 19 152 330 35 799 30 708
Simple contracting-Rice 1.3 54% 114 071 931 213 219 182 895

a Producer services and organization enterprise.
b Green innovation, rural energy and transformation pole.
c Solidarity Enterprise for Services to Rural People.

34. Economic results and sensitivity analysis. Given the wide range of activities
foreseen, PADAAM will have many economic benefits, the totality of which cannot
be addressed in calculating the economic return indicators, such as the economic
internal rate of return (EIRR) and the net present value (NPV). Nevertheless, the
analysis covers the project’s main benefits and the resulting support for production
(rice, maize and cassava), support for the creation and strengthening of
stakeholder partnerships (simple contracting, 4Ps, co-enterprises) and the
rehabilitation of rural feeder roads.

35. The project’s EIRR is established at 18.9 per cent, and the NPV, with an economic
opportunity cost of capital of 6 per cent, at EUR 54.2 million. This is a very
satisfactory result, all the more so because certain benefits could not be included in
the calculations due to insufficient data for their evaluation – for example, the
effects of capacity building and the construction of storage facilities, which have
improved food security. Overall, the project will have a positive impact on the
entire economy and especially on women and young adults, who are its priority
target groups.

36. The sensitivity analysis yields very robust results. Even in the case of a 30 per cent
drop in income, a 50 per cent increase in costs or a two-year lag in profits, the
economic rate of return remains largely above the opportunity cost of capital (6 per
cent), and the NPV, at more than EUR 20.6 million. Calculation of the switching
values shows that, all things being equal, the project’s economic return will be nil
only if its profits fall by 56 per cent or its costs increase by 125 per cent.

D. Sustainability
37. PADAAM will develop and/or improve the sustainability of the investments made at

different levels of the ADPs, thanks to its approach aimed at guaranteeing their
ownership by the beneficiaries and furthering beneficiary empowerment, thereby
limiting backsliding after project completion. The dynamics of the programme
approach in place since the advent of ProCar will consolidate the synergy of the
interventions and strengthen the sustainability of the achievements.

38. PADAAM’s actions will contribute to: (i) the institutional sustainability of farmers’
organizations and mixed groups of professionals in the targeted value chains, and
the strengthening of ATDAs through institutional support; (ii) the economic and
financial viability of the actors involved in the partnerships and business initiatives
developed by farmers’ organizations or young rural entrepreneurs; (iii) on the one



EB 2018/124/R.23/Rev.1

9

hand, the sustainability of the infrastructure that will be built in collaboration with
the decentralized territorial groups during implementation of their communal
development plans, and on the other, the involvement of the beneficiaries, who will
be organized to ensure the sustainable maintenance and management of the
infrastructure and facilities; and (iv) environmental sustainability and the promotion
of measures to increase target groups’ resilience to climate change. In addition, the
results of the sensitivity test performed as part of the economic and financial
analysis show the robustness of the project in the face of risks.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
39. The main risks for PADAAM are associated with: (i) the innovative nature of the

value-chain approach in the ADPs: (ii) the recent advent of the ATDAs as overseers
of the execution of the national value-chain promotion strategy; (iii) the weak
structure of the value chains’ APOs, and (iv) external factors, such as climate
change. These risks have been clearly identified and mitigation measures put in
place, among them: (i) the strengthening of ATDA technical functions and the
gradual transfer of project supervision; (ii) support for the establishment of APOs
and the improvement of their governance; (iii) the dissemination of drought-
resistant varieties, cultivation systems and conservation practices in agriculture;
and (iv) agricultural insurance. The project’s environmental and social risks put it in
Category “B.” The risks associated with climate change are considered moderate.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies

40. IFAD Strategic Framework 2016-2025. PADAAM is aligned with IFAD’s Strategic
Framework 2016-2025, which fosters inclusive and sustainable transformation of
the rural world. PADAAM will engage in activities aimed at the attainment of IFAD’s
three strategic objectives, which are to: (i) increase poor rural people’s productive
capacity; (ii) increase poor rural people’s benefits from market participation; and
(iii) strengthen the environmental sustainability and climate resilience of poor rural
people’s economic activities.

41. COSOP 2018-2022. PADAAM is included in IFAD’s strategy note for Benin, which
pursues the following strategic objectives: (i) Productive capacity, resilience to
climate change, and food and nutrition security of vulnerable rural populations are
sustainably improved; and (ii) access to agricultural output markets is improved.

42. IFAD strategy on climate change. The project is aligned with the IFAD strategy
on climate change, especially the following objectives: (i) support innovative
approaches to make smallholder farmers, both women and men, more resilient to
climate change; (ii) help smallholder farmers take advantage of the available
measures and financing to mitigate its effects; and (iii) establish a more coherent
dialogue on climate change, rural development, agriculture and food security.

43. Natural resource and environmental management. PADAAM is aligned with
IFAD’s Environment and Natural Resource Management Policy (2011) and is based
on the following guiding principles: (i) engagement in value chains to drive green
growth (principle 5); and (ii) promote climate-smart approaches to rural
development (principle 3).

44. IFAD targeting strategy. The project’s targeting strategy espouses IFAD’s policy,
which is based on targeting that is geographic, direct and self-targeting. PADAAM
engages with poor rural people, women and young adults, the priority beneficiaries
at the heart of IFAD interventions. The different profiles of the target groups have
been considered in the project support, notably through an analysis by sex and
age, as well as wherewithal (degree of wealth). PADAAM also integrates the issues
of gender and youth in its targeting and throughout the project’s life cycle. The
development of gender and youth targeting strategies and mechanisms was



EB 2018/124/R.23/Rev.1

10

introduced during the project design phase. These strategies also sought to devise
measures to promote empowerment, facilitation, and execution during its
implementation. The project will also ensure that these elements are well-
integrated during results monitoring and impact assessment.

45. Integration of smallholder farmers and the private sector in agricultural
value chains. PADAAM’s development approach is focused on value chains and
based on an overall analysis of the entire value chain (for each of the three value
chains – rice, maize and cassava). The value-chain approach adopted considers all
stakeholders in each of them (in addition to poor rural people, young adults, and
women, who are IFAD’s main target group) and their interactions. The market is
considered a driving force, and the activities are based on an assessment of the
demand and the capacity of markets to absorb additional production. PADAAM
encourages private-sector engagement to promote the forging of 4P partnerships
that facilitate access to markets.

46. Social, environmental and climate evaluation procedures. Aligned.

B. Alignment and harmonization
47. PADAAM is aligned with the PAG and the PSDSA 2025, whose implementation it

supports by concentrating on the strategy to promote the three conventional value
chains. Project execution will respect the principles of coordination by value chain
established at the sector level and will support implementation of the national
development plans for these value chains overseen by the ATDAs.

48. In addition to the usual services, ProCar aims at fostering greater complementarity
between PADAAM and IFAD-funded operations, in alignment with the Adapted Rural
Financing Services Promotion Project and the Market Gardening Development
Support Project.

49. PADAAM’s targeting will consider the presence of the other bilateral and multilateral
partners operating in the project areas and the need for complementarity. In order
to ensure good coordination in the value chains, prior to start-up a study will be
conducted to update the intervention plan with the support of other technical and
financial partners such as the French Development Agency, German cooperation,
Belgian cooperation, Swiss cooperation, Netherlands cooperation, Canadian
cooperation, the European Union, the African Development Bank, the World Food
Programme, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the World
Bank, etc.

C. Innovation and scaling up
50. PADAAM is one of the first development projects formulated under the PAG. It will

support the national strategy to promote ADPs, innovatively combining the
geographic and value-chain approaches.

51. PADAAM will replicate IFAD’s strategy to further the social and economic inclusion
of poor rural people and scale up successful integrated and innovative approaches
to agricultural value-chain development in order to promote intensified use of
innovative production and processing technologies, efficient agricultural and
agro-industrial contracting practices and appropriate financing and risk
management mechanisms in the agricultural production system. While employing a
diachronic approach, the PADAAM design values the achievements of the recently
sunsetted IFAD interventions – that is, the Rural Development Support Programme
and the Rural Economic Growth Support Project.

D. Policy engagement
52. The project is aimed at grassroots capacity building, especially through

consolidation of the technical, economic, organizational, and operational
competencies of APOs (unions and federations) and mixed groups of professionals.



EB 2018/124/R.23/Rev.1

11

The goal is to endow their structures for representation with greater legitimacy and
enable them to actively participate in policy-making.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
53. A financing agreement between the Republic of Benin and IFAD is the legal

instrument under whose terms the proposed financing will be granted to the
borrower/beneficiary. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as
appendix I.

54. The Republic of Benin is authorized under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

55. I hereby certify that the proposed financing is consistent with the stipulations of the
Agreement Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
56. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing by adopting

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan to the Republic of Benin under
highly concessional terms in an amount of thirteen million three hundred
twenty thousand euros (EUR 13,320,000) and upon such terms and conditions
as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions
presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
Benin under the Debt Sustainability Framework in an amount of
thirteen million three hundred twenty thousand euros (EUR 13,320,000) and
upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with
the terms and conditions presented herein.

Gilbert F. Houngbo
President
















































President’s report

Proposed Loan and Grant to the
Republic of the Union of Myanmar for the
Western States Agribusiness Project


Republic of the Union of Myanmar

Western States Agribusiness Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Ministry of Finance

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Irrigation

Total project cost: US$20.26 million

Amount of IFAD loan: US$8.98 million

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional: 40 years, including a 10-year
grace period and a service charge of three quarters
of one per cent (0.75 per cent) per annum

Amount of IFAD grant: US$3.98 million

Financing gap

Cofinancier(s):

US$4.47 million

Implementing partners

Amount of cofinancing: US$1.05 million

Terms of cofinancing: Grant

Contribution of borrower: US$0.99 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$0.78 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2018/LOT/P.6/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to Republic of the Union of Myanmar for the Western States Agribusiness
Project, as contained in paragraph 54.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of the Union of
Myanmar for the Western States Agribusiness Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context

1. Emerging from 50 years of isolation, Myanmar has embarked on a comprehensive
path of political and economic reforms since 2011. These aim to introduce elements
of popular representation into the political sphere, foster economic growth and
inclusive social development, improve the business environment, attract foreign
investment and reduce poverty.

2. Myanmar’s population was estimated at 53.9 million in 2015, of which some
66 per cent is rural. Myanmar is ethnically diverse, with eight major ethnic groups
and 135 subgroups.

3. Despite being resource-rich, Myanmar is one of the poorest nations in South-East
Asia. An estimated one third of the population were living below the poverty line in
2005, but this proportion had dropped to one fourth by 2014. The 2015 Human
Development Report ranked the country 148th among the 188 nations rated, with a
human development index of 0.536. Myanmar’s per capita gross national income
was estimated at US$1,160 in 2015. The annual growth rate of gross domestic
product accelerated from 4.8 per cent in 2011 to 7.2 per cent in 2015, while
inflation was reported at 8.4 per cent at the end of that year.

4. The agriculture sector is the core of the economy, generating 37 per cent of GDP
and employing about 70 per cent of the working population in 2015. There is a
strong association between agriculture and poverty; and there is significantly
greater poverty in rural areas. The incidence of poverty is also higher among ethnic
groups compared to the majority population.

5. Disparities exist among and within states and within communities. Rural poverty is
largely a function of poor resource endowments. The rural poor are typically
landless people and small and marginal farmers, usually owning between less than
one and five acres of land. They lack access to adequate food and to essential non-
food items and services. Many of the poorest live in isolated hill tracts and upland
areas of ethnic states, which were previously ravaged by decades of civil conflict
that left them isolated and without development investment.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

6. IFAD’s strategy in Myanmar is to support the Government in creating a model for
agricultural modernization and rural transformation in each agroecological zone of
the country. The first investment – the Fostering Agricultural Revitalization in
Myanmar (FARM project) – created the model for agricultural development, service
delivery and enterprise growth in the central dry zone. This model is now being
scaled up by development partners and the Government across the entire dry zone.
The second investment – the Eastern States Agribusiness Project – establishes the



EB 2018/LOT/P.6/Rev.1

2

model for agribusiness development and community agroforestry, and will create
farming and employment opportunities across the eastern hilly zone for ethnic
groups, indigenous people, ex-combatants, and returning migrants. The third
investment – the Western States Agribusiness Project – to be financed under the
2016-2018 performance-based allocation system (PBAS) cycle – creates the model
for climate-resilient agricultural transformation from subsistence to commercial
livelihoods, to be implemented across the western upland areas and forests. With
these projects, IFAD is fulfilling its strategic objective of helping the Government
create optimal models for modernizing agriculture across agroecological zones, with
a strong focus on the ethnic states.

7. The project’s rationale is anchored in the Government’s policies to reduce economic
and social disparities in rural areas. It is consistent with the National
Comprehensive Development Plan, the Framework for Economic and Social
Reforms, and the Poverty Alleviation and Rural Development Action Plan. The
project’s rationale has four dimensions: (i) to provide a systemic structural
response to the challenges of, and opportunities for, rural transformation in
southern Chin and northern Magway; (ii) to create a model for the environmentally
sustainable modernization of agriculture in degraded sloping areas, which generates
economic benefits for poor households; (iii) to rehabilitate productive infrastructure
in ways that optimize sustainable use of the natural resource base; and (iv) to
forge pathways for communities to transition from subsistence to commercial
livelihoods through better access to inputs, knowledge and services. Activities for
livelihood-support and nutrition-sensitive agriculture have also been included, to
address important needs among local communities.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
8. The project is located in southern Chin State and the northern Magway Region,

which share a common river basin. These areas have among the highest
concentrations of poverty in Myanmar. Chin State is located in the hilly western
border area. Its people belong to the Chin ethnic group and its 53 officially
recognized subgroups. Southern Chin is home to some of the most remote and
isolated communities in the country. Magway Region is situated in the central dry
zone, and its population is mostly of the Bamar ethnic group. The region is poor
and food-insecure, and has suffered a series of natural calamities and major
harvest losses in recent years.

9. The project’s target groups consist of: (i) small and medium-scale farming
households in upland and lowland areas; (ii) livestock producers; and
(iii) non-farming and landless households. Women and women-led households will
be prioritized; and youth, as the primary agents of change at the community level,
will be the focus of activities involving technological innovation and
commercialization.

B. Project development objective
10. The project’s goal is to improve the social and economic status of rural households

in a climate-resilient manner in the northern Magway Region and southern
Chin State. Its objective is to increase household incomes and enhance food
security and nutrition quality. Its investments focus on commodities and services
that have comparative advantage, market demand and growth potential.

C. Components/outcomes
11. The project’s two expected outcomes are: (i) access to productive and social

infrastructure is improved; and (ii) technological, financial and policy environment
for small farmers and agribusinesses is enhanced.



EB 2018/LOT/P.6/Rev.1

3

12. Component 1: Infrastructure. The project will finance strategic investments in
productive and social infrastructure.

13. Subcomponent 1.1: Productive infrastructure. The project will finance:
(i) rehabilitation of irrigation schemes to ensure an adequate and reliable supply of
water to farms; (ii) rural access roads linking farms to markets; (iii) irrigation
technology for home gardens to ensure food security and nutritional diversity; and,
(iv) land consolidation on a pilot basis. These investments will generate
opportunities for increased incomes, reduce on-farm and off-farm production costs,
and improve food security for communities and households. They will also improve
water management, reduce water conveyance and application losses by
30-40 per cent, improve drainage and reduce siltation, and conserve groundwater.

14. Subcomponent 1.2: Social infrastructure. The project will invest in social
infrastructure facilities mainly at the household level, particularly targeting the
needs of women and the poorest households. Domestic water supply, rainwater
harvesting, and renewable energy solutions will be eligible for support. Scheme
selection will be participatory, sensitive to cultural considerations, and subject to
social, technical, financial and environmental feasibility. The ownership,
management, operation and maintenance of all facilities constructed will be
optimized to ensure sustainability.

15. Subcomponent 1.3: Capacity-building. The project will build capacities in the
Irrigation and Water Utilization Management Department and the Department of
Rural Development of the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Irrigation (MoALI) –
responsible for productive and social infrastructure respectively. This will be done
through the provision of technical assistance; strengthening of staffing and office
facilities; awareness of water, sanitation and hygiene issues; awareness of
nutritional diversity; and capacity development for social mobilization.

16. Component 2: Services. The project will invest in agricultural modernization and
enabling services to optimize resource management, productivity and benefits in
areas of infrastructure investment.

17. Subcomponent 2.1: Agricultural modernization. The project will invest in a
range of agriculture, livestock and technical services to modernize production and
trigger improvements in food security and nutrition, livelihoods, and economic
returns. Services delivered to farming households will include land titling,
technology transfer, skill development, access to inputs and supplies, access to
markets and information, contractual linkages, and access to financial resources.
Climate-resilient sloping agricultural land technology will be promoted. Services
delivered to the landless will focus on technical and business management skills,
microenterprise development and private-sector linkages.

18. Subcomponent 2.2: Financial services. Building on FARM experiences, the
project will support financial inclusion for small farmers, livestock owners and the
landless, ensuring equal access for ethnic groups and women. It will invest in:
(i) savings and credit groups, promoting financial literacy; (ii) a rural business fund
to support microenterprises; (iii) an agribusiness fund to help agribusinesses set up
processing facilities in the project area; and (iv) a line of credit to refinance project-
related agriculture, livestock and enterprise-lending operations by licensed financial
institutions.

19. Subcomponent 2.3: Policy engagement. The project will contribute to an
inclusive and evidence-based policy framework for rural development in Myanmar,
specifically related to the project’s implementation experiences. It will focus on:
(i) transition from shifting to sedentary agriculture and associated customary land
laws; (ii) re-categorization of high-value commercial crops from non-timber forest
products to agricultural or industrial crops; and (iii) agricultural service delivery and
market linkages.



EB 2018/LOT/P.6/Rev.1

4

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

20. Based on an institutional assessment at the state level, experience in similar
contexts and the country strategy, the project’s implementation approach is to:
(i) strengthen MoALI and other relevant agencies at the state level, and increase
their responsibilities for implementing activities in a sequenced manner; (ii) engage
with reputable implementing partners to serve as lead technical agencies and to
gradually devolve responsibilities to public agencies as their capacities mature;
(iii) establish small state-level project implementation offices (PIOs) for
coordinating implementation at state level and for monitoring and reporting on
progress ; and (iv) establish a project management unit (PMU) in the Department
of Rural Development (DRD) that will be integrated within DRD structures. The PMU
will be responsible for project implementation, fiduciary management, work
planning and budgeting, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), and policy interface
functions. It will manage contracts with implementing partners and public and
private entities.

B. Organizational framework
21. MoALI, in its capacity as lead project agency, will be responsible and accountable

for the project. The DRD of MoALI will be the project's focal department. The
Ministry of Planning and Finance will enter into subsidiary financing agreements
(SFA) with selected licensed financial institutions for administration of the credit
line.

22. The project will be governed by a National Project Steering Committee and two
project coordination committees (one in each location). It will be managed by the
central PMU established within DRD and the two decentralized PIOs (one in each
location).

23. The project will be executed by implementing partners, MoALI at the state level,
and the private sector. They will lead social mobilization, community interfacing and
policy engagement. Infrastructure will be implemented by the Irrigation and Water
Utilization Management Department (IWUMD) and DRD, in collaboration with
private-sector engineering firms and contractors, as required. Agricultural
modernization will be implemented by MoALI knowledge centres (KCs), brokering
services and markets for the target groups, in collaboration with producer
associations and community organizations. Financial services will be provided by
licensed financial institutions.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

24. Planning. The annual work plan and budget will be the key management tool for
planning, monitoring and reporting on the implementation of activities. It will be
based on project design, cost tables and the implementation manual; and it will be
informed by operational experiences and challenges. The logical framework will
constitute the main reference for framing annual work plan and budgets, to create
clear linkages among proposed activities, budget requirements and expected
outputs, outcomes and impacts. A participatory planning approach will be applied,
to ensure that project investments reflect the target groups’ needs and aspirations.

25. Monitoring and evaluation. The project’s M&E system will be designed to provide
reliable information to facilitate results-based management. It will be aligned with
the M&E system developed under the FARM, and will help strengthen MoALI’s
system for monitoring the effectiveness of official development assistance. The M&E
system will have a three-tier structure: (i) output monitoring, focusing on physical
and financial inputs, activities and outputs; (ii) outcome monitoring, focusing on the
use of outputs and measurement of benefits at the household and community



EB 2018/LOT/P.6/Rev.1

5

levels; and (iii) impact assessment, evaluating impacts against objectives. All M&E
data, analysis, and reporting will be disaggregated by poverty status, gender, and
ethnicity.

26. Learning and knowledge management. The project’s learning system will be
structured at the state, region and central levels. It will capture information on
progress, lessons and solutions to implementation constraints. A consolidated
annual project review will be performed towards the end of each fiscal year, to
assess physical and financial progress against the targets and towards the
objectives.

27. Knowledge management will be a systematic feature throughout the project. To
enable effective knowledge management and sharing, results and lessons from the
project will be systematically documented through specific studies and knowledge
products commissioned by the PMU and/or the PIOs. The M&E system will be a key
knowledge source. Innovations observed during implementation will be documented
for possible scaling up. The MoALI and PMU will be responsible for sharing
knowledge documents through dedicated websites, workshops and seminars.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
28. As fiduciary risks are high in Myanmar, the project will apply a number of mitigating

measures: (i) financial reporting based on automated systems; (ii) competitive
recruitment of qualified staff; (iii) use of a financial management manual
integrating controls with operations; (iv) technical assistance and external
oversight; (v) a control framework integrating periodic internal audits and
independent external audits; and (vi) a good governance framework to ensure
accountability and transparency.

29. Financial management. The PMU will be responsible for all aspects of project
financial management, including budgeting, financial statements and reporting,
withdrawal applications for IFAD disbursements, and the coordination of audit
processes.

30. Flow of funds. Designated accounts in United States dollars will be opened for the
IFAD loan and the IFAD grant, and will be operated using the imprest method. Bank
accounts denominated in local currency will be opened at the PMU level, with
signatories at appropriate level for operational efficiency.

31. Financial reporting. The PMU will maintain separate accounts for the project, in
accordance with the cash basis of accounting. The financial statements prepared for
the project will be supplemented with additional data as necessary, so as to provide
minimum disclosures under international accounting standards.

32. Project expenditure will be recorded using the accounting software currently used
by the PMU of another ongoing project in MoALI. Further customization is foreseen
to enhance the software’s reporting capability.

33. Taxes. IFAD’s General Conditions for Agricultural Development Financing, adopted
in 2009 and amended in 2014, allow IFAD financing to be used to pay taxes. The
payment of taxes with IFAD funding is foreseen for the project. The Ministry of
Planning and Finance has formally requested IFAD to cover taxes on the basis that
tax exemption is impractical and the tax burden is low.

34. Audit. The project will be audited by the Office of the Auditor General of the Union
(OAG), which has adopted INTOSAI audit standards. OAG conducts mostly financial
audits, with some procurement and performance audits.

35. Procurement. IFAD procurement guidelines will apply to the project. The
programme implementation manual will specify detailed procurement requirements
and procedures. The procurement methods, prior review arrangements, cost and
time estimates, and risk mitigation measures will be defined in the Letter to the



EB 2018/LOT/P.6/Rev.1

6

Borrower and reflected in the procurement plan. Technical assistance will be
provided to develop PMU and PIO procurement capacities.

E. Supervision
36. The project will be supervised by IFAD. A supervision and implementation support

mission will be undertaken annually; and MoALI offices at the central, state and
regional levels will participate in these missions. A midterm review mission will be
undertaken jointly by IFAD and the Government at the end of the third year of
implementation, to assess the progress, achievements, constraints, emerging
impact and likely sustainability of project activities, and to make recommendations
and any adjustments for the remaining project period.

IV. Project costs, financing, and benefits
A. Project costs
37. The total project cost, including duties, taxes and contingencies, is estimated at

US$20.26 million over a six-year implementation period. Indicative costs for each
component are detailed in table 1. Indicative costs by expenditure categories are
provided in table 2.

Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component

IFAD loan IFAD grant
Implementing

partners Financing gap
Beneficiaries/
private sector

Borrower/
counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Infrastructure 4 065 58.6 1 124 16.2 963 13.9 780 11.2 6 932
1.1 Productive
infrastructure 3 573 83.2 278 6.5 117 2.7 327 7.6 4 294
1.2 Social
infrastructure 146 9.1 627 39.0 383 23.8 453 28.1 1 610
1.3 Capacity-building 346 33.7 219 21.3 463 45.0 1 028

2. Services 3 938 32.4 2 854 23.5 1 050 8.6 3 509 28.9 796 6.6 12 146
2.1 Agricultural
modernization 1 148 12.4 2 854 30.8 1 050 11.3 3 427 37.0 796 8.6 9 275
2.2 Financial services 2 708 100.0 2 708
2.3 Policy engagement 81 50.0 81 50.0 163

3. Project management 981 83.2 198 16.8 1 179
Total 8 984 44.4 3 978 19.6 1 050 5.2 4 471 22.1 780 3.8 994 4.9 20 257

B. Project financing
38. The project will be financed by an IFAD loan of US$8.98 million, an IFAD grant of

US$3.98 million, a government contribution of US$0.99 million, a
beneficiary/private-sector contribution of US$0.78 million, and implementing
partners’ cost-sharing of US$1.05 million. The financing gap of US 4.47 million may
be sourced through cofinancing identified during implementation or through a
subsequent PBAS cycle.



EB 2018/LOT/P.6/Rev.1

7

Table 2
Programme/project costs by expenditure category and financier*
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure
category

IFAD loan IFAD grant
Implementing

partners Financing gap
Beneficiaries/
private sector

Borrower/
counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount
1. Civil works 3 256 91.9 44 1.2 117 3.3 127 3.6 3 554
2. Vehicles 255 100 255
3. Equipment 24 100 24
4. Consulting

services 633 21.2 1 489 52.5 861 30.3 2 984
5. Training 661 38.0 303 17.4 777 44.6 1 741
6. Goods,

services
and inputs 1 615 23.0 2 141 30.5 1 050 15.0 1 528 21.8 652 9.3 29 0.4 7 015

7. Credit 2 276 100 2 276
8. Salaries

and
allowances 152 8.6 1 189 67.7 416 23.7 1 757

9. Operating
costs 104 15.9 549 84.1 652

Total 8 984 44.4 3 978 19.6 1 050 5.2 4 471 22.1 780 3.8 994 4.9 20 257
*

Disbursement categories will be specified in schedule 2 of the negotiated financing agreement. A maximum of six disbursement categories is
envisaged to allow sufficient flexibility during implementation.

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
39. The project is expected to directly benefit 76,810 households, of which 10,190 in

Chin and 66,620 in Magway, encompassing a total of 390,410 rural women and
men. Many additional households will indirectly benefit from project activities. The
estimated project cost per beneficiary household is US$327.

40. Project benefits will be generated from improved infrastructure, land tenure,
agricultural technology, market access, enterprise growth and financial services.
The main beneficiaries will be small farming households, landless/tenant
households, and off-farm households. The key results will be higher incomes,
additional jobs, better food security and nutrition, and secured climate resilience.

41. The project’s economic internal rate of return over 20 years is estimated at
32 per cent.

D. Sustainability
42. The sustainability of project investments is based on the underlying business

relationships that the project will generate between small farmers and markets, and
between enterprises and markets. Global development experiences have shown
that profitable business relationships are an optimal instrument for making
investments sustainable and for breaking the cycle of dependency and poverty.

43. Project sustainability is also based on: (i) access to knowledge: KCs will be low-cost
facilities that will eventually operate on a cost recovery basis; (ii) access to
markets: upgraded commodity chains, contract farming and outgrower schemes
will ensure smallholder access to markets; (iii) access to land: the project will
invest in securing land tenure and ownership, particularly in Chin State; (iv) access
to water: irrigation and drainage improvement, combined with participatory water
management, will improve water distribution and operation and maintenance;
(v) access to basic needs: social infrastructure will cover underlying needs related
to food security, nutrition, and domestic water supply; (vi) access to finance:
financial inclusion activities will link smallholders and landless microentrepreneurs
to the formal financial sector; and (vii) access to extension: use of MoALI extension
officers as KC managers trained by the project will ensure continuity in service
delivery.



EB 2018/LOT/P.6/Rev.1

8

44. Exit strategy. The project’s exit strategy is to strengthen public institutions at the
central and state levels, to rely on a range of institutional service providers for
implementation, to foster profitable business relationships among producers and
markets, and to improve the capabilities of poor rural women and men.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
45. The project’s main risks are in the governance, expropriation, fiduciary and capacity

areas. They will be mitigated by a robust project governance framework, a set of
legal assurances to be negotiated with the Government, substantial technical
assistance and capacity-building, and the underlying business relationships to be
fostered.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

46. The project’s goal and objectives are aligned with the Strategic Framework
2016-2025 in terms of market-driven smallholder development and rural business
growth. It is compliant with all relevant IFAD policies, strategies and guidelines,
and in particular with the Fund’s policies on targeting, rural finance, land tenure,
Engagement with Indigenous Peoples, and Gender Equality and Women’s
Empowerment, as well as with the partnership and climate change strategies, and
the Policy on Preventing Fraud and Corruption.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
47. The project’s rationale is anchored in IFAD’s poverty reduction mandate and the

Government’s policy for reducing economic and social disparities in rural areas. It is
consistent with Myanmar’s National Comprehensive Development Plan, the
Framework for Economic and Social Reforms, and the Poverty Alleviation and Rural
Development Action Plan. It is closely coordinated with the emerging agriculture
sector investments of multilateral and bilateral development partners, and with the
Agriculture and Rural Development Sector Working Group.

Innovations and scaling upC.
48. Innovation. The project is the first substantial investment in Myanmar’s western

states to address the climate change challenges posed by erratic rainfall, intra- and
inter-annual drought, and record high temperatures that are undermining farm
productivity and the livelihood options of the rural poor. It introduces several
innovations in its model for climate-smart agricultural development in the
upland/lowland areas of the western states. Key innovations in the Myanmar
context include: (i) introduction of sloping agricultural land technology;
(ii) promotion of climate-smart agricultural practices and technologies;
(iii) livelihood diversification, with potential for greater value-added; (iv) promotion
of smallholder-driven small businesses and microenterprises; and (v) support for
adapted rural finance products and services.

49. Scaling up potential. Given the transient nature of the current agriculture sector
regulatory framework in Myanmar, particularly in view of the major political
changes that occurred in 2015, there is an important window of opportunity for
scaling up the methodologies and results pioneered by IFAD-financed operations in
Myanmar. The country programme is engaging in this in two ways: (i) successful
service delivery models are already being replicated and brought to scale in other
parts of the country by the Government, partners, and the private sector; and
(ii) policy engagement opens avenues for scaling up investments based on
implementation experiences, the fostering of stakeholder alliances to capture policy
proposals, capacity-building for policy development, and the promotion of policy
advocacy within national processes.



EB 2018/LOT/P.6/Rev.1

9

Policy engagementD.
50. The project will contribute to an inclusive and evidence-based policy framework for

rural development in Myanmar, specifically related to the project’s implementation
experiences. It will support formulation of the policies and regulations needed to
enhance and sustain project investments, and to contribute to the ongoing policy
discussions on broader agricultural modernization and rural transformation. Policy
engagement will also aim at scaling up successful approaches in other states and
regions of the country, and will contribute to the project’s exit strategy.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
51. A project financing agreement between the Republic of the Union of Myanmar and

IFAD will constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached in
appendix I.

52. The Republic of the Union of Myanmar is empowered under its laws to receive
financing from IFAD.

53. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
54. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Republic of the Union of Myanmar in an amount equivalent to eight million
nine hundred and eighty four thousand United States dollars (US$8,984,000)
and upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance
with the terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
the Union of Myanmar in an amount equivalent to three million nine hundred
and seventy eight  thousand United States dollars (US$3,978,000) and upon
such terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the
terms and conditions presented herein.

Gilbert F. Houngbo
President


















































President’s report

Proposal for a grant to the
Central African Republic for the
Project to Revitalize Crop and Livestock
Production in the Savannah


Central African Republic

Project to Revitalize Crop and Livestock Production in the
Savannah

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Recipient: Central African Republic

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development
Ministry of Livestock and Animal Health

Total project cost: US$29.04 million

Amount of IFAD grant: US$12.4 million

Terms of IFAD grant: Grant under the Debt Sustainability Framework

Financing gap: US$12.6 million

Contribution of recipient: US$0.966 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$3.077 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2018/LOT/P.9

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
grant to the Central African Republic for the Project to Revitalize Crop and Livestock
Production in the Savannah, as contained in paragraph 39.

Proposal for a grant to the Central African Republic for
the Project to Revitalize Crop and Livestock Production in
the Savannah

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. The Central African Republic (CAR) is classified as a country with a fragile situation.

The recent humanitarian and security crisis in 2013-2015 devastated the economy
and caused a quarter of the population to flee their homes. GDP fell 37 per cent in
2013, stabilizing at a growth rate on the order of 5 per cent between 2014 and
2016. Some 74 per cent of the population depend on the agropastoral sector, which
accounts for 52 per cent of GDP. With a Human Development Index (HDI) of 0.352
in 2016, CAR ranks 188th of 188 countries,1 reflecting the poverty that affects an
estimated 67 per cent of the population as a whole and 72 per cent of rural people.
Life expectancy is 51.5 years. CAR’s population density is among the lowest in the
world with five million people and an area of 623,000 km2. About 60 per cent of
the country’s people live in rural areas and the population is very young, with 60
per cent under 25.

2. The causes of poverty include poor availability and management of agropastoral
production factors, destruction of the economic fabric and limited road access; a
lack of infrastructure and of efficient public services in rural areas; and scarce
economic opportunities, especially for young people. The conflicts continue to have
an adverse impact on food security. Ten armed groups are still operative in the
areas bordering Cameroon and Chad, and in the country’s central and eastern
regions. Many farmers have fled their land, while others have had no access to
agricultural inputs or agropastoral markets. Livestock keepers have lost their herds
or migrated to Cameroon. Nevertheless, the potential for agricultural development
is extraordinary with close to 15 million hectares of arable land and 20 million
hectares of permanent pasture, as well as a favourable climate. The vulnerability
profile, however, presents extreme hazards such as torrential rains, flooding and
drought.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and RB-
COSOP

3. The Central African Government and IFAD, based on lessons learned from the
Project for Reviving Food Crops and Small Livestock Production in the Savannah
(PREVES), which was completed on 31 December 2017, have designed the Project
to Revitalize Crop and Livestock Production in the Savannah (PREPAS) to
consolidate and scale up gains under PREVES. PREPAS is in line with the National
Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan (PNRCP) 2017-2021, which sets forth the
Government’s priorities and was the subject of the donors conference held in
Brussels in December 2016. The PNRCP has three pillars: (i) support for peace,
security and reconciliation; (ii) renewal of the social contract between the
Government and the people; and (iii) economic recovery and reactivation of

1 United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), Human Development Report 2017.



EB 2018/LOT/P.9

2

productive sectors. PREPAS will contribute to the food security and productive
sector recovery objectives set under pillar 3.

4. In terms of IFAD, the alignment documents are IFAD’s Strategic Framework 2016-
2025 and the country strategy note 2018-2019 under which PREPAS is the only
investment planned.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
5. The project area covers the subprefectures of Bouar, Baoro, Bossemptélé and

Yaloké, with a possible expansion to Bozoum following the midterm review.

6. PREPAS will target some 30,000 beneficiaries and their households, or some
240,000 people potentially reached by the project. The beneficiaries are essentially
poor smallholder crop and livestock farmers and agricultural producers, at least 50
per cent of them women, 30 per cent young people and 10 per cent heads of highly
vulnerable families. Given the marked vulnerability of women in the Central African
Republic, a gender equity strategy will be developed to promote their economic
empowerment. The project will support the integration of young people into
existing groups, establishment of youth groups and promotion of youth
entrepreneurship in specific activities such as market gardening, small livestock
raising or upstream and downstream production activities, particularly related to
marketing and processing, the seed subsector, farm mechanization and borehole
maintenance.

7. The 355 groups under PREVES will be supported in achieving a higher stage of
professionalization, while 445 new grass-roots groups will be structured with
training and start-up support, taking the total number of groups to 800, or 20,000
beneficiary households. In addition, 10,000 more households will benefit from
activities around nutrition, access to drinking water, animal hygiene and
vaccination, and structuring activities.

B. Project development objectives
8. The overall objective of PREPAS is to contribute to reducing poverty and sustainably

improving food and nutritional security in the subprefectures of Bouar, Baoro,
Bossemptélé and Yaloké. The development objective is to strengthen the socio-
economic development framework and reactivate crop and livestock production
using approaches adapted to climate change.

C. Components/outcomes
9. Component 1: Promotion of community development. Expected outcome 1 is

improved community organization, nutrition and access to drinking water.

10. Subcomponent 1.1: Strengthening of organizational capacities. The aim is to
create an enabling environment for sustainable project implementation, by focusing
on sensitizing and mobilizing populations, encouraging dialogue between crop and
livestock farmers, organizing producers into groups and providing functional literacy
training. The main outcomes expected under subcomponent 1 are: (i) 800 groups
organized through community facilitation; (ii) 1,600 technical delegates of these
groups having received organizational training; (iii) 3,200 people having received
literacy training; (iv) 5,000 group members participating in savings and credit
activities.

11. Subcomponent 1.2: Promotion of nutrition and access to drinking water.
Nutritional education designed to improve the beneficiaries’ dietary behaviours will
be accompanied with other nutrition-related activities to put in place a healthy and
balanced diet. This objective will be achieved with the increased availability of foods
with high nutritional value and their processing. In addition, the project will
strengthen institutional capacities in nutrition. The project is also intended to
rehabilitate or build 135 boreholes in the project area and to continue to guarantee



EB 2018/LOT/P.9

3

the operation of the 65 boreholes installed by PREVES. The boreholes will be
combined with the construction of latrines following the models and approaches
disseminated by the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF). The main expected
outcomes under this subcomponent are: (i) 10,000 people having received
capacity-building in nutritional practices; (ii) 2,500 home gardens set up; (iii) 135
drinking water points constructed and 65 water points set up under PREVES
maintained; (iv) two spare parts warehouses installed; (v) 20 repairers trained.

12. Component 2: Productive investments. Expected outcome 2 will be producers
strengthened and recapitalized with more efficient production, processing and
marketing methods that are adapted to climate change. The products targeted will
be: (a) for crops: maize, cassava, groundnut, and red bean; and (b) for livestock:
poultry and smallstock – goats, sheep and pigs.

13. Subcomponent 2.1: Strengthening of the supply of services to producers.
The aim is to improve the supply of extension services for farmers as follows: (i) an
effective system of outreach and advisory assistance, and better technical and
logistical capacities among public services; (ii) professionalization of the seed
subsector to recover the productivity of the targeted value chains; and (iii) a
livestock vaccination campaign. The expected outcomes are: (i) thematic materials
and toolkits developed for outreach; (ii) 28 master trainers trained; (iii) 1,600
technical delegates having received technical training; (iv) 800 groups having
received extension services; (v) the Central African Agricultural Research Institute
station in Bolée better equipped; and (vi) the National Livestock School in Bouar
rehabilitated.

14. Subcomponent 2.2: Support for production, processing and marketing. To
ensure efficient implementation on a large scale throughout the PREPAS area,
various support modules will be used – network of seed producers, crop production,
livestock farming and market gardening – for the 800 groups. In addition, PREPAS
will support 150 modules benefiting 450 young people in areas such as:
(i) agricultural processing; (ii) transportation and marketing; (iii) input stores; and
(iv) mechanization. As part of the inclusion module for highly vulnerable
households, PREPAS will provide the most capable with start-up equipment
consisting of small-scale supplies and inputs to undertake farming, while
beneficiaries lacking labourers will receive small ruminants or poultry. They may
subsequently set up an agricultural or agropastoral group. The expected outcomes
under this subcomponent are as follows: (i) 800 agricultural, agropastoral and
market gardening groups, representing 20,000 households, having benefited from
crop, livestock and market gardening production modules; (ii) 8 ha of land
developed for market gardening and equipped with innovative irrigation devices,
mainly solar; (iii) 12 storage warehouses and eight input storehouses constructed;
and (iv) 450 young people supported and engaged in processing, marketing or
services upstream and downstream of the value chain.

15. Component 3: Coordination, management, monitoring and evaluation
(M&E) and policy dialogue. The expected outcome of subcomponent 3.1 is better
coordination and M&E of rural sector interventions and knowledge management
that stimulates fruitful consultations and enhances the sector environment in favour
of sustainable agropastoral development.

16. Subcomponent 3.1: Knowledge management and policy dialogue. The aim is
to set up a rural sector coordination group (RSCG) linked to the PNRCP institutional
guidance and steering arrangements. In addition to this strengthening and the
creation of a consultative framework, the RSCG will specifically support the
development of a rural sector M&E system with the participation and alignment of
technical and financial partners. Data from the M&E system will be used in annual
rural sector reviews and consultation themes, which may lead to the formulation of
policies such as the National Agricultural Outreach Policy (PNVA).



EB 2018/LOT/P.9

4

17. Subcomponent 3.2: Coordination, management and M&E. The objective of
this subcomponent is to coordinate project interventions, provide effective and
transparent financial management of resources, promote ongoing improvements in
tools, approaches and methods of the actors, and coordinate the results-based M&E
process.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
18. The government services participating in project implementation are, at the

regional, prefectural and subprefectural level, the Central African Agency for
Agricultural Development (ACDA), National Agency for Livestock Development
(ANDE), Central African Institute of Agricultural Research (ICRA), the Regional
Directorates for Rural Development 1 and 2, the West Regional Directorates and
the Livestock Centre and the prefectural services of the Interministerial Unit for
Rural Roads Planning and Coordination (CIPC-PR). At the national level, the actors
concerned will be the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MADR)
Directorate General for Monitoring and Evaluation and the Directorates General of
ICRA, ACDA and ANDE.

19. At the national level, the project management and coordination unit (PMCU) will
sign agreements and performance contracts with government and non-government
partners in the different areas of project implementation. The technical agencies
AGDR, ANDE and ICRA will be accountable for the implementation of project
activities in crop and livestock agriculture under agreements and protocols for
collaboration concluded with the PCMU. Certain specific activities will be
implemented by operators and service providers and through national and
international technical assistance to be selected by competitive bidding and linked
to the project under performance contracts.

B. Organizational framework
20. PREPAS will be placed under the joint oversight of MADR and the Ministry of

Livestock and Animal Health (MESA). The two ministries will jointly provide
supervision and direct interaction with other sector ministries and technical and
financial partners, and will coordinate M&E activities in relation to recovery and
peacebuilding in the Central African Republic. The Ministry of Finance and Economy,
as recipient, will manage all funds and will be responsible for making counterpart
funding available in an effective and timely fashion.

21. National consultations will take place through a national steering committee to be
created by a joint decree of the Ministers of Agriculture and Livestock. The national
steering committee will bring together representatives of the sector ministries
involved in PREPAS implementation and representatives of producers’
organizations. Decentralized consultations will take place at the subprefectural
level, within consultative committees created by joint decree of the Ministers of
Agriculture and Livestock. Secretariat services will be provided by the PREPAS
bureau chief.

22. Project management will be provided by the PMCU based in Bangui, which will have
administrative and financial autonomy. The two subprefectural branches will be
located in Yaloké and Bouar. In alignment with IFAD guidelines for implementation
of projects in fragile situations, PREPAS will promote partnership-building and
technical assistance mobilization (UNICEF, the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations, the United Nations Office for Project Services, the International
Institute of Tropical Agriculture, and the International Centre for Agricultural
Research for Development). This will allow for the scaling up of activities in year 3,
particularly in relation to drinking water access, training and production.



EB 2018/LOT/P.9

5

C. Planning, M&E, learning and knowledge management
23. Planning and budgeting for PREPAS activities will take place by means of annual

workplans and budgets (AWP/Bs). Beginning in year two, the draft AWP/B will
include a summary of results obtained and constraints encountered during the
preceding year. A flexible approach will be adopted to enable the AWP/B to be
revised in the course of the fiscal year as needed. The planning process will begin in
early September of each year so that the Government may transmit the AWP/B to
IFAD on 30 November at the latest. Since the M&E system was virtually nonexistent
during PREVES start-up, the project will develop an M&E system to steer
implementation of sector M&E, which will produce data for policy dialogue purposes.
The PREPAS M&E system will measure progress made on project implementation
and the results and impact on target groups, including core indicators from the
Operational Results Management System (ORMS). An M&E manual will be
developed. An automated database will be developed specifically for the project,
which will also be equipped with geographical information system (GIS) software
for intervention mapping. A knowledge management strategy will be developed at
project start-up and supported by the M&E system.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
24. Budgets will be prepared and approved in accordance with the management

manual. The budgets are to be specified and entered using accounting software.
The imprest accounts procedure will be used for disbursements. Prior conditions will
be met before the first disbursement. The management manual will outline all
control activities in detail. The PREPAS accounts will be kept on an accruals basis in
accordance with international accounting standards and the Organization for the
Harmonization of Business Law in Africa accounting system (SYSCOHADA). An
internal auditor will be hired and will report to the national steering committee or to
an audit committee. The external audit of the project will be done by a private audit
firm in accordance with IFAD guidelines.

25. Procurement will take place in accordance with IFAD guidelines and the public
procurement code of the Central African Republic. To the extent possible, contracts
will be grouped in such a way as to appeal to bidders, encourage competition and
obtain the bet offers. At project start-up, the PCMU will update the procurement
plan for the first 18 months and submit it to IFAD for approval. The procurement
plan will specify, inter alia, the procurement method for each contract and the
thresholds and preferences applicable within the project. Procurement plans for
subsequent years will be included in AWP/Bs and submitted for approval by the
steering committee and non objection of IFAD. Each procurement plan will stipulate
the procedures to be followed by bidders to ensure compliance with IFAD
procurement guidelines.

E. Supervision
26. PREPAS supervision and financial administration will be done directly by IFAD, with

participation by representatives of MADR and MESA, with two supervision missions
per year. The first of these will be dedicated to supporting project start-up with
preparation of the first AWP/B, the procurement plan for the first 18 months, and
terms of reference for baseline studies and tender documents. In light of the fragile
context, significant resources will be allocated to the country office to ensure
continuous supervision and strong implementation support.

IV. Project costs, financing, benefits
A. Project cost
27. PREPAS will be implemented over a period of six years. The project duration will be

reassessed at the midterm review given the fragile situations in the country. The
total project cost, including contingencies, is US$29.04 million (CFAF 15.9 billion).
Base cost is US$25.5 million (CFAF 14.0 billion). The project’s investment costs and
current expenses are, respectively, US$23.5 million (CFAF 12.9 billion) or 92 per



EB 2018/LOT/P.9

6

cent of base cost, and US$1.9 million (CFAF 1.1 billion) or 8 per cent of base cost.
Contingencies are US$3.5 million (CFAF 1.9 billion) of which US$0.8 million (CFAF
0.4 billion) for technical contingencies and US$2.7 million (CFAF 1.5 billion) for
financial contingencies.

Table 1
Project cost by source of financing and component
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Components
IFAD PBAS
2016-2018 Financing gap Beneficiaries Government Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Promotion of community
development
1.1 Organizational capacity-
building 632 34 1 242.90 66 - - 0 - 1 874.90 6.5

1.2. Promoting nutrition and
access to drinking water 2 440.80 67 763.7 21 - - 431.4 11.9 3 636.00 12.5

Subtotal 3 072.80 56 2 006.60 36 - - 431.4 7.8 5 510.90 19

2. Productive investments

2.1 Strengthening the supply
of services to producers

3 460.40 63 1 678.00 30 - - 376.8 6.8 5 515.20 19

2.2 Support for production,
processing and marketing 3 645.50 27 6 902.80 51 3 077.10 22.5 56.5 0.4 13 681.80 47.1

Subtotal 7 105.80 37 8 580.80 45 3 077.10 16 433.3 2.3 19 197.00 66.1
3. Coordination, management,
M&E and consultation

3.1 Knowledge management and
consultation 103.6 41 150.1 59 - - 0 - 253.7 0.9

3.2 Coordination, management
and M&E

2 117.80 52 1 862.50 46 - - 101.5 2.5 4 081.80 14.1

Subtotal 2 221.40 51 2 012.60 46 - - 101.5 2.3 4 335.50 14.9

Total project cost 12 400.00 43 12 600.00 43 3 077.10 10.6 966.3 3.3 29 043.40 100

B. Project financing
28. The financing sources for the project are as follows: (i) IFAD will provide

US$25.0 million, or 86 per cent of total project cost, assigned over two allocation
cycles of the performance-based allocation system (PBAS) – US$12.4 million under
the 2016-2018 cycle and US$12.6 million to cover the financing gap under a further
cycle; (ii) module beneficiaries will contribute US$3.1 million, or 11 per cent of total
cost, in the form of contributions in kind; and (iii) the Central African Government
will contribute US$0.97 million in the form of exemptions from taxes and tariffs on
goods and services to be acquired under the project, or 3 per cent of total cost. The
financing gap of US$12.6 million could be financed under subsequent PBAS cycles,
on terms to be determined and subject to internal procedures and Executive Board
approval, or by cofinancing to be identified during implementation.



EB 2018/LOT/P.9

7

Table 2
Project cost by category of expenditure and source of financing
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Category of expenditure
IFAD PBAS

2016 - 2018 Financing gap Beneficiaries Government Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

I. Investment expenses

A. Rural engineering/works 2 411.1 81.0 - - - - 565.6 19.0 2 976.6 10.2

B. Vehicles 525.4 69.1 14.6 1.9 - - 220.6 29.0 760.6 2.6

C. Equipment and supplies 388.1 62.5 53.0 8.5 - - 180.2 29.0 621.3 2.1

D. Training, workshops and
seminars

1 368.7 41.2 1 950.4 58.8 - - 0.0 - 3 319.1 11.4

E. Consulting services 2 450.0 58.9 1 706.6 41.1 - - 0.0 - 4 156.6 14.3

F. Goods, inputs and services 266.5 40.8 387.4 59.2 - - 0.0 - 653.9 2.3

G. Subsidies and grants 3 800.2 26.5 7 453.9 52.0 3 077.1 21.5 -0.0 - 14 331.2 49.3

Total investment expenses 11 209.9 41.8 11 565.9 43.1 3 077.1 11.5 966.3 3.6 26 819.2 92.3

II. Current expenses

A. Salaries and benefits 1 072.4 55.9 846.5 44.1 - - - - 1 918.9 6.6

B. Operating expenses 117.7 38.6 187.6 61.4 - - 0.0 - 305.3 1.1

Total current expenses 1 190.1 53.5 1 034.1 46.5 - - 0.0 - 2 224.2 7.7

Total project expenses 12 400.0 42.7 12 600.0 43.4 3 077.1 10.6 966.3 3.3 29 043.4 100

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
29. Financial analysis shows that the net benefits generated by operations and

enterprises are positive and that the activities promoted by the project are
profitable. The economic internal rate of return is 19.6 per cent. Net present value
is an estimated US$19.3 million, or CFAF 10,590 million, for a discount rate of 6 per
cent.

D. Sustainability
30. PREPAS is not expected to involve any adverse environmental and social impact

and has therefore been classified as a category B operation, among projects with
moderate climate risk. The probability of maintaining gains over the long term and
creating the desired conditions to develop crop and livestock farming in the project
area is good. Boreholes and water points will be managed by management
committees to make drinking water widely available, thus reducing the workload
and waterborne illnesses, and will meet the needs of multiple uses. In addition,
repairers will be trained to do maintenance. The approach for inclusion of the most
vulnerable people – through literacy and project support modules designed to
facilitate access to production factors – is structured so as to endow households
with the needed capital and to create production and management capacity over
the medium term to guarantee food and nutritional security.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
31. The main risks identified, in addition to fiduciary risks, are as follows: (i) worsening

of the country’s political and security crisis, and its possible spread to the PREPAS
area; (ii) poor technical and administrative capacities among project team
members; (iii) limited capacities of implementation partners; (iv) a lack of
coordination among interventions by technical and financial partners; and
(v) extreme climate events. Mitigation measures have been proposed for each risk.



EB 2018/LOT/P.9

8

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
32. PREPAS is aligned with IFAD policies, including: (i) IFAD’s Strategic Framework

2016-2025; (ii) Disaster Early Recovery Guidelines; (iii) Country Strategy
Note 2017-2018; (iv) climate change strategy; (v) environment and natural
resource management policy; (vi) targeting policy to mainstream smallholder
farmers and vulnerable groups into agricultural value chains; and (viii) policy on
gender equality and women’s empowerment.

B. Alignment and harmonization
33. PREPAS is aligned with the PNRCP 2017-2021, and will contribute to achieving the

objectives of food security and productive sector recovery included in pillar 3.
Within IFAD, the alignment documents are IFAD’s Strategic Framework 2016-2025
and Country Strategy Note 2018-2019, in which PREPAS is the only investment
planned. PREPAS will respond to IFAD’s strategic objectives 1, increasing the
productive capacity of poor rural people; and 3, strengthening the environmental
sustainability and climate resilience of their economic activities. PREPAS will also
contribute to achieving the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), in particular
SDG 1 (no poverty), SDG2 (zero hunger), SDG 6 (clean water and sanitation) and
SDG 15 (life on land).

C. Innovations and scaling up
34. IFAD considers innovation to be a process that adds value and solves a problem in

new ways. Based on this definition and to ensure the possibility of efficient
implementation on a large scale throughout the PREPAS area, the project will make
available standardized modules for production, processing, marketing and
production support services, taking into account the innovations that are best
adapted to withstand the effects of climate change, in particular involving manure –
e.g. training in integrated soil fertility management and EcoSan. PREPAS will also
consolidate and expand PREVES by gradually adding new villages and groups, and
with the inclusion of the Bossemptélé subprefecture.

D. Policy engagement
35. PREPAS calls for providing, based on pilot tests, factual data to guide policy

formulation favouring public and private investment and putting in place an
attractive regulatory and legislative framework. Through PREPAS, IFAD will support
the development and implementation of a seed policy, possibly in partnership with
FAO and/or the International Centre for Agronomic Research for Development. The
Central African Republic does not currently have a national policy on agricultural
extension. PREPAS will continue to pursue the extension approach used under
PREVES, adapting it to the local and national context. The data gathered will be
used to design such a policy over the longer term.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
36. A financing agreement between the Central African Republic and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as appendix I.

37. The Central African Republic is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD.

38. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Lending Policies and Criteria.

VII. Recommendation
39. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:



EB 2018/LOT/P.9

9

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Central African Republic
under the Debt Sustainability Framework in an amount of twelve million four
hundred thousand United States dollars (US$12,400,000), and upon such
terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms
and conditions presented herein.

Gilbert F. Houngbo
President

























































President’s report

Proposal for a loan to the Republic of Gabon
for the Agricultural and Rural Development
Project – Phase II

Republic of Gabon

Agricultural and Rural Development Project – Phase II

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of Gabon

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock, responsible
for the Graine national agriculture programme

Total project cost: EUR 20.93 million

Amount of IFAD loan:
(Performance-based allocation
system 2016-2018)

EUR 5.43 million

Terms of IFAD loan: Ordinary: Repayment term of 15 to 18 years,
including a grace period of three years, with an
annual rate of interest equivalent to 100 per cent
of the variable reference rate determined semi-
annually by the Executive Board

Financing gap: EUR 4.91 million

Contribution of the borrower: EUR 10.26 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: EUR 0.32 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2018/LOT/P.8

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
loan to the Republic of Gabon for the Agricultural and Rural Development Project –
Phase II, as contained in paragraph 48.

Proposal for a loan to the Republic of Gabon for the
Agricultural and Rural Development Project – Phase II

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Gabon is an upper middle-income country with a predominantly young population

estimated at 1.7 million. According to the Human Investment Strategy of 2014, the
poverty rate has dropped from 33 per cent in 2005 to 30 per cent in 2013. Poverty
is more prevalent in rural areas, where 45 per cent of households are economically
vulnerable compared to 20 per cent in urban areas.

2. The agriculture sector currently employs around 40 per cent of Gabon’s rural
population, yet contributes just 5 per cent of GDP. Agricultural production is
insufficient to make the country self-sufficient in food. To make up the resulting 60
per cent deficit in staple products, particularly cereals and meat, large volumes of
food are imported, estimated at more than US$650 million per year. The
prevalence of chronic malnutrition is higher in rural areas than in urban centres at
29 per cent and 14 per cent respectively.

3. This situation, the result of an organizational, political and institutional framework
that is weakly organized to stimulate agricultural development, is caused by
several factors: (i) uncontrolled and unsecured land tenure; (ii) small size of farms;
(iii) low yields for staple products; (iv) unattractive investment conditions and
insufficient tax incentives; (v) limited access to financing, seed, agricultural inputs
and outreach services; (vi) weak capacities among public, private and community
institutions operating in the sector; (vii) insufficient investment in production,
processing and marketing infrastructure; (viii) limited interconnectivity among
different value chain stakeholders; (ix) insufficient local workforce; and (x)
obsolete training infrastructure and platforms.

B. Justification and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

4. To reduce the country’s dependence on oil revenues and diversify the economy,
the Government launched the Emerging Gabon Strategic Plan (PSGE) setting forth
the main development priorities through 2025. In application of the PSGE, the
Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock, responsible for the Graine programme
(MALGP) developed the Strategy for Economic Recovery of the Agriculture Sector
for the period 2016-2023, built around three major priorities: (i) guarantee food
security and reduce food imports by 80 per cent; (ii) create at least 150,000 new
formal jobs in cooperatives; and (iii) boost agricultural exports to US$1 billion per
year.

5. The country still faces rural poverty, inequalities and other challenges such as
limited institutional capacities and weak support structures and mechanisms for
agricultural policy and strategy. Although policies have been launched in the past,
the lack of full implementation has limited their impact on rural poverty, food crop
productivity, nutrition and food security.



EB 2018/LOT/P.8

2

6. Achieving the current national ambitions for agriculture will therefore mean
overcoming these challenges, starting with the creation of enabling conditions for
mobilizing and settling rural people generally, and the young workforce in
particular. This challenge, in addition to the need to strengthen productive capital,
is to reform institutional support systems, improve access to rural areas and
guarantee an adequate supply of inputs and technologies to support production
processing and market integration. Essentially, a fact-based decision-making
process on strategy and policy is crucial to spark excitement and engagement
among farmers, and interest among the private sector and market actors, in order
to sustainably reactivate agricultural development in Gabon.

7. Against this backdrop, a contextualized approach to IFAD’s engagement in Gabon,
based in part on support for agricultural policy and in part on structuring
productive investments, is suggested to accompany the Government’s efforts to
meet the challenges described. IFAD assistance in policy dialogue, innovation,
knowledge management and partnership, including South-South cooperation, will
make it possible to build local and national institutional capacities, stimulate sound
governance and promote an enabling environment for national and private
investment.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
8. PDAR II will be implemented in three of the country’s nine provinces: Woleu-Ntem,

where PDAR was implemented, Ngounié and l’Ogooué-Ivindo. Within these
provinces, the project will focus on 16 production areas covering 43 cantons and
171 villages or groups of villages.

9. PDAR II is intended to reach more than 16,000 beneficiaries. It will target actors in
the value chains, including those operating upstream and downstream of
production, in related services and occupations, in particular agricultural service
provision, input distribution, and equipment installation and maintenance. The
priority target group comprises poor rural people, particularly: (i) smallholder
producers; (ii) rural youth; (iii) women; and (iv) indigenous people.

10. The other beneficiaries will be the public bodies involved in agricultural policy
formulation, implementation and evaluation, decentralized crop and livestock
services, producers’ organizations and the private sector. They will receive
capacity-building to ensure that goods and services provided are adapted to the
needs of the priority target group.

B. Project development objectives
11. The project development objective is to sustainably improve incomes, food security

and nutrition for smallholder producers – women, youth and indigenous people – in
three provinces in Gabon. More specifically, this means:

- Improving the agricultural policy environment to promote increased public
and private investment thanks to an effective and sustainable system that
allows for implementation and monitoring of subsector policies and
strategies;

- Promoting economic activities and entrepreneurship in key agropastoral value
chains to improve incomes, food security and nutrition.

C. Components/results
Component 1: Policy support

12. The goal of this component is to improve the institutional, policy and regulatory
framework for the agriculture sector to increase public and private investment in
the rural sector and improve sector governance.



EB 2018/LOT/P.8

3

13. The component will be implemented in three subcomponents.

Subcomponent 1.1: Agriculture policy dialogue
14. The aim of this subcomponent is to achieve participation by all stakeholders in the

process of sector policy development, implementation and monitoring – the private
sector, producers’ organizations, NGOs, youth and women’s representatives, and
so on – while ensuring that poor rural people and their organizations have a space
to express their concerns.

15. To this end, a national platform and three provincial platforms will be set up to
serve as a framework for dialogue on agriculture policy and bottlenecks impeding
agricultural development, subsector competitiveness and actors’ performance.
Working groups will be set up around the priority themes identified. Specialized
resource persons will be tapped to conduct studies documenting the discussions
and informing debates by presenting facts and sound evidence. To optimize
participation by producers’ organizations, their apex organization will be
restructured and will benefit from specific capacity-building.

Subcomponent 1.2: Support for evidence-based agriculture policy
formulation and implementation

16. Depending on the bottlenecks identified by platform participants, the project will
support the production and use of factual data to document the development or
revision of policies on priority themes and their implementation, to improve
governance and enable an effective rural transformation to take place.

17. Activities will relate to: (i) the conduct of prospective and thematic studies in
preparation for the development or revision and validation of priority policies;
(ii) preparation and validation of three provincial land use management and
allocation plans; (iii) mobilization of international technical assistance specializing
in agriculture policy during the first three years of implementation, through a
specialized institution.

Subcomponent 1.3: Strengthening national capacities for policy
implementation and monitoring

18. The aim of this subcomponent is to strengthen national capacities with training on
policy analysis, evaluation of different agricultural strategy options, production of
factual data to guide policy and decision-making. To support this strategic,
institutional and operational shift, PDAR II will support the following five actions:

- Conduct of an institutional and organizational diagnostic assessment by the
MALGP, to develop a restructuring proposal adapted to the mandates of the
central directorates, decentralized services and agencies;

- Entry into service of the Agriculture Development Agency, which was recently
created to implement agricultural policies and strategies;

- Operational capacity-building for three provincial directorates, the regional
directorate for the North and 18 agriculture divisions to improve their
effectiveness in monitoring and supervising interventions by PDAR II;

- Entry into service of the sector M&E system prepared by the Government with
technical support from the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations (FAO), and the establishment of a framework for consultation and
coordination of rural sector technical and financial partners; and

- Strengthening of the PDAR II steering, monitoring and knowledge
capitalization function.

Component 2: Value chain development and agropastoral
entrepreneurship promotion

19. This component is intended to intensify production systems and improve
productivity and competitiveness of produce by supporting the development of



EB 2018/LOT/P.8

4

local economic initiatives and entrepreneurship in the crop and livestock
subsectors. This objective will be achieved within the framework of four
subcomponents.

Subcomponent 2.1 – Support for consultation among local actors and
market access

20. The aim is to set up multi-actor innovation platforms in the 16 production areas to
improve consultation among actors and create local collective dynamics that will
enable market access. Each innovation platform will conduct a diagnostic
assessment for use in developing and implementing action plans.

Subcomponent 2.2 – Access to inputs and crop and livestock services
21. The intervention strategy will be based on setting up private local service

providers, particularly young people, by financing cross-cutting actions that are key
to promoting the targeted value chains. These actions will relate to multiplication
and distribution of plant material, supply of small-scale breeding livestock, setting
up agricultural machinery service providers and installing input stores in
partnership with producers’ organizations or private providers.

Subcomponent 2.3 – Support for agropastoral investment and
entrepreneurship

22. The aim is to cofinance actions plans, i.e. collective and individual investments
planned for production areas by innovation platform participants to improve
production, storage, processing and marketing, and raise the incomes of the target
groups. To this end, a PDAR II investment cofinancing mechanism will be set up at
project start-up following the model in the PDAR manual. This will define the
overall activity planning framework, cofinancing code, procedures and management
tools.

Subcomponent 2.4 – Capacity-building and dissemination of innovations
23. This subcomponent will cover testing and disseminating innovative techniques that

can lift the constraints on smallholder rural producers and improve the productivity
of production systems. In addition, it will allow for testing and disseminating
technologies to manage conflicts with wildlife generally, and with elephants in
particular, to enable the producers concerned to better manage their farms. Finally,
the subcomponent will promote South-South cooperation to seek solutions to
urgent challenges facing agricultural development in Gabon.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
24. The national platform for policy dialogue and the innovation platforms in production

areas will be coordinated respectively by a MALGP central or general directorate
and by provincial directorates. Participation by actors representing all economic
interests and target groups will be assured, to engage in dialogue, communication
and interaction to mobilize collective knowledge about the territories and prioritize
problems and possible solutions and take them to the Government. This approach
will improve the ownership and effectiveness of policies and strategies.

25. Policy and strategy development will be steered by the central directorate in charge
of planning and policy. International technical assistance will be used to carry out
agriculture policy support activities, including capacity-building for actors.

26. Setting up and coordinating innovation platforms will be a key activity under
component 2, to be launched at project start-up, as the success of productive
investments will depend upon them functioning properly. Supported activities will
be identified in the diagnostic assessments and consultations conducted in the
platforms, and will be included in their action plans. The action plans will define the
different individual and collective value chain subprojects to be submitted for
funding purposes.



EB 2018/LOT/P.8

5

27. Cofinancing for subprojects will be obtained via demand together with a feasibility
study or business plan. Business plans will be developed by the beneficiary with
support from the production area facilitator, and by ad hoc experts as needed. A
simplified procedure will be put in place to review the applications.

B. Organizational framework
28. The project will be placed under the oversight of the Ministry of Agriculture as the

executing agency. A national project steering and monitoring committee will be set
up to provide strategic direction. Consultation at the decentralized level will be
through a provincial technical coordination committee that will validate provincial
activity planning and supervise implementation to ensure harmonization and
consistency with sector strategies and interventions by other partners. Project
coordination and management will be done by a national project coordination and
management unit (PCU) based in Libreville with administrative and financial
autonomy. The PCU will comprise a national coordination unit and three provincial
branches located in Ngounié, Ogoué Ivindo and Woleu Ntem.

C. Planning, M&E, learning and knowledge management
29. Planning involves the preparation of annual workplans and budgets (AWP/Bs).

Planning and budgeting activities under component 1 will be steered by the PCU in
close collaboration with the Ministry of Agriculture central and general directorates
concerned. Planning and budgeting activities under component 2 will be based on
diagnostic assessments and consultations at the production area level, estimates of
potential demand in subprojects for the following year and recommendations from
annual participatory M&E workshops held at the provincial level, and will give rise
to preparation by each branch of an annual workplan for discussion at meetings of
provincial technical coordination committees, then transmitted to the PCU for
decision.

30. The M&E system will serve as a tool for steering at both the project and oversight
level. The information provided by the system will be used to help achieve project
results and to improve the strategy and policy framework. A management
information system and a subproject management and monitoring system will be
put in place to provide input for a spatial database on all project interventions.

31. Knowledge management will be linked to the project M&E through a global system
for collection and dissemination of information of use to the different actors, and
for gathering information on the activities and methods implemented. Products
generated will include training manuals, good practice guidelines, technical
specifications, posters, videos and rural radio broadcasts, as well as exchanges of
experience and knowledge.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
32. PDAR II financial management will be provided by the PCU, acting with

administrative and financial autonomy. The PCU will be responsible and
accountable to the Government and IFAD for the use of the project’s financial
resources in accordance with the financing agreement. The PCU will prepare
quarterly financial and accounting statements for transmission to the Government
and IFAD, as well as financial statements on project operations for submission to
an annual external audit. The administrative and financial management of PDAR II
and all fiduciary matters will be in compliance with the provisions and procedures
set forth in the letter to the borrower and in the administrative, financial and
management procedures manual.



EB 2018/LOT/P.8

6

33. Procurement will take place in accordance with the relevant IFAD guidelines1 and
the Gabonese Procurement Code. To the extent possible, contracts will be grouped
in such a way as to attract bidders, encourage competition and obtain better offers.
At start-up, the procurement plan for the first 18 months of implementation will be
updated by the PCU and submitted to IFAD for non-objection.

E. Supervision
34. PDAR II will be supervised jointly by IFAD and the Government, through

representatives of the project’s national steering and monitoring committee, with
two supervision missions each year.

IV. Project costs, financing, benefits
A. Project cost
35. The total cost of the project, including contingencies, is EUR 20.93 million (CFAF

13.73 billion) over a period of six years. Base costs are EUR 19.6 million, and cost
escalation and physical contingencies are EUR 1.32 million (CFAF 868 million), or 6
per cent of base costs. Taxes account for 8 per cent of total cost, in the amount of
EUR 1.72 million (CFAF 1.1 billion).

Table 1
Project cost by source of financing and component
(Thousands of euros)

Components

IFAD (PBAS)*
2016-2018 Financing gap Government Beneficiaries

Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Policy support and institutional
capacity-building

1.1 Agriculture policy dialogue 554 90.1 - - 61 9.9 - - 615 2.9

1.2 Support for evidence-based agriculture
policy formulation and implementation

196 14.9 - - 1 124 85.1 - - 1 320
6.3

1.3 Strengthening national capacities for policy
implementation and monitoring

1 289 40.7 726 22.9 1 150 36.3 - - 3 164 15.1

Subtotal 2 039 40.0 726 14.2 2 334 45.8 - - 5 100 24.4

2. Value chain development and
agropastoral entrepreneurship promotion

2.1 Support for consultation among local
actors and market access

1 487 39.8 805 21.5 1 447 38.7 - - 3 739 17.9

2.2 Access to inputs and crop and
livestock services

308 19.8 466 29.9 782 50.3 - - 1 557 7.4

2.3 Support for investment and
agropastoral entrepreneurship

370 13.1 1 775 63.0 350 12.4 322 11.4 2 817 13.5

2.4 Capacity-building and dissemination
of innovations

354 11.0 734 22.8 2 137 66.3 - - 3 225 15.4

Subtotal 2 520 22.2 3 780 33.3 4 716 41.6 322 2.8 11 338 54.2

3. Project coordination and
management 872 19.4 407 9.1 3 210 71.5 - - 4 488 21.4

Total cost 5 431 26.0 4 913 23.5 10 260 49.0 322 1.5 20 926 100.0

* Performance-based allocation system.

B. Project financing
36. PDAR II will be financed by IFAD, the beneficiaries and the Government of Gabon.

The project financing will be provided by the different sources as follows: (i) an
IFAD loan under the 2016-2018 AWP/B in the amount of EUR 5.43 million,
equivalent to US$6.3 million2 (26 per cent of total cost); (ii) a financing gap of EUR

1 These guidelines set forth the principles of economy, efficiency and social equity, and call for various methods ranging
from international competitive bidding to direct contracting depending on the contract type and amount.
2 At the rate of US$1.16 to EUR 1.



EB 2018/LOT/P.8

7

4.91 million, equivalent to US$5.7 million (23.5 per cent of total cost); (iii) a
government contribution of about CFAF 6.73 billion or EUR 10.26 million (49 per
cent of total cost), of which EUR 1.72 million corresponds to taxes and tariffs on
goods and services purchased by the project and a contribution in cash of EUR 8.54
million; and (iv) a contribution by beneficiaries to cofinancing for subprojects
estimated at EUR 0.32 million (1.5 per cent of total cost).3 The financing gap of
EUR 4.91 million could be covered under subsequent cycles of the PBAS – subject
to financing terms to be determined, compliance with internal procedures and
Executive Board approval – or by cofinancing mobilized during implementation.

Table 2
Project cost by category of expenditure and source of financing
(Thousands of euros)

Category of expenditure

IFAD (PBAS)
2016-2018 Financing gap Government Beneficiaries Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

I. Investment costs

Works 1 410 56.1 422 16.8 681 27.1 - - 2 512 12.0

Equipment and supplies 136 23.6 - - 438 76.4 - - 574 2.7

Transportation equipment 25 4.9 - - 483 95.1 - - 508 2.4

II. Consulting services

National consultants 616 21.7 823 29.0 1 400 49.3 - - 2 839 13.6

International consultants 1 589 42.5 762 20.4 1 391 37.2 - - 3 741 17.9

Subtotal 2 205 33.5 1 585 24.1 2 790 42.4 - - 6 580 31.4

Training and workshops 900 42.9 350 16.7 845 40.3 - - 2 096 10.0

Subsidies and grants 514 13.3 2 149 55.7 874 22.7 322 8.3 3 859 18.4

Total investment costs 5 190 32.2 4 506 27.9 6 112 37.9 322 2.0 16 130 77.1

III. Recurring costs

Salaries and benefits 242 6.6 407 11.2 3 002 82.2 - - 3 651 17.4

Operating and maintenance - - - - 1 146 100.0 - - 1 146 5.5

Total recurring costs 242 5.0 407 8.5 4 148 86.5 - - 4 797 22.9

Total project costs 5 431 26.0 4 913 23.5 10 260 49.0 322 1.5 20 926 100.0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
37. The quantifiable benefits of PDAR II are derived from the investments to be made.

The economic internal rate of return is an estimated 13.22 per cent, well above the
opportunity cost of capital (7 per cent); net present value is CFAF 6.92 billion
(US$12.23 million).

D. Sustainability
38. Three kinds of major adverse environmental and social impact potentially related to

project implementation have been identified: (i) conflicts between humans and
wildlife; (ii) accelerated deforestation as a result of supporting unsustainable
farming practices; and (iii) marginalization of indigenous peoples. For each of the
risks identified, alternative measures or safeguards have been proposed to
minimize the project’s adverse environmental and social impact and optimize
benefits for target populations.

3 Counterpart contributions from beneficiaries will represent at least 10 per cent of the total cost of the subprojects,
including contributions in cash and in kind. The counterpart ratios for public and common goods may, following
consultation with beneficiaries, exceed this percentage.



EB 2018/LOT/P.8

8

E. Risk identification and mitigation
39. Several risks have been identified: (i) insufficient or tardy mobilization of

counterpart funds; (ii) weak national capacities in coordination and
implementation; and (iii) weak national capacities in financial management and
procurement. Mitigation measures have been proposed for each of these risks,
including mobilizing international technical assistance.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
40. PDAR II is aligned with IFAD policies and major guidelines, such as: (i) IFAD’s

Strategic Framework 2016-2025; (ii) country strategy note 2017-2018;4
(iii) climate change strategy; (iv) natural resources and environmental
management policy; (v) rural finance policy; (vi) targeting strategy, in connection
with targeting vulnerable people and mainstreaming smallholder producers and the
private sector into agricultural value chains; and (vii) respect for gender parity and
social inclusion of young people.

41. A Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures of IFAD (SECAP) note
has been prepared. PDAR II is not expected to involve any significant adverse
social, environmental or climate impact. It is therefore proposed that it be
classified as a category B operation.

B. Alignment and harmonization
42. The project’s lines of action are in line with the priorities set forth in the PSGE, and

more specifically with the strategic guidelines of the Green Gabon Plan. They are
also fully aligned with the Strategy for Economic Recovery of the Agriculture Sector
for the period 2016-2023, and consistent with IFAD’s country strategy note
outlining the framework for cooperation during the 2016-2018 financing cycle.

C. Innovations and scaling up
43. Based on IFAD’s definition of innovation as a process that creates value added or

solves a problem in an original way using new solutions, PDAR II has selected the
following areas for innovation: (i) mitigating human-elephant conflict; (ii) inclusion
of indigenous peoples; (iii) South-South cooperation; and (iv) testing innovations
in a farming environment. Phase 1 of the project arose as a model for sustainable
socio-economic development in rural Gabon. Scaling up earlier achievements by
IFAD in the framework of public investment will inspire this model, and will be
realized using three main instruments: project financing, policy and strategy
consultations, and knowledge management.

D. Policy engagement
44. One component is entirely dedicated to policy development. The objective is to

improve the agriculture policy environment to encourage increased public and
private investment by setting up an effective and sustainable system to develop,
implement and monitor subsector policies and strategies.

4 Preliminary version presented in May 2017. In view of IFAD’s comparative advantage and lessons learned from
experience, the strategy consists of scaling up PDAR gains to intensify sector investment while enabling full
participation by rural smallholder producers in the agriculture sector recovery and diversification of the economy,
following an entrepreneurial approach. Overall, the aim of the strategy is to achieve a sustainable increase in incomes
and food and nutritional security for poor rural people, particularly women and young people. This overall objective
translates into three strategic objectives: (i) sustainably increase smallholder farmers’ productivity; (ii) improve
smallholders’ access to markets; and (iii) strengthen the capacities of all actors.



EB 2018/LOT/P.8

9

VI. Legal instruments and authority
45. A financing agreement between the Republic of Gabon and IFAD will constitute the

legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower. A copy of
the negotiated financing agreement is attached as appendix I.

46. The Republic of Gabon is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

47. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Lending Policies and Criteria.

VII. Recommendation
48. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Republic of Gabon in an amount equivalent to five million four hundred and
thirty-one thousand euros (EUR 5,431,000), and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

Gilbert F. Houngbo
President



























































 

 

 

 

 

 

President’s report 
 

Proposal for a loan and grant to the Republic 
of Senegal for the Support to Agricultural 
Development and Rural Entrepreneurship 
Programme ‒ Phase II  
 

Republic of Senegal  

Support to Agricultural Development and Rural 
Entrepreneurship Programme ‒ Phase II  

Financing summary 

Initiating institution: IFAD 

Borrower: Ministry of Economy and Finance  

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Infrastructure  

Total programme cost: US$72.4 million 

Amount of IFAD loan: 
(Performance-based allocation system 
[PBAS] 2016-2018): 

EUR 40.5 million (equivalent to US$46.3 million) 

Amount of IFAD grant:  
(PBAS 2016-2018): 

EUR 0.4 million (equivalent to US$0.5 million) 

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional: maturity of 40 years, including a 
grace period of 10 years, with a service charge of  
0.75 per cent per annum  

Cofinanciers: OPEC Fund for International Development (OFID), local 
communities  

Amount of cofinancing: OFID: US$10 million 
Local communities: US$0.2 million 

Terms of cofinancing: OFID: grant 

Contribution of the borrower: US$9.5 million 

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$5.9 million 

Appraising institution: IFAD 

Cooperating institution: IFAD 

 

 



EB 2018/123/R.12/Rev.1 

1 

Recommendation for approval 

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed 

financing to the Republic of Senegal for the Support to Agricultural Development 

and Rural Entrepreneurship Programme ‒ Phase II, as contained in paragraph 44. 

Proposal for a loan and grant to the Republic of Senegal 
for the Support to Agricultural Development and Rural 
Entrepreneurship Programme ‒ Phase II  

I. Strategic context and rationale  

A. Country and rural development and poverty context  

1. Senegal had a population of 15.26 million in 2017, 50.2 per cent women and  

49.8 per cent men. Demographic growth is 2.6 per cent per year. The Senegalese 

population is relatively young, with 62 per cent under 35 years of age. 

Unemployment is primarily young as well: nearly six of 10 unemployed people 

(60.6 per cent) were between 15 and 34 years of age in 2017, according to the 

National Agency of Statistics and Demography (2016). 

2. Growth in 2016, driven by agriculture and the secondary sector, was 6.5 per cent. 

Nevertheless, the endemic poverty rate remains unchanged at an estimated  

46 per cent of households, placing Senegal among the world’s 25 poorest 

countries.  

3. The country’s economy is based essentially on the primary sector – agriculture, 

fishing, mining and tourism – in addition to the secondary and tertiary sectors with 

new information and communication technologies. Agriculture employs 50 per cent 

of the population and accounts for 15.83 per cent of GDP (World Bank, 2016). 

Farming is mainly rainfed and seasonal, focusing on both cash crops – groundnut, 

cotton, horticulture – and staple foods such as millet, sorghum, maize, cowpea and 

rice. The groundnut subsector, long the mainstay of the economy, is undergoing a 

serious crisis. Current agricultural performance does not allow for improving living 

standards or reducing poverty among people living in rural areas.  

4. The food and nutritional status of Senegal’s population is cause for concern. Since 

2012, Senegal has faced a persistent nutritional crisis, with high rates of acute 

malnutrition in five regions – Matam, Tambacounda, Louga, Saint-Louis and 

Diourbel. Nutritional surveys conducted at end-2017 show a significant drop in the 

prevalence of acute malnutrition in these five regions, but the situation remains 

precarious despite this positive development. Some 120,000 children will need 

nutritional care, including more than 23,000 suffering from severe acute 

malnutrition and close to 92,000 with moderate acute malnutrition. Around 25,000 

expectant and nursing mothers will also need nutritional support (United Nations, 

2018). 

5. The United Nations Development Programme’s sustainable human development 

index ranked Senegal in 165
th
 place worldwide in 2016, with 46.7 per cent of the 

population living below the poverty line (World Bank, 2016). Poverty is 

multidimensional in Senegal and very pronounced in rural areas where farming is 

the main economic activity: in 2015 more than two thirds of households  

(69 per cent) were considered poor, 53.2 per cent of them very poor (National 

Agency of Statistics and Demography, 2015). 

6. The agriculture sector is extremely fragile in the face of climate hazards. Poor 

management of natural resources such as soil and water raise the vulnerability of 



EB 2018/123/R.12/Rev.1 

2 

poor people, whose incomes and food security are dependent on agriculture. 

Recent climate changes in Senegal include a 30 per cent drop in rainfall, an 

increase in temperature on the order of 0.9°C, growing aridification in the country’s 

north, a strong trend towards aridity in the central regions and a more or less 

strong trend towards semi-aridity in the southern regions. Should these trends 

continue, the resulting impact on water resources, agriculture, fishing, coastal 

areas and health could be significant. 

7. The supply of financial services in rural areas is insufficient to meet the financing 

needs expressed by the populations concerned. High transaction costs, limited 

institutional capacities of endogenous rural service providers, specific risks inherent 

to farming activity, a lack of assets that can be put up as collateral by people and 

inadequate financial resources given the specificities of savings that are often in 

kind – livestock, poultry, agricultural produce, etc. – act as obstacles to financial 

inclusion of rural populations in Senegal. 

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and  
RB- COSOP  

8. The Support to Agriculture Development and Rural Entrepreneurship Programme – 

Phase II (PADAER-II) will be carried out within a country context characterized by 

high levels of poverty and malnutrition, poor agricultural productivity, low access 

by agricultural value chain actors to external financing, very high youth 

unemployment and production systems that are highly exposed to climate 

phenomena. Accordingly, it will adopt an inclusive value chains approach that 

builds on and scales up the results achieved by IFAD in Senegal under the first 

phase of PADAER and elsewhere in the subregion. PADAER-II is fully aligned with 

national policies on rural development, in particular the Programme to Accelerate 

Agricultural Growth, the agricultural component of the Emerging Senegal Plan, the 

Livestock Development Programme, the National Food Security Plan and the 

National Action Plan on Climate Change Adaptation. The programme is aligned with 

the IFAD country strategy note, and takes into account experiences by the World 

Food Programme (WFP), the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United 

Nations (FAO) and the Global Environment Fund (GEF). 

9. The lessons learned from the first phase of PADAER showed that access to quality 

production factors for women and young people, together with a system of 

agricultural advisory assistance based on mobilizing endogenous resource persons 

from producers’ organizations (POs) supported by rural advisory assistance 

structures, can make a strong contribution to raising farm productivity. It is crucial 

to take climate variability into account by making sustainable hydro-agricultural 

improvements available to value chain actors, facilitating access to climate 

information and developing a farm insurance programme to build the resilience of 

vulnerable households. Previous experiences in Senegal also showed that giving 

producers access to secure and more profitable markets is a determining factor in 

achieving food security and combating poverty. 

II. Programme description  

A. Programme area and target group  

10. PADAER-II will operate in the regions of Matam, Tambacounda, Kédougou and 

Kolda. The programme area covers about 50 per cent of the country’s area and  

15 per cent of its population. PADAER-II will target 43,700 households directly, 

comprising about 437,000 people. The programme beneficiaries are essentially 

poor smallholder crop and livestock farmers, of whom at least 40 per cent will be 

women and 50 per cent young people, both girls and boys. 

11. PADAER will operate in the following value chains: rice, maize, fonio, small 

ruminants and improved village poultry breeding. The programme will support the 

market gardening subsector. In addition to these major value chains, it will support 



EB 2018/123/R.12/Rev.1 

3 

complementary value chains such as millet and sorghum, non-timber forest 

products and banana. Value chains to be prioritized will be those in which poor 

households, women and young people are most represented or could easily join.  

B. Programme development objective 

12. The goal of PADAER-II is to contribute to reducing poverty for women, young 

people and men living in the programme area by integrating them with profitable, 

diversified value chains that are resilient to climate change. The development 

objective is to sustainably improve the food security and incomes of smallholder 

crop and livestock farmers and to create permanent, well-paying jobs for rural 

people, particularly women and young people.  

C. Components/outcomes 

13. The programme is structured in three components.  

14. Component 1: Improving the supply of agricultural products. The expected 

outcome of this component is for smallholder crop and livestock farmers to 

sustainably increase their production and productivity. To this end, the programme 

will build: (i) hydro-agricultural improvements; (ii) pastoral infrastructure; and 

(iii) marketing infrastructure. It will facilitate access to production factors and 

advisory assistance on crop and livestock farming. The nutritional education 

subcomponent will strengthen knowledge and attitudes among rural people. To 

build smallholder resilience, the programme will consolidate the index-based 

insurance programme developed during phase one.  

15. Component 2: Developing value chains and financing actors. The expected 

outcome is professionalized and empowered agricultural value chain actors, 

particularly crop and livestock producers’ organizations. To this end, the 

programme will facilitate the development of rural entrepreneurship; capacity-

building for POs to enable them to provide sustainable services to their members; 

and collaborative governance of crop and livestock value chains to consolidate 

existing value chain inter-professional frameworks. The programme will also 

facilitate access by producers to credit and strengthen their knowledge of financial 

matters. 

16. Component 3: Coordination, monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and 

knowledge management. Under this component, the programme will finance: 

(i) the programme coordination unit (PCU); (ii) the operation of three branches 

located in Matam, Kédougou and Kolda; (iii) steering and technical activities; and 

(iv) strengthening of M&E capacities within the agriculture sector. 

III. Programme implementation 

A. Approach 

17. The PADAER–II intervention logic is to scale up the gains achieved under the first 

phase of the programme, as well as the positive results of innovations developed in 

Senegal, to promote rural youth employment, rural women’s empowerment and 

the climate change resilience of agricultural value chains. As in phase one, the 

programme will adopt an inclusive value chains approach driven by demand from 

agricultural value chain actors.  

18. The programme will outsource the implementation of activities with support from 

deconcentrated government services, national directorates and agencies, 

experienced national and international operators, civil society, and PO and private 

sector platforms.  

B. Organizational framework 

19. The Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Infrastructure (MAER) will provide oversight 

of PADAER-II. MAER will set up a steering committee based on the same 

committee as in phase one, expanded to take responsibility for new activities under 



EB 2018/123/R.12/Rev.1 

4 

PADAER-II. The Ministry of Livestock and Animal Production will serve as  

vice-chairperson of the committee. The technical committee, composed of the 

various national and regional actors in rural development, will review relevant 

matters as needed prior to meetings of the steering committee.  

20. PADAER-II will have a PCU that will be responsible for procurement and M&E and 

will coordination consultations among the partners to ensure sustainable 

agricultural value chain development. The PCU will be based in Tambacounda and 

will have three light branches located in Matam, Kédougou and Kolda. 

21. The PCU, directed by a coordinator, will comprise an administrative and financial 

officer, an infrastructure specialist, an M&E specialist, a specialist in gender issues 

and POs, a specialist in livestock value chains, a specialist in crop value chains, a 

specialist in rural entrepreneurship, an accountant, an M&E assistant and support 

staff. The branches will be very light units directed by a regional branch manager, 

with a secretary and a driver. They will provide representation and close 

monitoring of activities. The management staff of the PADAER-II PCU will be 

recruited on a competitive basis according to IFAD-approved procedures. 

C. Planning, M&E, learning and knowledge management  

22. Planning. The programme will be implemented on the basis of annual workplans 

and budgets (AWP/Bs). The AWP/Bs will be driven by the needs of agricultural 

value chain actors, with support from inter-professional value chain frameworks. 

Needs expressed at the regional level will be covered by a regional technical 

programme. The different regional technical programmes will be validated by the 

technical committee, then assembled by the PCU team into a national AWP/B, 

which will then be transmitted for comments to the Ministry of Agriculture and 

approved by the steering committee before being sent to IFAD for non-objection. 

To ensure consistency and complementarity of actions with partners operating in 

the programme area and investments in roads to connect production areas and 

hydro-agricultural improvements, the programme will ensure that such activities 

are in fact included in the community investment plans.  

23. M&E system. The M&E system will be used as a decision-making tool at various 

levels of programme implementation. M&E for PADAER-II will be established by 

drawing on lessons learned during phase one. A limited number of indicators will be 

gathered, disaggregated by sex and age as relevant. The system will be aligned 

with the national indicators used by MAER and the Ministry of Livestock and Animal 

Production. The programme will set up the system to monitor the agriculture 

subsector and will support the Ministry of Livestock’s research and planning unit in 

implementing the livestock sector monitoring system.  

24. Knowledge management. The knowledge management strategy for PADAER-II 

will link the M&E, results obtained and lessons learned. The programme will 

support the collection and dissemination of useful information for value chain 

actors at the local, regional and national levels, as well as the capitalization of 

activities and methods applied by IFAD projects.  

D. Financial management, procurement and governance 

25. Financial management. An evaluation of the proposed financial management 

system was done during programme design. The programme risk is considered 

moderate. The programme funds will be managed in accordance with the financing 

agreement. The administrative and financial management procedures will be set 

forth in the letter to the borrower and in the programme manual of administrative, 

accounting, financial and internal control procedures. 

26. The administrative, financial and accounting procedures manual will take into 

account the specificities of the programme, in particular the use of multiple 

financing sources and the number of intervention regions. The accounting 



EB 2018/123/R.12/Rev.1 

5 

procedures used will be those applicable to programmes and projects in the IFAD 

portfolio. 

27. Flow of funds. For disbursements, a principal designated account will be opened 

in the programme name by the Directorate for Cooperation and External Financing 

at a credible commercial bank to deposit the loan proceeds. A separate account will 

be opened for grant resources. An operations account, receiving funds from the 

designated accounts, will also be opened in Tambacounda, and movements will be 

subject to the double signature principle.  

28. Audit. In accordance with the new IFAD procedures approved in December 2017, 

an overall programme audit will be performed each year by an audit firm selected 

by competitive bidding. The project support unit of the Ministry of Economy, 

Finance and Planning will direct the audit firm selection process and the monitoring 

of implementation of audit recommendations. The internal control arrangements 

for the country programme will ensure that internal control for the programme 

takes place on the basis of an annual plan approved by the Ministry of Finance and 

IFAD. In addition to the annual audit, the project will prepare quarterly financial 

and accounting reports for transmission to the Government and IFAD. The audited 

financial statements will be published on the IFAD official website. 

29. Procurement. Contracts for goods, works and services will be awarded in 

accordance with recipient government provisions, provided they are compatible 

with IFAD procurement guidelines. The community procurement method may also 

be used to ensure participation by POs and local authorities. For infrastructure, the 

procurement specialists of regional development agencies will provide oversight of 

the quality of tender documents prepared by local authorities and implementing 

agencies.  

E. Supervision 

30. Programme supervision and administration of financing will be provided directly by 

IFAD.  

IV. Programme cost, financing, benefits  

A. Programme cost 

31. The total cost of the programme, for a duration of six years, is US$72.4 million, of 

which US$3.4 million for physical and financial contingencies, distributed as 

follows: US$56.0 million for component 1 (77.3 per cent), US$5.8 million for 

component 2 (8 per cent) and US$10.6 million for component 3 (14.7 per cent).  



EB 2018/123/R.12/Rev.1 

6 

Table 1 
Programme cost by source of financing and component 
(Thousands of United States dollars) 

 

IFAD loan IFAD grant OFID Beneficiaries 
Local 

communities 
Borrower/ 

counterpart Total 

Component Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % 

1. Improving the 
supply of 
agricultural 
products  32 352 57.8 - - 10 000 17.9 5 318 9.5 242 0.4 8 092 14.1 56 003 77.3 

2. Developing 
value chains and 
financing actors  4 194 72.4 500 8.6 - - 621  10.7 - - 478 8.3 5 793 8.0 

3.Coordination, 
M&E, knowledge 
management  9 747 91.6 - - - - - - - - 892 8.4 10 639 14.7 

Total 46 293 63.9 500 0.7 10 000 13.8 5 939 8.2 242 0.3 9 462 13.1 72 435 100 

 

B. Programme financing 

32. Financing for PADAER II breaks down as follows: a grant in the amount of  

US$0.5 million (0.7 per cent) and a loan from IFAD under the current performance-

based allocation system (PBAS) cycle in the amount of US$46.3 million  

(63.9 per cent); a loan from OFID in the amount of US$10 million (17.7 per cent); 

a contribution from the Government of US$9.5 million (13.1 per cent) 

corresponding to taxes and tariffs estimated at US$7.9 million, and a direct 

contribution in kind of US$1.5 million; a contribution from beneficiaries in the 

amount of US$5.9 million (8.2 per cent); and a contribution from communities for 

US$0.2 million (0.3 per cent). 

Table 2 
Programme cost by category of expenditure and source of financing  
(Thousands of United States dollars)  

Category of 
expenditure 

IFAD loan IFAD grant OFID Beneficiaries 
Local 

communities Government Total 

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % 

Investment expenses    

1. Civil and rural 
engineering 20 852 54.7 - - 9 430 24.8 231 0.6 242 0.6 7 342 19.3 38 096 52.6 

2. Equipment and 
vehicles 541 84.7 - - - - - - - - 98 15.3 639 0.9 

3. Fund for 
subprojects  9 916 67.7 - - - - 4 724 32.3 - - - - 14 639 20.2 

4. Support for 
subprojects  895 63.1 - - - - 305 21.6 - - 217 15.3 1 417 2.0 

5. Research, 
training, information 
and technical 
assistance formation  7 123 73.3 500 5.1 570 5.9 59 0.6 - - 1 464 15.1 9 717 13.4 

6. Service provision 1 479 64.6 - - - - 620 27.0 - - 193 8.4 2 291 3.2 

Total investment 
expenses 40 806 61.1 500 0.7 10 000 15.0 5 939 8.9 242 0.4 9 313 13.9 66 800 92.2 

Recurrent expenses    

1. Salaries and 
benefits 4 666 100.0 - - - - - - - - - - 4 666 6.4 

2. Operating 
expenses 821 84.7 - - - - - - - - 148 15.3 969 1.3 

Total recurrent 
expenses 5 487 97.4 - - - - - - - - 148 2.6 5 635 7.8 

 Total 46 293 63.9 500 0.7 10 000 13.8 5 939 8.2 242 0.3 9 462 13.1 72 435 100 

 



EB 2018/123/R.12/Rev.1 

7 

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis 

33. Financial analysis shows that the net benefits generated by operations and 

enterprises are positive and that the activities promoted by the programme are 

profitable. The economic internal rate of return for the programme is  

16.92 per cent. Net present value is estimated at US$41.2 million, or  

CFAF 24.3 billion, at a discount rate of 6 per cent. The sensitivity analysis confirms 

that the positive economic results and impact of the programme are robust to the 

risks identified.  

D. Sustainability 

34. The sustainability of the investments under PADAER-II will be ensured by: 

(i) systematically giving accountability from the outset to existing permanent 

structures set up and reinforced by previous projects and programmes – 

deconcentrated technical services closest to beneficiaries, grass-roots and apex 

professional organizations, and agricultural and rural advisory assistance and 

private sector organizations – to provide accessible socio-economic services of 

quality; (ii) giving accountability and providing institutional and economic 

strengthening to POs at all levels; (iii) setting up management and maintenance 

committees based on previous experience for infrastructure built or rehabilitated in 

each case; (iv) strengthening inter-profession capacities to provide collaborative 

value chain governance; (v) guaranteeing the creditworthiness of market operators 

and compliance with contracts between POs and market operators; and 

(vi) promoting production models that are resilient to climate change.  

E. Risk identification and mitigation 

35. Overall, the level of risk of PADAER-II is considered moderate. The most probable 

risks relate to climate hazards, in particular rising temperatures and declining 

rainfall, and to access by vulnerable households to financial institutions. These risks 

will be mitigated by means of an effective partnership between the programme and 

the financial institutions and other funds set up by the Government, and by 

developing climate-smart production models. In addition to the risks mentioned 

above, the additional workload to be taken on by the current team could have an 

adverse impact on internal control. This risk could be mitigated by realistic 

planning of activities and a good distribution of the workload. 

V. Corporate considerations  

A. Compliance with IFAD policies 

36. The programme is compliant with IFAD strategies, principles and instruments, and 

is aligned with IFAD’s climate change strategy.  

37. PADAER-II is classified in environmental category B. The programme activities will 

have moderate social and environmental impact owing to the intensification of 

agricultural and livestock production through the use of appropriate technologies as 

well as the processing and marketing of products. The programme calls for a set of 

approaches and technologies to avoid greenhouse gas emissions and to capture. 

B. Alignment and harmonization 

38. The programme is fully aligned with the Emerging Senegal Plan, in particular the 

agriculture component, and with the Programme to Accelerate Agricultural Growth. 

In the case of livestock activities, it is aligned with the National Livestock 

Development Programme and the livestock component of the Emerging Senegal 

Plan. Concerning nutrition, the programme is consistent with the Strategic Plan on 

Nutrition.  

C. Innovations and scaling up  

39. A number of innovations and good practices developed during phase one and 

during the implementation of other projects under the country programme will be 



EB 2018/123/R.12/Rev.1 

8 

scaled up: (i) commercial contracting between POs and market operators to 

facilitate access by smallholders to more profitable markets; (ii) the consolidation 

and establishment of value chain inter-professional frameworks to facilitate 

collaborative governance of activities and effective smallholder participation in 

consultations; (iii) capacity-building for smallholder producers in good practices in 

crop and livestock farming; and (iv) quality and management of infrastructure in 

crop and livestock value chains.  

D. Policy engagement  

40. PADAER-II will support the establishment of a national monitoring system for the 

agriculture subsector. For the livestock subsector, the programme will support the 

implementation of the system in place. Support for national M&E systems will 

significantly improve the quality of sector reports and the preparation of crop and 

livestock policies. At the institutional level, the programme support will facilitate 

good coordination of interventions and complementarity among the technical and 

financial partners.  

VI. Legal instruments and authority  
41. A financing agreement between the Republic of Senegal and IFAD will constitute 

the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower. A copy 

of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as appendix I. 

42. The Republic of Senegal is empowered under its laws to receive financing from 

IFAD. 

43. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement 

Establishing IFAD and the Lending Policies and Criteria. 

VII. Recommendation 
44. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of 

the following resolutions: 

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to 

the Republic of Senegal in the amount of forty million five hundred thousand 

euros (EUR 40,500,000), equivalent to forty-six million three hundred 

thousand United States dollars (US$46,300,000), and upon such terms and 

conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and 

conditions presented herein. 

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of 

Senegal in an amount of four hundred and forty thousand euros  

(EUR 440,000), equivalent to five hundred thousand United States dollars 

(US$500,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially 

in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein. 

 

Gilbert F. Houngbo 

President 

 
















































President’s report

Proposed grant to the Islamic Republic of
Afghanistan for the Support to National
Priority Programme 2



Islamic Republic of Afghanistan

Support to National Priority Programme 2

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Recipient: Ministry of Finance

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Livestock

Total programme cost: US$54.8 million

Amount of IFAD grant: SDR 34.5 million (equivalent to approximately
US$48.5 million)

Cofinancier(s):1 Microfinance Investment Support Facility for
Afghanistan (MISFA)

Amount of cofinancing: US$2.5 million

Terms of cofinancing: To be confirmed

Contribution of recipient: US$1.7 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$2.1 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD

1 The National Priority Programme 2 is tentatively being financed by the Government of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan and
a group of financiers including the European Union, the World Bank and the Department for International Development of the
United Kingdom.



EB 2015/115/R.10

1

Recommendation for approval
The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
grant to the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan for the Support to National Priority
Programme 2, as contained in paragraph 52.

Proposed grant to the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan
for the Support to National Priority Programme 2

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Afghanistan is currently undergoing a major security, political and economic

transition that will fundamentally shape its future. In late 2014 and early 2015,
Afghanistan assumed responsibility for its own security and a new Government was
established. With the transition, development assistance is being transformed from
off-budget operations executed by external service providers to on-budget
operations managed and implemented by national institutions, with capacity-
building support as required. The present programme is fully aligned with these
changes.

2. Afghanistan’s population was estimated at 30.6 million in 2013, with an annual
growth rate of 2.4 per cent. The population is relatively young, with 64 per cent
under 25 years of age, and a median age of 17. Approximately 76 per cent of the
population lives in rural areas. Afghanistan is ethnically diverse, with some 25
distinct ethnic groups.

3. Following almost four decades of conflict, Afghanistan remains one of the poorest
nations in the world. An estimated 36 per cent of the population lives below the
poverty line. The Human Development Report ranked the country 169th out of 187
countries in 2013, with a human development index of 0.468. Its gender inequality
index was 0.712 in 2012, ranking it 147th out of 148 countries.

4. Afghanistan has received a substantial level of development aid since 2003. Public
institutions have been strengthened, health care and education significantly
improved, and road infrastructure constructed. There are indications that these
activities have generated positive development outcomes in terms of life
expectancy, health status, education levels and living conditions. In recent years,
external assistance has fuelled high economic growth, with the annual GDP growth
rate (constant prices) averaging 10.4 per cent for the 2009-2013 period.

5. Despite these improvements, most Afghans continue to endure conditions of
hardship and insecurity. Infrastructure has been ravaged by conflicts and internal
markets remain largely disrupted. Limited arable land per capita, low precipitation
and harsh climate conditions in many areas contribute to the hardship and resource
poverty endured by farmers. Poverty is multidimensional, involving a complex
interplay among a lack of assets, years of conflict and insecurity, disasters,
inadequate infrastructure, weak public services and traditional roles.

6. The agriculture sector contributes 24 per cent of GDP and employs approximately
70 per cent of the rural labour force. Afghanistan produces food and cash crops,
some export and industrial crops, and livestock products. At present, there is
increasing potential to overcome the devastation wrought by years of conflict and
develop the crop and livestock subsectors to increase output, food security and
rural incomes.



EB 2015/115/R.10

2

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and RB-
COSOP

7. IFAD has historically been responsive to the specific needs of fragile states in terms
of policies, strategies and investments. Indeed, a substantial portion of the 2013-
2015 resource allocation cycle has been allocated to fragile states. This focus is
becoming increasingly structured and articulated, as requested by IFAD's governing
bodies. Two recent documents addressed the scaling up of engagement in fragile
States: A Strategic Vision for IFAD 2016-2025 (IFAD10/2/R.2), which prescribed
increased attention to the specific context and needs of fragile states, with
emphasis on building national capacities; and Enhancing IFAD’s business model for
inclusive and sustainable rural transformation (IFAD10/2/R.3), which outlined ways
to better engage in fragile situations and promoted the capacity-building of
community organizations and public institutions.

8. The present programme builds on this emerging strategic vision and adapts
relevant elements of the business model to the Afghan context. It focuses on
building national capacities and linkages across the agriculture sector – working
with community organizations, public agriculture services and the private sector –
to enhance community resilience and improve food security. It supports national
programmes, in complementarity and synergy with partners, in particular the
European Union. Consistent with the IFAD Guidelines for Disaster Early Recovery of
May 2011, it invests in high-impact crop and livestock activities with comparative
advantages, market demand and growth potential. Consistent with the Afghanistan
country strategic opportunities programme, it provides strategic and programmatic
support to the Government in agricultural sector transformation, rural economic
growth and poverty reduction.

9. The programme is fully aligned with the Government’s request to partners to
progressively align with the newly prepared national priority programmes, moving
from fragmented, project-based support to a sector-wide, programmatic approach
in support of coordinated development. It will enable IFAD to contribute to
sustainable, nationally driven development; to build the capacities of public and
private institutions and community organizations; to modernize the agricultural
sector; and to support the transition of smallholders from subsistence to
commercialized farming. It will also position IFAD to help the Government tackle
systemic sector challenges, particularly policymaking and public investment
programming.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
10. IFAD’s support for National Priority Programme 2 (NPP2) aims to achieve national

coverage over a three-phase implementation period of 15 years. The Support to
National Priority Programme 2 (SNaPP2) constitutes the first phase of IFAD support.
It will be implemented in three selected pilot provinces, namely Balkh, Herat and
Nangarhar, with planned geographical expansion to additional provinces over the
second and third phases. In the three pilot provinces, the programme will primarily
focus on six districts: Nahri Shahi and Dih Dadai in Balkh; Karukh and Zendhajan in
Herat; Darah e Noor and Khewa/Kuzkunar in Nangarhar. However, it will also invest
in other districts to the extent required by relevant agricultural backward and
forward linkages, value chain linkages, relevance of activities, synergy with other
development operations, and security considerations. Within the six identified
districts, the programme will cover about 589 community development councils
(CDCs) consisting of 57,000 households (427,500 people); it will also cover
additional CDCs and households in the other districts as required. Should security
deteriorate substantially in any selected district or province, the programme will
formally shift to another district or another province subject to consultations
between the Government and IFAD.



EB 2015/115/R.10

3

11. The programme has a three-tier target group: (i) at the subnational institutional
level, it will target provincial and district extension staff of the Ministry of
Agriculture, Irrigation and Livestock (MAIL), community mobilizers of the Ministry of
Rural Rehabilitation and Development (MRRD), and farmers’ resource centres
(FRCs); (ii) at the local institutional level, CDCs, NGOs and relevant private sector
entities will be strengthened and serve as interlocutors; and (iii) at the grass-roots
level, target groups will include poor rural women and men, kuchis (nomadic
herders), small farmers and herders, producers’ groups and women’s groups.
Woman-headed households and rural youth will be the object of specific
programme targeting.

B. Programme development objective
12. The goal of IFAD financing will be to contribute to improving the food security and

economic status of poor rural households in the three selected provinces. The
programme has two objectives: (i) institutional development and capacity-building
of community organizations, public extension services and relevant private sector
entities; and (ii) sustained increased incomes for small farmers and herders
fostered by improvements in productivity and output, infrastructure and market
linkages.

C. Components/outcomes
13. The programme has two components. Component 1: Institutional

development – approximately US$14.0 million, 26 per cent of total programme
cost.

14. Subcomponent 1.1: Extension services. The programme will strengthen the
extension directorate’s structures by: (i) establishing a women’s extension
department in MAIL to coordinate a cadre of female extension workers across the
target areas; (ii) strengthening the male extension worker cadre at the district
level; (iii) targeting young graduates from local agricultural faculties for recruitment
as extension assistants; and (iv) incorporating updated techniques and approaches
into the agricultural curricula.

15. Subcomponent 1.2: Farmers’ organizations. MAIL and development partners are
establishing a national network of FRCs across Afghanistan. The capacities of FRCs
and other relevant community organizations will be upgraded to enable them to
broker business relationships among stakeholders, bringing together decentralized
MAIL and MRRD services, input suppliers, market integrators and small farmers.

16. Subcomponent 1.3: Private sector. Private sector linkages, contract farming and
value chain upgrading will be integrated with district extension services and
community groups. Market linkages among producers and private companies will be
promoted, as a range of agricultural products can be processed to increase shelf
life, year-round availability and output price. Business service packages will be
developed to address the needs of typical enterprises. The capacities of
entrepreneurs will be upgraded and their links with producers’ groups enhanced.

17. Subcomponent 1.4: Policy and implementation support facility. This facility will
provide technical assistance (TA) to MAIL for agricultural development
programmes; provide TA and capacity-building to other relevant ministries; and
strengthen MAIL and MRRD knowledge management and communication products.

18. Component 2: Strategic investments – approximately US$35.8 million, 65 per
cent of total programme cost.

19. Subcomponent 2.1: Infrastructure. The programme will invest in irrigation
infrastructure and other community productive infrastructure, in line with
government policy and priorities.

20. Subcomponent 2.2: Productive investments. The programme will help to improve
the productivity of rainfed wheat, horticulture and livestock production to improve



EB 2015/115/R.10

4

food security and increase household incomes in the target communities. Farmers
and herders will be trained in improved technologies, post-harvest activities and
information sharing.

21. Subcomponent 2.3: Rural financial services. The programme will invest in a range
of financial products and delivery mechanisms to improve target group access to
financial services. These will include: (i) targeting the ultra-poor; (ii) developing
value chain financing products; (iii) promoting sharia-compliant financial products;
(iv) offering TA and incentives to participating financial institutions; and (v) possibly
competitive grant schemes for agribusinesses in due course.

III. Programme implementation
ApproachA.

22. The MAIL will be the lead implementing agency and the MRRD an additional
implementing agency. Relevant programme approaches and activities will be
mainstreamed into their operations. However, in the light of MAIL’s current capacity
gaps at decentralized levels, specific activities will initially be implemented by other
contracted ministries, projects and service providers (national entities, as far as
possible). The capacity-building of relevant national public and private organizations
will be a key responsibility of all contracted service providers, and the programme
will seek full implementation by reputable national institutions as soon as possible.

B. Organizational framework
23. The programme’s governance framework consists of the programme steering

committee (PSC), a provincial coordination committee (PCC) in each province, and
the existing MAIL programme support team (PST).

24. At the national level, the PSC will be responsible for policy and strategic guidance,
overseeing management and implementation, approving annual workplans and
budgets (AWPBs) and reviewing progress. It will consist of senior representatives of
MAIL, the Ministry of Finance (MOF) and MRRD.

25. Each PCC will be convened by MRRD’s National Solidarity Programme (NSP)
management and chaired by a MAIL district representative. Their membership will
consist of representatives of provincial entities, contracted service providers and
PST personnel. PCCs will be responsible for coordinating the implementation of
activities and sharing information and knowledge.

26. The PST will be responsible for managing and coordinating the programme. It will
be expanded with the addition of a programme manager and technical specialists to
carry out relevant activities. Programme staff will be recruited on a competitive
basis in line with IFAD guidelines and subject to IFAD prior review.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

27. AWPBs and activity calendars, based on the design report and informed by
operational experiences and supervision missions, will constitute the programme
planning framework. The PST will prepare AWPBs through a consultative approach
involving community organizations, FRCs, MAIL, MRRD and other stakeholders.
Following PCC approval, provincial-level plans and budgets will be consolidated by
the PST into a programme AWPB and submitted to the PSC for approval and to
IFAD for concurrence at least two months prior to the start of each fiscal year. The
consolidated programme AWPB will contain a procurement plan, in compliance with
IFAD requirements. All plans will be disaggregated by gender.

28. The programme’s monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system will collect data and
information to measure performance and progress towards objectives, and serve as
a learning tool by providing information for reflection on programme strategy and
operations. It will support decision-making at various levels and facilitate results-



EB 2015/115/R.10

5

based management. Where feasible, the programme will help to strengthen MAIL
M&E capacity.

29. Learning and knowledge management. The programme will formulate a
knowledge management strategy, in line with IFAD policy. Its website will be
completed within the first year of implementation and used as a knowledge-sharing
tool, hosted on IFADAsia. Information from M&E studies, reviews and study tours,
lessons and best practices will be shared through knowledge products such as
newsletters, publications, case studies and audio-visual reports. Knowledge-sharing
events will be organized at the community level and visits carried out to exchange
knowledge and learning by observing.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
30. Financial management. MAIL has extensive experience in managing IFAD-

financed projects. Current arrangements are efficient. Procedures are based on a
solid programme implementation manual (PIM) approved by IFAD in early 2014.
The PST finance unit has qualified and experienced staff confident in applying IFAD
procedures. For SNaPP2, the current PST staffing will be strengthened to enable it
to manage an additional programme. The IFAD contribution to SNaPP2 will be on-
budget and will rely on government systems. The PST will use, in addition to the
MOF public financial management system, its own accounting system to monitor
budget execution, control financial transactions, produce financial reports and
increase staff accountability. To ensure effective financial control, internal control
procedures applied under ongoing IFAD-financed operations, included in the PIM,
will be updated and applied to SNaPP2. An auditor will be contracted to undertake
internal audit activities in support of PST efficiencies.

31. Flow of funds. The flow of funds will be based on standard arrangements
applicable to on-budget externally financed projects. Funds from the Debt
Sustainability Framework (DSF) grant account will be transferred to a designated
account in United States dollars opened for this purpose in Da Afghanistan Bank or
another bank acceptable to IFAD. The designated account will be maintained and
operated by the MOF. IFAD will advance funds to the designated account, in
accordance with imprest account modalities.

32. Procurement. Programme works, goods and services will be procured by the PST
in compliance with IFAD Procurement Guidelines and the IFAD Procurement
Handbook.

33. Audit. Annual external audit of project accounts will be carried out by a
competitively selected, reputable auditor. The audit terms of reference will include
visits to contracted implementing partners and service providers, as well as field
visits, where appropriate. MRRD and all contracted service providers will submit
audited financial statements covering SNaPP2 activities to the PST within four
months following the end of each fiscal year. Where United Nations agencies are
exempt from such a requirement, they will submit unaudited annual financial
statements of expenditures to the PST.

E. Supervision
34. The programme will be directly supervised by IFAD. The supervision process will

guide the programme towards the achievement of its strategic objectives and broad
poverty reduction outcomes, while ensuring fiduciary compliance. A midterm review
and a programme completion mission will be undertaken, in programme year three
and at closure, respectively.

35. In the light of the prevailing security situation, the country team will assess
alternative methods to complement IFAD supervision and implementation support
processes, such as contracting and/or otherwise involving local organizations.



EB 2015/115/R.10

6

IV. Programme costs, financing and benefits
A. Programme costs
36. The total programme cost is estimated at US$54.8 million over a six-year

implementation period. This is inclusive of contingencies, cofinancing, beneficiary
contributions and counterpart funding. Programme costs are organized in three
components: (i) institutional development (26 per cent); (ii) strategic investments
(65 per cent); and (iii) programme management (9 per cent).

Table 1
Programme costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD MISFA Beneficiaries Government Total
amount % amount % amount % amount % amount %

A. Institutional
development 12 862 92 - 0 - 0 1 134 8 13 996 26

B. Strategic and productive
investments 30 838 86 2 500 7 2 123 6 289 1 35 750 65

B. Programme financing
37. The programme is expected to be financed by: (i) an IFAD DSF grant in the amount

of US$48.5 million; (ii) Microfinance Investment Support Facility for Afghanistan
(MISFA) cofinancing in the amount of US$2.5 million; (iii) a Government
contribution equivalent to US$1.7 million; and (iv) a beneficiary contribution
equivalent to US$2.1 million.

Table 2
Programme costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category
IFAD MISFA Beneficiaries Government Total
amount % amount % amount % amount % amount

1. Civil works 12 752 88 - - 1 417 10 289 2 14 458
2. Vehicles 132 41 - - - - 189 59 321
3. Equipment and materials 181 100 - - - - - - 181
4. Consultancies 538 100 - - - - - - 538
5. Goods, services and inputs 4 934 95 - - 241 5 - - 5 175
6. Grants 2 376 100 - - - - - - 2 376
7. Credit 9 000 78 2 500 22 - - - - 11 500
8. Capacity-building/training 11 872 100 - - - - - - 11 872
9. Salaries and allowances 4 956 94 - - - - 302 6 5 258
10. Operating costs 1 721 55 - - 465 15 922 30 3 108
Total Programme Costs 48 462 88 2 500 5 2 123 4 1 702 3 54 787

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
38. The programme will provide benefits to approximately 57,000 poor rural households

(427,500 women and men) represented by 589 CDCs. The immediate expected
benefits are increased productivity resulting from improved extension services,
farming and management practices, and access to markets and financial services.
These benefits will be expressed in terms of improved food security and increased
household incomes. In addition, participating households will have access to
training and capacity-building benefits. A number of other beneficiaries, such as
producers accessing rural financial services, woman-headed households adding
value to production, and youth receiving vocational training, have not been
quantified.

C. Programme management 4 762 94 - 0 - 0 279 6 5 041 9

Total programme costs 48 462 88 2 500 5 2 123 4 1 702 3 54 787 100



EB 2015/115/R.10

7

39. Additional benefits will accrue from capacity-building interventions. Participating
farmers will be able to access improved services from their CDCs, which will be
strengthened and supported. Women from the poor and very poor groups will be
empowered to manage their own social and economic development, with better
access to markets and inputs. The improvement of rural markets, rural access
roads and extension services will lead to higher output prices for farmers.

40. The programme’s economic internal rate of return is estimated at 24 per cent.
Sensitivity analysis shows the programme would be robust in the event of increases
in costs, decreases in benefits and delays.

D. Sustainability
41. The programme concept itself – support to a national priority programme rather

than a stand-alone project – directly addresses sustainability. Programme
management will be mainstreamed within existing ministerial structures and
financing will be on-budget rather than off-budget. Programme implementation will
utilize existing structures and arrangements to the maximum extent possible,
without creating new ones. The existing CDCs nurtured by the MRRD/NSP will serve
as the instrument for community engagement at all stages. Existing producers’
groups, such as farmers’ cooperatives and dairy unions, will be supported. District-
level capacities of extension services will be strengthened, with clear benefits for
sustainability. Similarly, FRCs will broker linkages between producers and the
private sector, which may be sustained, depending on the strength of the relevant
business relationships.

42. The programme exit strategy is to: strengthen public institutions at provincial and
district levels; gradually transfer full implementation responsibilities to ministries
and CDCs; foster profitable business relations between producers and markets; and
improve the capacities of poor rural women and men.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
43. The overarching risk relates to the recent political and security transition in

Afghanistan. Three post-transition scenarios, and the implications for the
programme, have been projected: (i) a best-case scenario, with a smooth political
transition, relative security, empowered institutions and economic growth; (ii) an
intermediate scenario, with a fragile political context, conflict confined to remote
areas and moderate economic growth; and (iii) a worst-case scenario, with political
instability, factionalism and continued conflict, and economic stagnation.

44. Many key elements related to the risk scenarios, such as a conflict-sensitive
approach to site selection, are already embedded in programme design. Other
elements, such as the configuration of TA, will be fine-tuned depending on the
prevailing scenario. During the initial stage of implementation, IFAD and the
Government will jointly reassess post-transition developments, update the
opportunities and risks under each scenario, and fine-tune the mitigation measures
and trigger points.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

45. As indicated earlier, the programme is consistent with policies, strategies and
investments relevant to fragile states, in particular A Strategic Vision for IFAD
2016-2025 and Enhancing IFAD’s business model for inclusive and sustainable rural
transformation. It is fully aligned with corporate policies on private sector
engagement, environmental impact and climate change mitigation and adaptation,
and gender mainstreaming. The programme’s environmental impact assessment
places it in category "B".



EB 2015/115/R.10

8

Alignment and harmonizationB.
46. The programme’s rationale is anchored in IFAD’s mandate of poverty reduction and

the Government’s priority to increase agricultural productivity. It is consistent with
national efforts to enhance development impact, reduce the duplication of aid
programmes and introduce programmatic approaches. It is aligned with the multi-
donor framework for agriculture production and market development, and in
particular with the assistance provided by partners such as the European Union,
World Bank, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Department
for International Development of the United Kingdom, German Agency for
International Cooperation and United States Agency for International Development.

Innovations and scaling upC.
47. The Government considers the programme a model for partner participation in the

NPP approach, which will be scaled up by MAIL when other partners provide funding
for NPP2. The programme is designed to expand, replicate, adapt and sustain
successful investments. Through its investment tools and forward-looking policy
support, the programme will create the pathways, drivers and spaces for scaling
up. Investments will be unbundled to facilitate operation of the core activities at
scale.

Policy engagementD.
48. The programme will inform agricultural sector policy through its implementation of

key NPP2 components and its structuring of the NPP2 governance and management
framework. The programme design process has already influenced overall
government policy as represented by NPP2. The programme’s policy and
implementation support facility will offer TA to all national institutions involved in
NPP2, in particular MAIL and MRRD.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
49. A programme financing agreement between the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan and

IFAD will constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as an appendix.

50. The Islamic Republic of Afghanistan is empowered under its laws to receive
financing from IFAD.

51. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
52. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Islamic Republic of
Afghanistan in an amount equivalent to thirty-four million four hundred fifty
thousand special drawing rights (SDR 34,450,000) and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President
























































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of
Argentina for the Programme for Economic
Insertion of Family Producers of Northern
Argentina (PROCANOR)


Republic of Argentina

Programme for Economic Insertion of Family Producers
of Northern Argentina (PROCANOR)

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of Argentina

Executing agency: Unit for Rural Change (UCAR)

Total programme cost: US$39.18 million

Amount of IFAD loan: EUR 22.85 million (equivalent to approximately
US$24.17 million)

Amount of IFAD grant: EUR 0.31 million (equivalent to approximately
US$0.33 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Ordinary: Maturity period of 18 years, including a grace
period of 3 years, with an interest rate per annum equal
to 100 per cent of the IFAD reference interest rate

Contribution of borrower: US$11.48 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$3.21 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/116/R.41/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval
The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed loan
and grant to the Republic of Argentina for the Programme for Economic Insertion of
Family Producers of Northern Argentina (PROCANOR), as contained in paragraph 33.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Argentina for
the Programme for Economic Insertion of Family
Producers of Northern Argentina (PROCANOR)

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country, rural development and poverty context
1. Argentina is one of the largest economies in Latin America and one of the world's

major producers of agricultural commodities, especially soybeans, maize and beef.
In addition, there are some 251,000 family farms in the country. Many of these are
run by poor families, the majority of whom live in the Greater North region. In
2010, 18 per cent of the rural population and 22 per cent of rural dispersed
households had unmet basic needs. The provinces in Northern Argentina have the
highest rural poverty rates in the country.

2. Poverty is especially severe in farming families, indigenous communities, rural
working families and large families without fixed incomes. Youth unemployment is a
serious problem in rural areas, and outmigration of young rural women is common.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

3. The Government of Argentina aims to reduce rural poverty through income
generation based on sustainable agricultural production. The Unit for Rural Change
(UCAR), of the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries (MALF), has
demonstrated the capacity to improve the performance of IFAD's portfolio, which is
implemented within its country programme as an instrumental part of the public
policy to support family farming. Specialized technical institutions cooperate with
UCAR in this task.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
4. The programme is based on public policy priorities, lessons learned in the IFAD

country programme and opportunities within the country to reduce rural poverty by
integrating family farming into value chains. Its design leverages opportunities for
building partnerships among agribusinesses, commercial enterprises and farmers’
organizations. It will prioritize emerging and dynamic value chains: (i) quinoa;
(ii) potatoes and ocas (Andean potatoes); (iii) chia; (iv) amaranth; (v) llama meat;
(vi) llama and vicuña wool; (vii) yacón (a tuber); and (viii) horticulture. These
value chains are characterized by market limitations and the increased participation
of family farmers.

5. The programme area includes the 10 provinces of Argentina’s Greater North:
Catamarca, Chaco, Corrientes, Formosa, Jujuy, La Rioja, Misiones, Salta, Santiago
del Estero and Tucumán, with activities concentrated in the provinces of
Catamarca, Chaco, Corrientes, Jujuy, Salta and Misiones.

6. Beneficiaries will include men and women producers (including indigenous
communities) engaged in the priority value chains and organized into producers’
organizations. The programme will prioritize existing organizations and promote



EB 2015/116/R.41/Rev.1

2

incorporation of vulnerable groups, especially indigenous peoples, women and
youth.

B. Programme development objective
7. The programme’s development objective is to improve sustainable integration of

small-scale producers into value chains. The five-year programme aims to reach
8,000 families.

C. Components and outcomes
8. The programme has four components:

 Component 1: Development of inclusive markets. This component will
strengthen development of dynamic, emerging value chains, with a focus on
family producers and joint ventures between small producers' organizations
and other private-sector actors. To develop markets for products, it will
support market promotion, brand creation and certification of origin. It will
also promote public procurement and the creation of market infrastructure.
Moreover, it will develop human resources by funding: scholarships for the
daughters and sons of family producers; training in business management,
business alliances and strategic partnerships; and special training for
government staff and producers’ organizations.

In addition, the programme will develop technologies for smallholder
producers, including adaptive research, prototyping of equipment, installation
of laboratories and development of seed systems for quinoa and other Andean
crops.

To develop markets for financial services, the component will carry out a
study of rural financial markets, organize provincial workshops and provide
resources to support requests for formal credit by producers’ organizations. It
will also support a study and pilot initiative on smallholder insurance.

In the framework of policy dialogue on value chains, the component includes
studies on the priority value chains and support to regional forums at the
cluster level that will facilitate interaction by value chain participants at the
regional level.

 Component 2: Organizational strengthening. To improve the functioning
of value chains, the programme will support participating organizations in the
following ways:

(a) In the pre-investment phase, it will support preparation of participatory
rapid diagnostics, institutional strengthening prior to the formulation of
business plans and establishment of business alliances.

(b) In the investment phase, it will finance implementation of approved
business plans, including physical assets, training and technical
assistance, and organic and fair-trade certification. In the rural finance
services sector, it will increase access to working capital through
guarantee funds to obtain loans from financial institutions and revolving
funds for direct credit. Land-use planning and tenure regularization
activities will include participatory development of maps to illustrate
local land tenure and resolve tenure issues.

 Component 3: Productive development. This component will strengthen
the productive capacities of producer families within participating producers’
organizations through investment in productive on-farm assets, technical
assistance, training and farmer field schools in which trials are performed by
producers’ groups and guided by technicians.

 Component 4: Management and administration. This component includes
programme management by UCAR and provincial management units. It will



EB 2015/116/R.41/Rev.1

3

include valid systems for planning, monitoring and evaluation, and knowledge
management.

III. Programme implementation
ApproachA.

9. The programme’s operational strategy will be based on: (i) development of clusters
in the emerging value chains; and (ii) business plans as the principal instruments
for investments, technical assistance and training for producers’ organizations.

Organizational frameworkB.
10. UCAR will be responsible for programme implementation and will directly execute

most activities in component 1 (including those designed to address market
failures) and component 4. Provincial governments will be responsible for
implementing components 2 and 3 through provincial management units, based on
financing agreements with MALF. If necessary, UCAR may implement some
component 2 and 3 activities. Beneficiary organizations will be responsible for
developing and executing the business plans through participatory processes.

11. There will be ample opportunity for beneficiary participation in the programme. In
the planning process, producers’ organizations will participate in cluster-level
forums to identify specific needs, define priorities and exchange ideas on policies
related to value chains. They will be responsible for planning and implementing
business plans, including procurement. Finally, they will monitor and evaluate the
implementation of their business plans, which will provide the programme’s system
with data.

Planning, monitoring and evaluation, learning and knowledgeC.
management

12. Planning will be based on defined goals and objectives. The programme’s annual
planning exercise will provide the flexibility necessary to implementation, in
coordination with provincial authorities. At the cluster level, improvement plans will
be prepared with the participation of provincial authorities, smallholder producers,
private enterprises and public institutions.

13. For the programme’s data and knowledge system, UCAR will apply results-based
management methods that use an organizational matrix to manage the
development of clusters and business plans. The system will be integrated into
UCAR’s existing management system, which allows the monitoring of physical
progress based on data entered at the provincial level. A tracking sheet will
facilitate analysis of information critical to measuring results. For impact evaluation,
implementers will collect information from beneficiary households using a family
questionnaire that includes IFAD’s Results and Impact Management System (RIMS)
survey. Institutional advancement will be tracked by monitoring the participating
producers’ organizations. Thematic studies will be carried out to analyse
experiences in programme implementation.

Financial management, procurement and governanceD.
14. Financial management. MALF, through UCAR, will be responsible for the financial

management of all programme resources, including flow of funds, disbursements,
internal controls, accounting, financial reporting and audit. For programme
implementation, UCAR will use its existing accounting system, which is satisfactory
to IFAD. Funding for start-up costs may be used for early programme expenditures.

15. Flow of funds. IFAD loan and grant resources will be disbursed to two designated
accounts in euro. From each designated account, funds will flow to the respective
operational account denominated in Argentine pesos, which will be managed by
UCAR. Provincial-level implementation units will open provincial operational
accounts denominated in Argentine pesos.



EB 2015/116/R.41/Rev.1

4

16. Procurement. UCAR, the provincial management units and producers’
organizations will carry out procurement on the basis of agreed procurement plans.
Procurement of works, goods and services in the framework of business plans, and
accounting for these expenditures, will be the responsibility of producers’
organizations, with support from provincial units.

17. Audit. The programme’s consolidated financial statements will be audited annually
by the national auditor general in accordance with IFAD’s Guidelines on Project
Audits. All programme accounts will be audited, including all sources of funding.
The scope of the audit will include visits to producers’ organizations. Annual audit
reports will be submitted to IFAD within six months of the end of each fiscal year.

SupervisionE.
18. The programme will be supervised directly by IFAD in accordance with the

methodology agreed on by IFAD and UCAR. Initial supervision tasks include support
for rapid programme start-up and set up of the accounting, planning, and
monitoring and evaluation systems.

Exception to IFAD’s general conditions for agriculturalF.
development financing and operational policies

19. With respect to retroactive financing, expenses related to the clusters supporting
priority value chains for activities beginning as of the date of negotiations will be
considered eligible up to US$500,000. For recognition, the borrower must submit
the expenses to IFAD for reimbursement once the financing agreement has entered
into force and disbursement conditions have been met.

IV. Programme costs, financing, benefits
A. Programme costs
20. The total cost for five years of implementation will be US$39.2 million, including

contingencies, of which: US$7.7 million relates to the inclusive markets component;
US$18.7 million to organizational strengthening; US$8.4 million to productive
development; and US$4.4 million to programme management and administration.
Management costs make up 11 per cent of the programme cost. Costs include
8 per cent for contingencies with respect to price escalation for goods, services and
operating expenses, and 0.3 per cent for physical contingencies with respect to
goods and services.

B. Programme financing
21. The programme will be financed by: (i) the Government, with a contribution of

US$11.5 million to cofinance support to the business plans of producers’
organizations, operating expenses and staff salaries; (ii) IFAD, through a loan of
US$24.2 million and a grant of US$330,000 for research and knowledge
management; and (iii) beneficiaries, with in-kind contributions of US$3.2 million to
cofinance the business plans. Programme costs by component and expenditure
category are presented in tables 1 and 2 below.



EB 2015/116/R.41/Rev.1

5

Table 1
Programme costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant Government Beneficiaries Total
Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Development of inclusive markets 5 984 78 188 2 1 531 20 - - 7 704 20
2. Organizational strengthening 11 586 62 - - 4 720 25 2 364 13 18 670 48
3. Productive development 6 136 73 - - 1 393 17 844 10 8 373 21
4. Management and administration 460 10 140 3 3 835 87 - - 4 434 11
Total programme costs 24 166 62 328 1 11 479 29 3 208 8 39 181 100

Table 2
Programme costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant Government Beneficiaries Total
Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Grants (capitalization of producers’
organizations) 16 616 65 - - 5 837 23 3 208 13 25 661 66

2. Goods, services and inputs 3 512 90 - - 396 10 - - 3 908 10
3. Consultancies (technical assistance) 1 828 65 328 12 636 23 - - 2 792 7
4. Training 1 444 100 - - - - - - 1 444 4
5. Credit and guarantee funds 765 100 - - - - - - 765 2
6. Salaries and allowances - - - - 3 742 100 - - 3 742 10
7. Operating costs - - - - 869 100 - - 869 2
Total programme costs 24 166 62 328 1 11 479 29 3 208 8 39 181 100

C. Benefit summary and economic analysis
22. The programme will serve some 8,000 rural families (approximately 37,700

people), including 7,100 smallholder families and 900 on- and off-farm jobs.
Smallholder producers, organized in approximately 119 producers’ organizations,
including 24 indigenous communities, will generate the programme’s expected
benefits.

23. The financial and economic evaluation indicates the activities’ viability at farm and
programme levels. The programme’s internal rate of return is 24.3 per cent, and
the net present value 364 million Argentine pesos.

D. Sustainability
24. The programme’s sustainability will be ensured by: (i) its choice of dynamic value

chains for which there is sound market demand and in which participating
producers have experience; (ii) its support to beneficiary organizations that will
ensure sustainability after programme completion; (iii) the adaptive research
integrated into component 1; (iv) the environmental, climate change adaptation,
land tenure security and commercial certification measures to be integrated into the
business plans; and (v) its support to sustainable rural finance services.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
25. The programme’s potential adverse impacts and risks of failing to achieve its

objectives are limited. The main risks include: (i) political and institutional risks,
which are low in view of the stable poverty-reduction policy framework in Northern
Argentina and UCAR’s track record in implementing poverty reduction programmes;
(ii) possible delays in incorporating participating provinces into the programme,
which will be mitigated by their early identification and participation in programme
design; (iii) possible hesitance of private companies to join the programme – to be
reduced by open communication and invitation to participate in the clusters;
(iv) market risks, which are low by virtue of the selected value chains’ dynamism
and the reduction of both supply and marketing constraints; and (v) technological
and climatic risks, which will be mitigated through local seed programmes,



EB 2015/116/R.41/Rev.1

6

technology development, adaptive research and support to the integration of
climate-proof infrastructure into business plans.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

26. The programme approach and implementation modalities are consistent with IFAD
strategies and policies. They specifically support IFAD’s fiduciary compliance and
are aligned with the IFAD Strategic Framework 2011-2015 and the policies on rural
finance, indigenous peoples, environment and natural resource management,
gender equality and women’s empowerment, and targeting.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
27. The programme is in line with government objectives and the Agri-Food and

Agribusiness Strategic Plan (PEA2). It is also consistent with the recommendations
of IFAD’s 2010 country programme evaluation in seeking a programme approach,
expanding the financial services available to smallholder producers and introducing
the use of grants to boost knowledge management.

Innovations and scaling upC.
28. The programme’s innovations include: (i) focusing on dynamic value chains;

(ii) bringing together smallholder producers, public institutions and private
companies in clusters to plan the development of the value chains; (iii) integrating
adaptive research into business plans; (iv) introducing sector-support activities
such as seed programmes and technology development to enhance production and
marketing processes; and (v) enabling access to a spectrum of rural finance
services.

Policy engagementD.
29. The programme will support development of public policies to support family

farming in Argentina and beyond by generating and communicating evidence of the
new approaches it applies. Best practices will be disseminated in coordination with
IFAD’s regional programme for the Common Market of the South (MERCOSUR),
which is active in strengthening pro-poor policy in the region.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
30. A financing agreement between the Republic of Argentina and IFAD will constitute

the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower/recipient.
A copy of the negotiated financing agreement will not be tabled at this session. The
Board is requested to approve the programme proposal subject to the completion of
the negotiations of the financing agreement before the April 2016 session of the
Executive Board. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement will be tabled at the
April 2016 Executive Board session, as well as any substantive changes to the
terms presented.

31. The Republic of Argentina is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD.

32. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.




VII. Recommendation
33. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Republic of Argentina in an amount equivalent to twenty-two million eight
hundred and fifty thousand euros (EUR 22,850,000), and upon such terms
and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
Argentina in an amount equivalent to three hundred and ten thousand euros
(EUR 310,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially
in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President























































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the
Kingdom of Bhutan for the
Commercial Agriculture and Resilient
Livelihoods Enhancement Programme


Kingdom of Bhutan

Commercial Agriculture and Resilient Livelihoods
Enhancement Programme

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Kingdom of Bhutan

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture and Forests

Total programme cost: US$31.59 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 5.89 million (equivalent to approximately
US$8.27 million)

Amount of IFAD grant: SDR 0.76 million (equivalent to approximately
US$1.06 million)

Amount of Adaptation for Smallholder
Agriculture Programme (ASAP) grant:

SDR 3.58 million (equivalent to approximately
US$5.02 million)

Financing gap:1 US$6 million

Terms of IFAD loan: Blend: Maturity period of 25 years, including a grace
period of 5 years, with interest at a fixed rate of 1.25 per
cent plus a service charge of 0.75 per cent per annum

Cofinancier: Food Corporation of Bhutan Ltd. (FCBL)

Amount of cofinancing: US$4.81 million

Contribution of borrower: US$5.77 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$0.66 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD

1 Subject to country selection and applicable and available additional financing from the 2016-2018 or 2019-2021
performance-based allocation system (PBAS) allocation or cofinancing.



EB 2015/LOT/P.16

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Kingdom of Bhutan for the Commercial Agriculture and Resilient
Livelihoods Enhancement Programme, as contained in paragraph 42.

Proposed loan and grant to the Kingdom of Bhutan for
the Commercial Agriculture and Resilient Livelihoods
Enhancement Programme

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Located on the southern slopes of the Eastern Himalayas, Bhutan is mostly

mountainous and heavily forested, with 70 per cent of its geographical area
covered in forests, 10 per cent with shrubs and only 3 per cent cultivated.
Elevations range from 160 to 7,000 metres above sea level, with 31 per cent of the
agricultural land on steep slopes – greater than 50 degrees.

2. Bhutan’s economy has experienced growth averaging 7 per cent per year, with
GDP per capita increasing from US$1,387 in 2006 to US$2,363 in 2013, and
poverty declining from 23 per cent in 2007 to 12 per cent in 2012. While
approximately 62 per cent of the population depends on agriculture (mostly
subsistence farming) for their livelihoods (95 per cent of the rural poor are
employed in agriculture), the share of agriculture in real GDP declined by more than
half, from 25 per cent in 2002 to 12 per cent in 2012. The share of spending on
agriculture also declined from 22.5 per cent in 1982 to 9.8 per cent in 2013.

3. Poverty in Bhutan is a distinctly rural phenomenon. Poverty also varies by region,
with the eastern parts of Bhutan significantly poorer than the rest of the country.
Many villages are still isolated: those with limited roads and market access tend to
have higher poverty rates. Lack of access to technology, business development
services, fair markets and suitable financial products constrain rural enterprise.

4. The challenges affecting agricultural production include natural disasters, declining
productivity, human-wildlife conflict, a shortage of farm labour, insufficient
irrigation and limited post-harvest management.

5. In addition, climate change is projected to have a major impact on agricultural
productivity as a result of changes in water availability, soil fertility and incidence of
pests and disease. Considering that the nation’s socio-economic well-being depends
largely on agriculture, water resources and forests, the impacts of climate change
have the potential to undermine development efforts.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
results-based country strategic opportunities programme (RB-
COSOP)

6. Bhutan’s Government has accorded highest priority to agricultural development in
its Eleventh Five Year Plan (2013-2018) in order to: (i) stimulate climate-resilient
production; (ii) build value chain systems for vegetables and dairy, and a
comprehensive marketing system to enhance the commercial viability of other
agricultural products; and (iii) facilitate institutional linkages and policy dialogue
towards the commercialization of agriculture.



EB 2015/LOT/P.16

2

7. The programme is therefore designed in alignment with the Eleventh Five Year Plan
as a strategic value chain programme with focused product interventions, taking
into consideration the Government’s priorities and gaps left by previous projects.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
8. The programme will initially be implemented in the six poorest eastern districts of

Lhuentse, Mongar, Pemagatshel, Samdrup Jongkhar, Trashigang and
Trashiyangtse. Upon midterm review, it will be scaled up to include districts in
central and south-western Bhutan.

9. The programme will follow an inclusive approach to reach all households living in
target communities. It will involve 21,860 households in six districts in establishing
sustainable agriculture production and an additional 7,115 households in building
vegetable and dairy value chains. Within the target districts, the programme will
work in areas that have been identified based upon: (i) demonstrated production
potential in select commodities; (ii) relative accessibility to roads and marketing
channels; and (iii) demonstrated interest and commitment of communities and
farmers’ organizations. Targeting will also focus on the inclusion of women and
youth.

B. Programme development objective
10. The goal of the programme is to sustainably increase smallholder producers’

incomes and reduce poverty through commercialization of production by
programme households. The objective is increased returns to smallholder farmers
through climate-resilient production of crops and livestock products in nationally
organized value chains and marketing systems. The goal and objective are both in
line with Bhutan’s poverty strategy.

C. Components/outcomes
11. The programme’s three main components are: (i) market-led sustainable

agricultural production; (ii) value chain development and marketing; and
(iii) institutional support and policy development. There will also be a management
component.

12. Component 1: Market–led sustainable agricultural production. This
component aims to bring about a sustainable increase in agricultural production by
rural households and enhance the resilience of agricultural production systems to
climate-induced shocks. It consists of three subcomponents:

(i) Increased production resilience and diversification in agriculture. This
subcomponent will promote integrated agricultural production and
management through: (a) strengthening existing farmers’ groups and
establishing new groups; (b) strengthening extension services, including the
lead farmers outreach model, and increasing their reach; (c) supporting
agricultural inputs, including seeds and seedlings; (d) developing efficient
irrigation; (e) promoting agricultural system innovations; and (f) piloting an
initiative on strengthening local institutions for increased climate resilience.

(ii) Intensification and expansion of vegetable production. In order to
ensure an adequate volume of acceptable quality produce and planned and
timely production, the programme aims to: (a) expand and intensify
vegetable production by rural households; (b) strengthen existing vegetable
producers’ groups and promote new groups; (c) provide vegetable production
inputs; and (d) promote vegetable seed research.

(iii) Intensification and expansion of dairy production. To ensure that an
adequate volume of high-quality milk is produced by smallholder dairy
farmers, the programme will: (a) strengthen existing smallholder dairy farmer



EB 2015/LOT/P.16

3

groups and establish new groups; (b) improve outreach services for livestock;
(c) support fodder and feed production; (d) provide dairy production inputs;
and (e) install bio-gas units.

13. Component 2: Value chain development and marketing. By building value
chains and marketing systems for vegetable and dairy products, the programme
will increase the incomes of smallholder farmers through their participation in
commercial farm production through three subcomponents:

(i) Development of resilient vegetable and dairy value chains. The
programme will support the design and implementation of vegetable and dairy
value chains, increasing climate resilience and strengthening the capacity of
the Food Corporation of Bhutan Ltd. (FCBL) for value chain development and
business plan design and implementation.

(ii) Strengthening agricultural commercialization and enterprise
development. Support will be provided for: (a) agriculture enterprise
development; (b) facilitating access to finance, including a social inclusion
fund and production support fund; and (c) development of multi-stakeholder
platforms and networks.

(iii) Development of community-driven market infrastructure. The
programme will support the creation of value chain infrastructure at the local
level, with ownership and management by communities, farmers’ groups,
cooperatives and small-scale entrepreneurs. Support will include the design
and construction of necessary infrastructure and equipment for vegetable and
dairy value chains.

14. Component 3: Institutional support and policy development. This component
aims to build an institutional and policy environment that fosters the collaboration
necessary for climate-resilient, market-led production and value chain development
in the renewable natural resources (RNR) sector for addressing structural
development constraints. The subcomponents include:

(i) Strengthened value chain and marketing knowledge and
communication. The programme will capture and document knowledge and
best practices from programme implementation, especially related to climate
resilience and value chain and market development by: (a) strengthening
market information systems; and (b) developing a curriculum for RNR training
institutes.

(ii) Mainstreaming climate change resilience and value chain lessons into
agricultural policies and sector strategies. This subcomponent will
involve: (a) participatory policy development and monitoring; (b) support to
Bhutan’s Ministry of Agriculture and Forests (MoAF) in mainstreaming
agricultural policy; and (c) developing a regulatory framework that is
conducive to private-sector development and public-private partnership (PPP).

III. Programme implementation
ApproachA.

15. The programme will be implemented over seven years, from 2015-2022. It will
adopt a flexible, non-prescriptive, process-oriented approach that enables
stakeholders to determine the scope of activities aimed at agricultural and livestock
diversification for climate-resilient livelihoods. Vegetable and dairy intensification
activities will follow a more selective approach to value chain and marketing
development.

Organizational frameworkB.
16. Programme implementation responsibility. MoAF will be the lead agency, with

overall responsibility for the programme and specific responsibility for achieving



EB 2015/LOT/P.16

4

outcomes 1 and 3 (see the logical framework in appendix II). FCBL is the
implementing partner responsible for achieving outcome 2. The national
programme steering committee and regional programme implementation
committee will advise the office of the programme management (OPM), which will
be responsible for the delivery of results. A liaison office under the direction of the
OPM will be established within the MoAF secretariat.

Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning andC.
knowledge management

17. Planning, monitoring and evaluation. Programme activities will be reflected in
the Government’s planning and monitoring system. The OPM will establish a
monitoring and evaluation (M&E) unit to ensure that all outputs, outcomes and
impact indicators are included in the planning and monitoring system, and will
design tools to capture critical field-level data not included in the planning and
monitoring system. The annual workplan and budget will be the main planning tool,
and will be used to review programme performance and progress.

18. Learning and knowledge management. A knowledge management strategy will
be prepared to facilitate engagement in policy development related to resilient
agriculture and dairy production, and marketing support. It will include strategies
for strengthening market information systems and developing RNR training
curricula. A strong knowledge-sharing and learning culture will be built through the
use of participatory tools and knowledge from M&E, and the development of
knowledge products.

Financial management, procurement and governanceD.
19. Financial management. The financial management assessment for this

programme concluded that the arrangements made by the MoAF are adequate. In
view of the low fiduciary risk, the country’s public financial management systems
will be utilized provided they are consistent with IFAD guidelines and procedures.
Qualified finance staff will be in place at the OPM and liaison office. Financial
reporting will follow national accounting standards on cash-basis accounting in line
with the International Public Sector Accounting Standards. The programme’s
financial accounts will be maintained with computerized accounting software and
customized to generate financial reports.

20. Fund flow mechanism. IFAD will make funds available to the Government under
the terms and conditions of the financing agreement. Programme funds will flow
from IFAD via designated accounts established in the Royal Monetary Authority, or
another commercial bank acceptable to IFAD. The designated accounts will be
administered following imprest account arrangements. Advances from the IFAD
loan must be segregated from other funds for the programme.

21. Internal controls and external audit. Internal controls will be established to
ensure operational efficiency, reliability of reporting and compliance with IFAD’s
requirements. The Government’s Royal Audit Authority has been mandated to audit
all foreign-funded loan programmes following standards set by the International
Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions. External auditing arrangements will be
established by the Royal Audit Authority.

22. Start-up costs. Expenditures for programme start-up that are inccured after the
entry into force of the financing agreement but before the satisfaction of the
conditions precedent to withdrawal, shall not exceed an aggregate amount of
SDR 25,000.

23. Procurement of goods, works and services. Procurement of goods, works and
services financed by IFAD under components 1 and 3 will be carried out in
accordance with the provisions of the Government’s Procurement Rules and
Regulations (revised June 2014). Under component 2, procurement will be carried



EB 2015/LOT/P.16

5

out according to FCBL Procurement Rules and Regulations, provided they are
consistent with IFAD’s Procurement Guidelines.

24. Governance. A national programme steering committee will provide policy
direction to facilitate implementation and guide programme management. A
regional programme implementation committee will steer design and
implementation of the annual workplan and budget at the local, district and regional
levels. The national programme steering committee will resolve all programme
management issues and disputes concerning implementation; unresolved issues
may be referred to the Minister of Agriculture and Forests. The governance
framework will ensure that the programme includes: (i) mechanisms for regular
internal audits at the OPM and implementing offices; (ii) annual independent
audits; (iii) verification of fiduciary compliance during supervision; (iv) independent
impact assessments; (v) efficient public financial management systems and efforts
to ensure transparency by strengthening state oversight institutions; and
(vi) community involvement in decision-making, planning, implementation and
monitoring.

SupervisionE.
25. The programme will be directly supervised by IFAD. A midterm review will be

conducted halfway through the implementation period and will provide
opportunities for programme realignment and scaling up based on the availability of
funds.

IV. Programme costs, financing, and benefits
A. Programme costs
26. The total programme cost is estimated at US$31.59 million over seven years,

including contingencies. The total base costs equal US$24.18 million and physical
and price contingencies account for US$1.86 million and US$5.55 million
respectively (8 per cent and 23 per cent respectively of total base costs).
Investment costs are estimated at US$26.18 million (83 per cent of the total cost)
while recurrent costs are estimated at US$5.41 million (17 per cent of the total
cost).

Table 1
Indicative programme costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Recipient IFAD loan Financing gap* IFAD grant
ASAP
grant Beneficiaries FCBL Total

Component Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount
1. Market-led
agricultural
production 4 196.0 4 808.7 4 268.6 399.8 3 024.6 658.8 - 17 356.7
2. Value chain
development and
marketing 598.5 3 150.1 1 662.3 173.9 1 729.1 - 4 281.0 11 594.9
3. Institutional
support and policy
development 13.6 144.0 65.7 34.0 268.9 - - 526.1
4. Programme
management,
coordination, M&E 965.7 170.6 - 452.9 - - 521.5 2 110.7

Total programme
cost

5 773.8 8 273.4 5 996.6 1 060.6 5 022.6 658.8 4 802.4 31 588.3

* Subject to country selection and applicable and available additional financing from the 2016-2018 or 2019-2021 performance-
based allocation system (PBAS) allocations or cofinancing.



EB 2015/LOT/P.16

6

B. Programme financing
27. The programme will be financed by: (i) an IFAD loan of approximately

US$8.27 million (26.2 per cent of the total programme cost); (ii) an IFAD grant of
approximately US$1.06 million (3.4 per cent of the total cost); (iii) an ASAP grant
of approximately US$5.02 million (15.9 per cent of the total cost); (iv) a mainly
in-kind beneficiary contribution estimated at US$0.66 million (2.1 per cent of the
total cost); (v) a contribution by the Government of approximately US$5.77 million
(18.3 per cent of the total cost); (vi) cofinancing from FCBL of US$4.81 million,
mainly through recurrent costs (15.2 per cent of the total cost); and (vii) a
financing gap of approximately US$6 million (19 per cent of the total cost) subject
to country selection and applicable and available additional financing from the
2016-2018 or 2019-2021 PBAS allocations or cofinancing. The Government will
finance taxes and duties, most of the recurrent costs, re-training (in line with the
mandate of the MoAF) and dairy inputs.



E
B
 2

0
1
5
/LO

T
/P.1

6

7

Table 2 a

Indicative programme costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Recipient IFAD loan Financing gap b IFAD grant ASAP grant Beneficiaries FCBL Total

Expenditure category Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Works 580.2 10.0 2 952.1 50.9 2 046.0 35.3 - - 185.2 3.2 38.6 0.7 - - 5 802.1

2. Equipment and
materials 675.1 10.0 2 298.5 34.0 2 587.6 38.3 204.4 3.0 90.2 1.3 432.7 6.4 462.3 6.8 6 750.7

3. Vehicles 7.3 10.0 - - - - 65.8 90.0 - - - - - - 73.1

4. Goods, services and
inputs 1 241.7 34.8 826.4 23.2 727.3 20.4 47.1 1.3 533.4 15.0 187.5 5.3 - - 3 563.4

5. Consultancies 13.2 0.5 761.4 28.7 206.8 7.8 260.3 9.8 1 413.9 53.2 - - - - 2 655.6

6. Workshops 0.0 - 192.6 34.1 190.5 33.8 166.2 29.5 14.9 2.6 - - - - 564.1

7. Training 2 238.5 34.7 969.9 15.0 238.3 3.7 215.9 3.3 2 785.0 43.2 - - - - 6 447.6

8. Fund - - 272.7 83.3 - - 54.5 16.7 - - - - - - 327.3

9. Operating costs 446.7 29.0 - - - - - - - - - - 1 091.1 71.0 1 537.8

10. Salaries and
allowances 571.2 14.8 - - - - 46.3 1.2 - - - - 3 249.0 84.0 3 866.5

Total programme costs 5 773.8 18.3 8 273.4 26.2 5 996.6 19.0 1 060.6 3.4 5 022.6 15.9 658.8 2.1 4 802.4 15.2 31 588.3
a The final disbursement categories will be decided based on IFAD procedures and will include a maximum of five cost categories to maximize efficiency.
b Subject to country selection and applicable and available additional financing from the 2016-2018 or 2019-2021 PBAS allocations or cofinancing.



EB 2015/LOT/P.16

8

E
B
 2

0
1
5
/LO

T
/P.

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
28. All crop and farm models analysed are profitable, yielding positive net present

value. Economic analysis of the programme based on financial models and using
economic prices shows it to be profitable, with an estimated net present value of
404 million Bhutanese ngultrums or US$7.3 million, and an internal rate of return
of 16 per cent at a discount rate of 10 per cent.

29. The programme will directly benefit 28,975 households.

30. Immediate benefits include: (i) increased vegetable and dairy production;
(ii) greater use of sustainable agricultural practices; (iii) increased access to
extension and market information; (iv) sustainable extension services; (v) market
access through consolidation of production; (vi) enterprise establishment; and
(vii) greater employment opportunities. Indirect benefits include enhanced rural
employment, strengthened climate resilience and improved household nutrition.

D. Sustainability
31. The programme incorporates many features designed to promote long-term

sustainability. By selecting a limited number of value chains, production support is
area-specific and tailored to value chain planning needs, allowing subsequent
chains to be established. The programme will also build target communities’
ownership through village-level planning and implementation, including
investments in the development of operation and maintenance groups for assets.
Links between production, marketing and enterprise development will be forged to
promote the sharing of benefits between farmers and the private sector.
Accountability and ownership by farmers will be built to allow for demand-driven
services. Finally, the programme will strengthen grass-roots institutions and their
support services.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
32. A major risk relates to the limited capacity of the implementing partner, FCBL, for

value chain and enterprise development, and PPPs. This has been mitigated by the
allocation of additional resources for strategy development, capacity development
support and targeted technical assistance. Strengthening climate change resilience
will be a challenge at the farm and community levels, and within value chains,
where risks, interests and values are diverse; success depends upon joint action
from an understanding of interdependent relationships. This risk has been mitigated
by strengthening climate-smart agriculture and farm management practices
through targeted technical assistance.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

33. The programme conforms to IFAD’s policies and strategies on targeting, gender,
environmental and natural resource management, and knowledge and innovation.
In terms of its environmental impact, the programme falls under Category B.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
34. The programme is in line with the Government’s Eleventh Five Year Plan

(2013-2018) and will specifically contribute to expanding agriculture service
outreach to remote and vulnerable populations, and increasing smallholders’
resilience to climate change and shocks. The MoAF has developed a market-led
agriculture development strategy to facilitate the transition from subsistence to
commercial agriculture; the programme supports this strategy.

35. To enhance efficiency and reduce redundancies among government stakeholders,
the programme will aim to achieve complementarities among partners. Synergies
with the World Food Programme and the World Bank have already been identified.



EB 2015/LOT/P.16

9

E
B
 2

0
1
5
/LO

T
/P.

Innovations and scaling upC.
36. The programme will support the following innovations: (i) the lead farmer model for

agricultural development; (ii) animal health service models; (iii) an e-agriculture
platform; (iv) permaculture approaches; and (v) linking smallholder market
development to the Bhutan commodity exchange. Although none of these
innovations is new, their integrated application in Bhutan through the proposed
programme is innovative. In addition, efforts to strengthen local institutions’
capacity for improved outreach and sustainability in collaboration with government
service networks have not previously been undertaken in Bhutan in an integrated
manner. Linking technical innovation with the development of new models is a
significant innovation in Bhutan.

37. In its second phase, the programme will also include areas with high production
and marketing potential for vegetable value chains in the south-central and
south-western districts, adding 7,500 direct beneficiaries (1,500 households).

Policy engagementD.
38. The programme will facilitate government linkages and policy dialogue towards the

commercialization of agriculture. This includes addressing RNR institutions and
policy issues to build strong agricultural institutions and sound policies for improved
and sustainable agricultural and marketing practices.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
39. A programme financing agreement between the Kingdom of Bhutan and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as
appendix I.

40. The Kingdom of Bhutan is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD.

41. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
42. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on blend terms to the Kingdom
of Bhutan in an amount equivalent to five million eight hundred ninety
thousand special drawing rights (SDR 5,890,000), and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Kingdom of
Bhutan in an amount equivalent to seven hundred sixty thousand special
drawing rights (SDR 760,000) and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide an ASAP grant to the
Kingdom of Bhutan in an amount equivalent to three million five hundred
eighty thousand special drawing rights (SDR 3,580,000) and upon such terms
and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President














































President’s report

Proposed loan to the Plurinational State of
Bolivia for the Integral Strengthening
Programme for the Camelid Value Chain in
the Bolivian High Plateau

Plurinational State of Bolivia

Integral Strengthening Programme for the Camelid
Value Chain in the Bolivian High Plateau

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Plurinational State of Bolivia

Executing agency: Ministry of Rural Development and Lands

Total programme cost: US$38.76 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR12.87 million (equivalent to approximately
US$17.89 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Blend: Maturity period of 25 years, including a grace
period of 5 years, with interest at a fixed rate of 1.25 per
cent plus a service charge of 0.75 per cent per annum

Contribution of borrower: US$16.5 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$4.3 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/LOT/P.13

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
loan to the Plurinational State of Bolivia for the Integral Strengthening Programme
for the Camelid Value Chain in the Bolivian High Plateau, as contained in
paragraph 47.

Proposed loan to the Plurinational State of Bolivia for the
Integral Strengthening Programme for the Camelid
Value Chain in the Bolivian High Plateau

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. In the past eight years, the performance of the economy of the Plurinational State

of Bolivia was sound, based on favourable macroeconomic policies despite slow
growth of major economies. From 2006 to 2013, the economy grew at an average
rate of 4.9 per cent, resulting in a fiscal surplus and a sustained increase in
international reserves. The debt-to-GDP ratio decreased from 51 per cent in 2006
to 27 per cent in 2010. Per capita income increased from US$1,100 in 2006 to
US$3,000 in 2014, with a GDP of US$30,000 million. Notwithstanding this, the
Plurinational State of Bolivia is one of the poorest countries in South America and
one of the most unequal: about 65 per cent of a total population of 10 million
inhabitants live in poverty and 2.7 million people live in extreme poverty.
Inequality remains high. The Gini index dropped from 0.59 in 2006 to 0.51 in
2009, and in rural areas from 0.64 to 0.53 in the same period. Poverty here has
the face of indigenous and peasant women, and the highest levels of food
insecurity. Of the 340 municipalities, 102 (30 per cent) are in an extremely
vulnerable situation.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

2. The proposed programme is fully justified in taking into account poverty conditions,
food insecurity and vulnerability of the rural population in selected priority
municipalities in the targeted area. Moreover, programme interventions are
relevant, taking into account the important contribution of South American
camelids to the economy of the population in the Bolivian High Plateau, whose
welfare is associated with the income derived from breeding and processing, and
from the marketing of fibre, meat and hides. The proposed activities will help
reduce difficulties and obstacles in primary production such as: (i) low productivity,
low quality and livestock numbers in the Bolivian High Plateau; (ii) improper
handling of animals and herds; (iii) limited availability of feed and water due to
deterioration of natural resources and climate change; (iv) expansion of the
agricultural frontier for quinoa cultivation; (v) low value added to raw materials;
and (vi) inadequate access to services (veterinary, inputs, etc.). The programme
will also address limitations on processing and marketing, including: (i) lack of
technical assistance; (ii) high production costs; (iii) inadequate access to markets;
(iv) lack of access to financial services; and (v) absence of relationships among the
diverse actors in the production complex. In this context, a long-term strategy is
proposed based on the sustainability of joint venture projects with access to
markets, and strengthening of organizational actors. Programme implementation
will scale up development approaches promoted by other IFAD-funded projects in
the country.The programme contributes to achievement of the objectives of the



EB 2015/LOT/P.13

2

National Development Plan, the Patriotic Agenda 2025 and the Agricultural
Development Sector Plan 2014-2018 of the Ministry of Rural Development and
Lands (MDRyT): poverty eradication and financial, productive and natural resource
sovereignty, which emphasizes that agricultural production must be used to meet
domestic demand and ensure food security.

3. The proposed programme, although not included in the results-based country
strategic opportunities programme (RB-COSOP) for the Plurinational State of
Bolivia 2008-2012 and its 2013-2014 extension, is consistent with IFAD Strategic
Framework 2011-2015 objectives to assist rural poor people in improving their
food security, increasing their incomes and strengthening their resilience by
implementing cost-effective and sustainable initiatives, which can create
opportunities for wealth creation and employment in rural areas.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
4. Programme area. The programme has been designed to be implemented in

approximately 47 municipalities in three departments of the High Plateau: La Paz,
Oruro and Potosi. Selection of the programme area was based on: (i) poverty
conditions; (ii) indices of economic, social and environmental vulnerability; and
(iii) the production potential of South American camelids and their by-products.
The programme area concentrates 67 per cent of the population of camelids in the
country, representing 1,915,436 animals, with Oruro accounting for 57 per cent, La
Paz 33 per cent and Potosi 17 per cent.

5. The programme area is characterized by altitudes ranging from 3,600 to
4,600 metres, presenting low humidity, low rainfall and high solar radiation. The
climate is cold and dry, with extreme temperatures up to minus 15° C in winter
and annual average temperatures of 4-8° C. Frosts occur throughout the year, and
hail by the end of the rainy period, causing serious damage to the few crops and
native grasslands of the area.

6. Targeting and target groups. Implementation of the programme will be based
on geographical targeting in accordance with IFAD’s targeting policy. The
programme will be consistent with the definition adopted by IFAD for interventions
in the Plurinational State of Bolivia, which determines that the target population is
composed of small-scale producers, artisans, women and men microentrepreneurs,
rural populations living in extreme poverty and food insecurity, and marginalized
groups (indigenous peoples, women and youth). The target group includes: rural
populations (Quechua, Aymara) with moderate to extreme levels of poverty,
limited access to irrigation and water, lack of financial capital, difficulties in
accessing financial services, training and technology, limited employment
opportunities, poor or inadequate socio-economic organizational levels and
outmigration in areas with high environmental vulnerability. As part of the
targeting strategy, the programme will take into account the New State
Constitution, which explicitly recognizes the collective rights of indigenous peoples
and the right to consultation processes.

7. Target group. Using geographical targeting criteria, a typology of farm families,
and data from the 2012 census by the National Institute of Statistics, the
programme area comprises 106,571 rural families. Of this total, it is estimated that
63,942 families are engaged in breeding camelids.

8. Gender. The programme is consistent with the three strategic objectives of IFAD's
gender policy: (i) promote economic empowerment to give women and men an
equal opportunity to participate in profitable economic activities and benefit from
them; (ii) give women and men the opportunity to equally express themselves and
influence rural institutions and organizations; and (iii) achieve a more equitable
balance in workloads and the distribution of economic and social benefits for



EB 2015/LOT/P.13

3

women and men. It will ensure that these considerations are taken into account,
identifying inequalities and furthering affirmative action. The programme will
promote equitable leadership in productive organizations that contribute to the
economic empowerment of women’s associations and groups, taking into account
the workload these economic initiatives will entail. It will also systematize
experience by productive organizations in the implementation of measures for
gender equality and inclusion of youth, disseminating findings and
recommendations through events and publications.

B. Programme development objective
9. The main purpose of the programme is to improve living conditions of families and

productive economic organizations linked to the camelid production complex, while
ensuring sustainable management of natural resources. The programme will
contribute towards: (i) reducing rural poverty and child malnutrition; (ii) increasing
physical assets (productive infrastructure) and financial assets of programme
users; (iii) enhancing the integration of business initiatives of beneficiaries in
camelid value chains; (iv) increasing the incomes of participating families;
(v) furthering adoption of practices conducive to natural resource management;
and (vi) increasing the capacities of programme users (human and social assets)
based on the principle of social inclusion of women and youth.

C. Components/outcomes
10. Programme implementation includes three main components:

11. Component 1: Primary production and management of natural resources.
The objectives of this component are to strengthen access by poor families to
initiatives seeking to improve: primary production at the level of family production
units and communities, and sustainable management of natural resources.
Programme initiatives will improve the productive environment, increase resilience
to the effects of climate change, mitigate negative environmental impacts and
provide conditions for competitive entry into markets.

12. Implementation of this component will include two subcomponents:

(a) Improvement of primary production in nutrition, animal health and
management and support to small farm infrastructure. Implementation will
include the following activities: (a) programme information dissemination
workshops; (b) participatory territorial planning; (c) competitive financing of
household and community production unit initiatives; and (d) training in
gender equality, rural youth and experience-sharing.

(b) Sustainable use of natural resources. This subcomponent will be based on a
territorial management approach to implementation of natural resource
management, aimed at improving livelihoods ecosystems through the
following activities: (a) integrated community management of water
resources; (b) management and soil conservation; and (c) strengthening
local institutions for natural resource management and systematization of
experiences.

13. Component 2: Processing and marketing. The objective of this component is to
support families and their organizations in generating productive economic
infrastructure conditions to encourage private investment, improve transformation
processes for value creation and deepen competitive access to markets, while
increasing interaction among actors in the South American camelid production
complex. The component links the dynamics of improving production and
productivity of camelid breeders with transformation initiatives to generate added
value in the fibre, meat and hides value chains.

14. This component includes two subcomponents:



EB 2015/LOT/P.13

4

(a) Processing of fibre, meat and hides. Implementation will include the following
main activities: (a) training of programme teams in competitive allocation of
financial resources and financing of business plans; (b) strategic analysis of
the camelid production complex in its three value chains; and (c) financing of
business plans in processing and speciality export markets.

(b) Marketing of processed products. Implementation will include the following
main activities: (a) support to marketing processes and markets; and
(b) innovation and systematization in terms of gender equality and rural
youth.

15. Component 3: Access to financial services. The objective of this component is
to enhance knowledge, access to and inclusion of participating farmers,
organizations and business groups in the financial services and products offered by
financial entities. This component includes three subcomponents: (i) information
and financial education; (ii) mobilization of savings; and (iii) promotion of financial
services.

III. Programme implementation
A. Approach
16. The programme will pursue a territorial development approach in the context of the

camelid production complex. lt will strengthen the capacities of families and local
organizations to improve camelid productivity, while enhancing the management of
natural resources and resilience in order to support livelihoods and food and
nutritional security, in partnership with public and private stakeholders. Assistance
will be provided in developing the business skills of productive economic
organizations to help them gain access to markets through implementing business
plans and through strategic investments in the processing of intermediate products
of the camelid complex value chain. The programme will also promote and deepen
the provision of financial services, thus furthering financial inclusion. It will allocate
funds through competitive mechanisms for the implementation of various
production and business initiatives in accordance with existing public policies.

B. Organizational framework
17. Programme implementation will be the responsibility of a programme

implementation unit (PIU) within the MDRyT, and departmental technical units
(DTUs), located in the three departments in the programme area.

18. Implementation. The PIU will be responsible for day-to-day implementation of
the programme, with technical, administrative, financial and legal capacity. The
PIU will be staffed by a programme coordinator and by the professional, technical
and administrative staff required for the correct implementation of the programme.
Staff will be located in a central office in La Paz and in the three DTUs located in
the programme area.

19. Programme guidance. Overall guidance will be provided by a programme
steering committee (PSC). At the departmental level, the programme will establish
territorial rating committees, community juries and local productive initiatives
approval committees (LPIACs).

20. Programme steering committee. The PSC will be responsible for providing
strategic policy for interventions. It will be composed of five members,
representing the MDRyT – which will head the committee; ministries involved in
programme implementation; and programme users.

21. Territorial rating committees. These committees will assess proposed primary
production and food security and nutrition initiatives. They will be established at
the departmental level and composed of five members selected according to
custom. One of the members will be a subject-matter specialist or local expert.



EB 2015/LOT/P.13

5

22. Community juries. Participating communities will select an expert in natural
resource management according to local customs, who will qualify the physical
results in each community, together with a local municipal facilitator.

23. Local productive initiatives approval committees. Three LPIACs will be
established in the programme area and entrusted with selection and approval of
business plans submitted by potential users or beneficiary groups. The composition
of the committees and the requirements for the submission and approval of
business plans will be detailed in the programme implementation manual.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

24. Planning. Operational planning will be based on annual workplans and budgets
(AWP/Bs) prepared through a participatory process. The PIU will submit quarterly
progress reports and an annual report to IFAD.

25. Monitoring and evaluation. M&E will be the responsibility of the PIU. Activities
will include preparation of a baseline survey, a midterm review (MTR) and a
programme completion report. The baseline survey will be prepared in parallel with
the collection and systematization of information under the Results and Impact
Management System (RIMS), which will be replicated at midterm and at
programme completion.

26. Learning and knowledge management. Programme implementation will involve
introduction of an effective knowledge management system involving all
stakeholders. The programme will develop activities to enable a process of
reflection to better understand what processes and programme outcomes are being
reached. Knowledge acquired will contribute towards lessons learned and towards
adjusting the implementation strategy of the programme if needed. The
programme will support systematization, exchanges of experiences, life stories and
the use of audiovisual techniques in evaluation. These will be disseminated through
information and communications technologies and will contribute greatly towards
knowledge-sharing.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
27. Financial management. The MDRyT, through the PIU, will be responsible for

overall financial management of the programme, including AWP/Bs, procurement,
flow of funds, disbursement, internal control, accounting, financial reporting and
audit. The programme will use the national Integrated System of Management and
Administrative Modernization software, in addition to programme-specific software
for budget and accounting to ensure compliance with IFAD requirements.

28. Flow of funds. The Ministry of Economy and Public Finance will open, in the
Central Bank of Bolivia, a designated account in United States dollars, within the
treasury single account system. The designated account will be operated by the
MDRyT and will be used exclusively for the proceeds of the loan.

29. Procurement. Procurement will follow national procurement procedures and
regulations to the extent that they are consistent with IFAD’s procurement
guidelines.

30. Audit. The programme’s consolidated financial statements will be audited annually
by private independent auditors in accordance with IFAD Guidelines on Project
Audits. All programme accounts will be audited, including all sources of funding,
IFAD, the Government, departmental and municipal governments and communities
of users. Annual audit reports will be submitted to IFAD within six months after the
end of each fiscal year.



EB 2015/LOT/P.13

6

E. Supervision
31. The programme will be directly supervised by IFAD, which will oversee compliance

with the programme financing agreement, including procurement and contractual
agreements, in collaboration with the PIU. Supervision missions will be scheduled
after consultation with the national authorities and the PIU.

IV. Programme costs, financing, benefits
A. Programme costs
32. Total programme costs have been estimated at the equivalent of US$38.8 million.

The cost structure includes the three main components and programme
management: (i) primary production and management of natural resources,
US$18.3 million (47.2 per cent); (ii) processing and marketing, US$13.7 million
(35.9 per cent); (iii) access to financial services, US$1.4 million (35.4 per cent)
and; (iv) programme management, US$5.4 million (13.8 per cent).
Table 1
Indicative programme costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan

National
Government
counterpart Beneficiaries

Departamental
governments

Municipal
governments Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %
1. Primary production

and management of
natural resources 5 361 29.3 4 221 23.1 2 351 12.9 1 154 6.3 5 204 28.5 18 291 47.2

2. Processing and
marketing 7 005 51.0 1 901 13.9 1 461 10.6 2 747 20.0 610 4.4 13 725 35.4

3. Access to financial
services 808 58.5 55 4.0 518 37.5 - - - - 1 381 3.6

4. Programme
management 4 717 87.9 648 12.1 - - - - - - 5 365 13.8

Total 17 891 46.2 6 826 17.6 4 329 11.2 3 902 10.1 5 814 15.0 38 762 100.0



EB 2015/LOT/P.13

7

B. Programme financing
33. Programme financing comprises an IFAD loan of approximately US$17.9 million

(46.2 per cent); the Government contribution of US$16.5 million (49.7 per cent),
made up of the national government counterpart contribution of about
US$6.8 million (17.6 per cent), departmental governments US$3.9 million
(10.1 per cent), municipal governments US$5.8 million (15 per cent); and
contributions in cash from beneficiaries of about US$4.3 million (11.2 per cent).
Table 2
Indicative Programme costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan

National
Government
counterpart Beneficiaries

Departamental
governments

Municipal
governments Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %
1. Grants and

subsidies 9 151 38.5 3 442 14.5 4 329 18.2 1 471 6.2 5 352 22.5 23 744 61.3
2. Training 2 299 48.6 2 407 50.9 - - - - 20 0.4 4 726 12.2
3. Works 150 4.9 29 0.9 - - 2 431 79.7 442 14.5 3 052 7.9
4. Consultancies 1 920 84.0 376 16.0 - - - - - - 2 287 5.9
5. Vehicles and

equipment 524 83.2 106 16.8 - - - - - - 630 1.6
6. Operating costs 3 848 89.0 475 11.0 - - - - - - 4 324 11.2

Total 17 891 46.2 6 826 17.6 4 392 11.2 3 902 10.1 5 814 15.0 38 762 100.0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
34. Benefits and beneficiaries. Programme benefits will accrue as a result of

increased herd productivity, value addition in fibre, meat and leather, strengthened
partnerships with other actors in the value chain, better participatory territorial
management of the sustainable use of natural resources (water, soil and
grassland), and cofinancing of business plans, capacity-building of users and
greater participation by women and youth. It will benefit a total of 30,000 families;
equivalent to 47 per cent of the target population, encompassing a total of
1,996 rural communities.

35. Economic analysis. The programme’s financial feasibility was evaluated for
10 years, taking into account the opportunity cost relative to the bank rate
(11.5 per cent). For farm models, the internal rate of return (IRR) was estimated
at 22-37 per cent. Net present value (NPV) was positive in all cases, ranging from
US$107 to US$543, with incomes above the poverty line. Microenterprise models
showed an IRR from 18 to 56 per cent, and NPV ranged from US$5,882 to
US$45,312 with increased employment levels – implying a reduction of wage
labour outside the farm and greater commitment to business development. The
economic evaluation was projected for 20 years in terms of contributing to
improving the national economy. The evaluation considered adjustments in cash
transfers to programme users (competitions for primary production, management
of natural resources, productive infrastructure for proposed business plans and
savings). Price contingencies were adjusted, considering that imported inflation is a
distortion of actual prices. Adjustments were also made regarding economic input
prices (farm labour) and shadow prices (for tradable goods) whose ratio is
equivalent to US$1.24. Indicators show that the programme is economically
feasible and a good investment for the Government. The IRR is 27 per cent, NPV
US$23.5 million and the cost-benefit ratio 2.3:1, considering a discount rate of
12.67 per cent.

36. Sensitivity analysis shows that in terms of economic feasibility the programme is
more sensitive to the reduction of benefits than to increased costs. With reduced
benefits, the programme withstands up to 37 per cent, and with increases in costs,
up to 84 per cent. Considering delays, the programme withstands two-year delays,
maintaining positive benefits.



EB 2015/LOT/P.13

8

D. Sustainability
37. Sustainability of programme interventions is based on: (i) strengthened capacity of

families, communities and municipalities to undertake sustainable territorial
planning to manage their productive base – assuming the adoption of improved
management of natural resources; (ii) organizational strengthening of communities
and productive economic organizations, which will enable greater empowerment
and capacity for coordination in intervention areas and will generate public/private
partnerships; (iii) improved access by producers – as a result of technical and
business management training – and strategic investments in productive
infrastructure (jointly with municipal and provincial governments) will enable them
to fully participate in value chains, gaining access to local, regional, national and
international markets; and (iv) adoption of gender and generational approaches
will allow for greater participation by vulnerable groups such as women and youth.
All of the above will be reinforced through financial education supported by savings
mobilization, which will allow producers and productive economic organizations to
graduate from dependence on government funding and grants, allowing them to
grow independently. The MTR and M&E of the programme will facilitate design of
an exit strategy – considering progress made and prospects for sustainability of the
results in different dimensions (institutional/organizational, financial, technical and
environmental).

E. Risk identification and mitigation
38. The following risks have been identified: (i) possible duplication with upcoming

financing by the World Bank; (ii) delays in launching programme operations;
(iii) limitations on the processes of establishing or formalizing small- and medium-
sized enterprises; (iv) funding for new business ventures will require transfers to
producer organizations with low implementation capacity, including for fiduciary
duties, which may affect implementation of economic initiatives;
(v) implementation of infrastructure initiatives in conjunction with departmental
and municipal governments will require financial contributions that may not be
available; (vi) market acceptance, increased demand for diverse products in the
value chain, and reduced barriers resulting from measures designed to ensure food
safety, especially meat products; (vii) climate change events such as droughts,
frosts and hailstorms affecting agricultural primary production; (viii) increased
deforestation of native species in favour of the introduction of quinoa, based on
market demand; and (ix) difficulty in making progress in financial inclusion, owing
to geographical and cultural distance between financial institutions and potential
customers.

39. Mitigation measures will include: (i) coordination during the design of new projects
and leadership of national authorities in generating synergies in the
implementation stages and agreements between funders to avoid duplication of
efforts; (ii) IFAD and national authorities will facilitate the processes needed for
effectiveness, including prompt approvals and no objections; (iii) the programme
will facilitate establishment of new ventures through support to strengthening
corporate governance and compliance requirements; (iv) it will provide training to
programme users in managing trust mechanisms of the financial resources
transferred; (v) the programme will ensure that funding by departmental and
municipal governments is assured before the start of activities, and that
agreements have been signed to ensure compliance with the agreements made;
(vi) it will support producers’ groups in fulfilling food-safety certification
requirements when it begins sponsoring implementation of this type of initiative.
The programme will also follow up on ongoing measures designed to streamline the
obtaining of health certificates from the National Agricultural Health and Food
Safety Service (SENASAG) for infrastructure and meat products; (vii) it will provide
funding for initiatives by target groups to improve their environment and reduce
their vulnerability; (viii) the programme will implement awareness workshops on



EB 2015/LOT/P.13

9

environmental issues, keeping in mind the balance that must exist in the
man/nature relationship, and strengthening knowledge management activities
through learning routes and other mechanisms; and (ix) a strategy to reduce
geographical and cultural distances in accessing financial services will be adapted
to include financial education and temporary monetary savings incentives, which
have proved to be useful tools in stimulating demand for deposit-taking services.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
40. The programme is aligned with IFAD policies regarding: (i) targeting, by supporting

activities that benefit the rural population living in poverty; (ii) gender equality, by
furthering empowerment and promoting greater participation by women;
(iii) indigenous peoples, by adopting an intervention strategy based on sustainable
land management, strengthening the traditional local organization of production
units through a participatory approach and recognition of the value of ancestral
knowledge; (iv) management of natural resources, through more productive and
resilient ecosystems and activities including soil conservation, integrated water
resource management, and institutional strengthening of local communities and
municipal governments; (v) rural finance, by supporting access to financial services
and deepening access to credit for productive enterprises; and (vi) private-sector
development, through strengthening the capacity of camelid breeders to establish
partnerships with diverse actors in the fibre, meat and leather value chains
generated.

B. Alignment and harmonization
41. The programme is aligned with the Agricultural Sector Development Plan

2014-2018, which includes technological development, agricultural innovation, use
and management of soil, water and vegetation cover for agricultural production,
health and food safety, sovereignty and territorial management by indigenous and
peasant farmers. The programme will generate synergies and strategic alliances
with public and private entities that operate in some municipalities in the
programme area, thus contributing to harmonization of activities in rural territories
(e.g. the World Bank’s Rural Alliances and Community Investment in Rural Areas
Projects).

C. Innovations and scaling up
42. The programme will innovate by introducing participatory planning, and supporting

economic initiatives on a more continuous basis, including provision of diversified
technical assistance. It will scale up development approaches promoted by the
VALE, PROMARENA and PROSAT projects funded by IFAD in the country.1 The
scaling up process is possible in the context of a favourable regulatory framework
that supports innovation with a territorial perspective aimed at management of the
primary production base, an efficient management of natural resources, financial
inclusion and inclusion of women and youth.

D. Policy engagement
43. Policy dialogue will cover: governance of municipal territories and communities for

sustainable territorial management; strengthening of local institutions in natural
resource management; and capacity-building of communities and municipalities in
land-use planning and in natural resource and risk management, including
strengthening municipal productivity and risk management units. The programme
will further engage in analysing the policy approach of the MDRyT in the context of
its National Camelid Programme.

1 Enhancement of the Peasant Camelid Economy Support Project, Management of Natural Resources in the Chaco
and High Valleys Regions Project and Technical Assistance Services Project for Small Holders.



EB 2015/LOT/P.13

10

VI. Legal instruments and authority
44. A programme financing agreement between the Plurinational State of Bolivia and

IFAD will constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed loan to the
borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as appendix I.

45. The Plurinational State of Bolivia is empowered under its laws to receive financing
from IFAD.

46. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
47. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on blend terms to the
Plurinational State of Bolivia in the amount of twelve million eight hundred
seventy thousand special drawing rights (SDR 12,870,000), and upon such
terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms
and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President























































President’s report

Proposed loan to the Kingdom of Cambodia
for the Accelerating Inclusive Markets for
Smallholders Project



Kingdom of Cambodia

Accelerating Inclusive Markets for Smallholders Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Kingdom of Cambodia

Executing agency: Ministry of Commerce

Total project cost: US$61.6 million

Amount of IFAD loan: US$36.3 million

Terms of IFAD loan Highly concessional: Maturity period of 40 years,
including a grace period of 10 years, with a service
charge of 0.75 per cent per annum

Cofinanciers: Private businesses

Amount of cofinancing: US$8.6 million

Terms of cofinancing: Private investment through value chain innovation fund

Contribution of borrower: US$8.65 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$8.1 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/119/R.23/Rev.1

1

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
loan to the Kingdom of Cambodia for the Accelerating Inclusive Markets for
Smallholders Project as contained in paragraph 39.

Proposed loan to the Kingdom of Cambodia for the
Accelerating Inclusive Markets for Smallholders Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Cambodia has made dramatic progress in reducing poverty over the last decade.

Between 2004 and 2012, poverty was reduced from 53 per cent to 17.5 per cent,
surpassing all expectations and exceeding the Millennium Development Goal
poverty target. More than 4.3 million people have moved out of poverty during this
period – mostly in rural areas – with the number of poor people dropping from
almost 7 million in 2004 to below 2.5 million in 2012 (World Bank, 2015). The
country’s vibrant and pro-poor agricultural growth was the key driver of this
dramatic reduction in poverty. More than 60 per cent of Cambodia’s poverty
reduction was attributed to the agriculture sector: higher rice prices stimulated
greater rice production, which helped to increase farm wages (World Bank, 2013).
Between 2004 and 2012, the annual growth in gross agricultural production was
8.7 per cent and agricultural value added grew by 5.3 per cent during this period.

2. Despite this significant reduction in poverty, many of the 4.3 million people that
have moved out of poverty are still vulnerable. This is because the majority of
them are still "near-poor" and are therefore extremely susceptible to slipping back
into poverty if shocks occur. Indeed, almost all of the gains of the last decade
could be reversed by an average loss of KHR 1,200 per day (US$0.30), which
would return 3 million near-poor people into poverty and raise Cambodia’s poverty
rate to 40 per cent (based on 2011 poverty data; World Bank, 2013).

3. Additional poverty reduction will depend on the success of agriculture in the
coming years since this sector involves a large share of the labour force and has a
major role in exports. Farmers are among the country’s poorest and most
vulnerable people, and the factors that drove Cambodia’s growth – especially
higher rice prices and expansion of production – are unlikely to drive significant
further growth. Continued poverty reduction will depend on finding new ways to
expand Cambodia's agricultural sector in terms of overall agricultural growth,
higher returns (especially returns on labour) and inclusiveness of growth.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

4. Since Cambodia’s dramatic poverty reduction was largely driven by agriculture,
most poverty reduction occurred in rural areas. Given the importance of agriculture
in the rural economy, continued agricultural growth is crucial to promote further
poverty reduction and economic growth in rural communities. If farm incomes are
to keep pace with non-farm wages, returns on agricultural labour need to rise
dramatically; however agricultural growth has stalled. In order to continue
Cambodia’s poverty reduction and inclusive growth, there is a need to restart
agricultural growth through intensification, diversification and commercialization.

5. Fortunately, there are currently market opportunities for higher-return agricultural
growth and a number of important developments are enabling Cambodian farmers
and agribusinesses to capitalize on these opportunities. These include a rapidly
improving rural finance sector, promising market-support and production



EB 2016/119/R.23/Rev.1

2

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

initiatives, and farmers’ increasing interest in market opportunities for
agribusiness. However: many smallholders still cannot access financing for
investments in their farms; value chains are highly fragmented, leading to high
transaction costs; many small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) are informal,
which limits their capacity to invest and their understanding of new markets; many
agribusinesses struggle to aggregate supply from several smallholder farmers; and
major capacity gaps exist in competitive on-farm production and post-harvest
management. Tackling these challenges is vital if Cambodian agriculture is to
compete in both export markets and against imports from neighbouring countries.

6. The rationale for the Accelerating Inclusive Markets for Smallholders (AIMS) Project
is to: (i) identify a portfolio of promising growth opportunities; and (ii) work with
actors in the value chain to identify and address bottlenecks to faster growth. This
requires filling gaps in networks, skills and resources to forge a practical pathway
to growth.

7. The project design is consistent with the strategic objectives of the 2013-2018
country strategic opportunities programme (COSOP), specifically its first strategic
objective to enable poor smallholders to take advantage of market opportunities. It
is closely aligned with the Government’s policies for rural development, including
the Rectangular Strategy’s resolve to make agriculture a leading sector in the
nation’s economy and source of sustainable economic growth, and to increase food
security and reduce poverty. The project is also aligned with the Cambodia Trade
Integration Strategy 2014-2018, which addresses issues of trade-sector
competitiveness, job and income creation, and sustainable human development.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
8. Project area. The project will be implemented in all parts of the country, with

actual locations determined by the selection of priority value chains. AIMS will
initially work in 15 provinces based on the section of five flagship commodities to
be supported by five multistakeholder platforms and three inter-regional technical
hubs.

9. The project’s primary beneficiaries will be smallholder farm households, including
poor and near-poor farmers, and women-headed households participating in the
supported value chains and voluntarily collaborating in project activities. Secondary
target groups include other value-chain actors such as agricultural cooperatives,
farmer organizations, SMEs, agribusinesses, service enterprises and industry
associations. The project will aim to make agriculture and value-chain integration
more attractive to the younger generation as a profitable business.

B. Project development objective
10. The project’s development objective is to increase returns from farming for

smallholders, including poor farmers and youth, through efficient public-sector
investment. There are expected to be 75,000 direct household beneficiaries of the
project with increased assets of at least 25 per cent.

C. Components/outcomes
11. The project will have two technical components and one project management

component:

 Component 1: Value chain development will focus on brokering,
facilitation, innovation and capacity-building to support the inclusive growth
of five high-value product value chains covering crops and livestock. Value
chain brokering and facilitation through a cluster approach will form the core
of the component’s approach. This cluster approach will geographically group
key actors along the value chain in the same geographic areas. For AIMS,
value-chain actors will typically be defined by zones of production, which form
discrete buying zones that include a number of competing buyers and
traders.



EB 2016/119/R.23/Rev.1

3

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

IFAD’s public-private-producer partnership models will be drawn upon for the
supported contract farming arrangements. Building on both existing and
emerging production clusters, the project will: (i) follow a consistent process
to develop and promote links between buyers, producers and service
providers through multistakeholder platforms and contract farming
mechanisms; (ii) give priority to innovation in local value chains, especially
through a value chain innovation fund (VCIF) and; (iii) promote the
development of local markets for private-sector support services.

 Component 2: Value chain financing will aim to increase private
investment in priority value chains by farmers, SMEs, agricultural
cooperatives, agribusinesses, service providers and others. Priorities for the
investment agenda in each value chain will be driven by the private
value-chain actors via the brokerage and facilitation process supported
through component 1. The value chain financing component will employ a
two-pronged approach to stimulate private investment in priority value
chains. This approach will be implemented through two sub-components:

(i) 2.1 Value chain investment support. AIMS will provide direct financial
support to stimulate private investment through the VCIF and a credit
line for policy-based financing to be administered by the Rural
Development Bank or a third-party fund administrator. The total value of
investment support will be approximately US$18 million. The total value
of support grants and loans available to each value chain through the
VCIF and line of credit should be broadly proportionate to the expected
development outcomes of that value chain (including the number of
farmers benefiting and each farmer’s increased profit). Only investments
assessed as commercially feasible will be eligible.

(ii) 2.2 Financial service provider partnerships. Private investment in
high-value agriculture can only be accelerated with significantly increased
financing from banks and microfinance institutions to farmers,
agricultural cooperatives, SMEs, agribusinesses and service providers.
AIMS will initially partner with three major microfinance institutions with
substantial agricultural portfolios and the internal capacity to lend for
agriculture (for example having dedicated agricultural finance officers).

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

12. The project design is based on the following principles:

(a) Only commercially viable value chains and investments will be supported.
This is essential for supported value chains to sustain long-term
competitiveness and self-sufficiency after project implementation without
public subsidies.

(b) To attract IFAD support, value chains must have real potential for inclusive
growth and involve significant numbers of poor farmers who are able to earn
profits from the growing value chains along with other enterprises.

(c) From the start, AIMS will promote the development of critical business-
support services and input markets, which are a vital to sustaining a
competitive industry that strengthens the primary value chain.

(d) AIMS will build the capacity of individuals, institutions, networks and systems
while delivering project results.

(e) The project will promote learning from best practices elsewhere, refining and
adapting approaches that work well in the Cambodian context.

B. Organizational framework
13. Project implementation will be primarily decentralized, with overall project

coordination provided by the Ministry of Commerce (MOC) as lead implementation



EB 2016/119/R.23/Rev.1

4

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

agency (LIA). MOC will support project activities through three regional hubs and
the Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF) will collaborate with the contracted
fund administrator for the VCIF and the Rural Development Bank or a qualified
private bank for the line of credit.

14. MOC will be the lead executing agency for the project and will lead component 1,
with the responsibility of coordinating business development and agriculture
marketing. This ministry will host a project management office (PMO), which will
include the component 1 management team led by the AIMS project director. The
PMO will be responsible for overall financial management, reporting and
administration in collaboration with the MOC Directorate General for Domestic
Trade. The Department for International Cooperation of MOC will be responsible for
financial management, procurement, monitoring and evaluation (M&E),
communication and reporting.

15. MEF will be the implementing agency for component 2 (value chain financing). The
component 2 team will establish a management office within this ministry, which
will supervise the appointed VCIF fund administrator and Rural Development Bank
or a qualified private bank in relation to the line of credit. Overall, as per its
borrower’s representative role, MEF will also be responsible for: (i) inter-agency
coordination; (ii) providing government fiduciary oversight and management;
(iii) providing sufficient and timely counterpart contributions to finance project
activities, including payment of government staff salaries; and (iv) timely
processing of withdrawal applications, procurement approvals and other necessary
documents according to standard operating procedures.

C. Planning, M&E, and learning and knowledge management
16. Planning and M&E. Planning processes and schedules within AIMS will be

harmonized with the regular planning processes of MEF and MOC. A major focus for
M&E will be the establishment of a highly effective management information
system (including online and offline, Internet and mobile devices) to provide
project managers and value chain teams with timely and reliable information on
developments in each priority value chain. This will allow intervention plans to be
assessed and information and networks from neighboring provinces and countries
to be integrated.

17. The M&E system will utilize regularly updated results chains and M&E frameworks
for each priority value chain to compliment IFAD’s Results and Impact Management
System (RIMS), and the project logframe. The use of results chains for individual
value chains will enable the identification and tracking of change indicators for each
value chain and cluster. The results chains will also be powerful tools for
communication among value-chain stakeholders regarding opportunities,
bottlenecks and joint action

18. Learning and knowledge management. Effective and efficient learning,
knowledge management and communication are central to meeting the project’s
objective through communities of practice, social networks and online systems.
AIMS will invest in high-quality, evidence-based knowledge management in order
to contribute to policy development. The project will also seek to strengthen
institutional capacity related to policy-based financing for sector development,
trade research and facilitation. In this context, AIMS will support targeted
institutional strengthening activities and project management will integrate
effective knowledge management and communication. The knowledge
management and communication strategy will play an important role in ensuring
that the project achieves its indented outcomes. This strategy will be coordinated
by the Department for International Cooperation on behalf of the PMO and will
include a full-time knowledge management and communications officer from this
department.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
19. Financial management. The project’s financial management will be in line with

the standard operating procedures for externally funded projects (used by all



EB 2016/119/R.23/Rev.1

5

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

donor-funded programmes in Cambodia) and supervised by IFAD to ensure that:
(i) funds are used efficiently and for intended purposes; (ii) disbursements of
project funds facilitate rapid implementation; (iii) funds are well managed and flow
smoothly; (iv) accurate financial reports are issued in a timely manner; (v) a
robust flow of reliable information on project activities ensures accountability; and
(vi) project assets and resources are safeguarded. The Ministries of Commerce and
Economy and Finance will be authorized to manage all project-related bank
accounts, including those utilized for government counterpart funding.

20. Flow of funds. As lead executing agency, MOC shall open and maintain a
designated account in United States dollars at the National Bank of Cambodia to
receive the loan proceeds from the account maintained by IFAD and an account in
United States dollars to receive and manage the government counterpart funds for
the project. MOC shall open a project bank account for the implementation of
component 1. MEF shall open a project bank account for the implementation of
component 2 and coordination activities.

21. Procurement. Procurement shall be carried out in accordance with the updated
standard operating procedures promulgated under the law on public procurement
for implementing all externally funded projects. The standard operating procedures
detail the procedures, processes, good governance framework and controls as
established in the procurement manual. Government rules and procedures will be
applied and as long they are consistent with IFAD’s procurement guidelines.

22. Internal control and external audit. All procedures for project implementation
and management will be documented in the project implementation manual and
consistently applied. The manual shall include provisions regulating the
establishment of internal controls, monitoring and review of transactions, and
accounting software requirements. An independent private auditor will be hired for
the annual audit of consolidated financial statements (including those prepared by
both MEF and MOC). Proper terms of reference for audits will be an important
safeguard for all stakeholders. These terms of reference will include visits to
implementing partners and service providers, and field visits when appropriate. The
audited financial statements and audit reports will be submitted to IFAD within the
six months following the close of each fiscal year.

23. Governance. A project level good governance framework will cover procurement,
financial management, disclosure, civil society participation, ethical conduct,
sanctions and project-specific issues. The project will support the strengthening of
national financial management and procurement capacity.

E. Supervision
24. AIMS will be jointly supervised by the Government and IFAD. Joint supervision

missions will be conducted at least once per financial year with additional
implementation support missions mobilized as necessary. A mid-term review shall
be conducted jointly by the borrower and IFAD at the end of the third project year
to: assess the progress, achievements, constraints, emerging impacts and
sustainability of the project, and make recommendations and necessary
adjustments for the remainder of the disbursement period.

IV. Project costs, financing, and benefits
A. Project costs
25. The total project cost is estimated at US$62.1 million. Indicative costs for each

component are detailed in table 1. Indicative project costs by expenditure category
and financier are provided in table 2.



EB 2016/119/R.23/Rev.1

6

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component

IFAD loan
Other

cofinanciers Beneficiaries
Borrower/

counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Value Chain
development 13 994 66.4 - - 273 1.3 6 810 32.3 21 077
2. Value Chain financing 20 721 54.9 8 586 22.7 7 843 20.8 602 1.6 37 751
3. Project Coordination
and knowledge
management 1 542 55.4 - - - - 1 243 44.6 2 785

Total 36 257 58.8 8 586 13.9 8 116 13.2 8 654 14 61 613

B. Project financing
26. AIMS is to be financed by an IFAD loan, a private-sector contribution (by

beneficiaries and businesses) and the Government. IFAD will finance
US$36.3 million (58.8 per cent) of project costs as a loan to the Government. The
Government will finance US$8.65 million (14 per cent of total costs). Project
beneficiaries are expected to contribute US$8.1 million (13.2 per cent) and private
businesses are expected to contribute US$8.6 million (13.9 per cent).
Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD loan
Other

cofinanciers Beneficiaries
Government
counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Consultancies 2 284 60 - 0 - 0 1 522 40 3 806
2. Equipment and
material - 0 - 0 - 0 721 100 721
3. Training 3 544 50 - 0 - 0 3 544 50 7 088
4. Credit and guarantee
funds 8 967 100 - 0 - 0 - 0 8 967
5. Grants and subsidies 18 594 52.7 8 586 24.3 8 116 23 - 0 35 296
6. Salaries and
allowances 2 867 50 - 0 - 0 2 867 50 5 734

Total 36 257 58.8 8 586 13.9 8 116 13.2 8 654 14 61 613

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
27. AIMS will generate financial and social benefits by introducing improved

agricultural practices, commercial farming of high-value crops and improved post-
harvest management in rain-fed and irrigated crop and livestock production.
Financial benefits will include greater incomes for households targeted by the
project. Social benefits will include reduced poverty in the targeted project areas as
a result of increased household income and improved employment opportunities in
the agriculture sector.

28. The economic rationale for AIMS is based on: (i) improved agricultural productivity
and reduction of post-harvest losses as a result of the introduction of improved
technologies; and (ii) increased cropping intensity and cultivation of high-value
crop varieties and livestock with drip irrigation to expand dry-season production.
With a potential increase in yields of between 50 per cent and 100 per cent from
drip-irrigation, these improved production practices and integrated soil fertility
measures are expected to significantly improve household incomes.

29. The economic analysis of the project indicates that AIMS is robust in economic
terms. The overall economic internal rate of return is estimated at 31.9 per cent,
which is above the opportunity cost of capital in Cambodia. The economic internal
rate of return was estimated based on the assumption that 70 per cent of target



EB 2016/119/R.23/Rev.1

7

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

farmers will adopt the improved technology promoted by the project, and will
expand the use of drip-irrigation cultivation.

D. Sustainability
30. Financial sustainability is at the core of the AIMS approach, which seeks to catalyze

profitable private-led investments by farmers and businesses into value chains and
associated private service enterprises. The project is expected to facilitate the
successful operation of farmer groups, agribusinesses and other enterprises in each
value chain. Institutional sustainability of critical value-chain facilitation activities
will be achieved by building strong and mutually beneficial relationships among
farmers, private businesses and government agencies, especially via
multistakeholder platforms and regional hub teams.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
31. The main identified risks include: (i) ineffective targeting of poor smallholders;

(ii) a lack of market opportunities, which may limit the scale of impact;
(iii) unfamiliar approaches to market-oriented agriculture development;
(iv) insufficient flexibility in resource allocation and action plans; and (v) a lack of
coordination between national and sub-national agencies, and the private sector.
To mitigate these risks, the project will: (i) ensure rigorous and objective value
chain assessment and selection; (ii) select and screen five initial products targeted
to the domestic and export markets for market demand and profitability;
(iii) provide intensive and sustained technical assistance (including social
mobilization) and mainstream value chain activities, taking into account previous
experiences in the region; and (iv) ensure that managers have up-to-date
information on each value chain through M&E systems based on current best
practices (e.g. the Donor Committee for Enterprise Development Standard). In
addition, MEF will: (i) ensure overall coordination; (ii) implement the project
through field-based hub offices; and (iii) directly involve stakeholders in project
delivery as members of regional hub teams and in project governance via the
project steering committee.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

32. The design of AIMS complies with IFAD policies and strategies on targeting,
gender, indigenous peoples, environmental and natural resource management, and
private-sector engagement. Consideration has been given in project design to
gender in the division of labour within selected value chains and to the barriers
women face in project participation. Most of the activities related to environmental
impact fall under category B.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
33. The multistakeholder platform that will be implemented by AIMS in each value

chain cluster will provide a sub-national forum for all stakeholders to harmonize
their support of local value chains, including other development actors. AIMS will
be harmonized with other major projects including the Agriculture Services
Programme for Innovation, Resilience and Extension implemented by the Ministry
of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries, which will strengthen public and private
extension services and decentralize investment budgets through programme-based
budgeting. This will enable provincial departments of agriculture to respond to local
priorities identified through multistakeholder platforms. AIMS will also be
harmonized with the Boosting Food Production Project, implemented by the
Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries General Directorate of Agriculture,
which will complement AIMS activities in the rice sector and share joint
multistakeholder platforms for vegetables in common provinces. In addition, AIMS
will build on the progress of a project supported by the French Development
Agency in the rice sector and planned value chain infrastructure investments in the
forthcoming Asian Development Bank Value Chain Project, which will also support
value chains and provinces targeted by AIMS.



EB 2016/119/R.23/Rev.1

8

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Innovations and scaling upC.
34. The review of the 2008-2012 COSOP identified the need for a more pragmatic

approach to maximize synergies between projects, improve knowledge
management, harmonize with development partners and ensure sustained
improvements in the capacity of public extension services. The scaling up study
also emphasized the importance of improved knowledge management and the
identification of opportunities. AIMS responds to the recommendation of this study
that IFAD [in Cambodia] rebalance its operational goals with more of an emphasis
on becoming truly a learning and scaling-up organization. This will be
operationalized through the project’s multistakeholder value chain initiatives and
its explicit focus on learning, knowledge management and communication.

Policy engagementD.
35. AIMS will invest in high-quality, evidence-based knowledge management in order

to contribute to policy development. The project also seeks to strengthen
institutional capacity related to policy-based financing for sector development and
trade research and facilitation. In this context, AIMS will support targeted
institutional strengthening activities. The knowledge management and
communication strategy will ensure that evidence-based policy analysis reaches
key decision makers in a useable form while facilitating broad-based stakeholder
engagement policy dialogue.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
36. A project financing agreement between the Kingdom of Cambodia and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as appendix I.

37. The Kingdom of Cambodia is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD.

38. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
39. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms
to the Kingdom of Cambodia in the amount of thirty-six million three hundred
thousand United States Dollars (US$36,300,000) and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President

























































President’s report

Proposed loan to the Republic of Cuba for the
Livestock Cooperatives Development Project
in the Central-Eastern Region


Republic of Cuba

Livestock Cooperatives Development Project in the
Central-Eastern Region

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of Cuba

Executing agency: Ministry of Foreign Trade and Foreign Investment,
delegated to the Ministry of Agriculture

Total project cost: US$50 million

Amount of IFAD loan: EUR 10.9 million (equivalent to approximately
US$11.9 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Ordinary: Maturity period of 18 years, including a
grace period of three years, with an interest rate per
annum equal to 100 per cent of the IFAD reference
interest rate

Cofinancier: French Development Agency

Amount of cofinancing: EUR 25 million

Contribution of borrower: US$10 million (CUP 10 million as per official exchange
rate of the Central Bank of Cuba)

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/LOT/P.16/Rev.1

1

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
loan to the Republic of Cuba for the Livestock Cooperatives Development Project in
the Central-Eastern Region as contained in paragraph 58.

Proposed loan to the Republic of Cuba for the Livestock
Cooperatives Development Project in the Central-Eastern
Region

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Cuba is a middle-income country that in 2014 had a population of 11.2 million,

23 per cent living in rural areas. In 2014, Cuba’s nominal gross domestic product
(GDP) was US$80,656 million, equivalent to a GDP per capita of US$7,186.
However, care must be taken when analysing per capita GDP in view of the
country’s regulated dual monetary system, in which the Cuban Peso (CUP) and the
Cuban Convertible Peso (CUC) coexist. According to the World Food Programme
(WFP), between 60 per cent and 75 per cent of households’ income is spent on
food, which is high compared to other middle-income countries (the average is
between 20 per cent and 45 per cent).

2. With social policies guaranteeing food and nutritional security, and targeting the
most vulnerable populations, Cuba has made major strides in eradicating extreme
poverty and hunger. It is the only country in Latin America and the Caribbean to
have eliminated severe infant malnutrition. According to the 2015 Human
Development Report, Cuba is advanced in terms of human development, with a
score of 0.769, ranking 67th out of 188 countries. Cuba’s score is above average for
countries rated as high in human development (0.744).

3. Cuba’s agricultural sector accounts for about 4 per cent of its GDP but employs
approximately 20 per cent of the workforce, 16 per cent of whom are women. The
agricultural sector is in transition, with an increasing role played by private
cooperatives and individual farmers, which account for over 90 per cent of
agricultural production on 70 per cent of the land. While the state purchased
80 per cent of national production in 2007, this figure decreased to 60 per cent in
2012. Growing domestic food markets and demand from the increasing tourist
sector are providing opportunities for local producers; however producers must
enhance the quality and quantity of their production in order to serve these
markets.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities
4. Food security is a strategic priority for the Cuban Government. The agricultural

sector’s current productivity is well below the country’s potential, considering the
availability of natural resources and human and technological capital. As a result,
local food production is insufficient to cover demand and Cuba is highly dependent
on food imports.

5. A decline of productivity in Cuba’s livestock sector was caused by gradual
decapitalization since the 1990s. As a result, the livestock sector changed from an
advanced production system based on the intensive use of inputs to a dispersed
system of pastoralism. National milk production fell from 982 million litres in 1989
to 434 million litres in 2014, and meat production decreased from 271 thousand
tons in 1990 to 119 thousand tons in 2014.



EB 2016/LOT/P.16/Rev.1

2

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

6. Improving agricultural productivity is therefore at the core of Cuba’s public policy
agenda. Since April 2011, Cuba has begun a series of political, institutional and
economic reforms known as the Economic and Social Policy Guidelines. These
guidelines call for a gradual transformation of the agricultural sector by introducing
more market incentives and private-sector production, and reducing controls on
prices and wages.

7. As outlined in the country strategy note, IFAD can play an important role in
supporting the transformation of Cuba’s agricultural sector by supporting
smallholders organized into private cooperatives, who represent the productive
backbone of the sector. In order to meet the challenges of changing economic
conditions and benefit from new opportunities, these smallholders need productive
assets, inputs and capacity-building.

8. The Livestock Cooperatives Development Project in the Central-Eastern Region
(PRODEGAN) aims to support private cooperatives comprised of smallholders
managing dual-purpose cattle and focused on milk and meat production. The
Government currently imports nearly 50,000 tons of milk powder per year to cover
50 percent of local demand in a world market characterized by volatile prices.

9. The proposed project builds upon the experience gained from the ongoing
Cooperative Rural Development Project in the Oriental Region (PRODECOR), which
focuses on production of maize and beans in the eastern provinces of Las Tunas,
Holguín, Granma and Santiago de Cuba. As in PRODECOR, the focus of this project
is on increasing the productivity of private cooperatives through participatory
development plans and improved service provision.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
10. The project area encompasses the province of Camagüey, in which four priority

municipalities have been selected: Guaímaro, Sibanicú, Camagüey and Jimaguayú.
These municipalities comprise 45 per cent of the province’s cattle population and
57 per cent of its milk production. The area was selected because of its long
tradition of livestock production, its productive potential, the presence of processing
plants with spare capacity and the concentration of cooperatives that are already
integrated into existing value chains.

11. Since the 1990s, the economy in Camagüey province has suffered because of a
decline in the livestock sector caused by decreasing investments, a lack of inputs,
limited technical assistance, land degradation and the effects of climate change and
variability. The proposed project aims to reverse this trend.

12. PRODEGAN will directly benefit 11,500 rural families organized in 105 cooperatives,
for a total of 34,500 direct beneficiaries. These direct beneficiaries will include:
(i) members of cooperatives producing meat, milk and dairy products such as
cheese; (ii) wage-earning rural workers employed by the cooperatives; and
(iii) technicians employed by the service providers of livestock cooperatives.

13. The cooperatives average between 60 and 140 members; women represent
13 per cent of cooperative membership and young people 11 per cent. PRODEGAN
will focus on reaching women (at least 20 per cent) and youth (at least 15
per cent), and will support their inclusion in cooperatives’ decision-making and
productive activities.

14. Three types of cooperatives exist in Cuba. Credit and service cooperatives, created
in 1963, are characterized by individual land ownership and comprise
approximately 60 per cent of the cooperatives in the area; they are considered to
be the most efficient form of cooperative. Basic cooperative production units are
former state farms transformed in 1993. Characterized by collective ownership
structures, they comprise approximately 30 per cent of cooperatives in the area. In
agricultural production cooperatives, which were created in 1975, individuals



EB 2016/LOT/P.16/Rev.1

3

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

voluntarily agree on collective ownership (they comprise approximately 10 per cent
of the cooperatives in the area).

B. Project development objective
15. The development objective of the project is to promote the sustainable growth of

the livestock sector by increasing the production and sale of milk and meat, raising
the incomes of beneficiary families in cooperatives. The main outcomes for the
primary target group will be: (i) higher average net incomes for members of
participating cooperatives; (ii) increased delivery of cold milk from cooperatives to
the industry from 17 million litres to 47 million liters per year; and (iii) increased
sale of beef by cooperatives from 5,000 tons to 6,000 tons per year.

C. Components/outcomes
16. PRODEGAN has three inter-linked technical components and one component for

project management. The main focus of component 1 is on strengthening milk and
meat producing cooperatives, which currently have significant manual labour
capacity, high mortality and low birth rates of cattle, insufficient pastures and
limited water availability. Through component 2, service providers in the project
area will be strengthened in order to free up land, increase water availability,
improve artificial insemination and veterinary services, and build cooperatives’
capacity. Finally, in order to ensure sufficient capacity to collect and process the
increased milk and meat produced, agro-industry in the project area will be
supported through component 3. The main expected outcomes of each component
are detailed below:

(a) Component 1: Strengthening smallholder livestock cooperatives. By
implementing cooperative development plans (CDPs), livestock farmers will
increase their cattle populations and milk and meat production in a
sustainable manner. The project also aims to improve their managerial and
organizational capacities, with a focus on gender. Specific outcomes will
include: (i) an increase in annual milk production per lactating cow from
600 liters to 1,300 liters; (ii) decreased mortality of herds from 7 per cent to
4 per cent; and (iii) an increase in the percentage of women in managerial
positions within cooperatives from 14 per cent to 20 per cent.

(b) Component 2: Strengthening service providers. The project is expected
to enable service providers to substantially improve the frequency and quality
of their services, including technical assistance and provision of quality inputs.
Specifically: (i) the percentage of pregnant inseminated cows is expected to
increase from 45 per cent to 60 per cent; (ii) improved pastureland in the
project area will increase from 4,000 hectare to 8,000 hectare per year; and
(iii) 200 water-capture infrastructures will be rehabilitated.

(c) Component 3: Strengthening agro-industry. Through component 3, milk
and meat transport and industry processing capacity will be strengthened; the
exact outcomes will be defined by a value chain study. Expected outcomes
include: (i) an increase in transport capacity for the collection of milk; and
(ii) an increase of the processing capacity of the meat industry in Camagüey.

(d) Component 4: Project management and coordination. This component
consists of project management and monitoring and evaluation (M&E)
activities. It includes the development of strategy and operational guidelines,
and the responsibility for technically sound project implementation. The M&E
system will be an important input into the knowledge management agenda of
IFAD’s country programme, which is the basis for IFAD’s dialogue with the
Government on rural development.



EB 2016/LOT/P.16/Rev.1

4

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

17. In line with experience from PRODECOR, the implementation approach is based on
the definition of community-driven CDPs. Through these plans, livestock farmers
will assess their strengths and weaknesses, and the opportunities and threats they
face, and define the most appropriate development strategy for their cooperatives.

18. In parallel with the development of the first CDPs, a participatory value chain
analysis will be carried out involving major stakeholders in the livestock sector. The
objective of this study is to identify the main weaknesses and entry points in the
milk and meat value chains in order to guide the development of
service-strengthening plans.

19. It is foreseen that cooperatives, most service providers and agro-industry
stakeholders will finance their investments through bank loans in the local currency
– mainly from the Bank for Credit and Trade. A similar mechanism is currently
being implemented through PRODECOR. Service providers such as environmental
agencies, institutes for land and water, and the University of Camagüey, which
cannot utilize credit, will be supported through budgetary allocations by the
Government.

20. The CDPs and service-strengthening plans are expected to be formulated over a
three-year period and each will have a time horizon of two to three years. The
overall duration of the project is expected to be six years.

B. Organizational framework
21. The Ministry of Foreign Trade and Foreign Investment will act as legal

representative of the borrower. The responsibility for execution will be delegated to
the Ministry of Agriculture, which regulates all activities related to milk and meat
production. Within the Ministry of Agriculture, the responsible agency will be the
Livestock Business Group, which is responsible for providing production and
business services to livestock cooperatives. The Ministry of Agriculture will also
coordinate agro-industry investments with the Ministry of Food Industry and the
Food Industry Business Group.

22. In order to benefit from lessons learned, a national coordination office for IFAD
projects in Cuba will be established at the Ministry of Agriculture, employing staff
from PRODECOR. This office will be in charge of: (i) supporting the definition of
participatory development plans; (ii) administration, financial management and
procurement; (iii) planning and M&E; and (iv) knowledge management, including
South-South cooperation, exchanges, seminars and studies.

23. In addition, a technical implementation unit will be established within the Livestock
Business Group with a main office in Havana and a local office in Camagüey.

24. An investment evaluation committee will be set up to evaluate the individual
investment plans of cooperatives, service providers and agro-industry stakeholders.
In addition, a national project steering committee will be established to approve
annual workplans and budgets, and provide strategic guidance. Both committees
will be comprised of representatives from government ministries; IFAD will be an
observer on the national project steering committee.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

25. A planning, M&E and knowledge management system will be established to provide
timely information on project performance and support continuous improvement of
project management. The system will be designed and launched during the first six
months of implementation, benefitting from the experience of PRODECOR. Its
purpose is to: (i) generate updated information on project goals, outputs, results
and impact; and (ii) facilitate learning, the exchange of experiences and best
practices, and the dissemination of project results.



EB 2016/LOT/P.16/Rev.1

5

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

26. A midterm review will be conducted to: (i) assess the cost recovery of the service
providers; (ii) evaluate the performance of the different types of cooperatives; and
(iii) analyse the performance and impact of the reference farms. As a result of this
midterm review, any necessary adjustments will be discussed with the Government.

27. The National Statistics and Information Office is expected to participate in the
development of the baseline survey, midterm review and final impact study.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
28. Financial management. Financial management and procurement for the project

will be undertaken by the national office for the management of IFAD-funded
projects within the Ministry of Agriculture. This arrangement will capitalize on the
experience gained by PRODECOR staff and is expected to promote project
readiness. This project will utilize the same accounting system as PRODECOR,
which complies with minimum IFAD requirements.

29. The financial management and procurement systems used by public entities in
Cuba are in line with national regulatory authorities including the Office of the
Comptroller General, the Ministry of Finance and Pricing, the Ministry of Economy
and Planning, and the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Foreign Investment.
Compliance with the standards and procedures governing these systems is
mandatory for all government agencies. This requirement also applies to the
Livestock Business Group, the national coordination office and technical
implementation unit.

30. Based on Cuba’s 2015 Transparency International Corruption Perceptions Index
score of 47 and IFAD’s experience in the country, the project’s fiduciary risk has
been rated as medium. The measures highlighted in this section, along with
implementation support, are considered sufficient to mitigate fiduciary risks.

31. Flow of funds. The borrower will open a designated account in euros at the Bank
for Credit and Trade exclusively for the loan proceeds. Operating accounts in
convertible pesos will be opened at the same bank and administered by the national
coordination office.

32. Audit. The project team will submit annual consolidated financial statements
compliant with international standards. The annual consolidated financial
statements will be independently audited in line with terms of reference approved
by IFAD and in accordance with the International Standards on Auditing and IFAD’s
Guidelines on Project Audits. Annual audit reports will be submitted to IFAD within
six months from the end of the each fiscal year.

33. Procurement. Goods from abroad will be procured using the services of the
Caribbean Citrus Anonymous Society, the Ministry of Agriculture’s specialized
import-export agency. The delivery of external acquisitions and domestic
procurement will be handled by the Ministry of Agriculture’s Business Logistics
Group and the Livestock Insurance and Services Company. The national
coordination office will be required to seek IFAD’s approval on a no-objection basis
before replacing the procurement agency. Minor purchases will be handled by the
national coordination office, which will apply the provisions and regulations detailed
in the project operating manual in accordance with IFAD’s procurement guidelines.

34. Governance. To promote good governance, IFAD applies a policy of zero tolerance
against fraud, corruption and misconduct.

E. Supervision
35. PRODEGAN will be directly supervised by IFAD in line with its policy on supervision

and implementation support. As the lead agency, IFAD will also supervise
implementation of the portion of the project financed by French Development
Agency (AFD) based on an agreement between AFD and IFAD. AFD will participate
in supervision missions and will approve all annual workplans and budgets,
procurement plans, terms of reference, reports of external evaluations and
requirements for annual audit reports related to AFD financing.



EB 2016/LOT/P.16/Rev.1

6

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

36. The first supervision mission is planned for the first year of the project and will
focus on operational and financial progress achieved during initial implementation.
It will include a review and assessment of the project’s financial management
arrangements. Subsequent supervision missions will take place annually, including
field visits to verify progress and evaluate any implementation problems.

37. Implementation-support activities during the first 18 months are expected to
include:(i) supporting the fulfilment of conditions for the first disbursement;
(ii) organizing a start-up workshop; (iii) training staff of the national coordination
office and technical implementation unit in the preparation of annual workplans and
budgets, procurement plans and withdrawal applications, and fiduciary
requirements and procurement procedures; (iv) supporting the preparation of an
implementation strategy, value chain study and progress reports for each project
component; and (v) supporting the design and set-up of the planning, M&E and
knowledge management system.

F. Exceptions to the General Conditions for Agricultural
Development Financing and IFAD’s operating policies

38. Expenses incurred from the date of approval by the Executive Board until the date
of entry into force of the financing agreement will be considered eligible up to a
ceiling of EUR 300,000 for activities related to: (i) adjustments to the accounting
system; (ii) the start-up workshop; (iii) the baseline survey and gender
methodology; (iv) the value chain study; and (v) equipping and operating the
national coordination office and the technical implementation unit. Depending on
the nature of expenditures, the costs of these activities will be charged against the
relevant categories of expenditures indicated in the financing agreement.

39. In addition, it was agreed with the Government of Cuba that as an exception to
section 14.04(a) of the General Conditions for Agricultural Development Financing,
the number of arbitrators will be three, and the provisions of article 9 of the
Arbitration Rules 2012 of the Permanent Court of Arbitration will apply.

IV. Project costs, financing and benefits
A. Project costs
40. The base cost of the project is US$47.5 million, plus estimated contingencies, for a

total cost of US$50 million. Of the total cost, 5 per cent is for physical contingencies
and price increases.
Table 1
Indicative project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component

IFAD loan
Other cofinancier

(AFD)
Borrower/

counterpart1 Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Strengthening smallholder
livestock cooperatives 7 940 67 18 485 66 4 512 45 30 937 62
2. Strengthening service
providers 2 412 20 5 615 20 2 131 21 10 158 20
3. Strengthening agro-industry - - 4 000 14 2 000 20 6 000 12
4. Project management and
coordination 1 548 13 - - 1 357 14 2 905 6

Total 11 900 24 28 100 56 10 000 20 50 000 100

1 In accordance with the Agreement Establishing IFAD and the General Conditions for Agricultural Development
Financing, IFAD usually calculates the value of government contributions using the exchange rate published by the
International Monetary Fund (IMF). However, Cuba is not a member of the IMF. According to the Central Bank of Cuba
and the United Nations Operational Rates of Exchange, the exchange rate of US$/CUP is 1:1, and is therefore the rate
used in this document for the US dollars value of the government contribution expressed in local currency. There is no
actual rate for foreign currency transaction to and from CUP within the country, and the exchange rate from CUP to CUC
used for private transactions in the country is significantly different than the US$/CUP rate. The actual value of the
government contribution will be subject to external audit based on expenditures incurred.



EB 2016/LOT/P.16/Rev.1

7

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

B. Project financing
41. The project will be financed by: (i) an IFAD loan denominated in euros (equivalent

to approximately to US$11.9 million); (ii) a loan from AFD for EUR 25 million
(equivalent to approximately US$28.1 million); and (iii) a counterpart contribution
from the Government estimated at US$10 million.

42. IFAD and AFD loans will cofinance components 1 and 2; external financing of
component 3 (strengthening agro-industry) will be provided by AFD; and
component 4 (project management) will be financed by IFAD. The borrower’s
contribution will cofinance all components and taxes.
Table 2
Indicative project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD loan
Other cofinancier

(AFD)
Borrower/

counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Equipment and materials 10 415 88 27 589 98 5 162 51 43 166 86
2. Consultancies 685 6 193 1 58 1 936 2
3. Training 190 2 318 1 3 616 36 4 124 8
4. Operating costs 610 4 - - 1 164 12 1 774 4

Total 11 900 24 28 100 56 10 000 20 50 000 100

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
43. The main benefits expected from the project are: (i) an increase in domestic milk

and meat production and sales (which reduces the need for imports); (ii) the
strengthening of actors along the milk and meat value chains; and (iii) an increase
in the participation of women and youth, ensuring a better quality of life for
cooperative members.

44. The financial analysis shows that considering prices in Cuba’s livestock sector, the
proposed investments are financially viable. The financial rate of return ranges from
38 per cent to 87 per cent (whereby credit and service cooperatives have higher
rates of return than cooperatives characterized by common ownership structures).

45. The economic analysis, which considers economic prices and costs, shows that the
proposed project is competitive with imports, with an economic rate of return of
14.8 per cent and a net present value of US$26 million.

D. Sustainability
46. The project design is based on the sustainable development of the cooperative

organizations, with support also extended to service providers and local
agro-industry. Measures to promote sustainability include: (i) a special budget
dedicated to increasing the participation of women and youth, enabling the
sustainable development of human capital; (ii) integrating the area’s main
environmental agencies as service providers in order to ensure the sustainable
management of natural resources and the adoption of climate change adaptation
measures; and (iii) involving local financial institutions (especially the Bank for
Credit and Trade) as loan providers to ensure the financial sustainability of the
investment plans.



EB 2016/LOT/P.16/Rev.1

8

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

E. Risk identification and mitigation
47. The main identified risks and mitigation measures are described below:

Main risks Mitigation strategy

Changes in Cuba’s current
policy framework could lead to
changes in relative prices.

The project will strengthen the productive, organizational and
entrepreneurial capacities of participating cooperatives, increasing their
adaptive capacities to possible market changes. This will be achieved
through capacity-building and the sustainable provision of equipment and
inputs to increase their productivity and competitiveness.

Climate variability poses a risk
to project activities.

To ensure the sustainable management of natural resources, the
formulation and implementation of CDPs will take into consideration the
environmental context in which cooperatives operate; the Government’s
environmental agencies will be involved in this process.

A lack of understanding of the
project strategy, methodology
and implementation procedures
may have adverse effects on
implementation.

The establishment of a single coordination office with experience from
the PRODECOR project will allow the project to benefit from the lessons
learned in terms of methodology, administration, financial management,
procurement and M&E.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

48. The project is consistent with IFAD’s Strategic Framework 2016-2025, and aims to
increase rural people’s productive capacities while supporting market participation
and strengthening the environmental sustainability and climate resilience of their
activities. The project is also compliant with IFAD’s policies on: (i) targeting, by
applying geographical targeting (by province, municipality and cooperative),
self-targeting (through participatory development plans) and social targeting
(focused on women and youth); (ii) gender, through its strategy aimed at closing
the gender gap and increasing women’s participation in cooperatives;
(iii) environmental and natural resource management, by supporting
climate-resilient production and the sustainable management of land and water
resources; and (iv) rural finance, by providing access to rural financial services.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
49. The proposed project is aligned with the Government’s agricultural sector reform

agenda, as outlined in the Economic and Social Policy Guidelines. This includes:
(i) fostering the autonomy and productivity of cooperatives; (ii) supporting free
competition by facilitating producers’ direct access to inputs, equipment and
markets; (iii) reducing the amount of unproductive land and increasing agricultural
yields in an environmentally sustainable manner; and (iv) ensuring that banking
services are available to the agro-industry sector. In addition, the project is aligned
with Cuba’s Intended Nationally Determined Contribution to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change since it includes climate change
adaptation activities and mitigation measures (e.g. renewable energy sources).

50. IFAD has engaged with development partners such as the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), WFP, Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations (FAO), the United Nations Industrial Development Organization
(UNIDO) and the European Union to ensure that the project is aligned with their
activities in the country. The project’s integrated approach, which considers value
chains and long-term environmental sustainability, is based on lessons learned
from two projects on environmental investments in milk production managed by
UNDP and financed by the European Union and the Swiss Agency for Development
and Cooperation.

Innovations and scaling upC.
51. The main innovations that the project will introduce are: (i) the establishment of

"service cooperatives" providing support to other cooperatives (e.g. hay and
ensilage services, and equipment maintenance); (ii) 10 reference farms for
observing and disseminating new technologies (four of which will develop



EB 2016/LOT/P.16/Rev.1

9

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

innovative environmental practices such as automatic meteorological systems,
solar-powered electric fences and biodigesters); and (iii) the establishment of
10 hectare of silvo-pastoral areas for each cooperative. Other innovations will be
demand driven, emerging from cooperatives’ development plans. These innovations
will be disseminated through knowledge-sharing activities.

52. If the project successfully meets its objectives, it could be scaled up to other
municipalities in Camagüey province and the neighboring provinces of Ciego de
Ávila and Las Tunas – potentially doubling the number of beneficiaries.

Policy engagementD.
53. Policy dialogue will be driven by the national project steering committee, which will

include representatives of the Ministry of Agriculture, the Ministry of Foreign Trade
and Foreign Investment, the Ministry of Food Industry, the Ministry of Science,
Technology and Environment, the Ministry of Economy and Planning, the National
Institute of Water Resources, the National Statistics and Information Office, the
Central Bank of Cuba and the Bank for Credit and Trade, with IFAD and AFD as
observers. This dialogue will cover: (i) lessons learned from project innovations and
their potential for scale-up; (ii) the results of efforts to increase the participation of
women and youth in the livestock sector; (iii) progress in establishing a financing
mechanism with the Bank for Credit and Trade; and (iv) any risks related to the
Cuban economy’s gradual liberalization and changes in relative prices, along with
mitigation strategies.

54. M&E and knowledge management activities during project implementation will
assist both the Government and IFAD in making better use of the policies for the
cooperative sector as detailed in the Economic and Social Policy Guidelines.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
55. A project financing agreement between the Republic of Cuba and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as appendix I.

56. The Republic of Cuba is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

57. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
58. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Republic of Cuba in an amount equivalent to ten million nine hundred
thousand euros (10,900,000) (equivalent to US$11.9 million), and upon such
terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms
and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President




















































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of
Ecuador for the Project to Strengthen Rural
Actors in the Popular and Solidary Economy
(FAREPS)

Republic of Ecuador
Project to Strengthen Rural Actors in the Popular and
Solidary Economy (FAREPS)



EB 2015/LOT/P.18

iv

Republic of Ecuador

Project to Strengthen Rural Actors in the Popular and
Solidary Economy (FAREPS)

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower/recipient: Republic of Ecuador

Executing agency: National Institute for Popular and Solidary Economy
(IEPS)

Total cost of the project: US$35.97 million

Amount of IFAD loan: EUR 14.25 million (equivalent to approximately
US$15.90 million)

Amount of IFAD’s Adaptation for
Smallholder Agriculture Programme
(ASAP) grant:

SDR 2.85 million (equivalent to approximately
US$4.00 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Ordinary: Maturity period of 18 years, including a grace
period of 3 years, with an interest rate per annum equal
to 100 per cent of the IFAD reference interest rate

Contribution of the borrower/recipient: US$12.00 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$4.07 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/LOT/P.18

1

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation on the proposed
financing to the Republic of Ecuador for the Project to Strengthen Rural Actors in
the Popular and Solidary Economy (FAREPS), as contained in paragraph 41.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Ecuador for
the Project to Strengthen Rural Actors in the Popular and
Solidary Economy (FAREPS)

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Ecuador, with GDP in 2013 of US$94,470 million, is currently classified as a middle-

income country. The economy is largely dependent on oil and export agriculture.
Following years of political and economic instability, a stable government was
democratically elected in 2009 and has since implemented a programme of far-
reaching change in the political, economic and social spheres. In 2013, GDP grew
4.6 per cent. In view of the current decline in the price of oil and mining products,
the projected rate of growth for 2015 is somewhat lower at 3.8 per cent, though
still above the regional average.

2. In recent years Ecuador has made significant strides in combating poverty.
Between 2009 and 2012, poverty fell from 36.0 per cent to 25.5 per cent, one of
the most notable achievements in the region. The Gini coefficient improved from
0.55 to 0.484 over the same period. Despite the recent progress on social
indicators, the poverty gap persists, particularly in rural areas where poverty runs
at 42 per cent, close to double the urban rate. The campesino population generally,
and particularly Afro-Ecuadorans, indigenous people and women, occupy the
poorest quintiles. In addition, 1.6 million Ecuadorans live in extreme poverty, 70
per cent of them in rural areas.

3. In view of the foregoing, eradicating extreme poverty and reducing the incidence of
poverty is one of the major objectives of the Government of Ecuador. A key
strategy for promoting social and economic inclusion has been to strengthen the so-
called popular and solidary economy (PSE), which seeks to promote economic
development on an associative and solidary basis.

4. The concept of PSE arises from the need to recognize the value of the informal or
popular economy, and the economy formed by association-based or solidary
economic organizations, and their contribution to GDP. Indeed, the popular and
solidary economy is the largest employer in the Ecuadoran labour force. Sales by
microenterprises represent an estimated 25.7 per cent of GDP, 10 per cent of total
net income and 90 per cent of the country’s production units, and generate
approximately 60 per cent of total employment.

5. Formalizing the informal economy within Ecuador’s new regulatory and
administrative frameworks is one way of promoting more equitable and democratic
economic relations, as well as greater inclusion of people living in conditions of
poverty and vulnerability. The prevailing legal framework requires economic
organizations to adopt best practices in management, such as regularizing
employees, democratizing decision-making processes and distributing any
dividends in an equitable manner. These best practices make the PSE attractive to
people living in poverty, who may decide either to join an existing organization or
set up a new one.



EB 2015/LOT/P.18

2

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and with
the RB-COSOP

6. In 2014, Ecuador approved the National Strategy for Equality and Poverty
Eradication (ENIEP), which calls for mainstreaming poverty reduction into the
overall initiative for change in the production matrix. In the case of the rural sector,
the strategy promotes a shift from providing support for campesino production to
adopting a more complex value chain-based approach. In this way the project is
fully aligned with the Government of Ecuador’s priorities and strategies for
economic and social inclusion, thus contributing to rural poverty eradication.

7. In addition, the project is completely consistent with the strategic objectives set
forth in IFAD’s new results-based country strategic opportunities programme (RB-
COSOP) for Ecuador, as follows: (a) improve access to assets and resources to
support diversification of the Ecuadorian rural economy, promoting, among other
measures, associative enterprises and investments that generate employment and
income for poor rural families in Ecuador; and (b) Increase the capacities of poor
rural producers and potential entrepreneurs to engage in, and benefit from, pro-
poor and inclusive productive policies.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
8. The project will take place in the south-eastern part of Ecuador, in the Costa, Sierra

Sur and Amazonia regions. In the Costa r1egion, the project will cover the
provinces of Guayas and Los Ríos; in Sierra Sur the province of Azuay; and in
Amazonia the provinces of Morona Santiago and Zamora Chinchipe, which borders
on Peru. The population of Morona Santiago is largely indigenous (48.4 per cent),
while in the provinces located in Costa, more than half the population identify as
Montubio, a regional ethnic group.

9. The project will focus on areas with high levels of unmet basic needs (UBN) and a
high incidence of vulnerability. In a context of UBN-based poverty calculated on the
order of 60.1 per cent countrywide in 2010, the cantons where the project will be
implemented post indexes that are higher than both the national and the provincial
averages. The highest levels are found in Amazonia, where UBN-based poverty is
95.9 per cent. The population in these cantons is young, with an average age of
under 29.

10. The project will work with organizations and association-based enterprises that are
already registered with the Superintendency of Popular and Solidary Economy
(SPSE), or with other public institutions such as the Ministry of Agriculture,
Livestock, Aquaculture and Fisheries and the Ministry of Economic and Social
Inclusion (MIES). New associations may also be legalized. The project beneficiaries
will be smallholder farmer and rural worker families living in poverty as measured
by UBN and/or vulnerability but no longer receiving the human development bond,
who have both the interest and potential to undertake and manage business plans
on the terms outlined in the PSE framework. Two specific target groups have also
been identified: women and their families, and young people. At least 30 per cent
of the beneficiary families are to be headed by women (about 6,000 families), and
10 per cent by young people (about 2,000 families).

11. Within this framework, those wishing to become project beneficiaries will need to
belong to or join a legalized PSE organization, or set up a new organization and
legalize it – IEPS will assist the latter in the legalization process within the EPS
system. The project is expected to cover at least 200 organizations in this way.

B. Project development objective
12. The development objective of the project is to increase incomes and employment

among PSE rural families living in conditions of poverty and vulnerability within the



EB 2015/LOT/P.18

3

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

project area. Upon completion of the project, approximately 20,000 rural families
living in conditions of poverty and vulnerability – in social, economic and climate
change terms – are expected to have received benefits, with at least 80 per cent of
them having seen a sustainable increase in income derived from agricultural and
non-agricultural activities promoted by the project.

C. Components/outcomes
13. The project is structured in three interrelated components:

(a) Capacity-building (initial and preinvestment phase). The aim is to lower the
barriers limiting the development of organizations and association-based
enterprises and to strengthen PSE actors to develop and manage them
sustainably. The component is intended to: (i) build the capacities of the
target groups in fundamental PSE areas; and (ii) promote dialogue among
PSE actors and between these and local and national institutions. This
component will also contribute to improving public policies promoting the PSE,
to facilitate access by PSE actors to resources, services, and public and
private markets.

(b) Enterprise development and commercial exchange (investment phase).
To support the target groups in developing profitable and sustainable
initiatives, the component calls for two types of direct investment:
(i) investment in solidary business plans; support will be provided for
organizations included in implementation of the first component with
comprehensive strengthening plans (CSPs) prepared on a participatory basis
and being applied by their members. On this basis the project may make
investments in the form of nonreimbursable transfers to cofinance specific
aspects or all of a solidary business plan (SBP), in accordance with the criteria
stipulated in the project operating manual. The SBP will cover goods or
services for which the territorial area offers strengths and internal or external
markets; and (ii) funds for conditional incentives; PSE organizations will be
offered incentives to achieve two kinds of specific objectives: economic
integration and decent employment. In the first case, incentives will ensure
that a larger number of farmers are able to place their products on the market
and have access to transportation, collection or technical assistance services;
and that small association-based enterprises are able to join an existing entity
or create a new one. In the second case, incentives will be linked to an
increase in decent jobs for people living in conditions of poverty or
vulnerability: young people, handicapped people, the indigent, women,
indigenous people, Afro-Ecuadorans and Montubios. These incentives are
reserved for organizations that are already consolidated and have access to
stable markets, with installed capacity that is sufficient and timely.

(c) Knowledge management, management and administration (investment
phase). Covers essentially promotion of a participatory planning, monitoring
and evaluation system for the target population, as well as knowledge
management and project administration. This component also includes
strengthening other PSE actors, including IEPS and local service providers, in
key areas for PSE development, including participatory monitoring and
evaluation (M&E) and management of the knowledge generated.

14. The project also includes activities to be implemented with ASAP funding to
complement the overall project strategy. Organizations will be trained to be better
adapted to climate change, and specific activities will be identified, proposed and
financed to improve the resilience of the beneficiaries and investments funded. A
specialized service provider will provide training. As part of the CSP preparation
process, information will be included on climate risks and proposed mitigation
measures, as well as specific adaptation measures to be included in SBPs. The



EB 2015/LOT/P.18

4

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

ASAP funding will cover implementation of such specific adaptation measures in the
context of the SBP.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
15. The project strategy is intended to create and consolidate the capacities of

association-based enterprises that are to form the economic fabric of the PSE at the
territorial level. To this end, three main avenues of action will be established,
following the operating structure of IEPS: (i) strengthening of actors; (ii) productive
development and market exchange; and (iii) M&E, including participatory
monitoring and knowledge management. The project will develop and apply
differentiated local strategies in a concerted and participatory manner with local
actors, involving a process of ongoing dialogue with the main PSE actors, local
offices of government institutions, decentralized autonomous governments and, in
the case of indigenous peoples, traditional authorities.

B. Organizational framework
16. IEPS will be responsible for implementing the project. IEPS headquarters is located

in Quito and it is present in the project area in the Zone 5 Directorate, covering the
provinces of Los Rios and Guayas, the Zone 6 Directorate covering the provinces of
Azuay and Morona Santiago, and the Zone 7 Directorate, covering the province of
Zamora Chinchipe.

17. The project will have a general contractor hired by IEPS in accordance with
prevailing legislation in the country by means of a selection process acceptable to
IFAD. The general coordinator will report to the IEPS Director General and will be
responsible for project administration and day-to-day operations, in accordance
with the zone directorates of the provinces where activities are located. Financial
administration will be done in coordination with the financial administration
department of IEPS. The general coordinator will be supported by the professional,
technical and administrative staff needed for proper implementation.

18. The project’s financial administration will be the responsibility of a team to be hired
by IEPS, reporting to the financial administration department of IEPS. Project
management at the provincial level will be done by technical teams reporting to the
zone directorates for the provinces of Guayas and Los Ríos, Azuay and Morona
Santiago, and Zamora Chinchipe, in close coordination with the general coordinator.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

19. The project will apply a planning, M&E, learning and knowledge management
system in accordance with national and IEPS directives and IFAD guidelines. This
system will be an integral part of project management and a management tool
generating updated relevant information on project results, with an emphasis on
results measurement – outputs, outcomes and impact – and will facilitate the
development of learning platforms, exchanges of experiences, best practices and
dissemination of results.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
20. The IEPS financial administration department will be responsible for overall financial

management of the project, including the annual operating plan, flow of funds,
disbursements, internal controls, accounting, financial reporting and auditing. The
project will used the national financial management information system (e-SIGEF),
together with an additional specific system meeting IFAD requirements.

21. Flow of funds. The borrower will open an account at the Central Bank of Ecuador
designated exclusively for the loan proceeds, and another account designated
exclusively for the ASAP grant. Both will be denominated in United States dollars.



EB 2015/LOT/P.18

5

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

22. Audit. The consolidated annual financial statements will be audited each year by an
independent auditor in accordance with IFAD guidelines on project audits. All
project accounts will be audited, including those relating to IFAD funds and those
relating to national counterpart funding. The audit reports will be delivered to IFAD
six months before the end of each fiscal year.

23. Procurement and contracting. Procurement and contracting will take place in
accordance with the National Public Contracting System Organic Law and
Regulations, to the extent they are compatible with IFAD’s guidelines on the
procurement of goods, works and services.

E. Supervision
24. IFAD will supervise the project directly. Support will be provided from the outset of

design to prepare adequately for start-up. IFAD and the borrower/recipient will
jointly conduct a midterm review at the end of year three.

IV. Project costs, financing, benefits
A. Project costs
25. The total project cost will be approximately US$35.97 million, including

contingencies. The first component will cost US$4.27 million (equivalent to 11.9 per
cent), whereas the second component calls for an allocation of US$26.43 million,
representing 73.5 per cent of total investment. The third component will involve
spending of US$5.27 million (14.7 per cent).
Table 1
Indicative project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries

Borrower/
recipient

counterpart Total

Component Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Capacity-
building 2 913 68.3 840 19.7 - - 512 12.0 4 265 11.9
2. Enterprise
development and
commercial
exchange 12 213 46.2 3 160 12.0 4 073 15.4 6 988 26.4 26 434 73.,5
3. Knowledge,
management and
administration 774 14.7 - - - - 4 500 85.3 5 274 14.7

Total 15 900 44.2 4 000 11.1 4 073 11.3 12 000 33.4 35 973 100.0

B. Project financing
26. The combined project financing totals approximately US$35.97 million. The

borrower/recipient will contribute US$12 million (33.4 per cent), the IFAD loan will
provide US$15.90 million (44.2 per cent), the ASAP grant will provide US$4 million
(11.1 per cent), and the beneficiaries will contribute US$4.07 million
(11.3 per cent) in cash or in kind.



EB 2015/LOT/P.18

6

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Table 2
Indicative project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure
category

IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries
Borrower/recipient

counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

A. Training 2 913 83.0 312 8.9 - - 283 8.1 3 508
B. Consulting 2 445 72.4 528 15.6 - - 405 12.0 3 379
C. Grants 10 256 42.1 3 159 13.0 4 073 16.7 6 878 28.2 24 367
D. Goods,
services and
inputs - - - - - - 127 100.0 127
E. Vehicles 285 88.0 - - - - 39 12.0 324
F. Salaries - - - - 4 267 100.0 4 267

Total 15 900 44.2 4 000 11.1 4 073 11.3 12 000 33.4 35 973

C. Summary of benefit and economic analysis
27. The project is expected to directly benefit approximately 20,000 rural families. Most

of the beneficiary households are expected to engage in agricultural production with
value added, and the remaining households to other kinds of production or
provision of other services. Most of the subprojects will be cofinanced with
contributions in cash or in kind by beneficiaries.

28. The activities financed will generate income of between US$400 and US$1,000 per
annum by family, depending on the type of activity, level of specialization and
allocation of productive assets.

D. Sustainability
29. The design of simple but efficient and effective SBPs that show motivating results in

the short term will ensure the economic sustainability of initiatives. The
sustainability of the cultural changes to be introduced with the project, in terms of
valuing and assimilating association-based and business-oriented concepts and
practices, will essentially depend on the actual benefits accrued by PSE families.
Accordingly, awareness-raising and capacity-building are essential; at the same
time, opening up spaces for participation and leadership by young people will be
key to the sustainability of initiatives. Finally, environmental risk analysis from the
design of initiatives will reinforce the environmental sustainability of association-
based projects, introducing specific technologies and practices to attenuate the
effects of climate change.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
30. The risks associated with project implementation relate mainly to management

issues. Among possible mitigation measures are: (i) development of a
communication plan to facilitate effective coordination and linkages among the
various actors involved in project implementation; (ii) conduct of a market analysis
and participatory design of business plans to assess the market feasibility of each
enterprise prior to making the investments; (iii) ongoing monitoring of service
providers based on process indicators, to mitigate the risk of low local supply of
sufficiently qualified service providers; (iv) finally, to mitigate the effects of climate
change, adaptation and risk management technologies will be introduced and
support will be provided for, inter alia, crop diversification.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
31. The project proposal falls under the overarching objective of IFAD’s Strategic

Framework 2011-2015 and contributes to achieving the strategic objectives relating
to improving access to services contributing to poverty reduction, as well as



EB 2015/LOT/P.18

7

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

developing economic and natural assets to improve the resilience of disadvantaged
rural people. In addition, the project approach and implementation strategies are
aligned with the rural poor targeting policy, the gender equality and women’s
empowerment policy, the policy on IFAD’s engagement with indigenous peoples,
including the requirement of free, prior and informed consent, the policy on natural
resources and environmental management, the climate change, social,
environmental and climate evaluation procedures, and the policies on rural finance,
knowledge management and innovation.

B. Harmonization and alignment
32. The project falls squarely within the priorities of the Government of Ecuador as

stated in the National Plan on Living Well 2013-2017 (national development plan),
and contributes to the strategy of economic and social inclusion under the approach
of changing the MIES and IEPS production matrix to eradicate rural poverty by
developing the popular and solidary economy. It is also consistent with the second
component of the ENIEP, whose pillars are agrarian revolution for food sovereignty,
promoting dignified work and strengthening the popular and solidary economy. The
project will also directly address the strategic objectives of the RB-COSOP 2014-
2018.

C. Innovation and scaling up
33. The project will allow for replicating the PSE approach, which has had very good

results under the Central Corridor Ecuador Project (PDCC) implemented by IEPS
with IFAD funding and closed in 2014. Given the positive impact of PDCC, IEPS
requested IFAD support to prepare this new operation to continue supporting PSE
actors by scaling up to a new intervention area and including new approaches and
tools based on lessons learned.

34. Moreover, this proposal includes innovative measures to promote the economic
inclusion of vulnerable people. Among these will be scaling up association-based
enterprises with conditional incentives, to be used to cofinance the operating capital
of consolidated solidary enterprises. In this way the project will enable particularly
promising solidary enterprises to grow in size.

35. Finally, knowledge management will include activities to collect, share and
capitalize on knowledge accumulated during project implementation, in order to
disseminate best practices and practical knowledge available in the project areas.

D. Policy engagement
36. The compilation of experiences and lessons learned, and exchanges on them among

the actors responsible for the PSE and their partners, will contribute to improving
IEPS workings, and will also serve as practical information on the use and
functionality of PSE public policies, and contribute to reform as needed. In addition,
the project will provide training to build the capacities of these actors and the
leaders of beneficiary organizations in applying PSE instruments.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
37. A project financing agreement between the Republic of Ecuador and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower. The negotiated financing agreement is attached in appendix I.

38. The Republic of Ecuador is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD.

39. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Lending Policies and Criteria.



EB 2015/LOT/P.18

8

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

VII. Recommendation
40. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Republic of Ecuador in an amount equivalent to fourteen million, two hundred
fifty thousand euros (EUR 14,250,000, (equivalent to approximately
US$15.90 million) and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide an ASAP grant to the
Republic of Ecuador in an amount equivalent to two million eight hundred fifty
special drawing rights (SDR 2,850,000) and upon such terms and conditions
as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions
presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President





















































President's report

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of
Ecuador for the Catalysing Inclusive Value
Chain Partnerships Project (DINAMINGA)

Republic of Ecuador

Catalysing Inclusive Value Chain Partnerships Project
(DINAMINGA)

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of Ecuador

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, Aquaculture
and Fisheries

Total project cost: US$35.2 million

Amount of IFAD loan: US$25.7 million

Amount of IFAD grant: US$0.3 million

Terms of IFAD loan: Ordinary: Maturity period of 18 years, including a grace
period of six years, with an interest rate per annum
equivalent to 100 per cent of the IFAD reference
interest rate

Contribution of the borrower: US$5.6 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$3.6 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/119/R.27/Rev.1

1

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of Ecuador for the Catalysing Inclusive Value Chain
Partnerships Project (DINAMINGA), as contained in paragraph 59.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Ecuador for
the Catalysing Inclusive Value Chain Partnerships Project
(DINAMINGA)

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. The Republic of Ecuador is classified as an upper middle-income country. In 2015

the country posted GDP growth of 4.1 per cent, with inflation and external debt of
4.0 per cent and 20.4 per cent, respectively. With sustained growth over the past
decade has come an expansion in the public sector, broad-based reforms and social
programmes, and upgraded infrastructure, particularly roads. This modernization
process has been funded largely with oil revenues. However, the gradual decline in
oil prices since 2014, difficulty accessing new sources of financing and dollar
appreciation have affected the general government budget, which was cut by
2.2 per cent of GDP in 2016.

2. The economic deceleration and contraction in domestic demand contributed to
pushing up poverty from 22.5 per cent to 23.3 per cent between 2014 and 2015,
resulting in a rise in rural poverty from 35.3 per cent to 39.3 per cent. Despite the
progress made on inequality, poverty and expanding access to services, the gaps
between urban and rural and vulnerable people – indigenous, Montubian and
Afro-Ecuadorean people – are even more marked. In addition, the current
macro-economic situation places this progress in jeopardy. Many of the families
who have risen above the poverty threshold are in a vulnerable situation that could
easily revert to absolute poverty.

3. In this context, one of this administration’s priority objectives is to make a shift in
production patterns by promoting the value chain approach and adding value to
commodities in order to boost exports.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

4. The project originated in the realization by the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock,
Aquaculture and Fisheries (MAGAP) that providing production support is not
sufficient to enable smallholder farmers to overcome poverty. What is needed is to
identify promising subsectors and act along the entire value chain to distribute
returns more fairly. To contribute to sustainable rural development it is crucial to
seek institutional partnerships with the private sector, in order to match supply to
demand and enable smallholder producers to benefit from market opportunities and
raise their incomes. The project’s collaboration with the Ministry of Industry and
Productivity (MIPRO) is a response to these needs, and the partnership with IFAD is
taking place in the context of major government policies.

5. The project is aligned with the strategic objectives of the country strategic
opportunities programme (COSOP), which are as follows: (i) to improve access to
assets and resources to support the diversification of Ecuador's rural economy by
promoting, inter alia, associational initiatives and investments that generate
employment and income for poor rural families in Ecuador; and (ii) build the



EB 2016/119/R.27/Rev.1

2

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

capacities of poor rural producers and potential entrepreneurs to enable them to
participate in and benefit from the formulation of inclusive, pro-poor production
policies.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
6. The selected area includes 65 cantons in the provinces of Orellana, Napo

(Amazonia), Imbabura (Sierra Norte), Cotopaxi, Chimborazo, Bolívar and
Tungurahua (Sierra Centro), Guayas, Los Ríos, Manabí and Esmeraldas (Costa), the
latter two seriously affected by the earthquake earlier in 2016.

7. The selection criteria included the incidence of poverty in terms of unmet basic
needs and consumption; the presence of vulnerable groups; production volumes in
the selected subsectors; and the existence of smallholder producers organizations
(SPOs) in the value chains considered, with access to collection and/or processing
infrastructure.

8. The project target group comprises approximately 20,000 rural smallholder
producer families deriving most of their family incomes directly from one of the
selected subsectors – fine flavour or flavour cacao, blackberries and golden
berries – and are living near the poverty line.

9. The smallholder producers considered include people of mixed race (Montubians
from the Coastal area), and indigenous and Afro-Ecuadorean people. The social
targeting criteria are intended to promote the inclusion of smallholder producer
families and limit resource capture by non-needy families, and to adapt the project
to regional characteristics.

B. Project development objective
10. The goal of the Catalysing Inclusive Value Chain Partnerships Project (DINAMINGA)

is to improve the living conditions of smallholder families in strategic sectors. The
development objective is to improve the incomes of smallholder families producing
cacao, blackberries and golden berries within the project area.

11. The aim is to generate an increase in the margins derived from value addition and
redistribute income within the priority value chains so that profits reach smallholder
producers.

C. Components/outcomes
12. Component 1: Promoting partnerships1 by smallholder producers with the

agribusiness sector and markets. The objective is to forge win-win partnerships
between smallholder producers and agro-industrial enterprises, to enhance the
impact and sustainability of business initiatives supported within the selected value
chains. The expected outcome is better market access for the targeted smallholder
producers. Activities include: promoting commercial partnerships among value
chain actors; promoting trade in the selected subsectors; building competencies
and capacities for partnerships; and promoting access to financial products and
services.

13. Component 2: Building sustainable production, associational and
entrepreneurial capacities of smallholder producers. The objective is to
improve the capacities of targeted smallholder producers to boost productivity,
enhance quality, generate value added, and improve management and governance
of their production organizations or family enterprises. This component will
cofinance the execution of gap-closing plans. Activities include: promoting

1 Minga (mink'a or minga in quechua) means collective work done for the community; minca derives from
the quechua minccacuni, "to ask for help while promising something"). It refers to a pre-Columbian tradition of voluntary
community or collective work for a common (social) or reciprocal purpose. In Ecuador the term "minga" has been used
in the term “Gran Minga del Cacao nacional”, part of the MAGAP National Programme.



EB 2016/119/R.27/Rev.1

3

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

agricultural and post-harvest good practices; building entrepreneurial, associational
and gender equality capacities; and generating capacities to access financial
services.

14. Component 3: Knowledge development, management and administration.
This component consists of a planning, M&E, knowledge management, and
management and administration systems.

III. Project execution
A. Approach
15. Ecuador’s export agriculture sector, which provides 25 per cent of total

employment, plays a dominant role in the economy and contributed 36 per cent of
GDP in 2015, but continues to be a two-tier system. On one hand is a dynamic and
industrialized sector of medium-sized and large enterprises engaging in intensive
monocropping of banana, flowers and African palm. On the other, holding potential
for improvement – in cacao, coffee and fruit – is a sector composed of smallholder
producers who are the country’s poorest and do not as yet participate in value
chains with strong demand from domestic and international markets.

16. The fine flavour cacao and non-traditional Andean fruit (blackberry and golden
berry) value chains were selected on the basis of rising broad-based demand on
domestic and global markets, high potential for improvement, producers living in
conditions of poverty and vulnerability, and areas with high poverty rates.

17. IFAD will contribute significant value added under this project on the basis of past
experience in the cacao sector through public-private-producer partnerships (4Ps)
with local governments and cacao processors; previous projects in Ecuador; and
agro-enterprise operating models. The analysis done by IFAD shows the need for
flexibility and adaptability to different contexts. Moreover, three cases in the cacao
sector – in the Dominican Republic, Indonesia and Sao Tome and
Principe – have shown that an immediately operational and market-oriented private
sector allows for greater efficiency in projects.

18. The selected value chains feature similar constraints on allowing producers to
garner a larger share of the benefits. These are both endogenous – relating to
production, productivity, quality, traceability, certification and lack of business
capacity – and exogenous – a high level of intermediation, lack of recognition for
weight and quality of the products, and volatile prices. This creates an obstacle to
achieving stable quality in the supply of raw or processed materials, and to building
trust between members, and between members and buyers.

19. The project has been designed around the structure of the selected value chains,
both associational and individual, to address all bottlenecks identified within
them: at the production stage for Andean fruit, and in processing and marketing,
the main links in the chain, in the case of cacao. The strategic orientation set out by
MAGAP and MIPRO calls for linking producers’ associations to business demand both
on the domestic market and for export, including niche markets such as the organic
and fair trade segments. The strategy follows the 4P model, which consists of
building partnerships between the public sector, the private sector and smallholder
producers, represented by their leaders, with intermediation and facilitation by the
public sector, represented by the executing agencies MAGAP and MIPRO. To reflect
Ecuador's diverse realities, the model has been adapted to different
modalities. Through these, the aim is to facilitate and support the matching of
supply and demand so that supply responds to the requirements of demand, better
prices are obtained in recognition of quality and the level of intermediation is
lowered.

20. The greatest possible number of targeted beneficiaries will be reached by adopting
differentiated approaches. The project calls for: (i) an economies of scale approach



EB 2016/119/R.27/Rev.1

4

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

by supporting selected SPOs in providing timely marketing and other services to
member and non-member providers; (ii) a family business approach in the form of
support for individual smallholder producers to enable them, through their leaders,
to participate in partnerships with enterprises; (iii) a women in development and
youth approach to ensure that opportunities to access project resources and
services are available equally to women and men involved in the cacao, blackberry
and golden berry production chains, by setting gender and age quotas for
beneficiaries and introducing affirmative action measures; and (iv) a vulnerable
population approach by including indigenous and Afro-Ecuadorean people among
the targeted producers.

21. The operating strategy contemplates two kinds of complementary support: support
for off-farm activities managed by organizations with at least one collection centre,
in the form of subsidies (nonreimbursable transfers) conditional upon the fulfilment
of terms agreed under the 4P partnership; and direct on-farm support for individual
smallholder producers, considering their family businesses as rural
microenterprises. The objective is for activities by organizations and farms to
conform to conditions demanded by the market and for producers to gain greater
capacities, empower themselves and strengthen their links with organizations and
agribusinesses.

B. Organizational framework
22. The executing agency is MAGAP, through a project executing unit (PEU) within the

organizational structure of MAGAP that will provide administration, coordination,
supervision, support and M&E, together with MIPRO and pursuant to a specific
agreement.

23. Project implementation will be outsourced to an operator. MAGAP will be
responsible for relations with the National Planning and Development Secretariat
(SENPLADES), the Ministry of Finance and IFAD in connection with budget
allocation, withdrawal requests and reports on the project’s technical and financial
progress.

C. Planning, M&E, and learning and knowledge management
24. The project will perform planning, M&E, and learning and knowledge management

(PMELKM) functions in accordance with national and MAGAP provisions on PMELKM
and IFAD guidelines contained in the Project M&E Manual and General Conditions
for Financing. A conceptual and methodological document will be prepared outlining
the main orientations of PMELKM, highlighting the respective responsibilities of
MAGAP, MIPRO and the operator, the schedule of activities and the expected
outcomes.

25. The main approach guiding the planning and M&E functions is the managing for
development results (MfDR) approach, which calls for obtaining observable and
verifiable change for the target group. MfDR falls within the MAGAP’s governing for
results (GfR) initiative whereby MAGAP generates information on previously
established indicators. MfDR will be applied in project execution and in planning and
M&E by adopting the following principles: effectiveness in achieving objectives;
quality in serving people’s needs; transparency and accountability;
complementarity with other public agencies; citizen participation; learning
promotion; and continuity through institutional strengthening.

26. This methodology is supported by an automated tool to systematize and monitor
results. SENPLADES engages in medium- and long-term M&E in connection with the
quantifiable targets set in the National Development Plan. The coordinating
ministries monitor short-term commitments through the Managing for Governance
System (SIGOB).

27. The planning and M&E system will conform to the requirements of the M&E
subsystems of GfR, the Public Administration Secretariat, SIGOB, the Ministry of



EB 2016/119/R.27/Rev.1

5

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Production, Employment and Competitiveness and the Integrated Financial
Management System (SIGEF) of the Ministry of Finance.

28. An impact assessment plan has been agreed upon with the Government of Ecuador.
The quasi-experimental methodology will allow for a comparison of results by
producers and SPOs benefiting from the project (treatment group) with similar
producers and organizations that have not received any benefits (control group).
The intention is to measure the project’s causal impact on indicators of interest,
such as household income, production and sales, and other variables.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
29. Financial management. Financial management will take place through the PEU

financial unit which, in coordination with the MAGAP Financial Administration
Coordination Office, will be responsible for proper administration of the resources.
The main responsibilities of the PEU financial unit will be as follows: (i) ensure that
the project has adequate liquidity and prepare withdrawal requests; (ii) review the
Plan of Action (POA) and prepare the annual procurement plan; (iii) make the
necessary arrangements for yearly budget allocations; (iv) manage disbursements
to the operator; (v) review the operator’s financial statements and relevant
documentation and monitor the operator’s financial management; (vi) prepare
annual financial statements and deliver them to IFAD; (vii) contract the audit firm
and deliver the annual audit report to IFAD; and (viii) ensure fulfilment of the
fiduciary conditions of the financial agreement.

30. Operationally, the project will be implemented by an operator selected by MAGAP
under a competitive and transparent process based on national public contracting
regulations and in accordance with IFAD guidelines on project procurement. IFAD
will evaluate the proposed operator’s financial management before the contracting
process is finalized. The findings of the financial management evaluation will be one
of the criteria considered by IFAD in issuing its non objection to contracting the
operator.

31. Based on the country’s rating of 32 on the Transparency International Corruption
Perceptions Index, as well as IFAD’s experience in the country, the project fiduciary
risk is considered moderate. The financial management arrangements provided for
this project, together with close implementation support by IFAD, are considered
sufficient to mitigate this fiduciary risk.

32. Flow of funds. The borrower will open and maintain two designated accounts in
United States dollars exclusively for advance deposit of the loan and grant
proceeds, respectively.

33. Audit. The project will prepare annual consolidated financial statements in
accordance with the International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS). The
consolidated financial statements will be audited annually by an independent
private auditor in accordance with IFAD Project audit guidlines and international
auditing standards. All of the project accounts will be audited, including all financing
sources. The auditor’s terms of reference will include a detailed review of the
financial transactions carried out by th eoperator and all relevant documentation.
The audit reports will be submitted to IFAD within the first six months following the
end of the fiscal year under review.

34. Procurement. Procurement will take place in accordance with the Organic Law on
the National Public Procurement System and regulations, provided they are
compatible with IFADs’ procurement guidelines.

E. Supervision
35. IFAD will provide support for project implementation in the manner deemed most

advisable by the parties, seeking to improve effectiveness and ensure that the
objectives and desired outcomes are achieved. In addition, IFAD, in coordination



EB 2016/119/R.27/Rev.1

6

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

with MAGAP and MIPRO, will supervise the project directly, in accordance with the
Policy on Supervision and Implementation Support.

36. The implementation support and supervision plan will seek to contribute to reaching
the targets set and will monitor compliance with the commitments, provisions and
standards set forth in the financing agreement and operating manual. Support will
be provided from the time of formulation, taking advantage of the various
phases – review, negotiation, approval – for proper preparation of start-up. Among
other activities, plans call for providing support as follows: start-up workshop,
annual supervisión (two per year at the initial stage), midterm review and closing
workshop, and ongoing activities in support of execution. The plan will initially focus
on ensuring operating capacity for project management; preparing annual
workplans and procurement plans; and consolidate financial management
arrangements.

IV. Costs, financing, benefits
A. Project costs
37. The total cost of the project has been estimated at US$35.2 million, covering two

operating components and a project management component: (i) promoting
smallholder partnerships with agribusiness and markets, US$8.3 million
(24 per cent); (ii) building sustainable production, associational and entrepreneurial
capacities among smallholders, US$20.6 million (59 per cent); and (iii) knowledge
development, management and administration, US$6.3 million (18 per cent). Costs
have been calculated at current prices, taking into account the selected area.
Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant
Borrower/

counterpart Beneficiaries Total

Component Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Promoting smallholder
partnerships with
agribusiness and markets 7 024 27 - - 1 144 20 100 3 8 268 24
2. Building sustainable
production, associational
and entrepreneurial
capacities among
smallholders 14 860 58 - - 2 226 39 3 503 97 20 588 59
3. Knowledge development,
management and
administration 3 776 15 250 100 2 274 40 - - 6 300 18

Total 25 660 73 250 1 5 644 16 3 603 10 35 157 100

B. Project financing
38. The project will be financed by: the IFAD loan for US$25.7 million (73 per cent of

total project cost; the IFAD grant for US$0.3 million (1 per cent); a contribution by
the Government for US$5.6 million (16 per cent); and cash contributions by
beneficiaries for US$3.6 million (10 per cent). Detailed allocations by source of
financing and category of expenditure are shown in table 2.



EB 2016/119/R.27/Rev.1

7

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Table 2
Project costs by category of expenditure and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant
Borrower/

counterpart Beneficiaries Total

Component Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Works 636 2 - - 103 2 71 2 810 2
2. Equipment, materials
and vehicles 499 2 - - 81 1 37 1 582 2
3. Consulting and training 8 682 34 250 100 1 261 22 1 398 39 3 761 11
4. Grants and subsidies 12 853 50 - - 2 092 37 2 097 58 17 042 48
5. Salaries and operating
costs 2 992 12 - - 2 106 37 - - 5 098 14

Total 25 660 73 250 1 5 644 16 3 603 10 35 157 100

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
39. In the farm models, the financial internal rate of return (FIRR) is higher than the

discount rate and the financial net present value (FNPV), at an average of
US$3,000, demonstrates the project's financial feasibility to a 10-year horizon.

40. Strengthening the associations and improving their production capacities is
expected to generate the following benefits: an increase in household assets of
19 per cent over the baseline, and an average increase in incomes of
21 per cent. This gives an idea of the prospects for the associations' sustainability,
improved access to value chains and better negotiating power with buyers.

41. The cost estimate done for economic feasibility took into account adjustments for
transfers to direct beneficiaries, strengthening of organizations, investments in
upgrading infrastructure and equipment; adjustments to price contingencies;
adjustments to value-added taxes to reflect transfer payments; adjustments to
economic prices for inputs, tradable goods and the social discount rate.

42. The results obtained show that the project is economically feasible, with an
economic IRR of 28.50 per cent; economic NPV of incremental net return of
US$23.9 million and a cost-benefit ratio of 1.77.

43. The project’s sensitivity analysis and economic feasibility indicators show that it is
more sensitive to a price reduction where with a fall of 10 per cent the EIRR falls to
12.18 per cent and a reduction in returns where a fall of 14 per cent causes a fall in
EIRR to 12.51 per cent. In addition, with a reduction in returns of
20 per cent the EIRR is 22.94 per cent and a cost increase of 20 per cent leads to
an EIRR 22.94 per cent. In terms of delays, the project can withstand two years
and still maintain positive returns above the discount rate.

D. Sustainability
44. The project will promote a match between supply and demand of quality products,

and will make use of existing financial services available in the marketplace, adapt
them to potential demand and enable the two parties to negotiate the services they
need and the prerequisites for accessing such services, with support and mediation
from the Government in its capacity as intermediary. This matching of supply and
demand will serve as the basis for the partnerships and will contribute to their long-
term sustainability, even after the project's conclusion.

45. Success in terms of the scope of goal and objectives, sustainability and replicability,
lies in strengthening the actors involved and their partnerships: SPOs and both
female and male members, both formal and comercial; enterprises; and
institutions. This institutional strengthening and consolidation of capacities for
analysis, training, marketing and formulation of proposals will be achieved with
training and advisory assistance, and with the same participation and shared



EB 2016/119/R.27/Rev.1

8

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

responsibility of the target groups and their involvement in the project M&E
process.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
46. The project’s socio-environmental classification is B in accordance with IFAD's

Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures. The project will not
finance activities covered by category A of IFAD’s environmental policy. All of the
risks and adverse environmental and social impacts are avoidable.

47. The climate vulnerability classification is moderate. The project is in line with the
National Climate Change Plan 2015-2018, which prioritizes agricultura, water
management, ecosystems, energy and capacity-building in environmental risk
management.

48. The main risks identified with a medium or high probability of occurring are given
below.

Risk Probability Mitigation strategy
No timely fiscal allocation and no
adequate countryl counterpart
contribution

Medium  MAGAP, MIPRO and IFA will exert all their influence to
ensure that the required amount is allocated in a timely
manner.
 Minimum country counterpart is set in view of the current
macroeconomic context and budget us in Ecuador

Demand for financing from collection
centres is limited given difficulties
meeting the requirements of financial
institutions

Medium Training and technical assistance (component 3) will support
organizations and overcome barriers in financial idiom,
procedures and consultations to meet requirements

Financial institutions are not interested
in financing producers’ organizations

Medium Training and assistance to financial institutions should
underscore promotion of the three agroindustrial value
chains and report on l inkages and opportunities for serving
this market niche

Liquidity in the financial sector
continues to fall to levels that do not
allow for earmarking resources to
these segments

High More emphasis will need to be given to international banks,
especially in the case of the export of products.

Unforeseen losses as a result of
market instability, sudden contraction
in demand, unusual drops in global
prices and the lack of a mechanism to
differentiate prices in the International
Coffee Organization and global
commodity exchanges, as well as
extreme climate events.

High The project promotes moving producers closer to
compensation mechanisms that can cover, albeit in part,
unforeseen losses for any of the reasons indicated
(emergency fund, insurance)

Main environmental risks: use of
agrochemicals, loss of genetic
biodiversity of cacao, improper
management of solid and liquid waste

Medium Financing investments at the collection level will be
conditional on developing an environmental profile, in
accordance with national environmental regulations, and
compliance by business plans with the sustainable
environmental management principles set forth in the
Operating Manual, the Guide on Coffee Growing Best
Practices, and the Cacao Post-harvest Best Practices
Manual (MAGAP)

Cadmium content in Ecuadorean
cacao not permitted in the European
and U.S. markets

Medium Field tests to identify the main causes, pilot interventions and
generalization of practices that limit the fixing of cadmium in
cacao

Main climate risks: reduced availability
of water during dry months (Sierra);
lower yields and plant production
capacity (Sierra); higher likelihood of
floods and landslides (Costa and
Amazonía);2 increase and distribution
of pests and their vectors

Medium Funded infrastructure should take the minimum
considerations of environmental safeguards and include a
localization analysis. Construction of infrastructure will
include the principles of labour security, risk analysis
(seismic risks), and will take place outside areas of flooding,
landslides or geological faults

2 Flooding and landslides are among the primary four threats to the country in the provinces of the Coast region, and to a
lesser extent in the Sierra and Amazon regions.



EB 2016/119/R.27/Rev.1

9

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
49. The project complies with the main IFAD policies on targeting rural poor people,

gender equality and women’s empowerment, implementation in relation to
indigenous peoples, natural resources management and environment, and strategy
on climate change.

B. Harmonization and alignment
50. The project is fully aligned with the priority government policy to effect a shift in

production patters, as set forth in the National Plan for Good Living 2013-2017, and
with three of the main government policies: the National Strategy for Equality and
Poverty Eradication (ENIEP, SENPLADES, 2014); Ecuadorean Agricultural Policy and
Sustainable Territorial Rural Development 2015-2025 (MAGAP, 2016). In addition,
the project will directly address the COSOP strategic objectives based on the results
for 2014-2018.

51. Linkages were developed with other donors through their initiatives in support of
the private sector (Multilateral Investment Fund of the Inter-American Development
Bank, the Development Bank of Latin America) during implementation of the
project to improve private investment.

52. Also, within the framework of collaboration among the Rome-based agencies, the
project will be supported by FAO in developing and implementing the nutrition pilot
in the cantons prioritized for their higher incidence of malnutrition and integrated
disease and pest management.

C. Innovation and scaling up
53. The innovation by the project is to put forward the 4P model, adapted to the

diverse realities of Ecuador, as the central thrust of the approach, and seeks to
replicate successful partnership models.

54. Knowledge management will include activities to collect, share and capitalize on
knowledge accumulated during project execution, with the goal of disseminating
best practices and practical knowledge available in the project territories.

D. Policy engagement
55. The compilation of experiences and learnings, and exchanges between actors

responsable for MAGAP and MIPRO and their members, will contribute to improving
their operations, and will serve as practical information on the use and functionality
of public policies, helping with reform as needed. The project will build the
capacities of these actors and the leaders of beneficiary organizations.

VI. Legal instruments and powers
56. A financing agreement between the Republic of Ecuador and IFAD will constitute

the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower/recipient.
A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached in appendix I.

57. The Republic of Ecuador is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD.

58. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Lending Policies and Criteria.



EB 2016/119/R.27/Rev.1

10

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

VII. Recomendation
59. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Republic of Ecuador in the amount of twenty-five million six hundred and sixty
thousand United States dollars (US$25,660,000), and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
Ecuador in the amount of two hundred and fifty thousand United States
dollars (US$250,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President






















































President’s report

Proposed grant to the State of Eritrea for the
Fisheries Resources Management Programme


The State of Eritrea

Fisheries Resources Management Programme (FReMP)

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Recipient: The State of Eritrea

Executing agency: Ministry of Marine Resources

Total programme cost: US$32.12 million

Amount of IFAD Debt Sustainability
Framework grant:

SDR 10.75 million (equivalent to approximately
US$15 million)

Cofinanciers: Federal Republic of Germany

Global Environment Facility (GEF)

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations

Amount of cofinancing: Germany: US$5.97 million

GEF: US$7.89 million

FAO: US$500,000

Terms of cofinancing: Grant

Contribution of recipient: US$1.42 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$1.35 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/LOT/P.11

1

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
grant to the State of Eritrea for the Fisheries Resources Management Programme as
contained in paragraph 47.

Proposed grant to the State of Eritrea for the Fisheries
Resources Management Programme (FReMP)

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Strategic context. More than two decades after attaining its independence in

1993, Eritrea is still faced with many development challenges. The main economic
sectors have yet to fully recover, resulting in high unemployment, few
income-generation opportunities, an unsupportive business environment for
investment, and weak macroeconomic conditions. The country is prone to periodic
droughts and remains dependent on rainfed agriculture, which makes it highly
vulnerable to food and nutrition insecurity.

2. On the Human Development Index,1 Eritrea scored 0.391, ranking 186th out of
188 countries in 2014. The country also scored poorly on the Global Hunger Index2
with a score of 33.8 in 2014. Nonetheless, recent economic performance has been
positive, driven mainly by the mining sector. Real gross domestic product (GDP)
growth was estimated at 2 per cent in 2014 and 2.1 per cent in 2015 – double that
of 2013. The current GDP composition is services (59.9 per cent),
non-manufacturing (17.3 per cent), agriculture, animal husbandry, forestry and
fisheries (16.9 per cent), and industry (5.9 per cent). Exports increased in 2014
and 2015, but the current account balance is estimated to have deteriorated from
0.2 per cent of GDP in 2014 to -1.2 per cent in 2015, and is forecast to be
1.5 per cent of GDP in 2016. This is partly due to decreases in both remittances
and the "development and recovery" tax (a 2 per cent tax levied on the Eritrean
diaspora). Based on International Monetary Fund Article IV 2009,3 Eritrea was at
the pre-decision point for becoming a heavily indebted poor country (HIPC) and
therefore may be eligible for HIPC multilateral debt relief. Eritrea is classified as
"red" by the Debt Sustainability Framework and is therefore entitled to 100 per
cent grant financing.

3. Agriculture, animal husbandry and fishing are mainstays for most Eritreans, with
between 60 per cent and 70 per cent of the population relying on these subsectors
for their livelihoods; they also account for between 20 per cent and 30 per cent of
commodity exports. However, these subsectors are affected by highly variable
climatic conditions, inefficient rain-fed subsistence farming systems, limited
resource allocation and low profit margins. The fact that over 80 per cent of poor
people live in rural areas and depend on agriculture suggests that increasing
agricultural production and productivity would have a significant impact on poverty.
Eritrea has 26 per cent arable land, but only 4 per cent is under cultivation. Mining
is becoming important and is the main attraction for foreign investment. The

1 United Nations Development Programme Human Development Report 2015 (http://hdr.undp.org/en/2015-report).
2 The Global Hunger Index, produced by the International Food Policy Research Institute, is an aggregated measure of:
overall undernourishment; child wasting; child stunting; and child mortality (http://www.ifpri.org/topic/global-hunger-index).
3

http://www.imf.org/external/np/pp/eng/2013/071813.pdf: Only information for 2009 is available from the IMF; since then,
there has been no agreement with Eritrea’s Government on mission dates or modalities for the next Article IV.



EB 2016/LOT/P.11

2

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

growth outlook is promising if Eritrea exploits all its opportunities for trade and
opens its economy to foreign investment in sectors other than mining.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and the
country strategic opportunities programme

4. Eritrea has substantial and relatively underexploited marine and fisheries
resources, comprising nearly 1,000 fish species. These fisheries exist in an
unpolluted and undercapitalized marine environment; the fisheries sector
contributes only about 3 per cent of the country's GDP. The maximum sustainable
yield (MSY) of Eritrea’s Red Sea fisheries has been estimated by several sources at
80,000 tons per year (some fisheries experts provide a more conservative MSY
range of between 40,000 and 80,000 tons per year since there has been no recent
stock assessment). Small pelagic fisheries account for about half of this MSY and
are currently underutilized. Recorded total fish catches rarely exceed 10,000 tons
per year, of which fewer than 2,000 tons are caught by small-scale fishers.

5. This programme will support Eritrea’s Government in ensuring that the country’s
marine fishery resources are utilized in a sustainable manner to improve the
livelihoods of coastal communities. Specifically, the Fisheries Resources
Management Programme (FReMP) will: (i) support increased fish production while
ensuring that production levels do not exceed historical MSY estimates (for small
pelagic fish, it will be limited to 19,000 tons per year); (ii) support the Ministry of
Marine Resources in monitoring and enforcement; (iii) update MSY estimates and
adjust targets when needed; and (iv) invest in restoration and protection of the
ecosystem.

6. The projected total fish production represents an estimated gross first sales
value-at-landing of approximately US$50 million. This involves a huge investment
in fishing, processing and other support services like boat building, supply of
fishing gear, cold storage, production of ice and packaging material, and
opportunities in fish distribution and marketing. FReMP will mainly target fishers
who use traditional motorized wooden boats (along with a few using improved
motorized fiberglass boats). Other beneficiaries will include "foot fishers" who do
not own any fishing assets. The programme will address many limiting factors and
contribute to increased productivity, production and improved livelihoods of the
target beneficiaries. Eritrea’s mangrove forests also offer opportunities for
supplementing livelihoods with honey production, fodder for small livestock, and
fuelwood, ensuring the viability of fisheries over the long term.

7. Inland fisheries and aquaculture present another investment opportunity for
increased fish production, incomes and nutrition. The Government, with support
from other development partners, has established over 330 reservoirs, of which
70 are stocked with fish species including tilapia, carp and catfish. However, the
country’s inland fisheries resources are not widely exploited since many local
communities are: unaware of the nutritional benefits; they lack fishing skills and
equipment; and fishing is not part of their tradition. In addition, there are
opportunities for engaging in aquaculture using cages placed within water
reservoirs or in external ponds drawing water from the reservoirs. FReMP will
target 15 water reservoirs to demonstrate good practices and test successful
models that can be replicated and scaled up in the other reservoirs. The
programme will also assist in developing climate-resilient conservation plans for
the water reservoirs, which will lead to improved crop and livestock production,
and enhance rural populations’ nutrition and incomes.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
8. Programme Area. FReMP will be national in scope, targeting all six zobas

(regions) in Eritrea's coastal and inland areas. There will be a special focus on



EB 2016/LOT/P.11

3

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

marine fish landing sites, inland water reservoirs for aquaculture and fish markets.
On the Red Sea coast, it will target the Northern Red Sea and Southern Red Sea
zobas. In the inland zobas of Anseba, Debub, Gash Barka, and Maekel, the
programme will be site-specific, operating in selected water reservoirs with high
fishery production potential.

9. Target Group. The target group consists of: (i) small-scale fishers (men and
women small boat owners, crew members and foot fishers) who will participate
either as individuals or as cooperatives; and (ii) rural smallholder farmers involved
in subsistence agriculture and small livestock-keeping around inland water
reservoirs, and those involved in rehabilitating their catchment areas, who are
interested in economic activities along the inland fisheries supply chain; (iii) youth
entrepreneurs (fishers and non-fishers) interested in establishing business
enterprises or cooperatives that respond to market demand for fishery products
and services; (iv) women, especially women-headed households, who will account
for at least 30 per cent of the programme’s beneficiaries; and (v) demobilized
soldiers and internally displaced persons.

B. Programme development objective
10. Programme goal and development objective. FReMP will be implemented over

a seven-year period from 2017 to 2023. The programme’s goal is to contribute to
household food and nutrition security, and alleviate rural poverty. Its development
objective is to increase incomes and improve nutrition among targeted
beneficiaries, and promote the sustainable management of natural resources. In
pursuit of this objective, FReMP will support marine and inland small-scale fishers
to produce a surplus (within the MSY of the fisheries) for the market. To achieve
this, it will forge sustainable partnerships with various actors along the fish
production and marketing value chain. The aim will be to transform Eritrea’s
small-scale fisheries sector from subsistence to a sustainable commercial industry.

C. Components/outcomes
11. Component 1: Develop sustainable fisheries systems. This component will

support the establishment of necessary infrastructure and technologies for
production and post-harvest operations, marketing, and consumption of both
marine and inland fisheries. It will be achieved through three sub-components:

(i) Development of marine fisheries production and post-harvest systems;

(ii) Development and sustainable utilization of inland fisheries; and

(iii) Market development and promotion of fish consumption.

12. Component 2: Fisheries enterprise support services. This component seeks
to: (i) promote the development and build capacity of cooperatives and other
enterprise groups; and (ii) strengthen input-provision services to ensure that
legally constituted cooperatives and enterprise groups have access to the inputs
required to undertake economically viable and sustainable fish-related businesses.
These objectives will be achieved through two sub-components:

(i) Entrepreneurial capacity development; and

(ii) Strengthening of input supply services.

13. Component 3: Institutional strengthening and implementation support.
The objectives of this cross-cutting component are to: (i) ensure that the
institutions responsible for implementing and overseeing the programme’s various
implementation processes have the capacity to effectively carry out their duties;
and (ii) manage and facilitate the programme in an efficient and effective manner
by coordinating planning and implementation, financial management and control,
procurement support, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), knowledge management



EB 2016/LOT/P.11

4

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

and sharing, progress reporting, and liaising with other stakeholders. These
objectives are to be achieved through two sub-components:

(i) Capacity building of the Ministry of Marine Resources and other implementing
agencies for the development of the fisheries sector; and

(ii) Programme coordination and implementation support services.

III. Programme implementation
ApproachA.

14. The programme’s overall approach is to strengthen production systems and market
linkages. FReMP will use communities as an entry point, engaging local institutions
in participatory planning for sustainable fisheries development. The programme will
be implemented through – and fully embedded in – the Government’s
decentralized system, and sustainability will be a central aspect of the programme
approach. The programme will support enterprises in engaging with markets in
order to increase returns on their investments and establish public and private
mechanisms to ensure continuity of benefits. Gender will be mainstreamed across
the programme by: (i) ensuring that gender issues are considered in policy
dialogue and staff training; (ii) establishing programme work plans that are gender
sensitive and identifying gender focal points at the national and zoba levels;
(iii) promoting women’s participation in programme activities, particularly those
focused on small pelagic fish production and market linkages; and (iv) closely
monitoring gender empowerment.

B. Organizational framework
15. The management, coordination and implementation of FReMP will involve various

government institutions and private-sector entities. The Ministry of Marine
Resources will be the lead executing agency and will be supported by: (i) a
programme steering committee chaired by the minister responsible for fisheries
and with representation from ministries with direct relevance to the programme
goal and development objective; and (ii) an adequately staffed national
programme coordination office (NPCO). At the zoba level, FReMP will be
implemented, managed and coordinated through the zoba administration systems.
Zoba programme coordination offices will be established in all the six zobas to
strengthen programme management and coordination.

C. Planning, M&E, and learning and knowledge management
16. Planning. Annual work plans and budgets (AWP/Bs) will be the key instruments

for implementation and operational control. AWP/Bs will be prepared for all
programme participants, starting with the primary stakeholders at the community
level. These plans will identify activities according to needs and priorities through a
participatory planning process.

17. The NPCO will receive, review, harmonize and consolidate the AWP/Bs from the six
zobas and all other programme areas in collaboration with the Ministry of Marine
Resources. The NPCO will submit the consolidated AWP/Bs to the programme’s
technical committee for review and endorsement before submitting them to the
programme steering committee for approval and to IFAD for review on a "no
objection" basis. In order to facilitate the proper preparation of AWP/Bs, training
will be provided at programme start-up.

18. Monitoring and Evaluation. M&E will be embedded in the institutional
strengthening and implementation support component, coordinated by the NPCO.
This system will reach all implementers at the national and zoba levels, and will be
supported by additional professional staff, who will work closely with
subject-matter specialists to strengthen learning and knowledge management. The
M&E system will feed into the Ministry of Marine Resources management
information system and IFAD’s Results and Impact Management System.



EB 2016/LOT/P.11

5

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

19. Learning and knowledge management. Learning and knowledge management
will be based on the programme’s M&E system, especially on reviews and
participatory assessments of lessons learned during implementation. The
national-level M&E team will liaise with zoba-level counterparts to develop a
learning and knowledge management system.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
20. Financial management. The proposed financial management arrangements for

FReMP have been assessed as medium risk. Therefore it is recommended that the
Laccie accounting software be used instead of the Government’s financial
management system. The NPCO, which will be the accounting hub, has gained
experience through the Fisheries Development Programme (FDP) in the
implementation of IFAD-funded projects. In addition, the Laccie accounting
software was specifically designed for donor-funded projects and is able to
generate the required financial reports.

21. Flow of funds. A designated account will be opened at the Central Bank of
Eritrea to receive the proceeds from the IFAD grant, and Germany and GEF
contributions. A programme operating account at a bank acceptable to IFAD will
be operated in accordance with Government regulations. To facilitate
traceability of funds, each zoba will have a dedicated operating account to
receive activity-tagged cash advances against approved AWP/Bs, which will be
accounted for prior to any request for subsequent advances.

22. Audits. The Government’s audit processes will be used for FReMP. As was the case
for FDP, Eritrea’s Auditor-General will have the discretion to undertake the audit or
to appoint an independent private audit firm acceptable to IFAD. Either way, the
auditor’s terms of reference will require IFAD's "no objection" review on an annual
basis. The Ministry of Marine Resources’ internal auditors will include FReMP in their
annual rolling internal audit plans and issue formal reports at least twice each year.

23. Procurement. All procurement funded by the programme will be carried out in
accordance with national procurement procedures to the extent that they are
consistent with IFAD’s Project Procurement Guidelines. The country’s legal and
regulatory framework for public procurements has been assessed as sufficiently
robust. There are checks and balances within the system to ensure that public
procurement is undertaken transparently and competitively. Lessons learned from
FDP indicate that a programme-specific procurement officer should be recruited to
strengthen: (i) records management; (ii) contract management; (iii) the
integration of procurement into budget formulation; and (iv) reporting.

24. Transparency, governance and anti-corruption. The Government will maintain
a governance and anti-corruption framework throughout the programme
implementation period to mitigate the risk of fraud and corruption, and promote
effective utilization of programme funds. Specific measures to mitigate identified
fiduciary risks will include: (i) use of the Laccie accounting system at the NPCO to
reduce the risk of human error; (ii) checks and balances in contracting and
administration; (iii) the integration of FReMP into internal audit plans within all
zobas; (iv) activity-tagged transfers to zobas instead of general cash releases;
(v) maintaining the current statement of expenditure ceiling used in other
IFAD-funded projects in Eritrea, given the inherent risk; (vi) adequate staffing
arrangements; and (vii) continued capacity building of the cooperative credit unit
to handle the asset financing.

E. Supervision
25. FReMP will be jointly supervised by IFAD and Eritrea’s Government. The frequency

and composition of missions will be determined by actual requirements through
collaboration with IFAD and the Government. Preferably, supervision missions will
take place every six months. Supervision will not be seen as a general inspection



EB 2016/LOT/P.11

6

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

or evaluation, but as an opportunity to assess achievements and lessons learned,
and to jointly reflect on improving implementation and increasing the likelihood of
achieving the programme’s development objective.

IV. Programme costs, financing, and benefits
A. Programme costs
26. Programme costs. The total programme costs over seven years, including

contingencies, taxes and duties, are estimated to be US$32.12 million as detailed
in table 1.
Table 1
Programme costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component

IFAD grant GEF FAO Germany Government Beneficiaries Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Develop sustainable
fisheries systems 4 958 40.4 6 508 53.0 - - 26 0.2 286 2.3 504 4.1 12 284 38.2
2. Fisheries enterprise
support services 3 376 31.4 128 1.2 - - 5 940 55.3 445 4.1 846 7.9 10 735 33.4
3. Institutional
strengthening and
implementation
support 6 666 73.2 1 254 13.8 500 5.5 - - 686 7.5 - - 9 105 28.3

Total programme
costs 15 000 46.7 7 890 24.6 500 1.6 5 966 18.6 1 417 4.4 1 351 4.2 32 124 100.0

B. Programme financing
27. The total combined FReMP investment and incremental recurrent costs, including

physical and price contingencies, are estimated at US$32.12 million
(ERN 481.8 million). The programme will be financed by the Government, the IFAD
grant, Germany, GEF, FAO and beneficiary contributions. IFAD has confirmed a
grant equivalent to US$15 million from the Tenth Replenishment of IFAD’s
Resources (IFAD10), which represents 46.7 per cent of the total programme cost.
Germany will contribute US$5.96 million (18.6 per cent of the total programme
cost); GEF has committed US$7.89 million (24.6 per cent); FAO will contribute
US$500,000 (1.6 per cent); and beneficiaries will contribute approximately
US$1.35 million (4.2 per cent of the total programme cost) through their
participation in construction, setting up fishery sites and purchasing inputs like
fishing gear. The Government will finance the taxes and duties (US$1.42 million,
representing 4.4 per cent of total costs). Details of the financing arrangements are
shown in table 2.



EB 2016/LOT/P.11

7

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Table 2
Programme costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component

IFAD grant GEF FAO Germany Government Beneficiaries Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

I. Investment costs
A. Works 3 367 32.8 6 155 59.9 - - 26 0.3 227 2.2 504 4.9 10 279 32.0

B. Vehicles 1 707 72.1 54 2.3 - - - - 605 25.6 - - 2 367 7.4

C. Equipment and materials 2 206 22.5 353 3.6 - - 5 929 60.4 487 5.0 845 8.6 9 820 30.6

D. Consultancies 562 38.3 356 24.3 500 34.1 - - 48 3.3 - - 1 466 4.6

E. Training 4 187 86.7 629 13.0 - - 10 0.2 1 - 1 - 4 829 15.0

Total
investment costs 12 029 41.8 7 548 26.2 500 1.7 5 966 20.7 1 368 4.8 1 351 4.7 28 761 89.5

II. Recurrent costs
A. Salaries and allowances 1 370 80.0 343 20.0 - - - - - - - - 1 713 5.3

B. Operating costs 1 601 97.0 - - - - - - 50 3.0 - - 1 650 5.1
Total recurrent costs 2 971 88.3 343 10.2 - - - - 50 1.5 - - 3 363 10.5
Total programme costs 15 000 46.7 7 890 24.6 500 1.6 5 966 18.6 1 417 4.4 1 351 4.2 32 124 100.0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
28. Benefits and Beneficiaries. FReMP will target 17,500 households

(87,500 people) through 600 groups. The cost per beneficiary is US$361 (about
US$1,800 per household). The programme will provide direct support to inland
fishing cooperatives, small pelagic fishing enterprises, fish value-addition
enterprises (e.g. fish drying), fish mongers and traders, fish marketing, provision
of inputs through the cooperative support unit and the establishment of a
sustainable ice plant.

29. Expected benefits include: (i) increases in the production and quality of
marketable fish; (ii) higher prices for producers and traders as a result of the
aggregation of fish products and improved marketing processes; (iii) increased
community-level resource rental revenues; (iv) consumer benefits such as
enhanced availability and affordability of fish products by reducing inefficiencies
along the value chain; and (v) empowered government systems that have
benefited from capacity development.

30. Economic analysis. The programme has the potential to generate an economic
rate of return of 17 per cent over a ten-year period.

31. Impact indicators. FReMP is expected to facilitate the development of sustainable
production, processing and market linkages for marine and inland fisheries, and
deliver increased volumes of fish to consumers. This will: generate employment,
especially for youth and women; increase incomes of small-scale fishers in Eritrea’s
coastal and inland communities; increase the volume and quality of marketed fish
in coastal and inland areas; and enhance food and nutrition security in the target
communities.

D. Sustainability
32. Institutional sustainability. The participatory programme design process and

the bottom-up planning approach will ensure that programme implementation
modalities respond to the target communities’ concerns, sector-specific priorities,
national development policies and strategies, and the national institutional
framework. The approach creates ownership and builds the foundation for
sustainability after the programme ends. FReMP implementation will be fully
embedded within the Government’s institutional framework at all levels and the
Government has committed to continue this integration after programme



EB 2016/LOT/P.11

8

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

implementation. The institutional building-capacity approach encompasses
government institutions at various levels as well as cooperatives and enterprise
groups to ensure that skills continue to support programme-initiated activities after
completion.

33. Economic/income sustainability. The programme will build the capacity of
target groups in business plan development for their subprojects and prudent
financial management; enterprise groups will be linked to markets. The financial
analysis of the programme indicates that members of different enterprise groups
will improve their incomes and earn good returns on their investments. These
financial benefits on investments in the sector, coupled with improved access to
inputs, will promote sustainability and enhance replicability and scaling up. The
availability of a revolving fund through the cooperative credit unit will provide
opportunities for highly performing enterprise groups to expand their businesses in
the long run.

34. Environmental and climatic sustainability. The programme will promote
environmentally sustainable fishing practices by adopting a precautionary
approach, which involves promoting and enforcing good fisheries management
practices. FReMP’s interventions will support: adaptation to climate change through
investing in "climate buffers", which include watershed management; increasing
water and soil retention to reduce the impacts of drought and extreme rainfall; and
rehabilitation and planting of mangroves to safeguard their important role in the
coastal ecosystem. This approach also integrates expected climate change impacts
and utilizes these data in feasibility studies for infrastructure.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
35. Several potential risks could undermine the programme’s success if they are not

mitigated. Delayed programme start-up, slow disbursements during the early years
of implementation and high staff turnover have been recurrent problems in the
portfolio. To mitigate these risks, FReMP will operate with similar institutional
arrangements as FDP and will be managed by the same experienced programme
management unit. Expansion of fishing activities, if not properly controlled, could
lead to overexploitation of fish resources beyond the MSY for both marine and
inland fisheries. Mitigation measures include: (i) setting conservative catch levels
below historical MSY estimates (19,000 tons per year for small pelagics);
(ii) supporting the Ministry of Fisheries Resources in monitoring, control and
surveillance capacity; (iii) updating MSY estimates and adjusting targets when
needed; and (iv) investing in restoration and protection of the ecosystem. For
inland fisheries, the programme will facilitate the establishment of fishing
cooperatives with standard codes of fishing and environmental practice. The
programme will also support a hatchery to restock water reservoirs as necessary.
In addition, extension agents from the Ministry of Marine Resources and fishing
cooperatives will receive training in stocking and sustainable harvesting.

36. Based on Eritrea's 2015 Transparency International Corruption Perceptions Index
score of 18, the country’s inherent risk is high. The fiduciary risk has been
assessed as medium due to the introduction of mitigation measures highlighted
above.

37. Climate risks. The programme’s sensitivity to the impacts of climate change is
assessed as moderate. The greatest risk relates to the unknown impact of
increasing sea temperatures on marine fish resources. Through its monitoring
activities, the programme will be able to adjust to changes in fish stocks. At the
design stage, there were no data available to carry out an in-depth climate risk
assessment.



EB 2016/LOT/P.11

9

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

38. The design of FReMP is compliant with: (i) IFAD Strategic Framework 2016-2025;
(ii) Reaching the Rural Poor: IFAD Policy on Targeting; and (iii) IFAD Policy on
Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment. In addition, the nutrition focus of the
programme is aligned with the Government’s strategy on food security and
nutrition, and IFAD’s commitment to nutrition-sensitive interventions and action
plans on mainstreaming nutrition. FReMP will be implemented in compliance with
IFAD’s Environment and Natural Resource Management Policy, and IFAD's Climate
Change Strategy. Climate change adaptation measures are integrated into
programme activities in order to address the inherent risks resulting from a
changing climate and the potential multiplication of these effects on ecosystems.
As an extra safeguard, IFAD has developed a complaints procedure on alleged
non-compliance with its social and environmental policies and mandatory aspects
of its social, environmental and climate assessment procedures.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
39. The programme is fully aligned with Government investment priorities as defined in

the Eritrea Food Security Strategy, the Eritrea Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy
Paper and the five year (2013-2017) strategic development plans for the country’s
agriculture and fisheries sectors. It will be fully embedded in the Government’s
decentralized institutional framework and delivery mechanisms. Links between the
steering and technical committees as well as among the management teams will
ensure coordination, collaboration, learning and scaling up of good practices.
Operational linkages between the Ministry of Marine Resources and other relevant
ministries, and other development partners in the fisheries sector are expected to
result in synergies with the programme.

Innovations and scaling upC.
40. Innovation. Eritrea’s small pelagic fisheries present opportunities for introducing

new techniques and innovative products and recipes. Novel techniques and fish
products to be piloted include solar-dried assortments, pickling, fish powder,
protein concentrates, salted-pressed sundried fish snacks, fermented products, fish
oil, fish sauces and different fish recipes. Successful products will be introduced to
fish processing and marketing enterprise groups for commercial uptake. The
programme will also pilot new technologies to boost fish production.

41. Scaling up. Experiences from FDP will be used to guide programme interventions,
especially the formation of cooperatives and enterprise groups, capacity
development and input financing. FDP established an asset-financing model, which
has become instrumental in sustaining the country’s small-scale fishing sector,
particularly for large fish along the coasts. FReMP will scale up this proven model
for sustainable access to fishing inputs and replicate it in small pelagic fish and
inland fisheries supply chains. Enterprise groups at different links in these chains
will be able to access the inputs they need to undertake economically viable and
sustainable fish-related businesses.

42. The programme will pilot mariculture – the cultivation of marine organisms for food
– and aquaculture development activities in marine and inland systems, with the
objective of demonstrating their technical and economic viability. The inland
fisheries intervention will target up to 15 water reservoirs to generate good
practices that are replicable in the remaining water reservoirs across the country.

Policy engagementD.
43. The programme presents an opportunity to: (i) test new approaches, models and

technologies within small pelagic inland fisheries and coastal areas; and (ii) support
the Government’s own efforts to analyse the effectiveness of its fisheries policies,



EB 2016/LOT/P.11

10

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

including those on sustainable production and management of fisheries resources.
Lessons learned through the programme will be used to inform Government-led
dialogue around national policies. The programme will maintain policy engagement
around fish product marketing systems and related legal and regulatory
frameworks, particularly regarding the role of the National Fisheries Corporation
and fisher cooperatives in the pricing of fish products.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
44. A programme financing agreement between the State of Eritrea and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
Recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is included as appendix I.

45. The State of Eritrea is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

46. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
47. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a Debt Sustainability Framework
grant to the State of Eritrea in an amount equivalent to ten million seven
hundred and fifty thousand special drawing rights (SDR 10.75 million) and
upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with
the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President


















































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the Federal
Democratic Republic of Ethiopia for the
Participatory Small-scale Irrigation
Development Programme – Phase II
(PASIDP II)

Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia

Participatory Small-scale Irrigation Development
Programme Phase II (PASIDP II)

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources

Total programme cost: US$145.3 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 72,950,000 (equivalent to approximately
US$102 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: 40 years, including a grace period of 10 years, with a
service charge of 0.75 per cent per annum

Amount of IFAD grant: SDR 1,080,000 (equivalent to approximately
US$1.5 million)

Amount of Adaptation for Smallholder
Agriculture Programme (ASAP) Trust
Fund grant:

SDR 7,870,000 (equivalent to approximately
US$11 million)

Contribution of borrower: US$18.7 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$12.1 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/118/R.18

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Federal Democratic of Ethiopia for the Participatory Small-scale
Irrigation Development Programme Phase II (PASIDP II), as contained in
paragraph 43.

Proposed loan and grant to the Federal Democratic
Republic of Ethiopia for the Participatory Small-scale
Irrigation Development Programme Phase II (PASIDP II)

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development, and poverty context
1. During the last decade, the Government of Ethiopia has achieved impressive results

in economic growth and poverty reduction. Broad-based gross domestic product
growth averaged 10.8 per cent each year between 2003/2004 and 2013/2014, and
annual population growth was 3 per cent. This strong economic growth was driven
by significant public investment and expansion of services and agriculture. The
Government committed more than 60 per cent of its total expenditures to
poverty-oriented sectors such as agriculture, education, health, water and road
construction. Ending extreme poverty in Ethiopia requires sustaining current efforts
and ensuring that economic growth is inclusive, especially in the rural areas. Many
non-poor households in Ethiopia are just above the poverty line and vulnerable to
falling into poverty in the case of a significant shock.

2. To sustain the country’s strong economic growth, it is critical to enhance the
productivity of agriculture, particularly farming systems such as small-scale irrigation
with high potential for productivity increases. The Government’s Growth and
Transformation Plan II for 2015/2016-2019/2020 emphasizes the important role of
agriculture as a driver of economic growth.

3. Ethiopia is endowed with a highly diverse agroecological environment spanning from
temperate and moist tropical highlands to hot and arid lowlands, matched by a
diverse sociocultural setting. As much as this heterogeneity has to offer in terms of
natural resources, a common characteristic is environmental fragility. Major
challenges include soil degradation, deforestation and loss of biodiversity. Climate
change projections for Ethiopia indicate a significant increase in temperature and a
likely increase in droughts, heavy rains and floods, particularly in the lowlands.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

4. The Government of Ethiopia and IFAD are moving towards a programmatic approach
with a longer-term vision for lending in the Ethiopian small-scale irrigation
subsector. The first phase of the Participatory Small-scale Irrigation Development
Programme (PASIDP), which was implemented between 2008 and 2015, contributed
to reducing the country’s vulnerability to adverse climate risks and drought as well
as rural poverty and food insecurity. The country programme evaluation by the
Independent Office of Evaluation of IFAD recommended financing a second phase of
PASIDP since small-scale irrigation offers great potential for reducing the impact of
climate change, enhancing economic growth and reducing poverty, which are all
aspirations of the Government. This second phase will complete and hone the
intervention model developed in the first phase, and will pilot the geographical



EB 2016/118/R.18

2

expansion that will mainly be undertaken in the third phase, with an ultimate final
vision of scaling up the programme nationwide.

5. PASIDP II is based on the assumption that poor farmers who are provided with
access to a secure irrigation production base and access to markets and services will
be able to produce and market greater volumes of crops in a profitable manner. The
investment will include watersheds contiguous with the irrigation schemes, which
exhibit varying levels of degradation, in order to stabilize them, improve their
productive capacity and enhance their resilience. This will improve farmers’
prosperity, food security and nutrition, enhancing their resilience against external
shocks – including those induced by adverse weather and climate change as
witnessed in 2015 as a result of the El Niño weather phenomenon.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
6. The programme area of PASIDP II will cover four regions in Ethiopia: (i) Amhara;

(ii) Oromia; (iii) Southern Nations, Nationalities and Peoples’ Region; and (iv) Tigray.
By the time of the midterm review, opportunities to expand the programme
interventions into other regions on a pilot basis will be explored.

7. PASIDP II will benefit 108,750 households, of which: (i) 46,250 utilize small-scale
irrigation schemes and some fields in the adjacent watersheds; (ii) 37,500
households live in and utilize the adjacent watersheds; and (iii) 10,000 benefited
from irrigation support under PASIDP I and will benefit from the agronomic and
market linkages support under PASIDP II. In addition, 15,000 employment
opportunities will be created as a result of the growing labour requirements on farms
and in marketing chains. Within the selected irrigation schemes and adjacent
watersheds, PASIDP II will use a self-targeting approach together with mechanisms
to promote the inclusion of women, youth and vulnerable groups.

B. Programme development objective
8. The programme development objective is to improve income and food security for

rural households on a sustainable basis.

C. Components/outcomes
Component A: Investment in small-scale irrigation infrastructure

9. The expected outcome of component A is that farmers will have access to
sustainable irrigation schemes; the programme aims to develop at least 15,000
hectares (ha) of small-scale irrigation schemes. Subcomponent A.1 will support
(i) the selection of schemes; (ii) feasibility studies and detailed designs; (iii) the
establishment and strengthening of irrigation water users' associations (IWUAs); and
(iv) environmental and social impact studies and management plans. Subcomponent
A.2 will support the development of the selected irrigation schemes, including
multiple-user systems alongside irrigation.

Component B: Investment in capacity for sustainable agriculture
10. The expected outcome of component B is that farmers will have increased

market-oriented skills and capacity for sustainable agriculture. Component B will
support activities designed to ensure that beneficiaries operate in an environment
that is conducive to rural commercial development. Subcomponent B.1 will support
the strengthening of farmers’ cooperatives, the development of agribusiness linkages
and access to financial services. Subcomponent B.2 will: (i) support the
improvement of crop husbandry practices, mainly through farmers’ research groups
and extension support; (ii) facilitate access to improved seeds; (iii) include gender-
sensitive activities; and (iv) promote nutrition-sensitive agriculture. Subcomponent
B.3 will support improved watershed management and promote climate-smart
agriculture.



EB 2016/118/R.18

3

Component C: Programme management, monitoring and evaluation, and
knowledge management

11. Component C will focus on (i) learning and knowledge management; and
(ii) programme management, monitoring and evaluation.

III. Programme implementation
ApproachA.

12. Programme implementation will be governed by four main principles: (i) alignment
with government systems and procedures, and integration of programme
implementation into decentralized government institutions; (ii) empowerment of
beneficiaries to lead programme implementation through their grass-roots
institutions; (iii) cooperation with private service providers and business entities;
and (iv) partnerships and collaboration with other development partners and
stakeholders in the sector.

B. Organizational framework
13. Programme governance. A national programme steering committee (NPSC) will

provide overall policy and strategic guidance on programme focus, priorities and
institutional strengthening. The NPSC will be chaired by the Minister of State for
Agriculture and Natural Resources, and shall be composed of ministers of state from
relevant sectors including the: Ministry of Water, Irrigation and Electricity; Ministry
of Trade; Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change; Ministry of Finance
and Economic Cooperation; and Ministry of Industry. It will also include executives of
the Federal Cooperative Agency, the Ethiopian Agricultural Research Institute and
other institutions aligned with the programme’s strategic focus.

14. Programme management. The Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources will
be the lead implementing agency. The Minister of State for Natural Resources will be
responsible for coordinating implementation with support from the Directorate of
Small-scale Irrigation. A federal programme coordination and management unit
(FPCMU) will ensure: (i) planning, monitoring and evaluation, (ii) stakeholder
coordination at the federal level; and (iii) quality control of investments and cost-
efficiency. The Ethiopian Agricultural Transformation Agency will provide technical
and analytical support, and mobilize service providers for South-South Cooperation
to build capacity in areas of innovation, including support to market access alliances,
promotion of climate-smart innovations and agricultural finance.

15. Regional programme coordination and management units (RPCMUs) will coordinate
investment planning, procurement and coordination of design consultants, works
contractors and capacity-building service providers. At the district and
programme-site levels, implementation will be fully integrated into local government
structures. IWUAs will actively participate in the entire process of irrigation scheme
development, from identification to the final hand-over.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

16. The programme will be implemented on the basis of approved annual workplans and
budgets, which will be prepared jointly by the FPCMU, RPCMUs, district governments
and implementing partners. The FPCMU will consolidate the budget and present it to
the NPSC for approval pending IFAD’s prior review.

17. In line with the result-based management approach, progress towards programme
outputs, outcomes, impact and sustainability will be regularly monitored. Baseline
and impact surveys will be conducted at start-up, midterm and programme
completion to assess the effectiveness of the investment. Feasibility studies for each
irrigation scheme and watershed will provide baseline data to assess performance
and results.



EB 2016/118/R.18

4

18. To improve performance and build local partners’ capacity, the programme will
promote participatory monitoring and evaluation (M&E) tools. The FPCMU will
facilitate periodic structured discussions to share any issues encountered, solutions
and results. Learning and sharing of knowledge will be based on the programme’s
M&E system, particularly on reviews and participatory assessments of lessons
learned during implementation.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
19. A senior finance manager will be appointed to ensure the use of a consistent,

comprehensive chart of accounts and accounting software at the federal and regional
levels. An accountant will be recruited at the FPMCU and in each region.

20. Funds flow and disbursement arrangements. A designated account will be
opened at the National Bank of Ethiopia to receive the proceeds from the IFAD loan,
the IFAD grant and the Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme (ASAP)
grant. A programme operating account will be maintained by the FPCMU in
accordance with government regulations and a separate account will be opened for
the receipt of counterpart funding. The RPCMUs and implementing partners will also
open dedicated bank accounts in their regions to facilitate the transparency of funds.

21. Programme audits. The Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources internal
audit department will include the programme in its internal audit plans. The Office of
the Federal Auditor General will either directly perform the external audit, request
that the Audit Service Corporation perform it or hire an independent audit firm
acceptable to the Fund. The internal and external audit recommendations will be
reviewed by the NPSC.

22. Retroactive financing and start-up costs. As an exception to section 4.08(a)(ii)
of the General Conditions for Agricultural Development Financing, specific eligible
expenditures during the preparatory period from 1 July 2016 to 31 December 2016
up to the equivalent of US$2 million pre-financed by the Government will be
reimbursed from the IFAD loan after the financing agreement has entered into force
and the conditions precedent to withdrawal have been met. In addition to this
retroactive financing, withdrawals for start-up costs are encouraged for eligible
expenditures incurred between the date of entry into force of the Financing
Agreement and the satisfaction of the conditions precedent to withdrawal.

23. Procurement. The country’s legislative and regulatory framework provides an
adequate operational environment for procurement, including procurement for
works. Lessons from the previous phase imply that a programme-specific
procurement officer should be recruited to strengthen: records management;
contract management; the integration of procurement into the budget formulation
process; and reporting. Annual procurement plans will be subject to prior review by
IFAD and will serve as tools for planning, implementing and monitoring all the
programme’s procurement activities.

E. Supervision
24. The programme will be directly supervised by IFAD. Features likely to require

implementation support include: (i) planning and preparatory studies for irrigation
schemes, including the early establishment of IWUAs and facilitating beneficiaries’
active participation; (ii) implementation of an environmental and social management
framework (ESMF); (iii) programme M&E; (iv) procurement; (v) access to finance,
inputs and markets; and (vi) targeting.

IV. Programme costs, financing and benefits
A. Programme costs
25. Total programme costs over seven years, including contingencies, taxes and duties,

are estimated at US$145.3 million, as presented in the table below. Component A



EB 2016/118/R.18

5

represents 71.9 per cent of the costs, component B 20.5 per cent and component C
7.6 per cent.
Table 1
Programme costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component

IFAD loan IFAD grant
ASAP Trust
Fund grant Beneficiaries

Borrower/
recipient Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

A. Investment in
small-scale irrigation
Infrastructure 82 226 78.7 1 000 1.0 1 287 1.2 4 452 4.3 15 523 14.9 104 489
B. Investment in capacity
for sustainable agriculture 11 571 38.8 - - 8 516 28.6 7 621 25.6 2 108 7.1 29 815
C. Programme
management, M&E and
knowledge management 8 203 74.6 500 4.5 1 196 10.9 - - 1 091 9.9 10 990

Total 102 000 70.2 1 500 1.0 11 000 7.6 12 072 8.3 18 722 12.9 145 294

B. Programme financing
26. Programme financing comprises an IFAD loan of US$102 million on highly

concessional terms and an IFAD grant of US$1.5 million. An additional grant of
US$11 million (7.6 per cent of the total programme cost) from the ASAP Trust Fund
will support the mainstreaming of climate-resilient interventions within the
programme. The Government will provide the equivalent of US$18.7 million,
representing 12.9 per cent of total programme costs, to cover all duties and taxes.
Public services at the national, regional and district levels will play a major role in
programme implementation. The beneficiary contribution is estimated at
US$12.1 million, and will be provided in labour and materials.
Table 2
Programme costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD loan IFAD grant
ASAP Trust
Fund grant Beneficiaries

Borrower/
recipient Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

Training 4 142 33.4 - - 6 475 52.1 - - 1 801 14.5 12 417
Works 78 594 79.5 - - 1 000 15.0 4 452 4.5 14 831 15.0 98 876
Consultancies 3 954 47.0 1 500 17.8 1 988 23.6 - - 969 11.5 8 412
Goods, services and
inputs 9 348 50.5 - - 1 094 5.9 7 620 41.1 455 2.5 18 516
Salaries and allowances 3 572 84.1 - - 443 10.4 - - 233 5.5 4 247
Operating costs 2 390 84.6 - - - - - - 434 15.4 2 825

Total 102 000 70.2 1 500 1.0 11 000 7.6 12 072 8.3 18 722 12.9 145 294

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
27. The programme is expected to lead to: (i) a significant increase in farm productivity,

market output and incomes for 46,250 farm households cultivating 18,400 ha of
irrigated agriculture; (ii) higher yields in at least 60,000 ha of adjacent watersheds;
(iii) additional jobs for 15,000 young and landless people who are not members of
the households with irrigation schemes or watersheds; and (iv) improved market
access and higher yields for 10,000 farming households that received support under
PASIDP I.

28. With an economic rate of return of 28.8 per cent over 20 years and a net present
value of US$165 million per annum, the programme is an economically viable
investment. The sensitivity analysis indicates a solid resilience to increases in



EB 2016/118/R.18

6

programme costs and reductions in output prices. The adoption rate and time lags of
benefits are the most sensitive factors.

D. Sustainability
29. The participatory process of irrigation scheme establishment creates ownership and

the necessary foundations and commitments for sustainability after programme
completion. Programme implementation will be fully embedded in the Government’s
institutional framework at all levels, which will continue after programme
implementation.

30. Mutually beneficial market linkages will ensure the sustainability of beneficiaries’
incomes. The financial analysis indicates that producers will substantially improve
their incomes with solid returns on their investments. These financial benefits from
investment in the sector will not only promote sustainability but enhance replicability
and opportunities for scaling up.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
31. The design of PASIDP II has benefited from a risk assessment study recently

undertaken by the Platform for Agricultural Risk Management. Extreme risks with a
low or moderate frequency but high severity (such as extreme droughts or market
outbreaks) require the intervention of macro-level players.

32. The programme has been confirmed as Environmental and Social Category A since a
number of irrigation schemes may result in a loss of environmental services provided
by the natural ecosystem or have significant implications that affect a broader area
and are not easily remedied. An ESMF and a free prior and informed consent
implementation plan have been developed to guide the programme during
implementation, and environmental and social impact assessments (ESIAs) will be
conducted for those schemes classified as Category A, while environmental and
social management plans (ESMPs) will be prepared for those in Category B. The
programme will endeavour to avoid schemes that may result in a high probability of
resettlement. If any scheme is selected that will trigger physical or economic
resettlement, a resettlement action plan (RAP) will be prepared and disclosed as a
precondition for financing the scheme. The RAP process should entail meaningful
consultation and negotiation with any people who will potentially be affected in
accordance with the free prior and informed consent implementation plan. In terms
of climate risk, PASIDP II is classified as "medium". The climate risks will be
mitigated by increasing the ability of affected communities to adapt to environmental
and economic variability, demographic shifts, shocks and long-term changes.

33. As a result of the uncertain implications of – and resources required for – managing
ESIAs for Category A schemes, priority will be given to schemes classified as
Category B. During early implementation, ESIAs will be prepared and IFAD will
organize an independent review to assess their implications and determine the
Borrower’s and IFAD’s capacity to manage and implement these schemes.

34. Based on Ethiopia’s 2015 Transparency International Corruption Perceptions Index
score of 33 and public financial management assessments, the programme’s
fiduciary risk has been rated as medium. The measures highlighted in section III.D
of this report are considered sufficient to mitigate any fiduciary risks.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

35. Programme design is aligned with IFAD’s Policies for Targeting; Gender Equality and
Women’s Empowerment; Improving Access to Land and Tenure Security; the
Voluntary Guidelines on the Responsible Governance of Tenure of Land, Fisheries
and Forests; the Framework and Guidelines for Land Policy in Africa; and IFAD’s
Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP). The programme



EB 2016/118/R.18

7

is also aligned with IFAD’s Environment and Natural Resource Management Policy
and Climate Change Strategy.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
36. The programme is fully aligned with the investment priorities under the

Government’s Growth and Transformation Plan II. Linkages between the steering
committees and technical committees, as well as between the management teams of
programmes such as the Sustainable Land Management Project and the Agricultural
Growth Programme will ensure coordination, collaboration, learning, and scaling up
of good practices. Operational linkages with the Ministry of Industry’s Small and
Medium Enterprise Finance Project and the Agricultural Commercialization Clusters
project are expected to result in synergies with the programme.

Innovations and scaling upC.
37. The main innovations for scaling up outcomes include the: (i) mainstreaming of

participatory planning and selection of schemes; (ii) development of agribusiness
linkages and market access to mitigate marketing risk, especially for perishable
crops; (iii) integration of climate-adaptation strategies, including watershed
improvement and management, building on experiences with the Community-based
Integrated Natural Resource Management Project; (iv) promotion of improved crop
husbandry and access to improved inputs and financial services in order to achieve
the targeted yields and improve water productivity; (v) enhanced focus on women
and youth as priority target groups; (vi) mainstreaming of nutrition-sensitive
agriculture; and (vii) alignment with IFAD’s new SECAP and international
engagement with respect to climate change resilience.

Policy engagementD.
38. Productive use of water resources is a priority guiding Ethiopia’s agricultural

development agenda. Strengthening existing models for irrigation and enhanced
watershed management is a vital priority for policy engagement. The programme
presents an opportunity to: (i) test new implementation approaches, models and
technologies, identify successes and share relevant lessons; and (ii) support the
Government’s own efforts to assess the implementation and effectiveness of its
policies. The lessons learned in pursuing these approaches will be used to inform
Government-led dialogue around national policies.

39. Much of the policy engagement will take place within the framework established by
the Government for policy dialogue with its development partners and other national
stakeholders, including the Rural Economic Development and Food Security Sector
Working Group, and its subcommittees.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
40. A programme financing agreement between the Federal Democratic Republic of

Ethiopia and IFAD will constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed
financing to the borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is included
in appendix I.

41. The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia is empowered under its laws to receive
financing from IFAD.

42. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.



EB 2016/118/R.18

8

VII. Recommendation
43. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia in an amount equivalent to
seventy two million nine hundred and fifty thousand special drawing rights
(SDR 72,950,000) (approximately US$102 million) and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Federal
Democratic Republic of Ethiopia in an amount equivalent to one million and
eighty thousand special drawing rights (SDR 1,080,000) (approximately
US$1.5 million) and upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially
in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide an ASAP grant to the
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia in an amount equivalent to seven
million eight hundred and seventy thousand special drawing rights
(SDR 7,870,000) (approximately US$11 million) and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President



































































President’s report

Proposed loan to the Republic of India
for the Odisha Particularly Vulnerable Tribal
Groups Empowerment and Livelihoods
Improvement Programme

Republic of India

Odisha Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups
Empowerment and Livelihoods Improvement Programme

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of India

Executing agency: Scheduled Tribes and Scheduled Castes Development
Department, Government of Odisha

Total programme cost: US$130.39 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 36.4 million (equivalent to approximately
US$51.20 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: 25 years, including a grace period of five years, with
interest on the principal amount outstanding at a fixed
rate of 1.25 per cent per annum plus a service charge
of 0.75 per cent

Contribution of borrower: US$76.18 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$3.00 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/114/R.11

1

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Recommendation for approval
The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
loan to the Republic of India for the Odisha Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups
Empowerment and Livelihoods Improvement Programme, as contained in
paragraph 48.

Proposed loan to the Republic of India for the Odisha
Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups Empowerment and
Livelihoods Improvement Programme

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Despite its middle-income status, poverty reduction remains an important

challenge for India: 33 per cent of the world’s poor live in the country and poverty
has not fallen at the same pace as economic growth. Nutritional levels are
unacceptably low, with 42.5 per cent of children underweight for their age, being
one of the highest rates globally. Prevailing social inequality and the low
nutritional, educational and social status of women are considered key factors
contributing to the prevalence of malnutrition in children below the age of five.

2. India’s population is composed of several ethnic groups, speaking diverse
languages and more than 1,000 dialects. Poverty is particularly severe among
tribal populations. These groups identify themselves in more than 5,400 castes and
tribes and follow five major religions. India’s tribal populations are officially
registered as Scheduled Tribes (STs) according to distinct cultural and ethnic
features. STs, numbering 104.3 million in the 2011 census, constitute
approximately 8.6 per cent of India’s population. Unlike Scheduled Castes (SCs),
which are dispersed throughout the country, STs have traditionally been
concentrated in specific parts of the country characterized by forests, hills and
undulating inaccessible areas. This results in reduced access to basic services and
fewer opportunities for economic development. The decline in the poverty rate is
much slower for ST populations than for the general population. Of the total ST
populations, approximately 2.6 million (2.5 per cent) belong to Particularly
Vulnerable Tribal Groups (PTGs). This classification is reserved for the most
disadvantaged of all ST communities. Currently, 75 identified PTGs are spread
across 17 Indian states and union territories.

3. The proposed Odisha Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups Empowerment and
Livelihood Improvement Programme (OPELIP) will work in Odisha State, which has
one of the highest number of PTGs. Odisha is geographically the 8th largest state
and the 11th most populous among Indian states. Poverty rates of rural populations
are double those of their urban counterparts.

4. Odisha is home to 62 STs including 13 PTGs, which are concentrated in the Eastern
Ghats and the Northern Plateau. Both these regions are characterized by rugged
hilly terrain and high rainfall. Together they account for most of the state’s forests.
PTGs living in Odisha derive their livelihood mainly from shifting cultivation, rainfed
agriculture and the gathering of non-timber forest products (NTFPs). The incidence
of landlessness is high and farming practices have remained primitive, with rainfed
paddy and millets being the main crops.



EB 2015/114/R.11

2

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

5. Several provisions in the Indian Constitution seek to ensure better quality of life for
PTGs. Yet their economic status has not improved. They rank poorly on all
development indicators, such as food and nutrition security, literacy and health.
Given their high dependence on an ecologically complex natural resource base,
they are also highly vulnerable to variability in weather and climate shocks. Owing
to poor farming systems and a lack of focus on the development of rainfed areas,
PTG areas have suffered widespread land degradation. Efforts are thus needed to
reverse this downward spiral of low productivity and a declining resource base.

6. To deliver services to the 17 PTG areas, the Government of India has established
microproject agencies (MPAs). However, a consolidated high-intensity, integrated
programme of support through these institutions – with clear targets and time
frames – is still missing. The OPELIP will deliver this by capitalizing on institutional
development that has already taken place, and will provide a range of services to
PTGs through appropriate development initiatives.

7. The OPELIP will build on the experience of the IFAD-supported Orissa Tribal
Empowerment and Livelihoods Programme (OTELP), which has successfully
demonstrated an integrated development package in tribal areas. OTELP set up
village-level bodies and involved tribal groups in planning and implementation of
various development initiatives, especially development of the natural resources.
Encouraged by the success of OTELP, the Government of Odisha has requested
IFAD to scale up the approach into PTG areas. This is the first time an external
development partner has been asked to work in these most remote and difficult
areas of the state.

8. The programme is closely aligned with the priorities and strategies of both the
Government of India and the State Government of Odisha and will particularly
support the objective of achieving “faster and more inclusive growth”. It is
compatible with and supportive of other donor initiatives and will directly address
the strategic objectives of IFAD’s results-based country strategic opportunities
programme (RB-COSOP). The current RB-COSOP became effective in April 2011
and is jointly reviewed by IFAD and the Government of India annually to ensure full
alignment with national priorities and policies.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
9. OPELIP interventions will be implemented in 17 MPA areas located in 12 districts of

Odisha (Angul, Deogarh, Gajapati, Ganjam, Kalahandi, Kandhamal, Keojhar,
Malkanagiri, Mayurbhanj, Nuapada, Rayagada,and Sundergarh). This will cover
13 PTGs living in some 1,019 villages and hamlets and 84 gram panchayats (the
local self-governing institution at the village level). Overall, the programme will
cover 62,356 households.

10. In line with IFAD’s policy on targeting, the OPELIP will target marginalized groups:
women, children, unemployed youth, hill-area cultivators, the landless among
PTGs, and other tribal peoples. Based on geographical targeting, it will work in a
predefined number of MPA gram panchayats. Some programme interventions –
such as village development planning and the associated village institutions, and
infrastructure such as rural roads – will benefit 100 per cent of the population living
in these gram panchayats. To ensure precise targeting of marginalized groups, a
specific targeting strategy has been developed for each component.

B. Programme development objective
11. The overall goal of the OPELIP is to achieve enhanced living conditions and reduced

poverty in target group households. It will support improved livelihoods and food



EB 2015/114/R.11

3

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

and nutrition security for 32,090 PTG households, 13,970 other tribal households
and 10,810 other poor and 5,486 SC households. This will be achieved, in turn, by
building the capacity of target households, securing their entitlements to land and
forest, improving their agricultural practices to enhance production, promoting
income-generating microenterprises for alternate livelihoods, ensuring access to
services such as education and health, and improving community infrastructure. To
achieve the objective of empowerment, the programme will promote women’s self-
help groups (SHGs), organize village development committees (VDCs) for the
planning and implementation of programme interventions and train community
resource people (CRPs) to provide needed services in production, marketing and
legal assistance.

C. Components/outcomes
12. The OPELIP will have four components: community empowerment; natural

resource management (NRM) and livelihood improvement; community
infrastructure and drudgery reduction; and programme management.

13. Component 1: Community empowerment. Empowerment is the key
prerequisite to developing PTGs. It will be addressed through a series of capacity-
building initiatives, entry point activities and mobilization of community-based
organizations. Accordingly, the component will have two subcomponents:

(i) Community institutions. Promotion of village development associations
(VDAs) for the planning and execution of need-based community activities
that cover natural resource management, community-based paralegal
services, community-based health, hygiene and nutrition education, and
community infrastructure. Major activities will include: (a) engaging the
services of 17 NGOs supported by about 360 CRPs; (b) training of trainers
and capacity-building of CRPs; (c) mobilization of VDCs and capacity-building
of VDC members; (d) implementation of entry point activities in all 1,019
villages, as identified by VDCs; and (e) preparation of village development
plans (VDPs) and facilitation of VDCs in implementing activities identified in
VDPs.

(ii) Strengthening SHGs and rural finance. Promotion of SHGs and rural finance
services to enable social development of SHG members through facilitating
group savings and credit, and through building capacity. Key interventions
will include formation and strengthening of 3,800 SHGs, training of
microfinance CRPs, formation of 84 gram panchayat cluster-level forums
(GPLFs), provision of pro-poor and vulnerability reduction funds to SHGs and
community investment funds to GPLFs, and piloting of two cooperative
societies.

14. Component 2: Natural resource management and livelihood improvement.
Historically, PTGs have lived deeper inside forests than other STs, and some PTGs,
such as the Birhor and Mankirdia, were nomadic until recently. To support the
transition from hunting-gathering to shifting cultivation and eventually to settled
farming, this component will have three subcomponents:

(i) Natural resource management. Key interventions will include: (a) services of
an NGO specialized in land surveys and the issuing of land titles to PTGs;
(b) treatment of 20,000 hectares of arable land and construction of
900 irrigation structures; (c) capacity-building of 18,000 farmers in crop
development and horticulture; and (d) support to horticulture development
and cereal food crops, including oilseeds, pulses and tubers, in all villages.

(ii) Food and nutrition security. This will include: (a) training of school children
and SHG members in malnutrition, locally available nutritious foods,
preparation of nutritious food using local materials, sanitation and
alcoholism; (b) focus on cultivating locally available traditional food crops;



EB 2015/114/R.11

4

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

(c) nutrition-intensive interventions such as kitchen gardens, backyard
poultry- and goat-rearing; and (d) promotion of “convergence” to address
gaps in the areas of food availability, health, water and sanitation.

(iii) Livelihood improvement. The programme will support: (a) selection and
training of community service providers (CSPs); (b) household production
support; (c) market access support for producer collectives; (d) support for
NTFP marketing; and (e) vocational training and strengthening of PTG culture
and traditions.

15. Component 3: Community infrastructure and drudgery reduction. PTG
villages are characterized by poor housing, limited or no access to potable water
year round, absence of sanitation facilities, limited or no access to electricity and
limited or no road infrastructure. Some villages in the programme area have no
school buildings and, in those that do, in many cases the buildings are dilapidated
and without drinking water and sanitation facilities. Many villages do not have
paved roads or drainage inside the settlements, and children play in extremely
unhygienic conditions, especially during the rainy season. Though NTFPs constitute
a major livelihood source for PTGs, there are no platforms for drying and sorting
these commodities or for storage to facilitate collective marketing. This will be
addressed through two subcomponents:

(i) Community infrastructure. The programme will support construction of:
(a) 300 drinking water schemes and 542 school toilets; (b) 4,000 housing
units and habitat development; (c) 500 km of roads and 50 km of
electrification; and (d) infrastructure for 542 drying yards, 84 market yards,
250 aggregation centres and 250 SHG worksheds; and will provide power
tiller units, 2,000 irrigation pump sets and 84 hydram units. Operation and
maintenance of these facilities will be through VDCs, and village volunteers
will be trained as community mechanics.

(ii) Drudgery reduction. Under this subcomponent, the programme will support:
(a) construction of 35,000 smokeless wood stoves; (b) installation of
20,000 solar lanterns; (c) maintenance of fuelwood reserves in 540 villages;
and (d) construction of 84 milling units for hulling rice, millet, etc.

16. Component 4: Programme management. This component will have three
subcomponents: (i) a programme management unit (PMU) will be set up within the
lead programme agency; (ii) the programme will strengthen the 17 existing MPAs
through staffing and facilities; and (iii) a programme monitoring and evaluation
(M&E) and knowledge management (KM) unit will be set up within the PMU. The
programme will make an effort to strengthen existing systems within the MPAs,
rather than creating parallel ones.

17. Major outcomes of the OPELIP will include: 1,019 VDCs organized and functional;
3,800 SHGs and 84 GPLFs organized and functional; at least a 50 per cent
reduction in rural indebtedness; 100 per cent of PTG households holding
homestead titles and 75 per cent of them land titles; 43,000 households receiving
land and water management treatment measures; 19,000 households accessing
irrigation and an almost equal number of households planting fruit and spice crops;
31,000 households increasing cereal, millet, pulse and oilseed production;
9,000 households starting an income-generating activity; all households accessing
a water supply, and market and road connectivity; and 32,000 PTG households
having kitchen gardens, smokeless wood stoves and access to community fuelwood
reserves.



EB 2015/114/R.11

5

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

III. Programme implementation
A. Approach
18. The OPELIP has been designed to follow the successful bottom-up planning

approach of OTELP. Success under OTELP was attributed to the fact that the
implementation process was owned by tribal peoples. With local community
institutions at the heart of the programme, the new design focuses on scaling up
activities that have already been tested and proven successful in Odisha. The
programme will adopt an integrated approach involving support for improved
access to land, natural resources, agricultural technologies, financial services,
markets, productive and social infrastructure, and essential social services. Gender
empowerment will be mainstreamed in all activities. Given the extremely severe
malnutrition situation in PTG villages, the design has also piloted an approach to
mainstreaming nutrition-sensitive agricultural activities across all components.

B. Organizational framework
19. At the national level, the Department of Economic Affairs of the Ministry of Finance

will be the nodal agency for the programme. The Ministry of Tribal Affairs will be
involved in overall policy guidance.

20. At the state level, the Scheduled Tribes and Scheduled Castes Development
Department (STSCDD) will be the lead programme agency. Overall policy guidance
will be provided through a programme steering committee under the Chief
Secretary. A PMU set up within STSCDD will have overall responsibility for day-to-
day management of the programme and the functions relating to planning, funds
flow, M&E, gender mainstreaming, policy dialogue and KM.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

21. Planning. The programme will follow the planning process undertaken by the
respective MPA, taking the specific objectives and purposes of the OPELIP into
account. A draft annual workplan and budget (AWP/B) will be drawn up by the
PMU, consolidating all microplans, in consultation with the respective MPAs and
partner NGOs.

22. Monitoring and evaluation. The M&E system will measure progress and
performance, and will be a learning and decision-making tool at various levels. The
PMU will establish an M&E unit, which will support progress monitoring by
programme field implementation units and partner NGOs. The M&E unit will also
monitor programme outcomes and impacts through, among other tools, annual
outcome surveys and by applying the Results and Impact Management System
(RIMS) in accordance with IFAD guidelines. Semi-annual and annual reports will
also contain sections on analysis, interpretation and recommendations from
process monitoring, lessons learned and best practices.

23. Learning and knowledge management. Information generated by the
programme will be disseminated through IFAD websites, newsletters, thematic
reports and at learning events. The programme will develop a KM strategy and
appropriate action plans. KM will be used as a tool for internal learning by
programme stakeholders such as the staff of various implementing agencies, and
participating villagers and farmers, both women and men. Activities will include
regular review meetings at village/cluster, MPA and state levels and the production
of knowledge products such as newsletters (in local languages), briefs, training
materials, technical manuals, booklets, posters, videos, etc.

24. The OPELIP will also use audio/video systems to disseminate information from
farmer to farmer and village to village. It will build on the KM culture and practices
of OTELP and on the Digital Green programme to amplify knowledge through
combining technology and social organizations for community transformation.



EB 2015/114/R.11

6

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
25. Financial management. The OPELIP will build on the experience of the ongoing

OTELP. During implementation, the PMU will consolidate the AWP/B, including the
annual action plan for conservation-cum-development1 of microprojects, and
submit the consolidated AWP/B to the programme management committee for
approval. Financial accounting for the OPELIP will be done through computerized
accounting software at all levels. The software will be customized to generate
financial reports for the national and state governments and for IFAD according to
specific requirements. After programme start-up, the PMU will enter into a
subsidiary agreement with each MPA. Each MPA will submit a monthly progress
report to the PMU electronically. Strong internal control procedures will be
introduced, including adequate segregation of duties, especially at the MPA level.
Detailed procedures for recording, management and safeguarding of fixed
programme assets will be detailed in the programme implementation manual. An
internal auditor will be hired to provide continuous monitoring and review of
financial systems and procedures.

26. Flow of funds. IFAD financing of the programme will be routed through an
account designated to receive funds in advance (designated account), denominated
in United States dollars and maintained at the Reserve Bank of India. The
Controller, Aid, Accounts and Audit, Department of Economic Affairs (Ministry of
Finance, Government of India), will administer the designated account. Funds will
flow from STSCDD to the PMU bank account as non-lapsable funds in one or two
tranches, and funds from the PMU will be transferred to MPAs as grants-in-aid.
IFAD’s share of funds reimbursed to the Government of Odisha will flow to that
Government through the prescribed national procedures for budgetary support to
state governments. The PMU will release funds to the microprojects based on the
approved AWP/B for implementation of programme activities. The PMU will open a
separate bank account in a bank mutually acceptable to IFAD and STSCDD. Each
MPA will open a separate bank account, in any bank mutually acceptable to the
Government of Odisha and IFAD, to receive funds from the PMU and carry out
eligible expenditures.

27. Audit. The external auditing arrangements for the OPELIP will be established in
two tiers: (i) independent external audit; and (ii) compliance and performance
audit by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General (CAG) of India. As the
OPELIP PMU will be a part of STSCDD, CAG will undertake compliance and
performance audit of the department, in addition to the independent external
audit.

28. Procurement. Procurement of goods, works and services financed from resources
provided or administered by IFAD will be undertaken in accordance with IFAD’s
project procurement guidelines and procurement handbook, 2010. Procurement
will be undertaken in accordance with a consolidated procurement plan submitted
by the PMU and approved by the programme management committee and IFAD.

29. Governance. An intregrated framework for good governance has been developed
to ensure: (i) information transparency in the public domain; (ii) accountability in
the use of resources; and (iii) participation of the communities in decisions that
may affect them. The involvement of affected communities at all stages of
programme implementation can simultaneously improve development of outcomes
and reduce the scope for fraud and corruption. Key features of this governance
framework include, among others, use of a computerized financial management
system; setting up of a complaints and remedies mechanism; rotation of group
leaders of VDC, SHG, GPLF and social audit of group programme accounts; and
regular IFAD implementation support and supervision missions.

1 From the “Conservation-cum-Development Plan for PTGs” (Ministry of Tribal Affairs, Government of India).



EB 2015/114/R.11

7

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

E. Supervision
30. The OPELIP will be directly supervised by IFAD. During the programme’s start-up

phase, IFAD will attend the state-level start-up workshop and participate in
discussions on the programme’s approach and strategy. It will field annual
supervision missions, which will review progress with regard to physical targets,
compliance with fiduciary responsibilities and follow-up on audit recommendations,
and will result in agreed actions to further enhance progress and performance.
Government of Odisha representatives will participate in these supervision
missions. IFAD will also field implementation support missions on specific technical
issues.

IV. Programme costs, financing, benefits
A. Programme costs
31. Total programme costs are estimated at 7,954.15 million Indian rupees (Rs)

(US$130.39 million), including contingencies (US$6.30 million), over an eight-year
period. Key assumptions used in estimating programme costs include: (i) price
contingencies assumed at 5 per cent and applied on all items, except for grant and
subsidies categories and staff salaries financed by IFAD; (ii) an exchange rate of
Rs 61 per United States dollar; (iii) taxes and duties of 5 per cent on training, staff
and operating costs, of 15 per cent on service provider contracts and civil works,
and of 10 per cent on goods and equipment; (iv) all unit costs input in the local
currency unit (i.e. Rs); and (v) taxes excluded from IFAD financing.
Table 1
Indicative programme costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component
Borrower/

counterpart IFAD Beneficiaries Total

1. Community empowerment
Community institutions 6 449 9 653 - 16 102
Strengthening SHGs and rural finance 602 5 654 - 6 256

Subtotal community empowerment 7 051 15 307 - 22 357

2. Natural resource management and livelihood improvement
Natural resource management 13 718 8 584 2 116 24 418
Food and nutrition security 961 4 574 - 5 534
Livelihood improvement 1 313 7 565 559 9 437

Subtotal natural resource management and livelihood
improvement

15 991 20 723 2 676 39 390

3. Community infrastructure and drudgery reduction
Community infrastructure 40 641 1 126 69 41 836
Drudgery reduction 826 4 333 257 5 416

Subtotal community infrastructure and drudgery reduction 41 467 5 459 327 47 253

4. Programme management
Programme management unit 1 861 2 547 - 4 408
Microproject agency unit 9 615 6 369 - 15 984
M&E and KM 201 803 - 1 004

Subtotal programme management 11 677 9 719 - 21 396

Total cost 76 185 51 209 3 002 130 396

B. Programme financing
32. The programme will be funded through IFAD financing and Government of Odisha

counterpart financing from state budgetary resources, from funds under article
275(1) Special Central Assistance to Tribal Peoples Sub Plan, from the
conservation-cum-development fund and through beneficiary contributions. IFAD
will provide a loan of about US$51.20 million. The Government will provide



EB 2015/114/R.11

8

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

US$76.18 million, including staff costs, operating costs and the annual budget
allocation for development of PTGs and other STs. Beneficiaries are expected to
make an in kind contribution of labour equivalent to US$3.00 million.
Table 2
Indicative programme costs by expenditure, category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category
Borrower /

counterpart Percentage IFAD Percentage Beneficiaries Percentage Total

1. Civil work 47 043 84.9 7 131 12.9 1 246 2.2 55 420
2. Traininga 2 423 16.4 11 761 79.8 559 3.8 14 744
3. Goods, services
and inputs 15 978 43.9 19 187 52.8 1 197 3.3 36 362
4. Grants - - 7 149 100.0 - - 7 149
5. Operating costsb 10 741 64.2 5 981 35.8 - - 16 721

Total programme
costs

76 185 58.4 51 209 39.3 3 002 2.3 130 396

a Training and capacity-building.
b Includes staff salaries.

33. Retroactive financing. With a view to ensuring that the OPELIP start-up proceeds
smoothly, preparatory activities related to the NRM and livelihood improvement
component, certain staff costs, and preparation of a baseline survey and manuals
are proposed to be undertaken from April 2014 to entry-into-force of the financing
agreement. Accordingly, as an exception to the General Conditions for Agricultural
Development Financing, approval for IFAD retroactive financing for expenditures up
to US$406,240 is recommended. These proposed expenditures will fall under two
expenditure categories: (i) goods, services and inputs; and (ii) training and
capacity-building (table 3). The expenditures incurred will be reimbursed to the
borrower after the programme enters into force.
Table 3
Indicative retroactive financing by component, cost category and financier
(United States dollars)

Component
Disbursement account
category

Estimated
expenditure

Amount to be
reimbursed by IFAD

1. Community empowerment
Wages to multipurpose workers Goods, services and inputs 72 000 36 000

2. NRM and livelihood improvement
Engaging the services of a rural
organization

Training and capacity-building 320 000 256 000

4. Programme management
Baseline survey Training and capacity-building 134 400 107 520
Preparation of finance manual Training and capacity-building 8 400 6 720

Total 534 800 406 240

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
34. Programme investments have an overall internal rate of return of 23 per cent, with

a net present value of Rs 7,840 million and a cost-benefit ratio of 1.85. The
programme remains viable if costs increase and/or benefits decrease by
25 per cent. Farm model analysis shows significant increases in food production
from 510 kg to 1,020 kg per household, with net incomes increasing several fold
over existing levels.

35. A total of 62,356 households (comprising 32,090 PTGs; 13,970 other ST
households; 5,486 SC households; and 10,810 others) would benefit directly from
the programme.



EB 2015/114/R.11

9

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

36. Immediate benefits from the OPELIP include: (i) increased productivity through the
introduction of better management practices and improved farming practices;
(ii) minimized soil erosion; (iii) reduced runoff and increased infiltration;
(iv) enhancement of organic content of the soil; (v) greater social cohesion among
target group communities due to greater interaction with VDAs and SHGs;
(vi) security of land tenure due to recognition of the usufruct rights of PTGs and
restoration of alienated land; and (vii) increased recognition of and participation by
women.

D. Sustainability
37. The land survey and land allocation, with land title rights, provided to PTGs is

expected to trigger sustained improvements in land use and overall productivity.
Quality of the produce will be ensured through provision of quality seed and
seedlings by the programme and through capacity-building. Marketing could be a
constraint in the initial years, but would be overcome through the operations of
producers’ collectives and the provision of market infrastructure, as demand is
increasing for produce from the programme area. Increased capacity of the target
groups to undertake intercropping and other small enterprises through programme
support will enhance the sustainability of livelihoods.

38. The programme will contribute to environmental and NRM sustainability. Planting of
fruit trees in the current shifting cultivation areas will help protect soils and
improve productivity. The fruit trees and spice crops will provide PTGs and other
STs a regular and more reliable source of income and will reduce the temptation to
encroach on forest lands. In addition, programme participants will receive technical
training in good agricultural practices, improved soil fertility and soil health
management, eco-restoration techniques, planting along contour lines to prevent
erosion, and organic farming.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
39. There are a number of risks associated with the programme as detailed in the

logical framework. The goal-level risk of lack of support by the Government is
reduced by the Government commitment to continue tribal development
programmes and to enhance investment. The development-objective-level risk of
social instability is addressed by promoting and supporting local governments and
community institutions in building a coalition facilitating stability and economic
growth. The risk of a complex, challenging institutional setting involving 17 MPAs
will be reduced by additional, qualified staffing and staff incentives. Output-level
risks, such as crop production adversely affected by changing weather patterns,
will be reduced through a number of measures to mitigate the impacts of climate
change. Other risk mitigation measures include: (i) promoting interventions that
are profitable for PTGs; (ii) enhancing communication links for better access to
markets and services; and (iii) ensuring community participation in programme
planning and implementation to ensure community support for the programme and
insulation from the left-wing insurgency.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
40. The OPELIP is fully aligned with the IFAD Strategic Framework 2011-2015 and

supports both strategic objectives of the IFAD RB-COSOP for India. It is also
directed to one of the main target groups identified in the COSOP – indigenous
tribal groups. The programme design adheres to IFAD policies for poverty,
targeting and gender, indigenous peoples, climate change, scaling up, good
governance and the environment. The programme is classified as a category B
operation; thus no further environmental assessment is considered necessary.



EB 2015/114/R.11

10

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

B. Alignment and harmonization
41. The State Government has been actively involved in formulation and appraisal of

the OPELIP. The programme is built on the success of OTELP as well as on lessons
learned from other IFAD-supported projects in India. The OPELIP is aligned with
the India COSOP 2010-2015 and is compatible with and supportive of other state
government initiatives. It is also in line with strategies and policies of the
Governments of India and Odisha for the development of tribal and vulnerable
communities. The programme goal and objective are aligned with the objective of
“faster and more inclusive growth” of the Governments of Odisha and India.

C. Innovations and scaling up
42. The OPELIP represents a scaling up of the successful interventions of OTELP, and it

is expected that the OPELIP, itself, will be scaled up in time. As this is the first
externally funded development intervention targeted to PTGs, it offers an
opportunity to refine a model for PTG areas, which can then be scaled up to PTG
areas in other states with large PTG populations, such as Jharkhand and
Chhattisgarh.

43. The OPELIP will undertake case studies of innovations and success stories on a
regular basis and will report on them through annual progress reports and in the
India country newsletters.

D. Policy engagement
44. The policy engagement of the programme will support the Government of Odisha’s

efforts to address a number of policy issues relating to the development of tribal
populations. The programme will also provide funding for studies on key policy
issues and dissemination of the findings, and will engage in dialogue with the State
Government on other unresolved policy areas.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
45. A financing agreement between the Republic of India and IFAD will constitute the

legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower. A copy of
the negotiated financing agreement is attached as an annex.

46. The Republic of India is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

47. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
48. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on blend terms to the Republic
of India in an amount equivalent to thirty-six million four hundred thousand
special drawing rights (SDR 36,400,000) and upon such terms and conditions
as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions
presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President





















































President’s report

Proposed loan to the Republic of India
for the Andhra Pradesh Drought Mitigation
Project


Republic of India

Andhra Pradesh Drought Mitigation Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of India

Executing agency: Directorate of Agriculture

Total project cost: US$148.8 million

Amount of IFAD loan: US$75.5 million

Terms of IFAD loan: Blend: Maturity period of 25 years, including a grace
period of 5 years, with interest at a fixed rate of 1.25 per
cent plus a service charge of 0.75 per cent per annum.

Cofinancier(s): Rural Infrastructure Development Fund (RIDF)
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment
Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS)
Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY)

Amount of cofinancing: RIDF: US$6.2 million
MGNREGS: US$42 million
RKVY: US$2.4 million

Contribution of borrower: US$13.9 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$8.8 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/119/R.24/Rev.1

1

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
loan to the Republic of India for the Andhra Pradesh Drought Mitigation Project, as
contained in paragraph 48.

Proposed loan to the Republic of India for the Andhra
Pradesh Drought Mitigation Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. India is now the third largest economy in the world, having grown at a robust

7.5 per cent per year between 2004 and 2013. Poverty declined significantly over
the last decade, from 39 per cent in 2005 to 22 percent in 2014. Despite India’s
strong economic growth, poverty remains a major issue, with 23.6 per cent of the
population living on less than US$1.25 per day. India has 33 per cent of the world’s
poor people, and nutritional levels are unacceptably low, with 29.4 per cent of
children underweight.

2. India’s extremely strong agricultural performance in recent decades transformed
the nation from chronic dependence on grain imports into a net exporter of food.
However, as growth in other sectors outstripped that in the agricultural sector, the
latter's share of the national economy declined, now accounting for less than17 per
cent. Still, structural transformation has been slow; agriculture remains the main
livelihood for just over half of the population, and nearly three-quarters of India’s
population depend on rural incomes.

3. In the state of Andhra Pradesh, agriculture is the principal source of livelihood for
over 62 per cent of the population and accounted for 27 per cent of state GDP in
2014/2015. Annual average rainfall is 966 mm. Canals and groundwater are the
major sources of irrigation. Small and marginal farmers account for approximately
80 per cent of agricultural landholders, together cultivating 54 per cent of the
farmland. Rainfed agriculture is practiced on nearly 57 per cent of the net sown
area.

4. In the five districts of the project – Anantapur, Chittoor, Kadapa, Kurnool and
Prakasam – there are approximately 3 million farmers, 80 per cent of whom are
small and marginal farmers cultivating less than 2 hectares. Agricultural production
is largely based on cash crops – primarily oilseeds (groundnuts) followed by pulses
and cotton. Furthermore, the cattle and buffalo number are declining due to their
replacement by tractors and to increasing shortages of fodder and water. However,
the number of small ruminants is on the rise as they are well adapted to survive
drought. The five project districts have the highest number (12 million) of such
small ruminants in the state. Sheep outnumber goats. However, animal productivity
is low and mortality rates high due to poor access to support services and inputs,
delivery of support being made more difficult by flock migration in search of
seasonal grazing.

5. Less than one fifth of the predominantly rainfed area is irrigated, mainly by
groundwater, with irrigation used for commercial horticulture and some paddy and
dry-season crops, along with supplementary irrigation for rainfed crops.
Groundwater is also used for commercial purposes (e.g. packaged drinking water
and beverages). As a result, groundwater levels are declining and no longer a
reliable source of irrigation for many small farmers. In the districts of Chittoor and
Anantapur, for example, groundwater levels have reached a critical point where
well failure is a common occurrence. Drilling in these districts has become



EB 2016/119/R.24/Rev.1

2

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

expensive, as average depths reach up to 1,000 feet. As many as 95 per cent of
drilled wells fail or do not yield any water. It is estimated that groundwater
depletion now affects 30 per cent of all mandals/blocks (administrative subdivision of
districts in Andhra Pradesh) in the project area.

6. Soils over most of the project area are thin and have weak water-holding capacity.
Uncertain rainfall means crop areas and yields vary significantly from year to year.
Over the past 20 years in Anantapur district, the area of groundnuts has varied by
a factor of two and yields by a factor of 20 (between 1,310 kg/ha and 67 kg/ha).
Low and unreliable rainfall is an overriding constraint, and irrigation resources are
limited.

7. The risks involved in farming – relating to both rainfall and irrigation – mean that
farmers are finding themselves increasingly in debt. In particular, they are unable
to repay the loans they took to pay for sinking boreholes that produce no water.
This has caused considerable distress, with an increase in suicide among farmers,
especially those who made large investments in commercial horticulture. In the
project area, a wealth-ranking exercise conducted during project design showed
that 51 per cent of rural households were in the poor and poorest categories.

8. The state of Andhra Pradesh is responding to the challenge of drought and
depletion of groundwater by experimenting with a demand-side approach to water
management. Such an approach piloted from 2004 to 2009 the Andhra Pradesh
Farmer Managed Groundwater Systems Project (APFAMGS), implemented by the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) in approximately
640 villages demonstrated the following main results: reduction in groundwater
draft; replacement of bananas, rice and cotton by other crops that need less water,
such as peanuts and a locally bred variety of green lentils; replicable as no
authoritative leadership is required for enforcement of water management rules.
Andhra Pradesh authorities decided to replicate demand-side water management in
all drought-prone mandals in the project area through a saturation approach
covering all villages, and both rainfed farmers and farmers using borewells for
irrigation.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

9. The overarching problem the project will address is the low productivity and high
risk of farming in the drought-prone districts of Andhra Pradesh it covers. The
situation is further aggravated by poor access among farmers to information,
especially relating to weather and weather-related decisions (e.g. crop choices,
planting dates, pest and disease control), by the lack of any governance or
management system for water resources specifically limiting new borewell drilling,
by poor farming practices, and by suboptimal use of technology. Hence, the project
will make a concerted and coordinated effort to mitigate the problems of cyclical
drought and enable farmers to increase their incomes despite this very difficult
farming environment. This will be achieved through the adoption of resilient and
better-adapted agriculture; the integration of livestock (sheep and backyard
poultry) to improve the drought resilience of the farming system; better
management of water resources through groundwater-demand management at the
community level and its embedding in local government structures; and rainwater
harvesting and storage, and improved recharge of groundwater aquifers, to make
more water available.

10. The Andhra Pradesh Drought Mitigation Project (APDMP) is closely aligned with the
priorities and strategies of the state government of Andhra Pradesh. The Andhra
Pradesh state Strategy Paper for the Primary Sector, produced in 2014 with
assistance from the International Centre for Research in the Semi-Arid Tropics,
places priority on harvesting more rainwater in dry districts and managing scarce
groundwater resources. The Strategy Paper also supports soil health mapping and
increasing organic soil matter, organic farming and the development of horticulture.



EB 2016/119/R.24/Rev.1

3

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

The project objective and outcomes are fully aligned with the Andhra Pradesh state
strategy.

11. With regard to the results-based country strategic opportunities programmes
(COSOP) (extended until 2016), APDMP is fully aligned with the first strategic
objective, increased access to agricultural technologies and natural resources. It is
noteworthy that the 2015 country programme evaluation assessed the relevance of
the COSOP as satisfactory.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
12. The project area will be located in Anantapur, Chittoor, Kadapa, Kurnool (the

Rayalaseema region) and Prakasam, the five driest districts of the state of Andhra
Pradesh. The project will be implemented in village clusters that equate to gram
panchayats (GPs), the lowest level of local government in India. The project will
aim to cover 330 GPs, covering a total of 165,000 farming households. The project
will adopt a saturation approach in these GPs by targeting all farmers. In addition,
APDMP will engage with clusters of GPs that belong to the same drainage basin: the
river drainage basin together with the underlying groundwater define hydrological
units (HUs). Each HU includes on average five GPs.

13. The project target group will include all categories of farmers and landless people,
including Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, and vulnerable households, such
as women-headed households. Gender equity will be mainstreamed in project
activities. The project will adopt a two-step targeting strategy. First, the project will
adopt geographic targeting by focusing on the worst drought-affected villages in
the poorest mandals. Secondly, the project will adopt a social targeting approach.
Andhra Pradesh state has requested that the project ensure support is provided to
the 100 poorest households in each GP.

B. Project development objective
14. The overall project goal is to improve the incomes of approximately 165,000

farming households and strengthen their resilience to drought. This goal will be
achieved through the development objective of strengthening the adaptive capacity
and productivity of agriculture in the rainfed zones of five districts in southern
Andhra Pradesh state.

C. Components/outcomes
15. The project will comprise three components: (i) climate-resilient production

systems; (ii) drought-proofing through natural resource management and
governance; and (iii) project management and lesson learning.

16. Component 1: Climate-resilient production systems aims to increase the
resilience of crop and livestock production systems to climate change (specifically
drought) and provide farmers (individuals and small groups) with information to
make informed decisions on how to invest in protective irrigation, improve soil
fertility practices, diversify cropping systems and improve their livestock
productivity. Accordingly, component 1 will involve three subcomponents:

(i) Improved crop production systems through support to farmer information
centres, farmer field schools and the promotion of integrated soil fertility
management and protective irrigation.

(ii) Improved livestock production systems through support to community
livestock facilitators providing fee-based services to sheep producers
(improved housing, feeding and breeding) and a backyard poultry scheme
targeted at the poorest women.

(iii) Strengthened farmers’ organizations through a flexible approach, working
with existing organizations where possible and forming new organizations
where needed to support farmers through input supply, seed multiplication,
production services, machinery-hire centres and marketing support.



EB 2016/119/R.24/Rev.1

4

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

17. Component 2: Drought-proofing through natural resource management
and governance aims to mitigate drought and make agriculture more productive
by managing and investing in common property resources. Component 2’s
objective will be achieved through the following three subcomponents:

(i) Water governance will support water planning and supply and demand
management through water subcommittees at the GP level, which will form
hydrological unit networks (HUNs) that will operate at the drainage basin level
to further optimize investments in the conservation of surface water and
groundwater. Training and workshops will build local capacity and support the
development of surface water and groundwater planning and monitoring.

(ii) Water monitoring and conservation will cover local hydrological and
meteorological monitoring to support local decision-making and planning for
water resources as well as collaboration between GP water subcommittees
and HUNs and relevant administrations involved in water supply and demand
monitoring. A pilot hydrological mapping of aquifers is proposed to
complement available knowledge and information on groundwater. Soil and
water conservation activities will support the recharge of soil moisture and
groundwater, and geographically targeted water-harvesting activities will
complement local water supply management.

(iii) Regeneration of common property rangeland will support vegetative methods
for water conservation and strengthen community management of grazing,
rainwater harvesting and other environmental services.

18. Component 3: Management and lesson learning will see the establishment of a
state project management unit (SPMU) at the Andhra Pradesh state level and of a
district project management unit (DPMU) in each of the five districts. Lesson
learning will cover water resource planning and management, drought-resilient
agriculture and climate change adaptation, and the development of policies for the
crop and livestock sectors, especially for small ruminants.

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

19. The project will build on and scale up a number of current and recent initiatives for
farming in a drought-prone environment. These include the APFAMGS, mentioned
above, and state-led soil and water conservation works with the objective of
harvesting rainfall and recharging aquifers. In addition, APDMP will incorporate
aspects of a number of programmes of the Andhra Pradesh state Department of
Agriculture and Cooperation (DAC), including community seed multiplication, millet
production, groundwater sharing, rainfed farming, and farmer producer
organizations (FPOs). APDMP will also capitalize on innovations in plant breeding for
drought tolerance, soil fertility management, farm ponds to store water for
protective irrigation, and community management of common property rangeland.

B. Organizational framework
20. At the Andhra Pradesh state level, the DAC will be the nodal agency, the

Directorate of Agriculture will be the lead project agency and host the SPMU. The
Director of Agriculture will serve as ex officio project director. The Agricultural
Technology Management Agency (ATMA) will implement the project at the district
level. ATMA is an autonomous government agency responsible for extension
services with a mandate for multisectoral support including livestock and
horticulture. To implement APDMP, the capacity of ATMA will be strengthened
through PMUs with additional staff. A lead technical agency (LTA) will be contracted
to advise the SPMU on planning, capacity-building, monitoring, documentation and
information technology services. To support implementation at the field level,
facilitating agencies (FAs) will be hired to: (i) carry out participatory planning at the
community level; (ii) form and support FPOs and the GP water subcommittees and
HUNs; (iii) organize farmer field schools and other extension provision capacity-



EB 2016/119/R.24/Rev.1

5

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

building; and (iv) monitor implementation, including oversight of financial
expenditure by FPOs.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

21. Planning. A draft annual workplan and budget (AWPB) will be consolidated by the
SPMU with inputs from the DPMUs and other entities such as LTA and FAs. Each
DPMU will consolidate proposals made by project GPs or FPOs. The AWPB will then
be approved by the project steering committee and submitted to IFAD for approval
by 31 January every year.

22. Monitoring and evaluation. The monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system, guided
by an M&E framework set out in the project implementation manual (PIM), will
collect data and information to measure performance and progress towards
objectives; serve as a learning tool to provide information for critical reflection on
project strategies and operations; support decision-making at various levels; and
serve as a basis for results-based management. Responsibility for overall M&E and
reporting will lie with the additional project director and the planning and
monitoring manager in the SPMU. The LTA M&E unit will assist in conducting
outcome and impact monitoring, and preparing consolidated reports on project
progress and results.

23. Learning and knowledge management. In line with IFAD policy, learning and
knowledge management will be key elements of APDMP, through an integrated
approach whereby M&E will feed in to generating learning for the project and from
the project. The LTA will prepare a knowledge management strategy, building on
IFAD’s knowledge management strategy, during the first year of project
implementation.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
24. Financial management. In order to ensure the effective and efficient financial

management of APDMP, in addition to finance staff seconded by the state
government of Andhra Pradesh in charge of the management of all disbursements
via the Single Treasury Account (STS) and the personal deposit accounts, the SPMU
will recruit a finance officer and a finance support officer locally. The finance officer
will be responsible for the preparation of consolidated interim financial reports
(IFRs), the preparation of project's financial statements, the review of financial
reports and audits of FAs, and a number of internal control and administrative
organizational activities. The PIM will detail sound internal control procedures to be
followed in the daily administration of the project, at the central and district levels
alike. The financial management assessment of the project rated the fiduciary risk
as high, and the measures described above would mitigate this risk.

25. At the district level, in each ATMA district office, an accounting officer will be
recruited locally to manage financial resources received from the SPMU and prepare
the related financial reports. S/he will be supported by an accounts assistant
seconded from DAC or other another government department.

26. Flow of funds. IFAD financing will be channelled through a designated account
denominated in United States dollars to be opened at the Reserve Bank of India
and administered by the Office of Controller of Aid Accounts and Audit. IFAD will
establish an authorized allocation for initial advance in a maximum amount of US$3
million. The SPMU will use the State Treasury System for all its disbursements.
Funds flow arrangements foresee an extensive use of the state/country systems;
transfers from the state to the districts shall be done using the STS and Personal
Deposit (PD) accounts. Additional PD accounts shall be opened for each ATMA as
authorized by the State. Disbursements to the LTA and to all other FAs will be
managed at the SPMU level, while procedures for district office disbursements will
be detailed in the PIM.

27. The ATMA DPMUs will submit monthly financial reports to the SPMU based on the
actual expenditures incurred. The SPMU will consolidate the district expenditures



EB 2016/119/R.24/Rev.1

6

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

and its own and report quarterly consolidated IFRs, subject to audit certification at
the end of each financial year.

28. For the preparation of IFRs, withdrawal applications and financial reports, the STS
reporting facility will be supplemented by an accounting software procured on the
market and deployed in the SPMU and all district offices.

29. Audit. The State shall request the Accountant General of Andhra Pradesh (AG-AP)
to conduct annual audits of APDMP. The AG-AP will perform a “certification audit”
for externally financed projects, including a number of specific activities such as
audits of the project’s financial statements, of the IFRs submitted to IFAD, of
APDMP treasury transactions and the District ATMA Societies. AG-AP will issue
separate opinions covering each of the financial statements, IFRs and the use of the
STS and commercial banking system. The audited financial statements and audit
report, including the management letter, will be submitted to IFAD within six
months following the end of each financial year. Simultaneously, the statutory
annual audit shall be conducted by an independent auditor, empanelled with AG-AP.
The State confirmed that empanelled auditors will have full access to STS for
auditing purposes.

30. Retroactive financing. With a view to ensuring APDMP preparatory activities
proceed smoothly, activities related to baseline and land surveys, and to the
preparation of the PIM, manuals and guidelines are proposed between September
2016 and the date of entry into force of the financing agreement. Accordingly, as
an exception to the General Conditions for Agricultural Development Financing, it is
recommended that IFAD retroactive financing be approved for expenditures
totalling up to US$1 million. These proposed expenditures will fall under three
expenditure categories: (i) consultancies; (ii) goods services and inputs; and
(iii) salaries and allowances. The expenditures incurred will be reimbursed to the
borrower after the project enters into force.

31. Procurement. Procurement of goods, works and services under APDMP financed
from resources provided or administered by IFAD will be conducted in accordance
with IFAD’s Procurement Guidelines and Handbook, 2010. Procurement will be
undertaken in accordance with a consolidated procurement plan submitted by the
SPMU, approved by the Project Steering Committee and acceptable to IFAD.

32. Governance. As part of the robust e-governance policy and framework of the state
government of Andhra Pradesh, the SPMU will disclose the following minimum
documents either via the project web site or that of the Directorate of Agriculture:
(i) a procurement plan any revisions thereto; (ii) a procurement manual;
(iii) invitations for bids for goods and works for all national competitive bidding
contracts; (iv) request for expression of interest for selection/recruitment of
consulting services; iv) contract awards of goods, works and all consultancy
services; (v) list of contracts following direct contracting or single source selection;
(vi) shortlist of consultants, (vii) contract award of all consultancy services; and
(viii) reports of action taken on any complaints received. In addition, the SPMU will
disclose relevant information related to government funds as specified by the Right
to Information Act and the decisions of the State Information Commissioner
applicable to project implementation.

E. Supervision
33. IFAD will directly supervise the project, supporting project start-up and conducting

annual field supervision missions to review progress towards physical targets,
compliance with fiduciary responsibilities and follow-up on audit recommendations
and produce agreed actions to further enhance performance. IFAD and the Andhra
Pradesh state government will undertake a first main review no later than 24
months following the date of entry into force of the financing agreement, to be
followed by a midterm review within the subsequent 18 months.



EB 2016/119/R.24/Rev.1

7

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

IV. Project costs, financing, and benefits
A. Project costs
34. Total project costs are estimated at US$148.8 million over a five-year period,

including overall physical and price contingencies. Key assumptions in this estimate
include: (i) price contingencies of 5 per cent applied on all items; (ii) an exchange
rate of 70 Indian Rupees to one United States dollar; and (iii) taxes and duties of
12.5 per cent on works and 5 per cent on goods, inputs and services.

B. Project financing
35. Project financing will comprise, approximately: US$75.5 million, or 50.7 per cent of

total project costs, from IFAD; US$6.2 million from the Rural Infrastructure
Development Fund (RIDF); US$42 million from the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural
Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS); US$2.4 million from the Rashtriya
Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY); US$13.9 million equivalents in government counterpart
financcing, including taxes and duties and salaries of seconded staff; and US$8.8
million equivalents from beneficiaries. Taxes and duties account for US$5.4 million
equivalents.

Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component
IFAD loan GoAP* NREGS RIDF RKVY Beneficiaries Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount
1. Climate-resilient
production systems 65 583 59 10 814 9.7 18 915 17 5 463 5 2 447 2.2 8 363 7.1 111 584
2. Drought-proofing
through natural
resource
management and
governance 5 809 19 835 2.7 23 108 74.8 717 2 - 455 1.5 30 925
3. Management and
lesson learning 4 108 65 2 225 35 - - - - 6 333

Total 75 500 50.7 13 875 9.3 42 022 28.5 6 180 4 2 447 1.6 8 818 5.9 14 842

* GoAP - State Government of Andhra Pradesh.

Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure
Category

IFAD loan GoAP NREGS RIDF RKVY Beneficiaries Total
Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

Works 2 386 6.9 2 325 6.7 28 790 83.1 611 2 - - 541 1.3 34 653
Training 5 253 99.9 6 0.1 - - - - - 5 259
Consultancies 18 690 85.6 3 132 14.4 - - - - - 21 821
Goods, services
and inputs 45 084 56.1 6 363 7.9 13 233 16.5 4 938 6 2 447 3 8 276 10.5 80 341
Grants and
subsidies 1 921 73.3 70 2.7 - - 631 24 - - - - 2 621
Salaries and
allowances 2 166 52.2 1980 47.8 - - - - - - - - 4 146

Total 75 500 50.7 13 875 9.3 42 022 28.5 6 180 4 2 447 1.6 8 818 5.9 148 842

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
36. Investments under the project will have an overall economic internal rate of return

of 19 per cent and the net present value (discount rate at 10 per cent) remains
over 10 per cent if costs increase by 20 per cent or benefits decrease by 20 per
cent. Benefits have been calculated based on two cropping system farm models
(red soils and black soils, each for an average farm size of 1.62 ha), reflecting the
different cropping patterns on these soil types. Sensitivity analysis confirms that
the project would remain moderately robust to decreases in benefits and increases
in costs alike.



EB 2016/119/R.24/Rev.1

8

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

37. The project is expected to benefit a total of approximately 643,500 people through
165,000 farming households.

D. Sustainability
38. Project interventions will be sustainable. Improved agricultural practices, if found

by farmers to be useful and profitable, will be sustained, provided inputs and
markets are available. Many of the support services that the project will establish
can be operated as businesses by individuals or small informal groups.

39. Groundwater demand management will be sustained as water subcommittees are
embedded in the GP local government structure. It will also be important to sustain
groundwater-sharing networks, and provision has been made to establish a user
maintenance fund. Likewise, farm ponds will need require maintenance (desilting
and linings repairs), and entrusting the responsibility for this to the pond owner(s)
directly will contribute to strengthening their sense of ownership.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
40. There are a number of risks associated with the project, as detailed in the logical

framework. A significant risk at the development objective level is that of climate
change and increasing labour costs, further hindering the capacity of farming in the
rainfed areas of southern Andhra Pradesh to compete with other parts of India with
higher rainfall. This relates to the high climate change risk rating for the project,
which will be mitigated by increasing the productivity and the resilience to climate
change of rainfed agriculture. Should rainfed agriculture continues to face
difficulties in competing, then activities can be refocused towards more resilient
livestock and limited areas of irrigated horticulture. The risks associated with
drought-proofing via natural resource management and governance will be
mitigated by, among other support, building strong community ownership for local
groundwater demand management, reinforced by legal sanctions. The financial
management assessment of the project rated the fiduciary risk as high.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

41. The project is fully aligned with IFAD’s Strategic Framework (2016-2025) and
adheres to IFAD policies for targeting and gender mainstreaming, environment and
natural resource management, climate change and social, environmental and
climate assessment. Since the project is classified as a category B operation, no
further environmental assessment is considered necessary. The climate risk
classification is deemed to be high.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
42. The state Government has been actively involved in the formulation and appraisal

of the APDMP. The project, built on the alignment with existing government
structures of DAC and ATMA, will be dynamic and flexible. The proposed
arrangement is based on the current assessment of project needs and may be
modified should further requirements arise during implementation.

Innovations and scaling upC.
43. The project will seek to scale up and improve on experience in Andhra Pradesh

state of groundwater management in order to provide a holistic and integrated
response to the multifaceted and complex acute drought situation facing many
districts. The project will expand and adapt the participatory hydrological
monitoring programme of APFAMGS, implemented with the assistance of FAO, and
combine it with groundwater water-sharing and water supply investments from
public and private funds. Comprehensive M&E, together with special studies, will
generate detailed information on the process and results of project implementation.
These will bring together lessons learned and collect more information to help
formulate future strategies and support additional convergence.



EB 2016/119/R.24/Rev.1

9

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Policy engagementD.
44. The project will generate knowledge on water management and water use

efficiency that will inform future policies at state level. The proposed hydrological
survey under component 2 will contribute to decisions regarding groundwater
exploitation, recharge and management, and the findings will be reflected in the GP
and HU management plans and shared with the concerned line departments. The
experience of community water management involving GPs and water resource
planning at the GP and HU levels will also inform state strategies regarding water
resource planning and management, and conservation of groundwater resources.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
45. A project financing agreement between the Republic of India and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower. A project agreement will be entered into between the state of Andhra
Pradesh and IFAD. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached in
appendix I.

46. The Republic of India is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

47. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
48. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on blend terms to the Republic
of India in an amount equivalent to seventy-five million five hundred
thousand United States dollars (US$75,500,000), and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President























































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the
Republic of Indonesia for the
Integrated Participatory Development and
Management of the Irrigation Project

Republic of Indonesia

Integrated Participatory Development and Management
of the Irrigation Project

Financing summary

Initiating institutions: International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD)
and Asian Development Bank (ADB)

Borrower: Republic of Indonesia

Executing agency: Directorate General of Water Resources (DGWR),
Ministry of Public Works and Housing (MoPWH)

Total project cost: US$802.4 million

Amount of IFAD loan: EUR 93.15 million
(equivalent to approximately US$98.5 million)

Amount of IFAD grant: EUR 1.41 million
(equivalent to approximately US$1.5 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Ordinary: Maturity period of 18 years, including a grace
period of 6 years, with an interest rate per annum equal
to 100 per cent of the IFAD reference interest rate

Cofinancier(s): Asian Development Bank (ADB)

Amount of cofinancing: ADB: US$600 million

Terms of cofinancing: Loan

Contribution of borrower: US$102.4 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/116/R.19/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of Indonesia for the Integrated Participatory Development
and Management of the Irrigation Project, as contained in paragraph 44.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Indonesia for
the Integrated Participatory Development and
Management of the Irrigation Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Indonesia has made significant progress in reducing poverty and promoting

economic growth. Agriculture remains an important sector as a pathway for rural
transformation and poverty reduction. Yet Indonesian farmers face new threats
from volatile food prices, erratic agricultural markets and policies, growing
insecurity of access to land, degradation of natural resources and the worsening
effects of climate change. Ensuring inclusive economic development through
strengthened agriculture-sector performance is a key priority for the Government of
Indonesia, which has recently prioritized issues of food sovereignty and rural
development. Food security is challenged by a declining rural infrastructure – a
consequence of inadequate financing and delivery of operations and maintenance
(O&M) that limits increased productivity for rice and other high-value crops. High
transport and logistics costs are a serious constraint on business operations and
undermine the competitiveness of agricultural value chains. In addition, increased
higher-value cropping and commercialized agriculture are needed to improve rural
livelihoods. Technical and administrative capacity constraints hamper effective
planning, management and development as Indonesia’s decentralized government
structure heightens capacity challenges. Climate change is expected to further
worsen water scarcity in some areas, result in more-frequent extreme weather
events and less-favourable rainfall patterns for agriculture. It is recognized that
improved integration of irrigation management and agricultural development is
needed if the country is to achieve the desired impact on food security and rural
livelihoods.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

2. As part of its National Medium-Term Development Plan 2015-2019, the
Government aims at self-sufficiency in key staple foods, including rice, by 2017. In
support of this target, it has committed to rehabilitating 3.2 million hectares (ha) of
degraded irrigation systems to enhance rice and other food production. This has
placed considerable focus on agriculture and water, with calls for both the public
and private sectors to consider comprehensive and collaborative responses to
national development targets. Earlier attempts to enhance the productivity of
irrigated agriculture through a largely infrastructural focus have achieved
suboptimal longer-term results, mainly owing to: (i) failure to empower farmers
and strengthen a farming system response that maximized their opportunities to
capture sustainable economic benefits from infrastructure investments; and (ii)
failure to ensure that all parts of the new or rehabilitated irrigated schemes were
well maintained.



EB 2015/116/R.19/Rev.1

2

3. The project builds on these lessons and on learning from previous and ongoing
investments in irrigated agriculture. It is strongly aligned with government policies
and expenditure plans.

4. The Integrated Participatory Development and Management of the Irrigation Project
(IPDMIP) will significantly contribute to achievement of government priorities to: (i)
increase rice production for food security; (ii) develop higher-value cropping to
improve rural nutrition and livelihoods; and (iii) promote more productive irrigation
infrastructure and its sustainable management through the delivery of an
integrated package of infrastructure, institutional reforms and capacity
development to catalyse sector advances. Importantly, the project will complement
– and provide a robust framework for promoting – more-effective public and private
investment in irrigated agriculture.

5. By integrating a focus on irrigation rehabilitation into strengthened support for
agricultural and farmer livelihood development, the project provides an innovative
approach to investing in irrigated agriculture. It will introduce strengthened
mechanisms to promote more-effective cross-sectoral coordination and institutional
and policy development.

6. IPDMIP is fully aligned with the IFAD Strategic Framework 2011-2015, the current
interim country strategy and the forthcoming results-based country strategic
opportunities programme (RB-COSOP) for Indonesia (April 2016), which will focus
on productivity enhancement, market access and institution- and capacity-building
for rural women and men.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
7. Project area. The proposed project area will cover an initial 16 provinces

(5 in Sumatra, 4 in Java, 2 in Kalimantan, 3 in Sulawesi and 2 in Nusa Tenggara),
comprising 74 districts and up to 1,800 irrigation schemes, covering a total area of
some 450,000 ha (approximately 14 per cent of the 3.2 million ha national target).
Importantly, it will pursue a scaling-up strategy to promote the replication of
project activities in other villages in the targeted districts and in other districts and
provinces. It is estimated that the project model could be replicated in
approximately 10,000 subprojects covering some 2.2 million ha. This would
increase potential coverage to 6 million households or some 24 million individuals.

8. Target group. The project design adopts an inclusive targeting approach at the
irrigation scheme level to benefit all active farmers in the scheme. Within targeted
communities, categories of poor rural people consist of poor, near-poor and
better-off people. An explicit poverty and targeting strategy will be employed to
reach the most marginal households, including ‘poor people’ (i.e. moderately poor,
poor and very poor people), women, youth and those farmers at the tail end of the
irrigation schemes, who are normally the most vulnerable. The total number of
project beneficiaries is estimated at 900,000 households or 4 million individuals, of
whom approximately 50 per cent are women.

B. Project development objective
9. The goal of the project is to improve food security and livelihoods in rural

Indonesia. Its outcome objective is to increase the value and sustainability of
irrigated agriculture.

C. Components
10. Component 1. Increased irrigated agriculture incomes will focus on improving

farm and market systems and on providing appropriate service support, including
financial services, mainly for rice and high-value irrigated crops.



EB 2015/116/R.19/Rev.1

3

(a) Subcomponent 1.1. Improved farm productivity and services focuses
on on-farm activities and comprises: support to improved farmer extension
services available to smallholder farmers; farmer-to-farmer knowledge
dissemination; access to and storage of sufficient good-quality seed and other
inputs; and mechanization, including support for enhancing on-farm systems
for crop intensification and diversification and ensuring that farmers acquire
the necessary knowledge, skills and confidence to adopt improved agronomy
and better risk-management practices.

(b) Subcomponent 1.2. Improved market access and services focuses on
promoting better value addition and post-harvest activities and comprises
facilitating public and private investment through combined funding
instruments, supported by consultation platforms and capacity development
initiatives for rice, vegetables and technology access. For rice, support will be
provided to improve post-harvest activities and value addition. For
vegetables, support will build on existing and emerging production clusters,
following an iterative process to facilitate and develop links between buyers,
producers and service providers. It will prioritize innovation in local value
chains and actively promote development of local private-sector markets. As
with subcomponent 1.1, initiatives will be taken to encourage partnership
with private input suppliers.

(c) Subcomponent 1.3. Improved financial access and use of services is
based on facilitating better access to and leveraging mainstream financial
services. It will include savings, credit and, subsequently, other innovative
rural financial services (e.g. digital financial services and agriculture
microinsurance) by sustainable financial service providers, enabling seasonal
finance needs to be met through inclusive and pro-poor services. The
approach will build on existing structures and will develop partnerships with a
small number of existing financial service providers that demonstrate a clear
social inclusion performance and business strategy in expanding their
smallholder agricultural portfolio, and that have existing, proven financial
service schemes broadly aligned with the project’s objectives and aspirations
for rural financial services.

11. Component 2. Improved irrigation systems infrastructure will focus on
support to rehabilitation or upgrading of primary and secondary irrigation systems
and drainage infrastructure, and will include modernization of these systems for
one or several larger schemes.

(a) Subcomponent 2.1. Preparatory assessments comprises: activities to
provide reliable information regarding water availability in the basin, in
relation to the needs of the irrigation scheme – to be taken into account to
ensure that the scheme has adequate water to meet irrigation requirements;
and participatory rapid rural assessments, pre-design and drafting of overall
scheme intervention plans. Hydrological assessments will also take into
account the possible impacts of climate change.

(b) Subcomponent 2.2. Irrigation systems rehabilitation, upgrading
and/or modernization comprises activities to design and implement civil
works with respect to irrigation and drainage infrastructure. Detailed
engineering designs for civil works will cover primary and secondary irrigation
infrastructure, tertiary irrigation infrastructure and drainage works. To
address the water/food/energy nexus, the project will equip irrigation canals
with hydropower turbines – on a pilot basis – for management by WUAs
where technically, economically and institutionally feasible.

12. Component 3. Improved irrigation systems management will focus on
strengthening irrigation water delivery at the scheme level.



EB 2015/116/R.19/Rev.1

4

(a) Subcomponent 3.1. Empowerment of WUAs comprises activities to
facilitate the organization of irrigating farmers into empowered WUAs/WUAFs
capable of investing in and managing tertiary irrigation infrastructure, to
ensure adequate water supply and access to all farmers in the tertiary
irrigation scheme. Specifically, this will support training and capacity-building
of WUAs/WUAFs at the institutional level. Institutional support activities will
establish, reorganize and complete the WUA organizational structures in the
targeted irrigation systems, following government policy and procedure and
introducing the lessons of international experiences. This will also include
legal registration of WUAs/WUAFs, development of by-laws by their members,
appointment of board members and assignment of roles and responsibilities
in agreement with all involved farmers.

(b) Subcomponent 3.2. Improvement of irrigation systems field
management comprises activities to support central, provincial and district
governments in improving the efficiency and effectiveness of irrigation water
management through activities such as: irrigation system performance
assessments; preparation of irrigation management plans and irrigation
service plans; volumetric discharge measurement and water accounting;
improvement of irrigation service performance; needs-based planning and
budgeting; and refurbishment of existing offices, equipment and facilities
within the context of the preparation of O&M. To achieve sustainable
improvement of irrigation system performance, this will include establishment
and start-up assistance to irrigation management units (IMUs) for selected
irrigation schemes under the project.

(c) Subcomponent 3.3. Operationalization of a national asset
management system comprises activities in support of operationalizing
such a system, including aerial surveys – using remote sensing technology –
of primary, secondary, tertiary and other infrastructure, as well as
hydrological and agricultural data. These data will also be used to further
inform hydrological assessments under subcomponent 2.1 and to assist
project management and implementation under subcomponent 4.4.

13. Component 4. Strengthened policy and institutional frameworks for
irrigated agriculture will focus on: (a) strengthening the capacity of government
institutions and staff; and (b) supporting executing and implementing institutions at
national and provincial levels in undertaking overall project supervision. Improving
coordination among the different government institutions will be an important
element of these aspects.

(a) Subcomponent 4.1. Strengthened local-level policy, regulatory and
institutional framework comprises: supporting government line agencies
at provincial and district levels in identifying specific policy issues and
reflecting on how these could be tackled; supporting Badan Perencanaan
Pembangunan Daerah (BAPPEDA), the provincial and district planning agency,
in undertaking analysis and synthesis of knowledge from various sources and
in informing policy dialogue; and supporting both the line agencies and
BAPPEDAs in identifying policy options and actions.

(b) Subcomponent 4.2. Establishment of water resource management
and knowledge centres. Sixteen such centres will be established or
strengthened at the provincial level – including through recruitment of
personnel and procurement of office and training equipment and facilities –
for training on technical and institutional aspects of irrigation planning,
development and management.

(c) Subcomponent 4.3. Improved policy coordination for irrigated
agriculture comprises support for establishing and supporting a knowledge
management centre (KMC) in the National Development Planning Agency



EB 2015/116/R.19/Rev.1

5

(BAPPENAS), which will coordinate support for smallholder irrigated
agriculture, promote policy dialogue among domestic stakeholders and
strengthen national and local policy processes. The KMC’s remit would be
related to knowledge management and policy development, enabling the
Government to: foster continuity between development projects and policies
for smallholder irrigated agriculture by drawing out lessons; unify knowledge
from diverse initiatives; promote coordinated approaches to policy dialogue
among domestic stakeholders; and support national and local policy
processes.

(d) Subcomponent 4.4. Project management and implementation support
comprises support to executing and implementing agencies (EA and IAs) at
national and provincial levels in undertaking overall project supervision and
strengthening the planning, implementation and management capacities of
IAs.

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

14. The project adopts a menu-based programmatic approach: identifying and
packaging a strategic set of interventions in order to achieve the desired outcomes
and development objectives. Menu items will essentially consist of the
subcomponents and activities attributed to each output.

15. The implementation approach builds on the recently completed Asian Development
Bank (ADB) supported Participatory Irrigation Sector Project. Adjustments have
been made based on lessons learned from ADB’s and IFAD’s project implementation
experiences in Indonesia. These seek to strengthen linkages between agriculture
and the irrigation rehabilitation interventions, to strengthen poverty targeting, and
to respond to the need to expedite project implementation, with a view towards
contributing to national development targets for agriculture and for irrigation
rehabilitation.

B. Organizational framework
16. The National Steering Committee on Water Resources (NSCWR), chaired by the

Deputy Minister of Maritime and Natural Resources, Ministry of National
Development Planning/BAPPENAS, will be responsible for the overall coordination of
the project. The Directorate General of Water Resources (DGWR) in the Ministry of
Public Works and Housing (MoPWH) will be the executing agency. A national project
management unit (NPMU) will be established under the Directorate of Irrigation and
Lowland in DGWR to ensure overall coordination of implementation of the project. A
total of four national project implementation units (NPIUs) will be established: one
in the Directorate of Irrigation and Swamps (DoIS) in DGWR, responsible for
implementation of the irrigation infrastructure systems and related activities; one in
DoIS, responsible for implementation of O&M-related activities; one in the
Directorate General of Regional Development in the Ministry of Home Affairs
(MoHA), responsible for overall guidance of the BAPPEDAs; and one in the Agency
for Agricultural Extension and Human Resources Development (AAEHRD) in the
Ministry of Agriculture (MoA), responsible for implementation of agricultural and
related activities, in cooperation with provincial and district agriculture agencies.
The IFAD grant will be administered by the Ministry of National Development
Planning/BAPPENAS.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

17. Planning. The NPMU, in consultation with the NPIUs, will prepare and submit an
overall annual workplan, showing supporting (general) and subproject activities, to



EB 2015/116/R.19/Rev.1

6

ADB and IFAD for review and no objection. In addition, each participating district
and province will prepare an overall work plan and budget.

18. Monitoring and evaluation. Monitoring and evaluation (M&E) will serve three
distinct functions strengthening management, accountability and learning. A project
performance monitoring system will consolidate the M&E functions into a unified
system. Building on lessons learned under the IFAD-supported Coastal Community
Development Project (CCDP), it will comprise both a comprehensive list of
performance indicators at impact, outcome, output and suboutput levels, derived
from the project Design and Monitoring Framework (appendix II), and impact and
post-completion performance data. Data will be disaggregated by component and,
where possible, by district, gender and other dimensions. The indicators used will
include those contributing to IFAD’s Results and Impact Management System
(RIMS). The project will undertake baseline, midterm and impact studies and
conduct annual outcome surveys.

19. Learning. The M&E system will also seek to inform on issues that can improve the
relevance, effectiveness and efficiency of the project. The M&E unit, in collaboration
with the NPMU and other key project stakeholders, will identify specific topics that
need particular analysis – technical, institutional and policy-derived – and will
conduct snapshot studies. For each study topic, a learning plan will be developed to
ensure that the study feeds into a larger process of reflection at the project level
and, where appropriate, beyond.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
20. Financial management. The NPMU will be responsible for the overall consolidation

and coordination of project financial reporting and audit. The four NPIUs will be
responsible for financial management of expenditures under the respective project
components and/or activities. The roles and responsibilities of the implementing
entities will be clearly defined in the project implementation manual.

21. Financial management implementation arrangements will be aligned to national
public financial management (PFM) systems, which have been strengthened in
recent years. PFM modernization initiatives include an integrated financial
management information system, consolidation of the Treasury single account,
government accounting and reporting, strengthened audit institutions, accrual
accounting and adoption of international accounting and auditing standards. A
financial management assessment of the project has been prepared in accordance
with IFAD and ADB’s guidelines for financial management of projects. This
assessment finds that the overall project financial management risk is moderate,
and identifies mitigating actions, including strengthening financial management
capacity at all levels (EA, IAs and PIUs) in terms of staff training and technical
assistance, automated accounting systems, and internal and external audits.

22. Flow of funds. Donor funding will flow through three designated accounts
managed by the Ministry of Finance for the IFAD loan, IFAD grant and ADB loan
respectively. Three types of disbursement mechanisms will be adopted for the
project, consisting of: (i) replenishments of both the IFAD and ADB designated
accounts; (ii) reimbursement of prefinanced expenditures by both IFAD and ADB;
and (iii) direct payments.

23. Flow of funds for the project will be determined by the implementation strategies
adopted by IAs. These will consist of a combination of: (i) reimbursement from
Anggaran Pendapatan dan Belanja Negara (the national revenue and budget
agency) funded activities, which would then be passed on to local governments
through the deconcentration mechanism (Dekonsentrasi/Tugas Pembantuan); and
(ii) reimbursement for activities implemented under prefinancing agreements.

24. Audit. Internal audits will be conducted by the internal audit units of IAs, in
accordance with their mandate and annual workplans. As regards external audit



EB 2015/116/R.19/Rev.1

7

arrangements, the consolidated project accounts, prepared by the NPMU, will be
audited by the national auditor, in accordance with international standards for
these institutions. Audited project financial statements will be submitted to IFAD
and ADB within six months of the end of each fiscal year, in line with IFAD and ADB
audit guidelines. The audit reports will provide opinions, for IFAD and ADB funding
respectively, on the financial statements, use of designated accounts, statements of
expenditure and financing agreement covenants. The audit report will include a
management letter assessing the project’s internal control framework at diverse
implementing levels and making recommendations for improvement. The resolution
of audit observations will be monitored by the NPMU, the NPIUs and the national
auditor.

25. Procurement. The procurement of goods and works for IFAD financing will be
undertaken in accordance with the borrower/recipient procurement regulations to
the extent they are consistent with IFAD's Procurement Guidelines.

26. Governance. In line with their respective policies, IFAD and ADB will investigate,
directly or through their agents, any violations of the anticorruption policy relating
to the project. All contracts shall include provisions specifying the right of ADB and
IFAD to audit and examine the records and accounts of the EA and all project
contractors, suppliers, consultants and other service providers.

27. In addition, ADB’s accountability mechanism and IFAD's complaints procedure
provide independent processes through which people adversely affected by
ADB- and IFAD-assisted projects can voice and seek resolution of their problems,
as well as report alleged violations of ADB’s and IFAD's operational policies and
procedures.

28. Supervision. Supervision will be undertaken by IFAD in collaboration with ADB. A
formal supervision plan covering the period up to the midterm review will be agreed
upon at project start-up. In addition, IFAD will adopt a continuous supervision and
implementation support approach through the newly opened country office. An
extensive review will be carried out after two years of project implementation.

IV. Project costs, financing and benefits
A. Project costs
29. The project is estimated to cost US$802.4 million, including physical and price

contingencies of US$49.17 million.
Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component IFAD loan IFAD grant ADB Borrower Total

1. Increased irrigated agriculture
incomes 97 473 97 473

2. Improved irrigation systems
infrastructure 434 592 434 592

3. Improved irrigation systems
management 1 038 85 448 156 86 642

4. Strengthened policy and institutional
frameworks for irrigated agriculture 1 489 79 960 102 265 183 714

Total project cost 98 511 1 489 600 000 102 421 802 421

Interest during implementation 49 917 49 917

Commitment charges 524 524

Total disbursement 98 511 1 489 600 000 152 862 852 862



EB 2015/116/R.19/Rev.1

8

B. Project financing
30. The Government has requested financing of US$100 million from IFAD, consisting

of a loan of US$98.5 million and a grant of US$1.5 million. The IFAD loan and grant
will finance component 1 and some activities under components 3 and 4. The
Government has further requested a loan of US$600 million from ADB’s ordinary
capital resources. The ADB loan will finance components 2, 3 and 4. The
Government contribution to project costs is estimated at US$102.4 million.

Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD loan IFAD grant ADB Borrower Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Civil works 362 805 100 362 805
2. Vehicles and equipment 4 663 5 150 10 14 991 3 19 804
3. Consulting services - international 2 709 3 3 798 1 6 374
4. Consulting services - national 18 154 19 361 24 44 586 7 63 231
5. Term staff 5 342 5 5 342
6. Service contract 1 038 1 10 141 2 11 179
7. Workshop, training, socialization 29 014 30 271 18 36 956 6 66 243
8. Survey and studies 777 1 327 22 101 032 17 102 136
9. Institutional capacity-building 13 293 2 13 293
10. Safeguard/land

acquisition/resettlement 1 260 0.2 1 260
11. Incremental administration cost 380 26 11 139 2 102 421 100 113 940
12. Materials 15 297 16 15 297
13. Finance and credit 21 516 22 21 516

Total project cost 98 511 12 1 489 0.2 600 000 75 102 421 13 802 421
Interest during implementation 49 917 100 49 917
Commitment charges 524 100 524

Total disbursement 98 511 12 1 489 0.2 600 000 70 152 862 18 852 862

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
31. Benefits. Benefits would accrue from: (i) improved extension delivery; (ii) use of

improved seed; (iii) adoption of better water management techniques; (iv) access
to mechanization; (v) access to finance; (vi) enhanced access to and more-reliable
irrigation; and (vii) enhanced productivity in agriculture. Yet, in addition to on-farm
investments, higher returns are also generated by other important factors,
including: (i) an improved tertiary irrigation system; (ii) more-functional WUAs;
(iii) improved access to farm roads; and (iv) farmer training in water budgeting and
in financial literacy.

32. Economic analysis. The overall economic internal rate of return (EIRR) of the
project is estimated at 17 per cent for the base case. The net present value of the
net benefit stream, discounted at 10 per cent, is 4,944 billion Indonesian rupiah.
The EIRR was subject to sensitivity analysis to measure the impact variations in key
variables due to unforeseen factors. The results indicate that the most significant of
these risks would be overestimation of the achievable with-project rice yields or a
two-year (or more) delay in achieving project benefits. The former is considered a
low risk, as the yield potential is well known for available rice varieties genetically
superior to the varieties normally used by farmers at present. The latter will only be
a risk if there are delays once the project has started, and mitigation measures are
already being implemented to ensure a timely achievement of project benefits.

D. Sustainability
33. Sustainability of the project’s results is based on: (i) impact of capacity-building

activities on the formation of social and human capital among the identified target



EB 2015/116/R.19/Rev.1

9

groups (farmer groups and government officials); (ii) impact on relevant policy
frameworks and compilation of knowledge stock within the Government; (iii) the
demand-driven nature of the intervention; and (iv) linkages built among different
actors within the value chain.

34. Moreover, the project has an explicit scaling-up strategy to enhance the impact and
sustainability of achieved results.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
35. Although this is a very large and geographically dispersed project, its overall

premise is simple. The main risk of lack of support by the Government is reduced,
given the close alignment of project activities with national development priorities.
Already, prior to implementation, stakeholders across government agencies are
collaborating closely in preparing project implementation. The risk of lack of
coordination among stakeholders and limited understanding of project activities is
thus considered manageable. Assessments with regard to risks related to financial
management and procurement have been conducted and mitigation measures
identified. Environmental risks have been identified as manageable. The project
approach includes an additional mechanism to assess and mitigate risks at the
localized, subproject level.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

36. The project design adheres to relevant IFAD policies for microfinance,
private-sector participation, the environment, targeting and gender. The project is
categorized as environmental category B, in accordance with ADB‘s Safeguard
Policy Statement 2009.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
37. The project is set within a number of key government policy documents. The

National Long-Term Development Plan 2005-2025 and the related National
Medium-Term Development Plan 2015-2019 give prominence to: agriculture-sector
development, in particular ensuring food security, self-sufficiency and food
sovereignty through increased domestic production capacity; and the improved
provision of food which is sufficient in quantity and diversity, and which meets the
requirements of food safety, quality and nutrient content at an affordable price. The
project will support implementation of the participating ministries’ strategic plans
and priorities.

38. The project will complement and provide a robust framework for government
expenditure plans: MoPWH will invest almost US$25 billion over the period
2015-2019, including more than US$5 billion for irrigation rehabilitation works. MoA
has allocated US$219 million in 2015 through UPSUS for nationwide investments in
priority areas (i.e. agricultural infrastructure, seed, fertilizer, agricultural machinery
and extension services). Overall investments of almost US$15 billion are foreseen
for 2015-2019, including more than US$3 billion for improvements in agricultural
irrigation infrastructure and almost US$3 billion for improvements in productivity
and production. Both investments are for rice and food crops and are intended to
contribute to achieving food self-sufficiency by 2017. Thus the project enables more
effective and more efficient coordination of public investment in irrigated
agriculture.

Innovations and scaling upC.
39. The project adopts an innovation and scaling-up agenda responding to the

Government’s expectation that externally financed projects offer innovative
solutions that can be scaled up and that they assist learning through
implementation experience and the development of new policies, institutional
arrangements and programmes at the national level. The project will: (i) facilitate



EB 2015/116/R.19/Rev.1

10

piloting of innovations through subprojects, as well as at the overall project
management level; (ii) conduct evaluations or studies to review experiences gained
with the innovations promoted; (iii) analyse evidence, discuss findings with
stakeholders and synthesize conclusions; and (iv) support the scaling up of
successful approaches, methods and technologies – both within the project and
beyond it, through public policies, institutions and practices.

Policy engagementD.
40. In response to the Government’s request for strengthened policy-level support for

irrigated agriculture, the project will focus on strengthening the capacity of
government institutions and staff at national, provincial and district levels to
conduct consultative policy dialogue and design and to implement evidence-based
policies, regulations and strategies for participatory irrigation management and
irrigated smallholder agriculture. It will strengthen the local-level policy and
regulatory framework for supporting smallholder irrigated agriculture, building on
the participatory irrigation principles of the Government and ensuring that these
are operationalized. It will also strengthen the capacity of those institutions
responsible for coordinating irrigation development and delivering services, and will
build farmers’ understanding of their rights and responsibilities under national/local
policies. Moreover, the project will support the establishment and initial operation
of irrigation knowledge and training centres at the provincial level and will establish
a KMC within BAPPENAS to coordinate support for irrigated agriculture, promote
policy dialogue among domestic stakeholders and strengthen national and local
policy processes.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
41. A project financing agreement between the Republic of Indonesia and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is included as
appendix I.

42. The Republic of Indonesia is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD.

43. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
44. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Republic of Indonesia in an amount equivalent to ninety-three million one
hundred and fifty thousand euros (EUR 93,150,000), and upon such terms
and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
Indonesia in an amount equivalent to one million four hundred and ten
thousand euros (EUR 1,410,000), and upon such terms and conditions as
shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President

















































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Kenya
and proposed grant under the country-specific
grants window to the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations for the Kenya
Cereal Enhancement Programme – Climate-
Resilient Agricultural Livelihoods Window (KCEP-
CRAL)

Republic of Kenya

Kenya Cereal Enhancement Programme – Climate-
Resilient Agricultural Livelihoods Window (KCEP-CRAL)

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower/recipient: Republic of Kenya

Recipient: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations (FAO)

Executing agency: State Department of the Ministry of Agriculture,
Livestock and Fisheries

Total KCEP-CRAL cost: US$118.0 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 43.85 million (equivalent to approximately
US$61.8 million)

Amount of Adaptation for
Smallholder Agriculture Programme
(ASAP) grant:

SDR 7.10 million (equivalent to approximately
US$10.0 million)

Amount of IFAD grant to FAO: US$2.0 million

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional

Cofinancier: European Union

Amount of cofinancing: European Union: EUR 9.5 million (equivalent to
US$11.7 million)

Terms of cofinancing: Grant

Contribution of borrower/recipient: US$1.5 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: Beneficiaries: US$29.1 million
Financial institutions: US$1.9 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/114/R.9

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of Kenya and to the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations for the Kenya Cereal Enhancement Programme – Climate-
Resilient Agricultural Livelihoods Window (KCEP-CRAL), as contained in
paragraph 51.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Kenya and
grant under the country-specific window to the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations for the
Kenya Cereal Enhancement Programme – Climate-
Resilient Agricultural Livelihoods Window (KCEP-CRAL)

I. Strategic context and rationale
Country and rural development and poverty contextA.

1. Socio-economic background. Kenya has a total land area of 582,646 km2 and
an estimated population of 43 million people. High fertility combined with declining
mortality has contributed to a population growth rate estimated at 2.6 per cent.
Kenya’s arid and semi-arid lands (ASALs) make up more than 80 per cent of the
country’s land mass and are home to approximately 36 per cent of its population.
The remaining 64 per cent of the population lives in medium- and high-potential
areas in the central and western parts of the country, where the population density
is up to ten times the national average of 69 people/km2. In October 2014, Kenya
became a low-middle-income country. Despite uncertainties in the period leading
up to elections, rising insecurity and erratic weather, growth is expected to
continue in the next five years at an annual average of 5.9 per cent, facilitated by
ongoing infrastructure development. However, the challenges of poverty and
income inequality remain.

2. Agriculture and smallholder farming. The agriculture sector is the backbone of
Kenya’s economy, employing 70 per cent of the rural population and accounting for
65 per cent of export earnings. However, its share of GDP has declined from nearly
40 per cent in the 1970s to 25.3 per cent in 2013. Production of industrial and food
crops and horticulture accounts for 82 per cent of agricultural GDP and 94 per cent
of export earnings from agriculture. The remaining three subsectors of agriculture
– livestock, fisheries and forestry – account for the remaining 18 per cent of
agricultural GDP and 8 per cent of export earnings from agriculture, with significant
potential for added growth.

3. Rural poverty. The poverty rate in Kenya dropped from 52.2 per cent in 1997 to
45.2 per cent in 2009,1 and the Human Development Report 2013 ranked the
country 145th of 186 rated, with a human development index of 0.519.2 Over
75 per cent of Kenya’s population lives in rural areas, where, in 2009, poverty was
estimated at 50 per cent of the population. ASALs have the lowest development
indicators and the highest incidence of poverty in the country.

1 Kenya Integrated Household Budget Survey (KIHBS), 2005/06; Exploring Kenya’s Inequality (Kenya National Bureau of
Statistics and Society for International Development, 2013).
2 Human Development Report 2013 (New York: United Nations Development Programme, 2013), p. 146.



EB 2015/114/R.9

2

4. Food security and nutrition. Food security remains a major challenge for the
Government of Kenya. According to the Global Hunger Index,3 Kenya remains a
food-insecure country despite a slight reduction in hunger. Approximately 10
million Kenyans suffer from chronic food insecurity and poor nutrition.

5. Vulnerability to climate change. According to the Stockholm Environment
Institute,4 if climate change in Kenya is not addressed, the economic costs of its
impact are estimated at 3 per cent of GDP per year by 2030, and could reach
5 per cent by 2050. The agriculture sector, which contributes over 25 per cent of
annual GDP, is particularly affected by changing climatic conditions. Nearly
98 per cent of crop production is rainfed,5 and almost 50 per cent of animal
production occurs in ASALs. The increased incidence of drought and unreliable
rainfall are expected to significantly affect the sector.

Rationale and alignment with government priorities andB.
RB-COSOP

6. Programme rationale. Kenya is a food-deficit country that imports up to
20 per cent of its annual cereal requirements. Improvement in cereal production,
including maize, sorghum, millet and associated pulses, is constrained by the
limited adoption of improved crop technologies and practices. ASALs are an
important producing area: they account for 30 per cent of cereal production and
54 per cent of pulses produced in the country. Semi-arid areas have a comparative
advantage in the production of pulses, accounting for 99 per cent of the production
of pigeon pea, 95 per cent of green gram, 93 per cent of cowpea and 60 per cent
of millet. Semi-arid areas are also central to the production of sorghum, accounting
for 48 per cent of the total. In addition, 37 per cent of beans and 26 per cent of
maize are produced in semi-arid lands.

7. Alignment with government priorities and IFAD RB-COSOP. The KCEP-CRAL
is consistent with the country’s agriculture-sector development strategy 2010-
2020. The strategy’s main objectives are to achieve an agricultural growth rate of
7 per cent per year and reduce food insecurity by 30 per cent by promoting
innovative, commercially oriented and climate-smart modern agriculture. The
programme is also aligned with IFAD’s results-based country strategic
opportunities programme (RB-COSOP) 2013-2018, which recognizes that Kenya’s
food requirements go beyond increased food production in high- and medium-
potential areas, and calls for increased production in ASALs. Finally, IFAD’s support
in ASALs is guided by its Climate Change Strategy and Environment and Natural
Resource Management Policy. IFAD will mobilize resources from its Adaptation for
Smallholder Agriculture Programme (ASAP) to assist smallholders in improving
their livelihoods and becoming more resilient to climate change in the fragile ASAL
ecosystem.

II. Programme description
Programme area and target groupA.

8. Programme area. The programme area covers eight semi-arid counties in the
eastern and coastal regions of Kenya, with a combined population of over 5 million
people: Embu, Tharaka Nithi, Kitui, Machakos, Makueni, Taita Taveta, Kwale and
Kilifi. These counties were included based on: (i) agroecological suitability and
production potential of maize, sorghum, millet and associated pulses, which are
important to Kenya’s food security; (ii) incidence of poverty; (iii) vulnerability to
climate change; (iv) geographical concentration to maximize impact; and
(v) presence of similar development programmes (to avoid duplication). Within
these counties, 25 subcounties will be selected at start-up using the same criteria.

3 International Food Policy Research Institute, 2014.
4 Stockholm Environment Institute, 2009.
5 World Resources Institute et al., 2007.



EB 2015/114/R.9

3

9. Target group. The KCEP-CRAL will reach 100,000 smallholder farmers whose
livelihoods depend on maize, sorghum, millet and associated pulses, including:

(a) 60,000 food-insecure smallholder farmers, who will be supported in
graduating from recurring food insecurity and climate vulnerability to food
security and then to market-oriented commercial farming; and

(b) 40,000 smallholder subsistence farmers, who will be supported in graduating
into commercial farming.

10. Of these 100,000 smallholder farmers, the programme aims to sustainably lift
80,000 out of poverty (80 per cent of targeted farmers). There will be a special
focus on woman-headed households and on youth, given the constraints they face
in accessing agricultural services and inputs. The programme will also empower
county governments and communities to manage their natural resources more
sustainably and consensually, and will build their resilience to climate change
through community investments. A secondary target group will consist of
stakeholders along agricultural value chains – such as agro-dealers, private
extension services, buyers, processors and lead farmers providing support services
to smallholders – and who will facilitate smallholder access to enhanced agricultural
services.

Programme development objectiveB.
11. The overall development goal of the KCEP-CRAL is to reduce rural poverty and food

insecurity among smallholders in Kenya’s ASALs by developing their economic
potential, while improving their natural resource management capacity and
resilience to climate change in an increasingly fragile ecosystem. This goal will be
pursued through: (i) graduation of smallholder farmers to commercially oriented,
climate-resilient agricultural practices through improvements in productivity, post-
production management practices and market linkages for targeted value chains;
and (ii) empowerment of county governments and communities to sustainably and
consensually manage their natural resources and build resilience to climate change.

Components/outcomesC.
12. Programme components. The KCEP-CRAL is structured around three technical

components, supported by programme management:

13. Component 1. Capacity-building for climate-resilient productivity
enhancement and natural resource management. Through an e-voucher
platform giving smallholder farmers access to improved agricultural inputs and
technologies, the programme will enhance farmers’ productivity with a view to
commercialization. Activities in this component will support farmers in establishing
productive and climate-resilient crop enterprises suited to ASALs, and in improving
productivity through the adoption of good agricultural practices, such as
conservation agriculture and associated water conservation practices. The
programme will also support targeted counties in planning adaptation strategies,
adopting sustainable natural resource management practices and building
resilience to climate change.

14. Component 2. Post-production management and market linkages. The
programme aims to support farmers in capitalizing on productivity gains by
promoting improved on-farm grain handling and management, access to storage,
and warehouse receipt systems. These activities are expected to increase
smallholders’ access to markets and build their capacity to sell their produce at
more favourable prices.

15. Component 3. Financial services. This component is designed to: link farmers
to financial services in order to boost yields and income for reinvestment in their
farming businesses; and build the capacity of value-chain stakeholders, including
youth, to profitably engage in the provision of agricultural services.



EB 2015/114/R.9

4

III. Programme implementation
ApproachA.

16. The KCEP-CRAL is an expansion to ASALs of the Kenya Cereal Enhancement
Programme (KCEP), which began in April 2014 through a partnership involving the
Government, the European Union and IFAD. Its programme approach is based on
an expanded strategic partnership of the Government, the European Union and the
United Nations Rome-based agencies (RBAs): IFAD, FAO and the World Food
Programme (WFP). This partnership builds on each partners’ comparative
advantage in supporting farmers’ graduation from food insecurity to market-
oriented farming.

17. Within the partnership, WFP will provide support to food- and nutrition-insecure
farmers. With this support, households can gradually build productive assets and
acquire agricultural production and risk management skills to meet basic food
needs. IFAD will support subsistence farmers in graduating to market-oriented
farming by addressing constraints on production, post-harvest management,
processing and marketing. Through the ASAP Trust Fund, IFAD will also support
farmers’ investments in improved natural resource management and resilience to
climate change. Throughout this process, FAO will support farmer groups and
county governments in adopting good agricultural practices, including conservation
agriculture, while the European Union will sustain the achievement of programme
objectives by providing additional funding for implementation through IFAD and
FAO.

18. The programme approach encompasses an innovative public/private partnership
with financial institutions that aims to expand access to financial services as
beneficiaries graduate from subsidized support to market-oriented farming. Natural
resource management and climate change adaptation are mainstreamed in each
component to ensure that programme interventions are sustainable and improve
the resilience of targeted smallholders. Finally, while the programme will support
targeted households in meeting their cereal needs and in producing a surplus for
markets, WFP will support the transfer of good nutrition practices to households
through its protracted relief and recovery operation.

B. Organizational framework
19. Implementation framework. The lead agency for programme implementation is

the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries. This agency will be responsible
for coordinating programme implementation, supported by a programme
coordination unit (PCU) for IFAD-funded activities, and liaising with FAO and WFP
focal points for activities carried out by these agencies. A steering committee
chaired by the Principal Secretary of the State Department of Agriculture will be set
up at the national level to provide oversight and strategic guidance of
implementation. To operationalize the RBA partnership, an RBA technical
coordination group will comprise the PCU coordinator and FAO and WFP
representatives. The group will be responsible for annual planning, budgeting,
mobilizing RBA contributions to the programme and identifying opportunities for
collaboration with other donor-funded activities in target counties.

20. Grant to FAO for capacity-building of county structures. At the local level,
programme implementation will be aligned to Kenya’s devolution framework, with
the counties as primary implementers. Given the limited capacity of newly set up
county government structures, IFAD will provide FAO with a grant to build the
capacity of county agricultural offices to plan, execute and monitor agricultural
services and investments within the County Integrated Development Plan:

(i) A dedicated RBA implementation support team in each target county will
plan, execute and monitor agricultural services in the context of the KCEP-
CRAL. Each county’s support team will be composed of a lead technical



EB 2015/114/R.9

5

support officer and a national United Nations volunteer – both with an
agribusiness and programme management background. These experts will
work with FAO and WFP programme officers, and with the National Drought
Management Authority coordinator at the county level.

(ii) Capacity-building of county agricultural offices will strengthen the outreach of
agricultural extension agents in delivering agricultural services to farmers.
This includes training packages and cost provisions for agricultural services to
farmers in the context of programme implementation.

21. A memorandum of understanding will be signed with WFP to define roles and
responsibilities in programme execution. The agreement between the European
Union and IFAD will be revised to reflect the European Union’s increased KCEP
contribution to cover the CRAL window. The Union has also entered into a
contribution agreement with FAO to disseminate good agricultural practices,
including conservation agriculture, in the framework of the programme.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

22. Programme planning. Programme planning will follow a bottom-up and gender-
and-youth sensitive approach at the county level. Throughout the programme’s
seven-year implementation period, the PCU will support counties in sensitizing and
mobilizing stakeholders, and in requesting support. Eligible farmer and county
requests for programme support will be included in the KCEP-CRAL annual
workplan and budget (AWP/B), which will conform to the Government’s planning
cycle. For community-level investments, participatory rural appraisals will be
carried out to facilitate the formation of community-based organizations, which will
oversee implementation. Planning at the county level will be reflected in the County
Integrated Development Plan.

23. Monitoring and evaluation, and knowledge management. The programme’s
development goals will be monitored by a robust system, which will be aligned with
Kenya’s National Integrated Monitoring and Evaluation System and in compliance
with IFAD’s Results and Impact Management System (RIMS). RIMS is capable of
measuring results in terms of climate-change resilience, natural resource
management and the graduation of smallholders.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
24. Financial management. To ensure effective financial oversight, a programme

finance team will be set up at the lead national agency. In addition, there will be an
accountant in each of the three regions covered by the programme. At the county
level, an accountant from the National Treasury will be responsible for programme
financial management.

25. Internal controls. To complement government mechanisms, the following
internal controls will be instituted: (i) the PCU finance/administration manager will
be an agent (non-transacting) on all programme county and regional bank
accounts; (ii) at the county level, the national treasury accountant will be a
signatory to the programme bank account, together with the designated county
programme coordinator; and (iii) budget control will be supported through the
programme accounting software and the use of commitment ledgers (sometimes
called vote books) at the county level.

26. Accounting systems, policies and procedures. An off-the-shelf accounting
package with the ability to generate expenditure trends by component, category,
and activities in United States dollars, euro and Kenyan shillings will be used.
Development of programme uniform coding (chart of accounts) will be a joint effort
by the PCU finance team, those responsible for monitoring and evaluation, and
technical officers.



EB 2015/114/R.9

6

27. Financial reporting and monitoring will be conducted in accordance with
International Public-Sector Accounting Standards on a cash basis. In addition to
annual audited financial statements, IFAD will require semi-annual interim financial
reports.

28. The grant to FAO will be disbursed based on AWP/Bs. In addition, FAO will submit
statements of expenditure with respect to the use of at least 75 per cent of the
immediately preceding advance (and 100 per cent of previous advances). FAO will
provide regular reports to IFAD, including six-month unaudited financial reports,
and will submit a copy of FAO audited financial statements that cover any part of
the grant proceeds within six months following the official publication of FAO’s
audited statements.

29. Procurement. With the enactment of the Public Procurement and Disposal of
Assets Act and the Public Procurement and Disposal Regulations, Kenya has
established a sound legal framework for public procurement with clear hierarchical
distinctions. The legal and regulatory framework of the Public Procurement and
Disposal of Assets Act will be used in programme procurement. KCEP-CRAL
procurement provisions will build on the Ministerial Tender Committee of the
Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries. Items common across more than
one county will be procured nationally in bulk; contract award decisions will be
made by that committee. For activities such as spot road improvements and
construction of storage facilities that cannot be bulked and procured nationally, the
KCEP-CRAL will rely on the County Service Delivery Coordinating Unit Tender
Committee, as the legal authority to approve contract awards, and on the County
Governments Procurement Regulations.

E. Supervision
30. The programme will be jointly supervised by IFAD and the lead agency, with the

participation of FAO, WFP and the European Union. One supervision mission and
one follow-up mission will be conducted each year to review the programme
approach and its effectiveness. Special attention will be given to reviewing the
effectiveness of the RBA partnership in the graduation of farmers.

IV. Programme costs, financing and benefits
A. Programme costs
31. The total investment and incremental recurrent costs of the KCEP-CRAL are

estimated at US$118.0 million, including physical and price contingencies.
Programme investments by component are:

 Component 1. Capacity-building for climate-resilient productivity
enhancement and natural resource management accounts for
US$11.1 million, representing 9.4 per cent of total base costs.

 Component 2. Post-production management and market linkages accounts
for US$8.8 million, representing 7.5 per cent of total base costs;

 Component 3. Financial services, including the e-voucher scheme, accounts
for US$77.7 million, representing 65.8 per cent of total base costs; and

 Programme management accounts for US$11.7 million, representing
9.9 per cent of total base costs.

32. In addition, preparatory activities and implementation support at the county level
accounts for US$8.7 million (7.4 per cent of total base costs).



EB 2015/114/R.9

7

Table 1
Components by Financiers

(US$ '000) GoK
IFAD
Loan

ASAP
Grant

IFAD
Grant EU add-on

Financial
Institutions Beneficiaries Total

Am ount Am ount Am ount Am ount Am ount Am ount Am ount Am ount

462 5 124 - 2 000 1 134 - - 8 719

Adoption of  improved f arming practices including GAP and CA 24 - - - 1 086 - - 1 110
Community-based sustainable NRM and adaptation to Climate
Change - - 10 000 - - - - 10 000

24 - 10 000 - 1 086 - - 11 109

Strengthening of  f armer organizations and post-harvest
management 282 3 360 - - - - 173 3 815
Market Linkages and value addition 37 3 361 - - - - 1 579 4 977

320 6 721 - - - - 1 752 8 793

E-voucher platf orm f or productivity enhancement - 37 237 - - 7 142 1 860 26 212 72 451
Value Chain Financing 246 3 295 - - 543 - 1 172 5 255

246 40 532 - - 7 685 1 860 27 384 77 706
500 9 400 - - 1 781 - - 11 680

Total PROGRAMME COSTS 1 551 61 776 10 000 2 000 11 686 1 860 29 136 118 008

A. Capacity building for clim ate-resilient productivity
enhancem ent and NRM

Preparatory activities/ Implementation Support and Capacity-
building at county-level
Com ponents

E. Programme Management
Subtotal

C. Financial Services
Subtotal

Subtotal
B. Post-Production Managem ent and Market Linkages

Notes: GAP - good agricultural practice CA- conservation agriculture

Table 2
Expenditure Accounts by Financiers Financial
(US$ '000) GoK IFAD Loan ASAP Grant IFAD Grant EU add-on Institutions Beneficiaries Total

Am ount Am ount Am ount Am ount Am ount Am ount Am ount Am ount

I. Investm ent Costs
A. Works 231 4 119 - - - - 983 5 334
B. Vehicles 214 905 - 187 291 - - 1 597
C. Equipments & Materials 274 2 544 521 61 606 - 390 4 395
D. Consultancies 316 3 939 2 754 1 475 - 66 8 550
E. Trainings 516 4 657 3 125 - - 1 030 71 9 399
F. Grants and Subsidies - 36 299 3 600 - 7 111 829 27 626 75 465

Total Investm ent Costs 1 551 52 463 10 000 248 9 482 1 860 29 136 104 739
II. Recurrent Costs

A. Salaries and Allow ances - 6 671 - 1 752 1 427 - - 9 850
B. Operating Costs - 2 642 - - 777 - - 3 419

Total Recurrent Costs - 9 313 - 1 752 2 204 - - 13 269
Total PROGRAMME COSTS 1 551 61 776 10 000 2 000 11 686 1 860 29 136 118 008

B. Programme financing
33. The total costs of the KCEP-CRAL window will be financed by the Government, an

IFAD loan, an ASAP grant, an IFAD grant under the country-specific window to
FAO, a European Union contribution through IFAD, financial institutions and
beneficiaries as follows:

 The Government will finance taxes and duties valued at US$1.5 million
(representing 1.3 per cent of the KCEP-CRAL window).

 The IFAD loan to the Republic of Kenya, estimated at US$61.8 million
(52.3 per cent of the KCEP-CRAL window), will finance start-up activities,
capacity-building of farmer organizations, post-harvest management
activities, market linkage and value chain strengthening, and programme
management costs.

 The ASAP grant, estimated at US$10.0 million (8.5 per cent of the KCEP-
CRAL window), will finance mainstreaming of natural resource management
and climate resilience throughout the programme.

 The IFAD grant to FAO, estimated at US$2.0 million (1.7 per cent of the
KCEP-CRAL window), will be dedicated to capacity-building and the costs



EB 2015/114/R.9

8

incurred by county agriculture offices delivering agricultural services to
farming communities.

 The European Union additional contribution through IFAD is valued at
US$11.7 million, corresponding to EUR 9.5 million (9.9 per cent of the KCEP-
CRAL window).

 Finally, the contribution of financial institutions to the programme’s e-voucher
scheme and related financial services is estimated at US$1.9 million
(1.6 per cent of the KCEP-CRAL window). The beneficiary contribution is
assessed at US$29.1 million (24.7 per cent of the KCEP-CRAL window).

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
34. Overall, the KCEP and its CRAL window will support 140,000 smallholder farmers in

attaining food security and graduating into market-oriented commercial farming.
Through the CRAL window, 100,000 smallholder farmers in Kenya’s ASALs have
been targeted. The KCEP-CRAL will provide opportunities for increased returns on
smallholder agricultural production and marketing, with direct benefits including:

 Increased yields from improved agricultural technologies – including
conservation agriculture and good agricultural practices – and strengthened
extension systems;

 Increased climate resilience through adapted varieties and technologies,
better climate information and community resilience investments;

 Increased quality of marketable produce from post-harvest management,
training and access to equipment;

 Higher prices as a result of aggregation from village storage facilities and
other grain-bulking structures;

 Labour-saving technologies such as the use of herbicides (compared with
conventional weeding) and minimum tillage/direct seeding;

 Value addition through demonstrations of novel processing opportunities and
facilitation of linkages between business owners and financial institutions;

 Efficiency gains as a result of road spot improvements; and

 Incremental tax revenues generated for the central Government and county
governments from increased volumes of taxable production.

35. Economic analysis shows that the programme has the potential to generate an
economic rate of return of 15 per cent over a 20-year period. Benefits will accrue
to a range of stakeholders across many value chains, making the entire investment
even more viable and spreading its impact across the entire nation through
increased employment and tax revenues. Thus the actual economic rate of return
will likely be higher than the 15 per cent reported. Sensitivity analysis concluded
that the programme’s economic rate of return is relatively stable. It is estimated at
8.3 per cent if costs increase by 10 per cent, and at 13.3 per cent if benefits
decrease by 10 per cent.

D. Sustainability
36. The sustainability of programme investments and development results will be

ensured by:

 Mainstreaming natural resource management and climate-change adaptation;

 Promoting conservation agriculture and good agricultural practices;

 Empowering county governments and communities for sustainable natural
resource management and resilience to climate change;



EB 2015/114/R.9

9

 Building the capacity of stakeholders; and

 The e-voucher scheme and inclusive financial services.

37. At the institutional level, financial services, managed by financial institutions, will
be provided to stakeholders through a public/private partnership. This will enable
these institutions to expand their client base while they contribute to the
sustainable financial inclusion of ASAL smallholders. Investments by financial
institutions as programme partners are good indications of financial sustainability.
The relationship established between financial institutions and programme
beneficiaries will endure beyond the programme’s lifespan as these institutions
continue to provide beneficiaries with improved financial services.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
Risks Mitigation measures
Droughts or floods affect expression of
demand among target communities.

 Mainstream resilience packages in
programme activities

Climate-related risks hinder attainment
of programme objectives.

 Strengthen community-based resilience
systemsMainstream climate resilience in
programmes, plans and policies

Weather variability and crop failure
discourage financial providers from
participating in the programme.

 Assess feasibility of crop insurance
schemes. Strengthen climate information
services and climate-based extension
messages for smallholders

Low penetration of financial service
providers and cultural beliefs hinder
participation by target groups.

 Raise awareness
 Link target groups to contract farming and

outgrower schemes

Capacity of devolved structures to
manage implementation of activities is
weak.

 Embed capacity-building and
implementation support to county
structures for the programme’s
implementation organizational framework
and activities

 Empower county-level authorities with
resources for close monitoring,
supervision, timely updates and feedback

RBA coordination for mobilizing technical
and financial contributions to the
programme is weak.

 Embed RBA joint technical coordination
mechanisms at national and county levels
in the programme organizational
framework

Technical capacity for operationalizing
programme strategies and executing
programme activities is weak.

 Provide counties (PCU) with operational
strategies and technical tools for
programme execution under each
component

 Carry out activities requiring specific
technical competences through specialized
partners or service providers in
collaboration with counties. Identify
partners with specialized expertise for
each component

Exchange rate fluctuates  Conduct regular multi-currency monitoring
and reporting of programme costs

Fiduciary risks: Kenya’s Transparency
International 2014 Corruption
Perceptions Index was 2.5, which is an

 Specify external audit terms of reference,
conduct rolling internal audits, utilize off-
the-shelf accounting software and



EB 2015/114/R.9

10

Risks Mitigation measures
indication of high risk. disaggregate reporting by category,

component and financier

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

38. The programme responds directly to the following objectives of the IFAD Strategic
Framework 2011-2015: improved natural resources and the economic asset base;
improved access to services; capacity-building of rural people to manage profitable
and sustainable enterprises; opportunities for women and youth; sustainable
natural resource management; and adaptation to climate change.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
39. Support to developing the economic potential of ASALs is a priority in Kenya’s

Constitution and Vision 2030. The main goal is to fast-track their sustainable
development by increasing investment and ensuring that the use of resources is
reconciled with the realities of people’s lives. The National Policy for the
Development of ASALs recognizes that sorghum and millet are the most suitable
cereals for the environment, while maize continues to be cultivated by most
smallholder farmers as the primary cereal of choice.

40. The KCEP-CRAL is fully aligned with the Government’s priorities for ASALs and
harmonizes the efforts of major development partners – the Government, the
European Union and RBAs – in support of agricultural and rural development. In
line with national policies, the programme approach is adapted to the socio-
economic and biophysical characteristics of ASALs: (i) frequent drought; (ii) low
and unreliable rainfall; (iii) high vulnerability to climate change; (iv) fragile
ecosystems; and (v) high food insecurity and poverty.

41. The programme is also fully integrated into Kenya’s development partner
frameworks for agricultural and rural development. It directly contributes to
advancing the development results agreed by the Government and the United
Nations in Kenya under Kenya’s United Nations Development Assistance
Framework 2014-2018: strategic result 1 – inclusive and sustainable economic
growth; and strategic result 2 – environmental sustainability, land management
and human security. It will also generate knowledge products on food security,
approaches to graduation of smallholders to commercial farming, and climate
resilience in semi-arid areas. These products will be disseminated in development
partner working groups such as the Agricultural and Rural Development Donor
Group and the ASALs Donor Group, in order to inform policies and programming for
ASALs.

42. The programme’s organizational framework for implementation is aligned with
national systems. At the local level, programme implementation and RBA
coordination will be aligned with Kenya’s devolution framework. Counties will be
the primary implementers of the programme using community-based approaches.
Given the capacity gaps faced by the newly established county structures, the
programme’s organizational framework includes dedicated implementation support
to the counties for programme execution, coordination of RBA contributions and
the promotion of synergies with other donor-funded initiatives.



EB 2015/114/R.9

11

Innovations and scaling upC.
43. The programme incorporates innovative features such as:

 A partnership involving the Government, the three RBAs and the European
Union to steer farmers’ graduation from food insecurity to commercial
farming, with a focus on good agricultural practices, natural resource
management and resilience;

 A partnership with Equity Bank to set up an electronic platform combining
debit cards with e-vouchers to support smallholder access to new
technologies and financial services;

 Weather-based crop insurance, which will be piloted in the programme areas;

 Technical packages that introduce farmers to innovative combinations of
adapted inputs and practices for managing natural resources, which have
been tested by the Kenya Agricultural and Livestock Research Organization.

44. Moreover, the KCEP-CRAL will promote business models, including new business
partnerships between smallholders and buyers, governance structures and financial
mechanisms for storage and processing facilities. The innovative features described
above, if successfully implemented, will generate significant knowledge and the
potential for replication and scaling up in Kenya and the region. Monitoring and
knowledge management will thus be important in assessing and comparing
performance, learning from experience and documenting achievements and good
practices.

Policy engagementD.
45. The programme will generate lessons learned, good practices and innovations that

inform policy dialogue on agricultural development in semi-arid areas. Specific
areas of interest include: (i) adapted technical packages; (ii) inclusive business
models for farmers’ access to services and markets; (iii) innovative financial
instruments; (iv) approaches for graduating smallholder farmers from food
insecurity to commercial agriculture; and (v) increasing resilience to climate
change and natural resource management. Special attention will be given to
documenting the impact of synergies among the Government, RBAs, the European
Union and the private sector – each of which brings comparative advantages to
addressing complex agricultural and rural development challenges in ASALs.

46. Capitalizing on these synergies, as mentioned previously, the programme will
generate knowledge products on food security, graduation approaches, commercial
farming and resilience in semi-arid areas that will inform policy and programming
in ASALs.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
47. A financing agreement between the Republic of Kenya and IFAD will constitute the

legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower/recipient. A
copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as an annex.

48. A grant agreement between the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations and IFAD will constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed
grant under the country-specific window to FAO.

49. The Republic of Kenya is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD
and from IFAD’s Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme Trust Fund,
acting through IFAD in its capacity as trustee of the trust fund.

50. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.



EB 2015/114/R.9

12

VII. Recommendation
51. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Republic of Kenya in an amount equivalent to forty-three million eight
hundred and fifty thousand special drawing rights (SDR 43,850,000), and
upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with
the terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide an Adaptation for
Smallholder Agriculture Programme Trust Fund grant to the Republic of Kenya
in an amount equivalent to seven million one hundred thousand special
drawing rights (SDR 7,100,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall
be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant not exceeding two
million United States dollars (US$2,000,000) to the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, and upon such terms and conditions as
shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President


















































President’s report

Proposed loan to the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic for the Northern Smallholder
Livestock Commercialization Project: Rural
Financial Services Programme


Lao People’s Democratic Republic

Northern Smallholder Livestock Commercialization
Project: Rural Financial Services Programme

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Lao People's Democratic Republic

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry

Total programme cost: US$19.7 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 7.3 million (equivalent to approximately
US$10.0 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional: 40 years, including a grace period
of 10 years, with a service charge of three fourths of
one per cent (0.75 per cent) per annum

Cofinancier(s): Asian Development Bank (ADB)

Bilateral development partner(s) to be identified

Amount of cofinancing: ADB: US$2.9 million

Bilateral development partner(s) US$1.9 million

Terms of cofinancing: ADB: 1 per cent interest charge for grace period and
thereafter 1.5 per cent

Bilateral development partner(s): Grant

Contribution of borrower: US$4.34 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$0.6 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/LOT/P.20/Rev.1

1

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
loan to the Lao People’s Democratic Republic for the Northern Smallholder Livestock
Commercialization Project: Rural Financial Services Programme, as contained in
paragraph 40.

Proposed loan to the Lao People’s Democratic Republic
for the Northern Smallholder Livestock
Commercialization Project: Rural Financial Services
Programme

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Over the past decade, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic has experienced rapid

economic growth and poverty reduction. Although the national poverty rate declined
steadily by 40 per cent over the last 15 years, 26 per cent of the population still lives
below the poverty line. Poverty is predominantly rural, with high concentrations in
remote and mountainous areas adjacent to the north-eastern and eastern borders
with Viet Nam.

2. Agriculture and natural resources accounted for 24.8 per cent of gross domestic
product (GDP) and over 70 per cent of employment in 2014. More than 80 per cent
of the population depends on agriculture for their livelihood, while more than
50 per cent of households are subsistence farmers with annual incomes below
US$300. While GDP grew at 7.6 per cent in 2013, the agricultural sector grew by
just 2.7 per cent due to low productivity and inadequate links to opportunities arising
from rapid growth elsewhere in the economy. The livestock subsector is an
important source of income and store of wealth for rural smallholders, with
89 per cent of smallholders owning one or more types of livestock – buffaloes,
cattle, pigs, goats, poultry or other small livestock.

3. The expanding demand for livestock products in the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic and neighbouring countries is generating new income opportunities for
households in rural areas. The capacity of rural households to benefit from such
demand, however, remains limited. The productivity of traditional livestock
production systems is low and livestock is still primarily kept as a means of storing
wealth. There is a need to improve production methods to reduce costs and improve
off-take if rural livestock production systems are to provide expanded and
sustainable sources of income for smallholders.

4. The Government’s overarching long-term development goal is to graduate from the
status of least-developed country by 2020. The National Socio-Economic
Development Plan (NSEDP) and the National Growth and Poverty Eradication
Strategy are the main policy documents outlining the country’s strategy to eradicate
poverty. Poverty reduction efforts are focused on the 72 poorest districts, which will
benefit from community-driven access-oriented rural development. Ten of the 12
districts selected to benefit under the Northern Smallholder Livestock
Commercialization Project (NSLCP) are high-priority poor districts. IFAD supports the
Government in implementing its eighth NSEDP and, under the country strategic
opportunities programme (COSOP) 2011-2016, pursued the objectives of promoting
economic growth, sustainable livelihoods and food and nutrition security of poor
rural people.



EB 2016/LOT/P.20/Rev.1

2

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

5. The demand for meat in the Lao People’s Democratic Republic is forecast to increase
significantly over the next decade, as is demand for exports to neighbouring China
and Viet Nam. The Government has set the target of increasing livestock production
from the current 210,000 tons per year to 365,000 tons per year by 2020. The
information available suggests current exports meet less than 10 per cent of
potential demand, while domestic demand is rising at 4.5 per cent per year.

6. Against this backdrop, the Government requested IFAD and the Asian Development
Bank (ADB) to finance a programme supporting the commercialization of livestock
smallholders through the lateral scaling up of the recently completed Northern
Region Sustainable Livelihoods through Livestock Development Project (LDP),
cofinanced by ADB, IFAD and the Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation
from June 2007 to March 2014. LDP reached approximately 13,000 smallholders
with the potential advantages of more intensive, commercially oriented livestock
practices. Overall, the LDP initiated a long-term process of modernizing and
commercializing smallholder livestock production. Given the respective organizations’
comparative advantages, IFAD will support improving smallholder livelihoods
through access to rural financial services and strengthened farmers’ groups, while
ADB will invest in critical infrastructure and technical support. The ADB investment
became operational in the first quarter of 2015.

7. The Northern Smallholder Livestock Commercialization Project: Rural Financial
Services Programme (NSLCP-RFSP) supports the Government’s policy of expanding
domestic livestock production through improved productivity and value addition,
including through sanitary measures, to enable commercial smallholder farmers to
compete more effectively in regional markets and in import substitution.
Furthermore, the rural financial services component of LDP showed a high unmet
demand for rural financial services in the programme districts. Microfinance
institutions (MFIs) registered with the Bank of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic
(BoL) are expanding in the country, both lending to agriculture and providing
financial management and brokerage services to the rapidly expanding
savings-financed village funds (VFs). Private banks, however, are not yet significant
agriculture-sector financiers. In this environment, the NSLCP-RFSP will adopt a
two-pronged approach: to deliver NSLCP livestock credit at market terms on the
short term; and, on the longer term, to develop a strategy to: (i) build VFs into
sustainable financial institutions able to meet local immediate-term needs for rural
financial service; and (ii) improve the incentive structure for private banks and MFIs
to provide medium-to-long term agricultural rural financial services.

8. The financing for NSLCP-RFSP is in line with the COSOP 2011–2016, which
comprises three strategic objectives: (i) community-based access to and
management of land and natural resources; (ii) access to advisory services and
inputs for sustainable, adaptive and integrated farming systems; and (iii) access to
markets.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
9. Programme area. Programme implementation will focus on approximately 200

villages located in 12 districts in the northern Houapanh, Luang Namtha, Luang
Prabang and Xiengkhouang provinces, where poverty rates range from 28 per cent
to 43 per cent, with rural areas worst off. In each district, priority animal types will
be selected for support with due attention to potential production capacity for
support of market-oriented livestock value chains.

10. Target group. In each district, the programme will work with rural
livestock-farming households that are members of smallholder livestock production



EB 2016/LOT/P.20/Rev.1

3

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

and marketing groups (SLPMGs) to be formed under the programme. The
programme aims to work with a total of 300 SLPMGs in the 12 districts, extending
livestock-production and -marketing support to approximately 5,400 households and
their 32,000 members. Related community-based livestock infrastructure
investments will target an estimated additional 10,000 livestock-owning households
in the programme area. Access to rural financial services through village-based
saving and credit schemes will benefit approximately 20,000 households, including
non-livestock farming households. The programme will tailor its overall technical and
rural financial service support to ensure the inclusion of marginalized and poor
villagers in the programme activities through VFs.

11. The NSLCP will strengthen support for women and ethnic groups through intensive
training programmes. In collaboration with Lao Women’s Union (LWU), the
programme will promote gender equality and women’s participation in
village-development planning, SLPMGs and market-linkage programmes, assisting
women to gain equal access to agricultural support and investment opportunities.
Women’s empowerment and gender mainstreaming will be implemented and
monitored through a gender action plan. Farmer-to-farmer extension programmes to
improve livestock husbandry will specifically target ethnic groups.

B. Programme development objective
12. The goal of the NSLCP-RFSP is to establish a sustainable and scalable rural financial

and technical services model that supports the reduction of rural poverty and
increased livestock productivity. The development objective is to increase livestock
production through expanded financial and technical services.

C. Components/outcomes
13. Within the larger framework of the NSLCP, the IFAD-supported part of the

programme will have two main components:

14. Component 1. Increased productivity of smallholder livestock producers.
This component comprises two subcomponents:

(i) Smallholder livestock production and marketing groups. The
programme will work with 300 existing livestock production groups formed
under LDP that have made good progress along the commercialization
trajectory, to further build their capacities and expand their membership base
to form SLPMGs. SLPMGs will progress beyond the basic production
improvements achieved under LDP to: (i) access input supplies and services
needed for commercial production; (ii) produce higher-quality livestock for
sale at provincial markets; and (iii) market as a producer group. The provision
of services and technical assistance will assist SLPMGs in building their
capacities in livestock production and farm financial management so as to
profitably boost livestock production and income. Working with the Lao
Farmers’ Network, the programme will promote farmer-to-farmer extension.
The programme will identify lead farmers at the village cluster level for further
training in animal husbandry, who will subsequently mentor livestock
production programmes through interested SLPMGs.

(ii) Technology development. Under this subcomponent, four primary activities
will be implemented:

(a) Livestock market studies will evaluate livestock marketing in target
provinces and assess opportunities at the national level for value chain
development and livestock product export.

(b) Forage production will develop selected leguminous forages as profitable
farmer-produced seed crops for free distribution in small amounts to
new households, while also promoting the purchase and distribution of



EB 2016/LOT/P.20/Rev.1

4

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

grass splits to support the vegetative development of productive forage
grasses.

(c) As animal husbandry skills improve, various combinations of technical
and financial services will enable interested SLPMG members to become
livestock-breeding households and procure improved sires to sell
breeding services to villagers.

(d) Land use planning and allocation activities will enable villages to prepare
or update their land management plans to designate resources such as
water sources and suitable land for communal livestock production,
including planting forage and animal housing; where land use titles have
not yet been allocated, the programme will support participatory and
systematic individual and community land use titling.

15. Component 2. Sustainable and scalable rural finance services. This
component comprises three subcomponents to articulate a sequential three-pronged
approach to develop rural financial services.

(i) Financial services to NSLCP beneficiaries. The programme will provide
additional financing to former LDP village livelihood funds for one round of
lending to SLPMG members for viable livestock investments through
amortized loans at market rates. This project-driven credit scheme will be
phased out midterm and replaced by a longer-term sustainable financial
services system established under the programme (see points (ii) and (iii)
below). To support livestock credit delivery, technical assistance will be
provided to establish new guidelines for credit schemes and to empower
district LWUs to responsibly manage livestock development credit to SLPMG
members.

(ii) Networked village funds. The programme, in partnership with the BoL and
a bilateral development partner, will support the development of at least 200
community-based, savings-driven VFs. Such BoL-based schemes have
functioned successfully for more than five years in other provinces. The
programme will develop a systematic approach to expanding and
strengthening VFs, based on the establishment of VF-owned, second-tier
support organizations – Network Support Organizations (NSOs) – at the
provincial level. NSOs operate as management agents for their member VFs,
who also own the NSOs.

(iii) National agriculture-refinancing facility. At the request of the
Government, the programme will provide medium-term assistance to
establish a national agriculture refinancing facility (NARF), to be located within
the BoL. The NARF will receive funding from existing grants held by the
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry (MAF) as well as from the programme,
which it will apply to refinance a portion of the lending made by commercial
banks and MFIs to targeted agricultural sectors, in line with the national
agriculture development strategy, at rates that would significantly increase
margins for lending institutions. The NARF will thereby provide a powerful
incentive for the expansion of financial services in rural areas. Reflows from
the one-off project credit operations (described under (i) above) will be
channelled into the NARF. In the medium term, the NARF will also capitalize
NSOs (described under (ii)) once they reach a certain level of maturity.

III. Programme implementation
A. Approach
16. Programme implementation will span five years and support the Government’s policy

of expanding domestic livestock through improved productivity and value addition.
The approach also supports the Government’s sam sang (decentralization) policy,



EB 2016/LOT/P.20/Rev.1

5

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

whereby the province serves as the strategic unit, the district as the planning and
budgetary unit, and the village as the implementing unit. The programme
exemplifies such an approach through bottom-up planning, support to farmer-led
technical service delivery, the establishment of private and communal land use
rights, and the catalysis of private investments in rural and agricultural sectors. The
management structure will build on lessons learned through previous IFAD projects
in the country and the region, avoid parallel management systems and implement
transparent mechanisms for financial management and fund transfers.

B. Organizational framework
17. MAF, through its Department of Livestock and Fisheries, will be the lead agency with

overall responsibility for programme implementation, which it will delegate to district
administrations and to the National Programme Management Office (NPMO), based
in Vientiane. The heads of the Provincial Agriculture and Forestry Office and the
District Agriculture and Forestry Office will serve as programme focal points at the
provincial and district levels, respectively. The National Project Steering Committee
(NPSC), chaired by the MAF Vice-Minister, will be responsible for the overall direction
of the programme. It will provide guidance and oversight to participating provinces
and districts. The NPSC will include representatives of MAF, the Ministry of Finance,
the Ministry of Planning and Investment, the Chamber of Commerce and Industry
and the four provincial Governors/Vice-Governors. Provincial Project Steering
Committees, headed by provincial governors, will be responsible for their respective
annual work plans and budgets (AWPBs) and the financial and physical progress of
the programme.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

18. Planning, monitoring and evaluation. The AWPB will be the key management
tool for planning, monitoring and reporting on the implementation of activities. The
programme will follow a participatory planning approach in the target areas. The
monitoring and evaluation system will: (i) guide implementation through the
assessment and analysis of outputs, outcomes and impacts on poor households’
nutrition and livelihoods; and (ii) provide the Government information to measure
programme contributions to the implementation of MAF national strategies, and data
and analysis for evidence-based policymaking. A management information system
will be established to monitor operational and financial progress alike. Furthermore,
special studies will be undertaken at midterm and upon programme completion to
evaluate: (i) improvements in production and productivity; (ii) the use and benefits
of VFs and NSOs; and (iii) the implementation methodology/approaches adopted by
the programme. Other studies will be undertaken as deemed necessary by the
NPMO.

19. Learning and knowledge management. The programme’s knowledge
management and learning processes will: identify, analyse, document and share
knowledge; support the dissemination of innovations; and identify issues for
advocacy with policymakers, the broader donor community and other relevant
stakeholders. The programme’s learning systems will include: (i) study tours,
discussions and workshops for project and ministry staff at the national and district
levels to promote agricultural and financial services initiatives; and (ii) various
formats for the dissemination of results, including farmer-to-farmer extension.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
20. Financial management. As custodian of the funds in the programme account, the

NPMO will be responsible for programme financial management. The NPMO will also
be accountable to the Government and to IFAD for the proper use of funds in line
with applicable legal agreements and with contractual arrangements with service
providers. It will provide detailed financial statements of programme operations,
resources and expenditures for each fiscal year in accordance with standards and



EB 2016/LOT/P.20/Rev.1

6

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

procedures acceptable to IFAD. The financial management assessment of the
programme rated the fiduciary risk as high. Mitigation measures will include close
supervision, support and oversight from IFAD through: (i) the installation of
professional accounting software; (ii) the development of a financial manual
integrating controls linked to operations; (iii) biannual supervision and
implementation support missions; and (iv) a control framework integrating periodic
internal audits and independent external audits.

21. Flow of funds. The Government will open a designated account, denominated in
United States dollars, in the BoL to receive and hold the proceeds of the IFAD loan.
The NPMO will open and maintain an operational programme account, denominated
in Laotian kip, which will be funded and replenished as necessary from the
designated account upon NPMO request and in accordance with expenditures
incurred under approved AWPBs. The Ministry of Finance will ensure the timely
transfer of funds required by the NPMO. The NPMO will ensure the compliance of
replenishment requests from implementing agencies and that timely withdrawal
applications are submitted to IFAD with appropriate supporting documentation.

22. Procurement. The procurement of goods, works and consulting services financed by
IFAD will be carried out in compliance with the IFAD’s Project Procurement
Guidelines. National procurement procedures, processes and regulations will be
applied to the extent that they are consistent with those Guidelines.

23. Internal control and external audit. Internal control systems will be established
at the NPMO level. An external audit will be carried out in compliance with the
International Standards on Auditing and the IFAD Guidelines on Project Audits.
Independent external auditors will be appointed on a timely basis. The audited
financial statements and audit reports will be submitted to IFAD within six months
following the close of each fiscal year.

24. Governance. The NPMO will prepare a programme framework for investment
transparency and publicity. This framework will include provisions to ensure that
procurement is carried out, whether by the districts or by the NPMO, in accordance
with IFAD rules and specifications. Measures will include: (i) the publication of all
procurements, calls for proposals, contract awards and business partnership details
in local newspapers and at district and provincial offices; (ii) the participation of
end-user representatives in bid assessments; and (iii) prompt communication with
bidders. The framework will also include an internal code of conduct to be signed by
all staff involved in programme implementation.

E. Supervision
25. IFAD and ADB will jointly supervise the programme. Annual supervision missions will

be organized jointly with the Government and include the main implementing
agencies and stakeholders. Implementation support missions will be dispatched on
the basis of specific needs from the Hanoi subregional office. Supervision and
implementation support missions will jointly assess achievements and lessons,
review innovations and advise on corrective actions as required. A midterm review
will be organized by the Government and IFAD after 30 months, in mid-2019, in
close collaboration with relevant stakeholders, including the cofinanciers.

IV. Programme costs, financing, and benefits
A. Programme costs
26. The total cost of the IFAD-supported part of NSLCP-RFSP is estimated at

US$19.7 million, including contingencies, as indicated in table 1. The NSLCP-RFSP is
part of the larger IFAD-ADB financed NSLCP, which has a total value of
US$38.3 million, including US$21 million of ADB financing.



EB 2016/LOT/P.20/Rev.1

7

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

B. Programme financing
27. The IFAD-supported part of the NSLCP will be financed by a highly concessional loan

in the amount of US$10.0 million (50.9 per cent), while ADB will provide
US$2.9 million (14.7 per cent) and the bilateral development partner
US$1.85 million (9.4 per cent). The LDP carry-over in terms of reflows from rural
finance schemes is expected to provide US$2.4 million (12.2 per cent), while the
Government will directly contribute an estimated US$1.91 million (9.7 per cent) and
beneficiaries US$0.6 million (3.1 per cent). While the LDP carry-over is, in principle,
part of the government contribution, this amount is shown separately in table 1 and
table 2 for the convenience of monitoring.

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
28. It is estimated that the programme will benefit a minimum of 200 villages,

comprising 20,000 poor smallholder households, through access to livestock
production technology, support for livestock management infrastructure and
improved rural financial services. The direct beneficiaries include households
receiving programme-managed SLPMG livestock credit; borrowers from
NARF-refinanced NSOs/VFs investing in agricultural production; and households and
small agribusinesses borrowing from approved MFIs and commercial banks
refinanced through the NARF. In programme districts, villages and households not
directly targeted by the NSLCP-RFSP will benefit indirectly through the improved
capacities, services, systems and technologies adopted in their communities,
kum bans (village clusters) and districts.



/R
ev.1

8

Table 1
Programme costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component

IFAD loan

Bilateral
development

partner ADB loan
LDP

Carry-over Beneficiaries
Borrower/

counterpart Total

Amount %t Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Smallholder Livestock producers adopt productive technology 1 787 30.8 2 796 48.2 600 10.3 619 10.7 5 803
(i) Smallholder livestock production and marketing groups 897 22.9 2 400 61.2 600 15.3 22 0.6 3 919
(ii) Technology development 890 47.3 396 21.0 597 31.7 1 883

2. Farmers access sustainable and scalable rural financial
services 7 756 58.6 1 850 14.0 2 400 18.1 1 238 9.3 13 244
(i). Financial services to SLPMG 3 154 56.6 2 400 43.0 23 0.4 5 577
(ii) Networked village funds in NSLCP districts 3 265 62.1 1 850 35.2 145 2.8 5 260
(ii) Agriculture refinancing facility 1 337 55.5 1070 44.5 2 407

3. Effective project management 456 89.2 55 10.8 512
Interest during implementation 98 100 98

Total 10 000 50.9 1 850 9.4 2 895 14.7 2 400 12.2 600 3.1 1 912 9.7 19 657

Table 2
Programme costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD loan

Bilateral
development

partner ADB loan
LDP

Carry-over Beneficiaries
Borrower/

counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

A. Vehicles 32 100 32
B. Credit 3 750 52.4 2 400 33.6 1 000 14.0 7 150
1. Agriculture refinancing facility 1 000 50.0 1 000 50.0 2 000
2. NSLCP financial services 2 750 53.4 2 400 46.6 5 150

C. Operating costs 395 97.7 9 2.3 404
D. Training 1 081 100 1 081
E. Good, Services and Inputs 2 111 63.0 396 11.8 845 25.2 3 352
F. Consultancies 1 679 46.9 1 850 51.7 47 1.3 3 576
G. Equipment and Materials 561 98.0 12 2.0 573
H. Grants and subsidies 343 10.3 2 400 71.8 600 17.9 3 343
I. Salaries 49 100 49
Interest during implementation 98 100 98

Total 10 000 50.9 1 850 9.4 2 895 14.7 2 400 12.2 600 3.1 1 912 9.7 19 657

E
B
 2

0
1
6
/LO

T
/P.2

0
/R

ev.1



EB 2016/LOT/P.20/Rev.1

9

E
B

2
0
1
6
/1

1
9
/LO

T
[C

lick h
ere an

d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

29. The overall economic internal rate of return is 11.9 per cent, against a social
discount rate in the Lao People’s Democratic Republic currently estimated at 6 per
cent. The cost-benefit ratio of 2.16 indicates a return of approximately US$2.16 for
every dollar invested. The sensitivity analysis indicates the internal rate of return to
be robust.

D. Sustainability
30. The NSLCP-RFSP design approach placed central importance on sustainability. In

terms of rural financial services, the programme-implemented livestock credit
scheme will be phased out and reflows channelled into the NARF. In addition, a
significant number or rural finance operations are expected to be conducted through
the strengthened VFs, which, due to their operational mode, tend to reach full
sustainability at very low operational volumes. If successfully implemented under the
NSLCP-RFSP, it will be possible to expand and scale up the VF-support approach,
based on the services of the NSOs, in other parts of the country. As for the NARF,
the refinancing activities would be conducted only with banks and registered MFIs
that have passed due diligence tests and reached full institutional sustainability. The
programme also places emphasis on activities related to land use allocation and
titling, which are imperative for ensuring the sustainability of any investments in
technology and knowledge transfer, and their adoption by livestock farmers. Finally,
the programme will promote the capacity-building of public institutions from the
district to the national levels. Such investments in public capacity will enable the
establishment of a sustainable technical advisory services system.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
31. The main risks identified relate to institutional issues, including: (i) a lack of

technical coordination at the grassroots level; (ii) ineffective inter-institutional
cooperation and dialogue and consequent delays in disbursement for field
implementation; and (iii) a lack of interest in rural expansion among formal banks
and registered MFIs. To mitigate these risks, the programme will: (i) develop a
thorough coordination mechanism in the implementation guidelines; (ii) ensure the
involvement of affected kum bans and farmers’ groups at all steps in the
preparation, implementation and supervision of programme activities; and (iii) raise
awareness regarding value chain financing possibilities.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
32. The programme design is guided by IFAD’s Strategic Framework 2016-2025 and the

COSOP 2011-2016 for the Lao People’s Democratic Republic. The programme
complies with IFAD’s policies and strategies on gender equality and women’s
empowerment, indigenous peoples, environment and natural resource management,
access to land and security of land tenure, and knowledge management. While the
programme’s design and implementation activities may have some environmental
and social impacts on human populations or environmentally significant areas, these
will be small in scale, dispersed, largely site-specific and reversible. In terms of
environmental impact, the programme is classified as Category B.

B. Alignment and harmonization
33. The Programme is consistent with the Government’s development objectives, which

promote the expansion of market-oriented agricultural production. The programme
objectives are consistent with IFAD’s COSOP, with their focus on agriculture and
pro-poor trade, sustainable growth through private sector development, regional
integration and transforming agriculture from subsistence farming into a diversified
commercialized sector.

34. The programme will complement other IFAD, ADB and bilateral initiatives to improve
food security and income in the Greater Mekong subregion, including: (i) the



EB 2016/LOT/P.20/Rev.1

10

E
B

2
0
1
6
/1

1
9
/LO

T
[C

lick h
ere an

d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Strategic Support for Food Security and Nutrition Project; (ii) the Microfinance in
Rural Areas – Access to Finance Programme; (iii) the Land Management and
Decentralized Planning Project; (iv) the planned New Zealand Aid
Programme-financed Lao People’s Democratic Republic Beef Industry and
Veterinary Training Project; and (v) the Core Agricultural Support Project Phase II
(for food safety, linkages to cross-border value chains and livestock management).

C. Innovations and scaling up
35. The establishment of an innovative rural financial services model, at the explicit

request of the Government, is at the core of programme design. The most significant
innovation is the expansion of VFs and NSOs. Establishing new VFs and improving
the functioning of existing community-based operators are important steps forward
for financial inclusion and the provision of financial services in rural areas. The
proposed VF- and NSO-based approach provides an opportunity to test options for
further developing such community-based approaches and to link them more closely
to formal financial sector operations. The programme will support the Government in
developing innovative methods to promote rural and agricultural finance throughout
the country.

D. Policy engagement
36. The Programme will contribute to the analysis of policy issues related to

implementation experiences, in particular in rural finance. It will also foster
stakeholder alliances to generate policy proposals, build capacity for policy
development and promote policy advocacy within national processes. In addition, the
Programme is expected to provide evidence-based inputs to policy discussions on
issues such as the regulatory framework of the livestock subsector, and land use
planning. The Programme will use platforms such as the Agricultural and Rural
Development Sector Working Group to identify policy gaps and raise policy issues
related to implementation experiences.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
37. A financing agreement between Lao People’s Democratic Republic and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower.
A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as appendix I.

38. The Lao People’s Democratic Republic is empowered under its laws to receive
financing from IFAD.

39. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
40. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Lao People’s Democratic Republic in in the amount of seven million three
hundred thousand special drawing rights (SDR 7,300,000) (equivalent to
approximately US$10.0 million), and upon such terms and conditions as shall
be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President























































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of
Liberia for the Tree Crops Extension Project
(TCEP)

Republic of Liberia

Tree Crops Extension Project (TCEP)

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of Liberia

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture

Total project cost: US$30.73 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 9.48 million (equivalent to approximately
US$13 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional: Maturity period of 40 years,
including a grace period of 10 years, with a service
charge of 0.75 per cent per annum

Amount of Adaptation for Smallholder
Agriculture Programme (ASAP) grant:

SDR 3.28 million (equivalent to approximately
US$4.5 million)

Contribution of borrower: US$1.86 million

Contribution of beneficiaries/private
sector:

US$2.31 million

Cofinancier/financing gap: US$9.06 million

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/LOT/P.38/Rev.1

1

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of Liberia for the Tree Crops Extension Project, as
contained in paragraph 47.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Liberia for
the Tree Crops Extension Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Despite significant improvements since the end of the civil war, Liberia remains a

fragile state with weak institutions, policies and governance. The outbreak of the
Ebola virus disease has further constrained Liberia’s limited institutional capacity
and impacted its economy, threatening post-war gains. Liberia is classified as a
Least Developed Country and a Low-Income Food-Deficit Country,1 and relies
heavily on foreign assistance. The gross national income per capita was US$400 in
20142 and, according to the 2014 Human Development Index (HDI), increased by
68.2 per cent from 2000 to 2013. With a 2013 HDI value of 0.412, Liberia ranked
175 out of 187 countries in human development.

2. According to United Nations statistics, the population is estimated at 4.4 million,
with an annual growth rate of 2.6 per cent. Liberia has a large youth population: in
2013, 42.9 per cent of the population was estimated to be under 14 years of age.
The agriculture sector is the primary source of livelihoods for 48.9 per cent of the
active population – mainly in smallholder and subsistence farming. Liberia signed
the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme (CAADP) compact
and has thus committed to the Maputo Declaration on Agriculture and Food Security
and of a 10 per cent budget expenditure on agriculture, though it currently commits
only 3 per cent.

3. The tree crop sector was traditionally one of Liberia’s biggest employment sectors
and an integral part of its social fabric and economy. Primary cash crops included
cocoa, coffee, oil palm and rubber. During the Liberian civil war, the tree crop
sector was devastated and many farmers displaced from their land. The abandoned
farms and plantations degenerated into forest and their associated support
structures were damaged or destroyed. Market linkages vanished, while exports
dropped to near-zero levels. Rehabilitation and growth in the tree crop sector can
do much to increase farmers’ incomes, revive the rural economy and contribute to
consolidating peace. This section focuses on the rationale and underlying
development hypothesis for IFAD involvement. It briefly explains how the project’s
development objective contributes to specific objectives of the Government of
Liberia’s Poverty Reduction Strategy (PRS) and the CAADP and to the relevant
objectives of the results-based country strategic opportunities programme
(RB-COSOP). Moreover, it shows how the project links with ongoing IFAD
projects/grants (e.g. synergies/complementarities) and with the activities and
policies of other international agencies (harmonization) and major stakeholders.
Similarly, the country's forest, soil and water resources require effective and
sustainable management practices to improve agricultural productivity and
increased resilience in the face of climate change.

1 Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, list of Low-Income Food-Deficit Countries for 2014.
2 World Bank, World Development Indicators: gross national income per capita, Atlas method (current US$).



EB 2015/LOT/P.38/Rev.1

2

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

4. The Government is prioritizing both structural investments for long-term economic
growth and the post-Ebola recovery process. The Liberia RB-COSOP reached its
midterm in 2013, and was reviewed to identify the way forward for IFAD support
under the 2013-2015 performance-based allocation system (PBAS) cycle and
beyond. Overall, the midterm review revealed that strategic objectives under the
RB-COSOP were still relevant, but the transition from emergency to development
approach should be acknowledged more, which justifies a stronger focus on support
to the cocoa subsector.

5. The proposed Tree Crops Extension Project (TCEP) is part of the Government’s
strategy to promote export-oriented growth, with deep engagement by private
stakeholders in the cocoa value chain. Liberia became a member of the International
Cocoa Organization (ICCO), and IFAD contributed to its first membership fees. The
TCEP is aligned with government policies, in particular: (a) the Agenda for
Transformation (AfT), which was launched in 2012; (b) the Cocoa Export Strategy
2014-2018, 3 which is a blueprint for increased competitiveness of Liberian cocoa in
the global market; (c) the Economic Stabilization and Recovery Plan (2015-2017);
(d) the new Land Rights Act, to be enacted in 2015; (e) the restructuring process of
the Liberia Agricultural Commodities Regulatory Authority (LACRA) Act, which will
regulate the cocoa subsector; and (f) the National Adaptation Programme of Action
for climate change resilience.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
6. The TCEP will intervene in approximately eight statutory districts in Nimba County.

This geographical expansion will complement the ongoing Smallholder Tree Crop
Revitalization Support Project (STCRSP) in Lofa County.

7. The TCEP will benefit 11,000 stakeholders of the cocoa value chain, including:
(i) 8,000 cocoa smallholder members of kuu groups4 and farmer field schools
(FFS); (ii) approximately 2,400 additional farmers, who will benefit from the
rehabilitation of roads, input supply and market linkages; and (iii) 600 people
through job creation along the value chain. To select the 8,000 cocoa smallholders,
the TCEP will combine a self-targeting approach with tools to ensure inclusiveness.
Priority will be given to women, youth (18-35) and survivors of the Ebola outbreak.

B. Project development objective
8. The overall development goal of the TCEP is “to improve the livelihoods and climate

change resilience of rural households in Nimba County". The development objective
is to improve the incomes and climate change resilience of smallholder cocoa
producers in the county.

9. Some key impact and outcome indicators are: (i) 8,000 smallholder farmers have
increased the quantity of cocoa sold; (ii) 4,000 smallholder farmers have increased
their resilience to climate change; (iii) gross sales of cocoa per farm have increased
from US$178 in year 1 (Y1) to US$1,718 in Y6; (iv) at least 90 per cent of cocoa is
paid as grade 1 and receives 75 per cent of the ICCO reference price in Y6;
(v) 200 kilometres (km) of roads made passable all year round by end-Y3; and
(vi) 9,800 tonnes of cocoa sold through cooperatives and private-sector partners
(PSPs).

3 Developed with the support of the International Trade Centre.
4 Kuu is a traditional community-based cooperative work group that carries out brushing and cleaning of agricultural plots.



EB 2015/LOT/P.38/Rev.1

3

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

C. Components/outcomes
10. Component A: Revitalization of cocoa plantations. Basic revitalization and

replanting will take place in Y1-Y4 and will follow these phases: 1,000 hectares (ha)
in Y1, 2,500 in Y2, 3,000 in Y3 and 3,500 in Y4. Starting in Y2, 2,000 ha will be
targeted for replanting. Value chain linkage development, and greater focus on crop
husbandry and post-harvest handling, will be undertaken in Y1-Y6. Establishment
and operation of a seed station in Nimba County will also be supported to
guarantee the availability of improved planting material for farmers, village
nurseries and privately owned nurseries. Diversification of cocoa farms with banana
and plantain will be pursued for food security, climate resilience and smoothing of
cash flow, while simultaneously increasing the role of women in the farm economy.

11. Component B: Rehabilitation and maintenance of roads. Approximately
200 km of farm-to-market roads will be rehabilitated in Nimba County, using the
implementation methodology developed under the STCRSP. Regarding
maintenance, the TCEP will have a three-pronged approach: (i) capacity-building in
road maintenance; (ii) improvement of the road maintenance strategy, including
development of a financing mechanism; and (iii) transition financing of
maintenance on a cash-for-work basis.

12. Component C: Service provision for value chain development. This
component aims to: (i) strengthen the capacity of farmers’ cooperatives at the
district level; (ii) strengthen the capacity of the Ministry of Agriculture (MOA) and
Cooperative Development Agency (CDA) at decentralized levels; (iii) ensure that
climate change adaptation is mainstreamed in the technical support systems for
value chain development; and (iv) monitor deforestation in the tree crop sector.
The main innovation under the TCEP is the use of a long-term growth path for
institutional capacity-building of cooperatives.

13. Component D: Project coordination, monitoring and evaluation. The
objective of this component is to ensure effective, efficient operational planning,
implementation, monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and knowledge management.

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

14. Approaches and manuals developed under the STCRSP will be updated, and
STCRSP implementation arrangements harmonized with those of the TCEP. The
TCEP will build on the existing expertise and human resources of the STCRSP.
Moreover, the project will adopt a value chain approach to link cocoa farmers,
organized at the grass-roots level in kuu groups and FFS, with cooperatives and
PSPs.

15. Cocoa revitalization of farms will take place in Y1-Y4. Rehabilitation of roads will
take place in Y2 and Y3 and preparatory works will start in Y1. Finally, with regard
to the provision of services for value chain development, the approach to enhancing
the institutional capacity of cooperatives will be less supply-driven and more
bottom-up, while also clearly defining the responsibilities of the cooperatives in
their partnerships with the project and with grass-roots groups. Previous mapping
and capacity assessments of farmers’ cooperatives in Liberia have lacked sufficient
discrimination on which to base the selection for project inclusion.

Organizational frameworkB.
16. MOA is designated as lead project agency for the TCEP. It will have overall

responsibility for implementation and will ensure linkages to other relevant
ministries and agencies. MOA will also work closely with the CDA and LACRA.

17. The national steering committee (NSC) of the STCRSP will also serve the TCEP. The
NSC will orient the project strategy, oversee planning, review progress and impact,



EB 2015/LOT/P.38/Rev.1

4

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

and ensure linkages with related projects, government services and relevant value
chain stakeholders. The programme management unit (PMU) will be the secretariat
of the NSC.

18. The PMU, which is anchored in the Planning and Development Department of MOA,
is in charge of implementing all donor-funded projects in agriculture. Within the
PMU, coordination, management and M&E of the TCEP will be the responsibility of
the project implementation unit (PIU) in Monrovia, which has responsibility for all
IFAD-funded projects in Liberia. The IFAD-PIU will ensure day-to-day management
of the TCEP. In addition, the TCEP will establish a county PIU in Sanniquellie, Nimba
County.

19. The main implementing partners of the TCEP will be: (a) selected cooperatives
engaging in business agreements with the kuu groups and FFS; (b) at least two
PSPs, who will engage in procurement plans with the project and the cooperatives;
(c) the Central Agricultural Research Institute (CARI); and (d) other specialized
service providers, including national and international consulting firms,
non-governmental organizations (NGOs), commercial financial institutions and
others.

20. At the county level, the TCEP will liaise with the decentralized functions of MOA and
CDA. The county agricultural coordinator (CAC) and district agricultural officers
(DAOs) will monitor implementation of components A and C. The county resident
engineer (CRE) will liaise with the project on implementation and monitoring of
component B. A memorandum of understanding will be signed with the project to
define roles and responsibilities.

Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning andC.
knowledge management

21. Planning. The Monrovia PIU will consolidate an annual workplan and budget
(AWP/B) for each project year, on the basis of proposals from the county PIU. The
AWP/B will include: (i) a detailed description of planned project activities for the
coming project year, and the sources and uses of the related funds; (ii) an
18-month procurement plan for items to be procured with IFAD financing; and
(iii) indicators and associated targets extracted from the logical framework. The
draft AWP/B will be submitted to the NSC for clearance and then to IFAD for
comments and final non-objection.

22. Monitoring and evaluation. The logical framework of the TCEP will form the basis
for measuring outputs, outcomes and impacts of the project. The results of the
TCEP will then feed into the MOA subsector contribution to the national AfT M&E
system. The TCEP M&E system will take targeting of women and youth into account
– as a minimum, disaggregating data by gender and age. Moreover, indicators will
be developed to measure the results of specific activities targeting the most
vulnerable segments of the target population.

23. Baseline data will be collected prior to project implementation to ensure that results
are closely monitored to continuously improve the outreach, relevance and
effectiveness of interventions. To this end, in June 2015 SCOPEinsight5 carried out
an assessment of 15 cocoa cooperatives in Nimba and Bong counties in order to
diagnose capacity to enable the project to better tailor training curricula to the
specific needs identified. This exercise will be repeated in TCEP Y3 and Y6. In
addition, the PMU has contacted CARI to conduct a mapping exercise of
cocoa/coffee farms in Nimba County with which the project will potentially work.6

5 SCOPEinsight is an independent rating agency based in the Netherlands that assesses the business potential of
farmer organizations in agriculture, dairy, forestry and aquaculture in developing countries.

6 MOA/PMU is exploring other partnerships that could support the implementation of M&E activities under TCEP
(i.e. young professionals, the Liberia Institute of Statistics and Geo-Information Services (LISGIS), and county
community colleges).



EB 2015/LOT/P.38/Rev.1

5

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Finally, the TCEP will apply IFAD standard reporting procedures during
implementation.

24. M&E will be undertaken at multiple levels and by multiple stakeholders to support
effective implementation. Indicators have been developed during project design and
will be further refined as project activities become more detailed.

25. Forest cover and deforestation risks will be monitored in TCEP target areas through
a geo-information service (under the Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture
Programme [ASAP] grant).

26. Knowledge management plays a central role in IFAD’s scaling up agenda, and
the knowledge management strategy of IFAD-supported projects in Liberia will be
strengthened beginning with the TCEP. An action plan will be developed at start up.
This plan will outline activities to be undertaken, as well as roles and responsibilities
of project staff and implementing partners, to ensure the collection of high-quality
data, in-depth analysis, and creation of knowledge products for evidence-based
decision-making and to contribute to policy dialogue on the cocoa subsector.

Financial management, procurement and governanceD.
27. Country context and risk rating. The inherent risk in Liberia is assessed as

medium. The Corruption Perceptions Index score for Liberia has slightly
deteriorated from 41 in 2012 to 38 in 2013 and 37 in 2014. According to the latest
Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability assessment, conducted in 2012, the
Government has made significant improvements since the last assessment (2007),
but the overall state of public financial management remains moderately weak.

28. Responsibility for financial management of the project will rest with the PIU that is
responsible for implementing other ongoing IFAD projects. As part of the project
design process, a financial management assessment was undertaken. Financial
management arrangements and the capacity of the PIU were assessed as mostly
adequate to meet IFAD requirements; thus initial risk is considered medium. The
PIU will prepare periodic interim financial reports and annual project financial
statements in accordance with accounting standards acceptable to IFAD. All
financial management arrangements will be detailed by the PIU in a financial
procedures manual to be approved by the Fund.

29. Flow of funds. There will be two designated bank accounts (in United States
dollars) opened in the Central Bank of Liberia, one for the IFAD loan and one for
the ASAP grant. IFAD financing shall be disbursed against duly certified withdrawal
applications in accordance with IFAD disbursement procedures to be specified
further in the letter to the borrower.

30. Audit arrangements. The borrower, through the PIU, will appoint independent
auditors acceptable to IFAD, under terms of reference cleared by IFAD, and in line
with the IFAD Guidelines on Project Audits. An audited annual consolidated financial
statement for the entire project, together with a management letter on audit
observations on internal controls, shall be submitted to the Fund within six months
of the end of the fiscal year.

SupervisionE.
31. The project will be directly supervised by IFAD. Annual supervision missions,

including follow-up missions when needed, will be organized with the participation
of MOA, the Ministry of Finance and Development Planning, CDA, LACRA,
cooperatives and beneficiaries. Supervision will not be conducted as general
inspections, but as opportunities to assess achievements and lessons learned, and
to reflect on how to improve implementation and impact. Missions will be an
integral part of the knowledge management cycle.



EB 2015/LOT/P.38/Rev.1

6

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

IV. Project costs, financing and benefits
A. Project costs
32. Total project costs over six years, including contingencies, taxes and duties, are

estimated at US$30.73 million. The TCEP will absorb the entire 2013-2015 PBAS
allocation of US$13 million for Liberia under highly concessional lending terms, as
well as US$4.5 million in ASAP grant funding for climate change resilience activities.
The Government will finance taxes and duties on imported goods and the value
added tax (VAT) for a total of US$1.86 million. PSPs are expected to provide credit
of at least US$0.96 million. This amount includes PSP investments in the marketing
chain, as well as working capital that could be provided to cooperatives to buy
cocoa. The contribution of farmers totals US$1.35 million and consists of a
40 per cent contribution of own labour to the revitalization and replanting of cocoa
plantations and management of village nurseries, as well as to solar dryers. A
financing gap of US$9.06 million remains.

33. The ASAP grant will be used to finance: (a) in-country production of high-quality,
climate-adapted and disease-free planting material (seeds and grafting), including
through international partnerships; (b) promotion of farming practices that serve as
a buffer against increased climate pressures (higher shade, more-intensive plant
management including grafting and pruning, and income diversification through
various tree crops); (c) corresponding training of technicians and farmers;
(d) provision of solar dryers and training in their use; (e) participatory land-use
planning and monitoring based on satellite imagery, to ensure that increased
profitability of the tree crop sector and improved road access to remote areas do
not lead to deforestation; and (f) institutional capacity-building, policy dialogue and
knowledge management in the field of climate change resilience.

Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Millions of United States dollars)

IFAD
2013-2015

PBAS
Financing

gap
IFAD grant

(ASAP) Government

Private-
sector

partners Beneficiaries Total
Component Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %
A. Revitalization of

cocoa plantations 3.49 34.8 0.16 1.6 3.43 34.2 0.64 6.4 0.96 9.6 1.35 13.5 10.03 32.6
B. Rehabilitation and

maintenance of
roads 0.64 6.3 8.9 87.1 - - 0.68 6.6 - - - - 10.22 33.3

C. Service provision for
value chain
development 4.62 76.0 - - 1.07 17.6 0.39 6.3 - - - - 6.08 19.8

D. Project coordination,
monitoring and
evaluation 4.25 96.5 - - - - 0.15 3.5 - - - - 4.4 14.3

Total 13 42.3 9.06 29.5 4.5 14.6 1.86 6.0 0.96 3.1 1.35 4.4 30.73 100.0

B. Project financing
34. The TCEP will absorb the entire 2013-2015 PBAS allocation of US$13 million for

Liberia under highly concessional lending terms, as well as US$4.5 million in ASAP
grant funding for climate change resilience activities. The financing gap of
US$9.06 million – mainly to finance rehabilitation of roads (component B) – could
be financed by IFAD’s PBAS 2016-2018 allocation (modalities to be confirmed). The
Government and IFAD will explore further cofinancing opportunities.



E
B
 2

0
1
5
/LO

T
/P.3

8
/R

ev.1

7

Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD
2013-2015 PBAS Financing gap

IFAD grant
(ASAP) Government

Private-sector
partners Beneficiaries Total

Expenditure category Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

I. Investment cost 9.3 35.1 9.0 34.1 4.1 15.4 1.78 6.6 0.96 3.7 1.35 5.1 26.49 85.8
A. Works 99 1.1 8.5 90.9 99 1.1 0.7 7.0 - - - - 9.4 30.5
B. Goods, services

and inputs 2.1 49.7 0.1 2.5 0.6 13.8 0.3 7.0 - - 1.15 27.0 4.3 14.0
C. Vehicles 0.8 84.9 - - 0.07 8.1 0.07 7.0 - - - - 0.9 3.1
D. Equipment and

materials 1.1 24.6 0.04 0.9 1.9 42.0 0.3 7.0 0.96 21.2 0.2 4.3 4.5 14.8
E. Consultancies 1.9 67.8 - - 0.7 25.7 0.2 6.5 - - - - 2.8 9.3
F. Training 2.6 82.3 0.04 1.1 0.3 10.2 0.2 6.4 - - - - 3.1 10.1
G. Workshops 0.1 81.8 0.02 11.2 - - 0.009 7.0 - - - - 0.1 0.4
H. Services 0.5 45.4 0.3 24.5 0.3 30.2 - - - - - - 1.1 3.7

II. Recurrent costs 3.7 86.0 0.06 1.2 0.4 9.9 0. 08 2.8 - - - - 4.24 14.2
A. Salaries and

allowances * 2.5 95.2 - - 0.1 4.8 - - - - - - 2.6 8.5
B. Operational

costs 1.2 72.2 0.06 3.1 0.3 17.7 0. 08 7.0 - - - - 1.64 5.6

Total 13.0 42.3 9.06 29.5 4.5 14.6 1.86 6.0 0.96 3.1 1.35 4.4 30.73 100
*

Institutional capacity in Liberia is very weak and few service providers are available. Hence the required expertise needs to be internalized in the project. About 44 per cent of recurrent costs are
for staff salaries at the centralized level; 16 per cent for allowances to conduct field visits; 10 per cent for support to decentralized functions of MOA, CDA and young professionals; 9 per cent for
staff salaries at the local level; 8 per cent for salaries of staff tree crop experts; and the remainder for equipment and vehicles.



EB 2015/LOT/P 38/Rev.1

8

E
B
 2

0
1
5
/LO

T
/P.

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
35. Project benefits. The TCEP will have 11,000 beneficiaries: 8,000 cocoa

smallholder farmers, 2,400 additional farmers (who will benefit from spillover
effects) and approximately 600 people through job creation along the value chain.
Considering an average household size of 5.9 in the project area, this adds up to
64,900 household members. The project is expected to lead to increases in cocoa
production, marketing and exports as a result of: (a) revitalization of abandoned
plantations; (b) replanting of new trees on existing plantations; (c) higher yields at
the smallholder level, owing to improved production practices promoted through
dedicated extension systems; and (d) higher quality of cocoa as a result of
improved post-harvest handling and marketing. As a result of component B, the
rehabilitation of farm-to-market roads will procure access to markets, reduce time
and costs to reach local markets and limit the post-harvest losses caused by bad
transportation conditions. Regarding component C, the strengthening of
cooperatives will contribute to increasing their bargaining power in price-setting
when negotiating with buyers. It will also contribute to delivery of quality services
to cocoa farmers and guarantee sustainability of the approach, in particular,
dissemination of improved planting material, extension services, and access to
inputs and to output markets.

36. Financial analysis. The four financial models developed to simulate interventions
of the TCEP are based on information collected by the ongoing STCRSP and the
TCEP design team in April and July 2015. The financial crop models capture:
(i) increases in cocoa yield; (ii) increases in quality; and (iii) increases in prices for
higher quality, as well as better bargaining power for farmers. The yield
assumptions are based on information from other projects in Liberia and the region.
Cocoa price assumptions are based on World Bank price information and
projections (constant 2015 prices). Assumptions regarding grades are based on the
experiences of ongoing projects.

37. Economic analysis. The economic rate of return (ERR) of 37.2 per cent over
20 years is profitable from an economic standpoint and generates a total of
US$108.8 million in the same period (social discount factor: 4.3 per cent). The
sensitivity analysis indicates a solid resilience to: (i) increases in costs due to a
combination of risks affecting output prices, yields and adoption rates; (ii) lower
adoption rates due to a limited outreach of extension services; and (iii) increases in
project costs due to higher prices of service providers, road construction and
inputs.

D. Sustainability
38. It is proposed to classify the project as posing moderate socio-environmental risks

– category B – in view of: targeting of existing plantations and rehabilitation of
existing roads; safeguards against indirect deforestation; measures against
environmental risks of the application of agrochemicals; and careful monitoring of
negative social impacts. A Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment
Procedures (SECAP) note has been prepared. In terms of climate risks, a
preliminary classification of moderate climate risk is proposed at this stage.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
39. The main risks and mitigation measures to be adopted are: (i) weak governance

and institutional capacities – the TCEP will adopt direct contracting procedures,
follow IFAD procurement guidelines, and strengthen training and control systems
related to financial management; (ii) weak cooperatives and market linkages – kuu
groups and FFS will enhance the capacity and bargaining power of farmers. Market
linkages will be established through PSPs and cooperatives. The TCEP will also
provide institutional support to cooperatives; (iii) increased disease pressure will be
mitigated through the setting up and training of pesticide application teams in



EB 2015/LOT/P 38/Rev.1

9

E
B
 2

0
1
5
/LO

T
/P.

cooperatives and FFS, as well as through promoting the use of shade from trees
and diversification of farming systems; (iv) deforestation – interventions will be
restricted to existing farms; forest conservation agreements and participatory land-
use monitoring will contribute to controlling deforestation risk; (v) increased use of
pesticides and fertilizer – the fertilizer application promoted will be in doses too low
to cause environmental harm; biopesticides will be applied through specially set up,
trained and equipped spraying teams, thereby reducing the risk of inappropriate
use; (vi) insufficient planting material and/or not adapted to specific needs – a
collection station will be set up for screening and multiplication of seed and bud
woods for grafting; (vii) low quality of cocoa – solar dryers will be introduced for
individual farmers and at the cooperative level. LACRA will be involved in quality
control.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

40. The design of the TCEP is compliant with the relevant IFAD policies, including the
IFAD Strategic Framework 2011-2015, Rural Enterprise Policy, Private Sector
Development and Partnership Strategy, Rural Finance Policy, Gender Equality and
Women’s Empowerment, Youth Policy Brief, Targeting – Reaching the Rural Poor,
and Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
41. The Cocoa Export Strategy 2014-2018 is a blueprint for the increased

competiveness of Liberian cocoa in the global market. On the basis of an in-depth
diagnostic, the strategy proposes 15 structural interventions in the cocoa value
chain, of which at least eight will be addressed by the TCEP. These structural
interventions aim to: (i) speed up efforts to rehabilitate cocoa farms abandoned
during the civil war and better organize farm operations; (ii) improve land
management practices, aligned with Global Good Agricultural Practice
(GLOBALG.A.P.) and good management practice standards, especially at the
smallholder and cooperative level; (iii) increase availability of inputs by developing
a locally manufactured input supply chain, and by improving access to imported
inputs; (iv) use high-quality saplings/seedlings through collaboration with research
institutes in Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana and the United Kingdom, among other countries;
(v) increase levels of mechanization, leading to increased capabilities of sector
stakeholders for transformation and processing; (vi) better train local buying
agents engaging in best practices and ensure that they are maintained at the
farmgate level; (vii) increase support to women cross-border traders and other
women’s groups and actors active in the sector through mentoring, training in
improved negotiation skills, technical support and access to efficient grievance
mechanisms; and (viii) develop in-market support/national promotion branding.

Innovations and scaling upC.
42. Several approaches adopted by the TCEP are innovative: (a) organization of

farmers at the grass-roots level to enhance their bargaining power; (b) integration
of climate change resilience and related institutional capacity-building; (c) greater
focus on the supply chain for new genetic cocoa material; (d) added attention to
the post-harvest aspects and quality of cocoa; (e) extra emphasis on service
delivery by cooperatives to their members; (f) the combination of basic
revitalization of plantations with enhanced revitalization and replanting;
(g) additional focus on measures to include women and promote their access to
benefits; and (h) use of a long-term growth path for institutional capacity-building
of cooperatives, combined with a more-systematic approach and institutional
auditing.



EB 2015/LOT/P 38/Rev.1

10

E
B
 2

0
1
5
/LO

T
/P.

Policy engagementD.
43. ASAP grant. Within the ambit of the new LACRA Act (once enacted) and the United

Nations Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation Programme
(UN-REDD) policy development in Liberia – and in collaboration with other
development partners – the TCEP will support a national round-table on climate-
friendly cocoa and the potential expansion of cocoa production towards wetter
counties as part of a countrywide climate change adaptation strategy. Other items
that could be discussed are: (a) switching to farmgate pricing with a prescribed
minimum; (b) stimulating the cocoa sector through quality premiums and enforced
minimum standards; and (c) bilateral agreements with Ghana and Côte d’Ivoire on
technical exchanges, exchange of germplasm, multiplication strategies, control of
diseases and child labour issues.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
44. A project financing agreement between the Republic of Liberia and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as appendix I.

45. The Republic of Liberia is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

46. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
47. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Republic of Liberia in an amount equivalent to nine million four hundred
and eighty thousand special drawing rights (SDR 9,480,000), and upon such
terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms
and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant under the
Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme to the Republic of Liberia
in an amount equivalent to three million two hundred and eighty thousand
special drawing rights (SDR 3,280,000), and upon such terms and conditions
as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions
presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President

















































President’s report

Proposed grant to the
Islamic Republic of Mauritania for the
Inclusive Value Chain Development Project

Islamic Republic of Mauritania

Inclusive Value Chain Development Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Recipient: Islamic Republic of Mauritania

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture

Total project cost: US$45.2 million

Amount of IFAD Debt Sustainability
Framework grant:

10.75 SDR million (equivalent to approximately
US$15.0 million)

Amount of IFAD Adaptation for
Smallholder Agriculture Programme
Trust Fund grant:

4.3 SDR million (equivalent to approximately US$6
million)

Contribution of Government: US$5 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$2.2 million

Contribution of private sector: US$2 million

Financing gap: Approximately US$15 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: IFAD



EB 2016/LOT/P.14

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing for the Islamic Republic of Mauritania for the Inclusive Value Chain
Development Project, as contained in paragraph 49.

Proposed grant to the Islamic Republic of Mauritania for
the Inclusive Value Chain Development Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Mauritania has about four million inhabitants, 50 per cent of whom derive their

livelihoods from crop and livestock farming and fishing (World Bank, 2013). The
annual demographic growth rate was 2.8 per cent in 2013. The country covers an
area of 1,030,700 km2, more than two thirds of which is desert.

2. During the period 2005-2010, the rural sector contributed an average of 25 per
cent of GDP, which breaks down by subsector as follows: 11 per cent plant
production, 9 per cent livestock and 5 per cent fishing (World Bank, 2016).1 During
the same period, annual average growth in GDP linked to the primary sector was
4.1 per cent, with significant discrepancies between years as a result of irregular
precipitation.

3. Mauritania is classified as a lower middle-income country.2 The human development
index (HDI) improved from 0.424 to 0.487 between 2004 and 2014 but remains
below the average for sub-Saharan Africa, which stands at 0.502. Although more
than half the population live in rural areas, the country is urbanizing very rapidly
and the population is very young: 44 per cent of Mauritanians are under 15 years of
age,3 60 per cent under 25 and just 5 per cent are over 60.

4. The incidence of rural poverty remains high, particularly in the country’s south. The
proportion of the population defined as poor fell from 51 per cent in 2000 to
47 per cent in 2004, 42 per cent in 2008 and 31 per cent in 2014.4,5 Despite the
progress made, this percentage remains high, particularly in rural areas where
74 per cent of poor people live, and in the country’s south where 44.4 per cent of
the rural population still live below the poverty line compared to 16.7 per cent in
urban areas.6

5. The food and nutritional situation of Mauritania’s population is cause for concern.
According to the last food security survey (FSMS, 2015) conducted by the Food
Security Commission with support from the World Food Programme (WFP),
23.8 per cent of Mauritania’s households are food-insecure, particularly in the
country’s southern agro-pastoral strip. Ongoing food insecurity leads to high rates
of chronic malnutrition among children under five, with national rates above
20 per cent,7 while acute malnutrition affects 14 per cent of children.8,9

6. Local value chains face competition from imports. Mauritania imports an average of
60 per cent of the staple foodstuffs consumed in the country. Only red meat and
fish are covered by domestic production, while two thirds of cereals are imported.
Imports of market garden products, mainly from Morocco and Europe, have been

1 World Development Indicators.
2 World Bank, October 2015.
3 WFP, Food Security Survey in Mauritania, July 2009.
4 These poverty rates are based on a poverty line estimated in real terms at MRO 169,445 at 2014 harmonized prices.
5 World Bank, October 2015.
6 MAED, National Poverty Profile in Mauritania. Draft version, June 2015.
7 Critical threshold according to WHO.
8 SMART national nutritional survey, Mauritania, Ministry of Health and UNICEF, June 2015.
9 IFPRI Global Nutrition Report 2015.



EB 2016/LOT/P.14

2

rising since 2010. Despite substantial investments in developing rice growing areas,
the volume of rice imports remains high. Sugar and oil consumption are entirely
import-dependent. It is therefore essential to take demand into account before
undertaking any intervention in production to reduce the country’s food
dependence. This demand-driven approach is all the more important given the
experience of the Value Chains Development Programme for Poverty Reduction
(ProLPRAF), the previous project cofinanced by IFAD, which showed the local
markets can quickly become saturated.

7. Mauritania is among the countries most vulnerable to climate change. Based on the
environmental performance index for 2010, the country is in 161st place of
163 countries. Climate change amplifies natural risks such as periodic drought and
flooding, the resulting risks of network breakdown and human impacts. Climate
change also reduces productivity and biomass quality, which has a detrimental
impact on pastureland and non-timber forest products. High temperatures also
pose an obstacle for product conservation.

8. Mauritania’s financial sector is relatively modest in size and not well developed in
rural areas. With about 15,000 members, or 0.4 per cent of the population, and
US$1.7 million in financial savings,10 coverage by rural credit unions remains
limited. Low demographic density and low levels of capitalization among rural
people, hence their credit unions, place constraints on financial inclusion in value
chains.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and the
results-based COSOP

9. In a country context characterized by high levels of poverty and malnutrition, poor
value chain competitiveness, heavy dependence on imports and climate phenomena
that accentuate impoverishment among the population, PRODEFI builds upon and
scales up IFAD’s experience in Mauritania and elsewhere in the subregion by
adopting a poverty reduction approach based on supporting inclusive value chains.
The PRODEFI approach is fully aligned with national policies and strategies – the
Rural Sector Development Strategy, the National Agricultural Development Plan,
the National Food Security Strategy, the National Programme of Action for
Adaptation to Climate Change – and IFAD’s country strategy note. It is also based
on the experience of technical and financial partners with a presence in Mauritania,
particularly the European Union, WFP and the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations (FAO).

10. ProLPRAF showed that market access is a determining factor in food security for
poor people. It identified pro-poor value chains with good nutritional potential in
which vulnerable people, women in particular, could position themselves through
partnerships with the private sector and benefit from the value added with project
support in production, processing, transportation and commercialization. Promoting
policy dialogue between the Government and the main value chain actors will help
install an enabling environment for promotion of local production.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
11. PRODEFI will be implemented in the wilayas (regions) in the country’s

south – Brakna, Assaba, Gorgol, Guidimakha, Hodh El Gharbi and Hodh Ech
Charghi. In these six wilayas, intervention will be localized and phased. During the
first phase, in each value chain, the project will intervene around markets where
ProLPRAF gains need to be reinforced. During the second phase, PRODEFI will
gradually expand its activities in all six wilayas.

B. Project development objective
12. The overall objective of PRODEFI is to improve the incomes and food and nutritional

10 Central Bank annual reports and interviews during formulation mission.



EB 2016/LOT/P.14

3

security of poor rural people, particularly women and young people, in the project
area. The development objective is to include poor rural people, including women
and young people, in profitable and resilient value chains. PRODEFI will contribute
directly to achieving the objectives of the Rural Sector Development Strategy and
the National Agricultural Development Plan.

13. The project will target 42,600 direct beneficiaries and 243,000 indirect
beneficiaries, mainly farmers and other upstream and downstream value chain
actors. For the first phase, four value chains have been selected based on ProLPRAF
results and their poverty reduction potential: market gardening, poultry farming,
goat milk and non-timber forest products. For the second phase, plans call for
PRODEFI to operate in new value chains based on the results of the market studies
done during the first phase. A pilot operation in inland fishing will be conducted as
of project start-up around lake Foum Gleita.

C. Components/outcomes
14. The project will be structured around the following three components:

15. Component 1: Revitalization of value chains and development of pro-poor
public-private-producer partnerships (4Ps). The desired effect is for value
chain working groups (GTFs) and partnerships to support value chain development
and defend the interests of poor producers. To this end, the project will:
(i) reinforce and scale up GTF activities undertaken by ProLPRAF; (ii) promote a
better match between supply and demand and help set up higher performing and
more inclusive value chains by capitalizing producers, bringing actors into the
banking system, formalizing commercial transactions and facilitating partnerships
between actors, from simple contractual arrangements to 4P type partnerships; and
(iii) facilitate access to markets through structural improvements.

16. Component 2: Development and promotion of production models. The
intended effect is for the beneficiaries to adopt resilient, market-driven production
models that are sensitive to nutritional challenges. To this end, the project will
support: (i) competitive production models programmed to respond to market
demand, contracts and the 4Ps facilitated under component 1; and (ii) making
available training and advisory services associated with these production models,
i.e. nutritional education, agricultural advice, training for young people and
functional literacy.

17. Within the framework of these activities, the Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture
Programme (ASAP) financing granted will make it possible to take better account of
climate change by facilitating the use of solar energy – from production to storage
and processing – and promoting sustainable management techniques for natural
resources such as water, pastureland and plant resources, which are particularly
important in the non-timber forest products value chain.

18. Component 3: Coordination, M&E and knowledge management. Funding will
be provided for: (i) the project coordination and management unit based in
Nouakchott; (ii) the operations of two project operational management units, based
in Kaedi and Kiffa; (iii) the technical and financial assistance pool, based on cost
sharing with the Poverty Reduction Project in Aftout South and Karakoro – Phase II;
and (iv) strategic and technical steering activities as well as M&E, knowledge
management and communication.



EB 2016/LOT/P.14

4

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
19. The project approach adopted by PRODEFI is to scale up the successes of ProLPRAF

while reinforcing and complementing them and integrating them with national
strategies through systematic, expanded policy dialogue. The project will adopt a
value chain approach driven by market demand. It will support actors involved the
value chains, both individually and collectively, as well as policy dialogue.Within the
framework of component 1, the actors will benefit from assistance in organization
and consultation to improve the matching of supply to demand. Project
interventions will consist of building the capacities of the actors in organization,
governance and leadership. The project will promote actor-to-actor contracting,
prioritizing producers and private promoters of innovative projects. Under
component 2, the project will, in developing market-driven production models as
defined in component 1, promote an increase in agricultural productivity and
processing by offering support to producers – underscoring financial viability,
improved nutrition and adaptation to climate change.

20. In addition, to gain efficiency, the project will adopt an outsourcing approach with
support from experienced national and international operators and consulting firms.
Operational partnerships will be promoted with other technical and financial
partners, civil society and the private sector to implement activities.

B. Organizational framework
21. Technical oversight of PRODEFI will be provided by the Policy, Planning, Statistics,

M&E and Cooperation Directorate (DPSSEC) of the Ministry of Agriculture, with
technical links to the departments in charge of the value chains targeted by the
project: livestock, fisheries and environment. The government contribution to the
project will be included in the budget of the Ministry of Economy and Finance. The
national steering committee will report to the Public Investment and Economic
Cooperation Directorate of the Ministry of Economy and Finance. In addition, the
participation of GTF representatives will be crucial to facilitate policy dialogue
around value chain promotion. The same national steering committee could also
pilot other projects as part of IFAD’s programme in Mauritania.

22. With respect to programme coordination, a team in Nouakchott will be responsible
for operational and strategic project steering, with a mandate to, first, coordinate
and support work by branches and, second, facilitate policy dialogue on value chain
development at the national level.

23. Two operational management units, located in Kaédi and Kiffa and reporting
directly to the project coordinator, will be responsible for implementing the project.
Each unit will be administered by a branch head, based respectively within the
agriculture office in Kiffa and the livestock office in Kaédi. Both branches will be
supported by a deputy branch head and will benefit from the services of an M&E
assistant who will provide support for monitoring contracting, targeting, gender
equality, youth and nutrition, as well as a financial officer, secretariat and drivers.
Work premises will be shared with the regional offices.

24. With a view to gradually putting in place a programme approach to IFAD’s portfolio
in Mauritania, a shared pool of technical and financial assistance will provide
support to both projects in the portfolio. To this end, the PRODEFI PMU will be
housed in shared premises at the Nouakchott branch of PASK II.

C. Planning, M&E, learning and knowledge management
Planning

25. The PRODEFI activities will be presented each year in the form of an annual
workplan and budget (AWP/B) prepared on the basis of actors in the value chains
identified with GTF support and supported by annual action plans. Needs expressed
at the local level will be gathered on a participatory basis and consolidated by
wilayas with support from the operational management branches concerned. These



EB 2016/LOT/P.14

5

workplans will be subject to validation by technical steering committees, then
consolidated by the project coordination team in a national AWP/B and transmitted
for comments to the Ministry of Agriculture, then approved by the national steering
committee before being sent to IFAD for non objection.

M&E
26. The PRODEFI M&E system will be set up to provide information and analysis needed

to steer project implementation and plan sufficient human and financial resources
for implementation. It will measure progress in project implementation and its
effects and impact on the target groups. It will also report on a limited list of
indicators in connection with the Results and Impact Management System (RIMS),
the effects of climate change (ASAP financing) and nutrition.

27. The system will be participatory, and the main M&E stakeholders will be GTFs,
implementation partners and service providers. Socio-economic baseline surveys
will be done by external service providers at project start-up and completion, and
will be strengthened with a study on the problematic issue of gender and poverty,
which will be conducted on the basis of the women’s empowerment in agriculture
index.

Learning and knowledge management
28. A knowledge management strategy will be developed under PRODEFI. The

approach will consist of creating a value chain between M&E, knowledge and
communication in order to collect, process, document, add value to and
disseminate on a large scale the data and information generated by activities in the
field, using multimedia and new technologies. The lessons learned will be
communicated via the PRODEFI website and at various national and international
workshops.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
Financial management

29. From start-up, PRODEFI will benefit from fiduciary support to encourage a forward
planning dynamic, which will be reviewed and supported during supervision
missions.

Flow of funds
30. To facilitate disbursements, the Recipient will open a designated project account

denominated in United States dollars at the Central Bank of Mauritania. The
National Pesticide Control Commission (CNCP) will open three current accounts
denominated in Mauritanian Ouguiya as the operating accounts in the two cities
where the PRODEFI branches will be located and in Nouakchott, where CNCP has its
headquarters. Start-up costs in amounts and categories to be defined during
negotiations with the Government are provided for upon the entry into
effectiveness of the PRODEFI financing agreement. Commitments and payments for
these expenses will be submitted by the Government of Mauritania to IFAD for non
objection on the basis of a detailed AWP/B.

Audit
31. The project will have an internal control function with activities based on an annual

plan drawn up by the internal controller. In addition, a full project audit conforming
to relevant international standards will be conducted each year by a firm drawn
from a shortlist with demonstrated experience in auditing the accounts of
IFAD-funded projects or programmes.

Procurement
32. Contracts for goods, works and services funded by IFAD will be awarded in

accordance with the regulations of the Recipient, provided they are compatible with
IFAD’s procurement guidelines. Procedures governing contracts below the threshold
for sector commission jurisdiction will be set forth in the PRODEFI fiduciary manual.



EB 2016/LOT/P.14

6

E. Supervision
33. Project supervision and administration of the financing will be done directly by

IFAD.

IV. Project costs, financing, benefits
A. Project cost
34. The total cost of the project, which will be implemented over eight years, will be

US$45.2 million, of which US$4.2 million in respect of physical and financial
contingencies and US$41.0 million in base costs, which break down as follows:
US$18.3 million for component 1 (45 per cent), US$16.9 million for
component 2 (41 per cent) and US$5.8 million for component 3 (14 per cent).



7

E
B
 2

0
1
6
/LO

T
/P.1

4

Table 1
Project cost by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Components
IFAD

IFAD
ASAP

Other
FIN.

(Deficit)
Private Beneficiaries Government Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

A. Value chain revitalization and 4P development
1.Professionalization of actors
and value chain steering 1.1 43.1 - - 1.1 43.1 - - - - 0.4 13.8 2.6 5.8
2.Contracting initiatives and
partnerships between value
chain actors 2.5 25.4 1.0 10.6 2.5 25.4 2.0 21.0 1.4 13.9 0.4 3.6 9.7 21.5
3.Structural improvements for
market access 3.3 41.5 - - 3.3 41.5 - - 0.4 4.6 1.0 12.5 7.9 17.5

Subtotal 6.9 34.0 1.0 5.1 6.9 34.0 2.0 10.1 1.7 8.5 1.7 8.4 20.2 44.7

B. Production models development and promotion
1.Production and processing
models 4.2 26.3 4.8 30.0 4.2 26.2 0.0 - 0.5 2.8 2.3 14.6 15.9 35.3
2.Advisory assistance and
supply of services 1.2 43.0 - - 1.2 43.0 - - - - 0.4 14.0 2.8 6.1

Subtotal 5.4 28.8 4.8 25.6 5.4 28.7 0.0 - 0.5 2.4 2.7 14.6 18.7 41.4

C. Coordination, M&E and knowledge management
1.Coordination and
management 2.3 46.2 - - 2.3 46.2 - - - - 0.4 7.6 4.9 10.8
2.M&E, knowledge
management and
communication 0.5 36.4 0.2 13.6 0.5 36.4 - - - - 0.2 13.7 1.4 3.1

Subtotal 2.8 44.0 0.2 3.0 2.8 44.0 - - - - 0.6 9.0 6.3 13.9
Total 15.0 33.2 6.0 13.3 15.0 33.2 2.0 4.5 2.2 4.8 5.0 11.0 45.2 100.0



EB 2016/LOT/P.14

8

E
B
 2

0
1
6
/LO

T
/P.X

B. Project financing
35. PRODEFI, with a total cost of US$45.2 million, will be financed by: (i) IFAD, in the

amount of US$21 million (46.5 per cent of total cost), in the form of a grant for
US$15 million under the Debt Sustainability Framework for the 2016-2018 cycle of
the performance-based allocation system (PBAS), and a grant for US$6 million
under ASAP; (ii) private partners, in the amount of US$2 million (4.5 per cent);
(iii) the Government of Mauritania, in the amount of US$5 million (11 per cent);
and (iv) the beneficiaries, in the amount of US$2.2 million (4.8 per cent). The
financing deficit, in the amount of US$15 million, will be covered by other sources
of financing. Otherwise, it will be covered by a second tranche of IFAD financing
under the next PBAS cycle (2019-2021), subject to the availability of resources for
that cycle and subject to Executive Board approval.

Table 2
Project cost by category of expenditure and source of financing
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Category of expenditure4

IFAD
PBAS

IFAD
ASAP

OTHER
FIN.

(Deficit)
Private Beneficiaries Government Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount    %
I. Investment expenses

A. Works 4.9 36.8 1.2 8.9 4.9 36.7 0.0 - 0.7 5.6 1.6 12 0 13 3 29.3
B. Vehicles 0.1 30.2 - - 0.1 28.9 0.0 0.6 0.0 0.3 0 1 40 0 0 3 0.7
C. Equipment and
supplies 0.3 19.1 0.3 21.9 0.3 18.8 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.1 0 6 40 0 1 4 3.2
D. Training and
workshops 2.4 37.7 0.7 10.5 2.4 37.7 - - - - 0 9 14 0 6 4 14.1
E. Consultations 1.4 40.6 0.2 7.0 1.4 40.6 - - - - 0 4 11 9 3 5 7.7
F. Goods and services
and inputs 2.7 27.6 2.6 25.8 2.7 27.6 0.1 1.0 0.5 4.7 1 3 13 2 9 9 22.0
G. Grants and subsidies 1.5 21.4 1.0 15.0 1.5 21.4 1.9 28.3 1.0 13.9 0 0 - 6 9 15.2

Total investment
expenses 13.3 31.9 6.0 14.4 13.3 31.8 2.0 4.9 2.2 5.2 4 9 11 8 41 7 92 1

II. Operating expenses
A. Salaries and benefits 1.6 50.0 - - 1.6 50.0 - - - - - - 3 3 7.3
B. Operations 0.1 35.0 - - 0.1 35.0 - - - - 0 1 30 0 0 3 0.6

Total operating expenses 1.7 48.9 - - 1.7 48.9 - - - - 0 1 2 2 3 6 7 9
Total 15.0 33.2 6.0 13.3 15.0 33.2 2.0 4.5 2.2 4.8 5 0 11 0 45 2 100 0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
36. The financial analysis performed on the 4Ps and production models show that the

investments will be profitable, with internal rates of return (IRRs) higher than the
opportunity cost of capital and positive net present value (NPV). Based on the
assumptions included in the logical framework, the overall EIRR for the project is
20.5 per cent, generating NPV of US$19.6 million. The economic analysis takes into
account all of the aggregate benefits of the production models, 4Ps, environmental
co-benefits and the benefits deriving from tracks. The sensitivity analysis shows
robust results under all scenarios with different levels of risk.

D. Sustainability
37. The sustainability of PRODEFI results will be ensured by: (i) taking into account

market requirements and the profitability of investments in value chains;
(ii) strengthening and gradual participation of institutional actors such as GTFs,
government institutions and research centres, and economic actors such as
entrepreneurs and sponsoring companies, that are sustainably anchored in value
chain development; (iii) promoting a producer capitalization dynamic through
savings as a prerequisite for investments; and (iv) promoting production models
that are resilient to climate change and investments with positive environmental
externalities, as well as lower operating costs thanks to complementary ASAP
financing from IFAD.



EB 2016/LOT/P.14

9

E
B
 2

0
1
6
/LO

T
/P.X

E. Risk identification and mitigation
38. The risk level presented by PRODEFI is considered moderate. The risks considered

most likely and most serious are systemic risks linked to the macro-economic
context, including competition from imports, as well as climate hazards, weak
domestic supply of services, and limited technical and management capacities for
implementation of the country programme. These risks will be mitigated through
greater involvement in policy dialogue to promote inclusive value chains, financing
for adaptation measures and use of outsourcing.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
39. The project is in compliance with IFAD strategies, principles and tools in the areas

of rural finance and value chain financing, as well as gender equality. It is fully
consistent with IFAD's strategy on climate change (2010), particularly the objective
promoting innovative approaches to assist smallholder producers, both women and
men, to better adapt to climate change.

40. PRODEFI is classified in category B in that it is not expected to have any major
adverse environmental or social impact. Its climate vulnerability is deemed
moderate given the inclusion of adaptation considerations in all project activities.
The project also includes a set of technologies and approaches intended to prevent
greenhouse gas emissions and enable carbon storage.

B. Alignment and harmonization
41. The project is fully aligned with the objectives of the strategy on rural sector

development, which has as one of its five strategic directions the development of
value chains with growth potential, generating permanent employment and
motivating incomes, with support from structured mechanisms for consultation and
effective value chain management to the benefit of the organizations of value chain
actors. In addition, it is fully consistent with the National Agricultural Development
Plan, which calls for promoting the competitiveness of agricultural value chains. The
recent installation of the Value Chain Directorate at the new Ministry of Livestock
underscores the importance given to value chains within the Mauritanian
institutional landscape.

42. With respect to nutrition, an inter-sector action plan on nutrition has been drafted
under the initiative of the Renewed Efforts against Child Hunger and Undernutrition
(REACH) partnership with support from the United Nations Children’s Fund
(UNICEF), the World Health Organization (WHO), FAO and WFP. A national
multi-sector strategy on nutrition (2016-2025) is also nearing completion. PRODEFI
will be part of the implementation of this strategic plan.

43. In the area of climate change, in 2015 Mauritania prepared an INDC in connection
with the 21st Conference of the Parties of the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change. PRODEFI will contribute to implementing national priorities
through its support for small-scale irrigation and regeneration of plant cover.

C. Innovation and scaling up
44. A number of innovations and best practices introduced by ProLPRAF will be scaled

up under this project, e.g.:

(i) The market-driven value chain approach, through dialogue among the actors
within GTFs. The situational analysis done of GTFs at the time of project
design and the lessons learned from ProLPRAF allowed for a rigorous
identification of support on a larger scale for GTF governance, organization,
capacity for awareness-raising, leadership and youth representation;

(ii) The 4P initiatives undertaken during year one of ProLPRAF, which serve as a
model for developing 4P initiatives for PRODEF;

(iii) Capitalization of smallholder producers through savings, using the Centre for



EB 2016/LOT/P.14

10

E
B
 2

0
1
6
/LO

T
/P.X

International Studies and Cooperation (CECI) model piloted by Catholic Relief
Services in Mauritania, which showed promising results that warrant scaling
up the initiative; and

(iv) Support for community associations for joint management of natural
resources and non-timber forest products.

D. Policy engagement
45. PRODEFI will support GTF federations and inter-professions in engaging in policy

dialogue with the Government on improving the economic environment for value
chains. The exchanges will relate mainly to: (i) policies to promote inclusive value
chains; (ii) promoting local products; (iii) implementing legislation on cooperatives
and other professional organizations; and (iv) policy on trade and tariffs. This policy
dialogue process will result in concrete proposals on matters such as health and
quality standards for value chain products, improving national legislation and
enforcement, and market opportunities that could lead to improving food and
nutritional security for households. Within this framework, the project will work with
others operating in the area of institutional support and policy dialogue to ensure
good coordination among interventions.

VI. Legal instruments and powers
46. A financing agreement between the Islamic Republic of Mauritania and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
Recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached in appendix I.

47. The Islamic Republic of Mauritania is empowered under its laws to receive financing
from IFAD.

48. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Lending Policies and Criteria.

VII. Recommendation
49. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Islamic Republic of
Mauritania under the Debt Sustainability Framework in an amount equivalent
to ten million seven hundred and fifty special drawing rights
(SDR 10,750,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Islamic
Republic of Mauritania under the Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture
Programme (ASAP) in an amount equivalent to four million three hundred
thousand special drawing rights (SDR 4,300,000), and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President






















































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the
United Mexican States for the
Rural Productive Inclusion Project


United Mexican States

Rural Productive Inclusion Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: United Mexican States

Executing agency: Ministry of Social Development (SEDESOL)

Total project cost: US$19.5 million

Amount of IFAD loan: EUR 5.87 million
(equivalent to approximately US$6.6 million)

Amount of IFAD grant: US$0.5 million

Terms of IFAD loan: Ordinary terms: Maturity period of 15 years, including agrace period of 3 years, with an interest rate per annum
equal to 100 per cent of the IFAD reference interest rate

Contribution of borrower: US$11.4 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$1.1 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/LOT/P.31/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the United Mexican States for the Rural Productive Inclusion Project, as
contained in paragraph 52.

Proposed loan and grant to the United Mexican States for
the Rural Productive Inclusion Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Mexico is a country with a surface area of 1.96 million km2. The National Council on

Population estimated a total population of 121 million people in 2015 (112.3 million
according to the 2010 census), posting average demographic growth of 1.4 per
cent per annum. Rural people account for 23.1 per cent of the total population.

2. The Mexican economy is the second largest in Latin America and fourteenth in the
world. Mexico is a middle-to-high-income country at US$9,740 per capita. Although
total GDP grew at an annual average rate of 2.5 per cent from 1994 to 2013, this
was insufficient to improve living conditions for the population. Two key constraints
on economic performance are stagnant productivity and unequal income
distribution. Productivity over the past 30 years has declined at a rate of 0.7 per
cent per annum, while the Gini coefficient was 0.509 in 2010.

3. Within the agriculture sector, a highly heterogeneous productive structure prevails.
Family farms – subsistence farming with no market linkages and located mainly in
the central and southern regions of the country – represent 51 per cent of all rural
production units. Labour productivity in Mexican agriculture is notoriously low, at
just 26 per cent of the national average. Another critical problem in sector
performance is lack of access by rural smallholders to financing.

4. In recent decades the Government of Mexico has deployed significant efforts to
combat poverty, involving a broad range of public programmes with steadily
increasing budgetary allocations. The 2015 federal budget includes a package of
financing equivalent to US$22 billion for the Special Concurrent Programme for
Sustainable Rural Development.

5. Despite the scale of this institutional and financial effort, broad portions of the
population continue to live in poverty. In 2012 the National Council on Policy
Evaluation produced data indicating that 53.3 million people were living in
situations of poverty, 31 per cent of them in rural areas. Accordingly, the
administration that took office on 1 December 2012 designed a new social policy
that explicitly seeks to create synergy between income support (mainly conditional
cash transfers) and productive development programmes. Combining these
instruments was assigned as a mandate to Prospera, the social inclusion
programme created at the end of 2014, based on earlier experiences of the
Oportunidades and Progresa programmes. This new social policy seeks to give
families benefiting from income support the opportunity to develop their own
productive initiatives in order to autonomously and sustainably generate income
that enables them to improve their living conditions.



EB 2015/LOT/P.31/Rev.1

2

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

6. In this context, the Government is looking for ways to implement the new social
policy and is thus simultaneously testing different approaches to productive
inclusion. The present Rural Productive Inclusion Project (RPIP) should be seen as a
pilot in that regard, as should the Productive Territories Pilot Programme (PPTP).
IFAD provided support to the PPTP for design and initial implementation, in the
form of a grant to the Government for technical cooperation from the Latin
American Centre for Rural Development. The PPTP is now in operation and will
provide valuable lessons for implementation of the proposed project.

7. The RPIP is aligned with the National Development Plan 2013-2018, and especially
the Special Program to Democratize Productivity and the Social Development Sector
Program, which shape the context in which a new generation of social policy has
been designed. High priority is now given to the strategy of productive inclusion,
whereby the Ministry of Social Development (SEDESOL) and Prospera have
undertaken a number of actions such as design of the RPIP.

8. The project is fully aligned with IFAD’s country strategy, which sets forth two main
objectives: (i) help smallholders and campesinos significantly increase their
productivity by strengthening their assets, capacities, organization and access to
public services and to goods and service markets; and (ii) contribute to making
public spending for the economic development of smallholders and campesinos
more efficient and equitable.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
9. This project will be implemented in 26 municipalities in three federal states:

Guerrero, Hidalgo and Zacatecas. The municipalities have been selected on the
basis of: eligibility for the National Crusade against Hunger; incidence of poverty;
presence of indigenous peoples; a significant number of families served by
Prospera, especially those with land; and the location of strategic population
centres with market potential for carrying out the productive projects of Prospera
families.

10. The target population will comprise Prospera heads of household and their families
that: (i) live in rural areas in the selected states and municipalities; (ii) live in
situations of poverty; (iii) have the potential to engage in income-generating
agricultural and non-agricultural productive activities; and (iv) show interest in
participating in the project. Priority will be given to indigenous populations.

11. The project is expected to reach 12,800 Prospera beneficiary families, of whom
65 per cent are expected to submit applications to access productive projects, with
promotion provided by the project (8,400 families), and 65 per cent of these will
successfully access investments under ongoing productive development
programmes (5,400 families).

B. Project development objective
12. The goal of the project is to contribute to effective implementation of the

Government’s national strategy for productive inclusion and the reduction of rural
poverty.

13. The development objective is that beneficiary families increase their income by
implementing profitable and sustainable productive activities.



EB 2015/LOT/P.31/Rev.1

3

C. Components/outcomes
14. The project will seek to achieve its development objective through two

components: productive inclusion and institutional strengthening. In addition,
financial inclusion will be incorporated as a cross-cutting axis.

15. Component 1: Productive inclusion. This component will support Prospera
beneficiaries and their families participating in the project in accessing programmes
for productive development. It will help them use the investments efficiently to
increase the quantity and improve the quality of their products, access markets,
and thus raise their incomes. To this end, the project will strengthen the
organizational, technical and productive skills of the beneficiaries and improve their
capacities to access other government programmes.

16. In coordinating project activities in the communities, project promoters of
productive and financial inclusion (PIPFs) will play a key role, being responsible for
assisting beneficiaries in identifying potential productive activities and facilitating
access to technical assistance in designing projects for financing by the
programmes. PIPFs will also facilitate access to technical assistance for
implementation of beneficiary productive projects, and build capacities in
beneficiary organizations for obtaining additional aspects needed by some groups,
such as additional financing, legal constitution of small enterprises, etc. On the
other hand, technical assistance for the design and implementation of productive
projects will be provided by external technical assistants.

17. Component 2: Institutional strengthening. This component is designed to
strengthen the ability of Prospera to successfully take on a new role as the key
actor implementing the national strategy for productive inclusion. Its current solid
capacities are focused mainly on implementing social programmes and, above all,
on efficiently providing conditional cash transfers to more than six million
beneficiary families. Capacity-building will thus be provided both to implement the
project in the three states selected and to implement the productive inclusion
strategy nationwide.

18. The component will contribute to the development of new institutional skills through
capacity-building and training of Prospera staff in the project area and at
headquarters. In addition, research and analysis will be conducted and proposals
for innovation developed throughout implementation of the national strategy for
productive inclusion, i.e. in planning and design, operation, monitoring and
evaluation (M&E). Finally, organizational learning and discussion of public policies
will be promoted through targeted knowledge management activities.

19. Cross-cutting axis: Financial inclusion. As an integral part of the process of
developing capacity for effective productive inclusion and of facilitating technical
assistance provided to Prospera families, financial inclusion constitutes a cross-
cutting axis with three concrete activities: (i) financial literacy will be promoted
through provision of financial education among beneficiaries. This training will be
provided mainly by existing institutional programmes, and will be complemented by
PIPFs; (ii) the project management unit, with PIPF support, will strive to link
productive projects with the existing supply of rural financial services, including
existing guarantee funds, and will coordinate actions with government programmes
operating in the project area, thereby leveraging additional financing, mainly
working capital, for beneficiary productive activities; and (iii) each year, as part of
the annual project seminar, a forum promoted by Prospera will take place to raise
awareness among other actors in the financial sector. This will facilitate the
effective provision of finance to productive activities of family units within the most
vulnerable segments of the population, thus supporting them in their development
and income generation.



EB 2015/LOT/P.31/Rev.1

4

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

20. The project is being formulated in the framework of the new social policies, which
focus on promoting productive activities among beneficiaries. Thus the project
facilitates identification and creation of productive opportunities for people living in
poverty. It does this through access to resources from programmes for productive
development that enable beneficiaries to develop sustainable income-generating
activities, with the objective of structurally breaking the cycle of poverty.

21. Prospera’s mandate seeks to create synergy between the social and productive
policies, including the numerous programmes for productive development. In that
context, it should be stressed that the project will mainly facilitate access to
investments and services – such as productive investments, technical assistance for
implementation, and rural financial services – that are currently being offered by
the other government agencies or private actors.

22. The project will promote links with productive development programmes, based on
lessons learned from other pilot programmes, such as the PPTP. In that regard, it
will benefit from the institutional linkages and attention generated by the PPTP with
several federal productive programmes. It will also take advantage of valuable
lessons learned on the strengthening of producer groups and targeting
mechanisms, among other aspects.

B. Organizational framework
23. Strategic project direction will be provided by the Prospera Technical Subcommittee

on Employment, Income and Savings (STEIA), currently chaired by the Ministry of
Finance and Public Credit (SHCP), with representatives of Prospera’s national
coordination and heads of various productive development programmes. The
executing agency is SEDESOL, through Prospera’s national coordination. To this
end, a technical team will be appointed within the existing Prospera structure,
specifically within the Office of Coordination and Linkages (DGCV), to direct project
implementation in coordination with the various Prospera operating divisions
involved, as well as with state-level branches. This team and its location within
DGCV, with functions to be specified in the project implementation manual, is
strategically important in ensuring project management in accordance with the
objectives and timelines set, as well as close coordination with other productive
inclusion actions operating within Prospera. The Office of General Administration
and Finance (DGAF) will be responsible for the project’s administrative and financial
management within Prospera.

24. The project calls for two types of key actors for technical assistance and capacity-
building: (i) national-level institutions to provide training of national coordination
project staff and technicians supporting Prospera families benefiting from the
project; and (ii) technical assistance and training service providers supporting the
design, processing, start-up and consolidation of productive projects of Prospera
family organizations.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

25. The project will set up a system for planning and M&E that is compatible with
Prospera’s M&E framework. Prospera is known for its strong capacity in this area,
which so far, however, has focused mainly on evaluation of conditional cash
transfers and their impact on the beneficiary group. This project will complement
the current system with a strong focus on M&E of productive inclusion and
institutionalization of these new capacities in Prospera.



EB 2015/LOT/P.31/Rev.1

5

26. Prospera has not yet defined a single operating modality for implementation of the
productive inclusion strategy, but is rather testing different methods, such as the
previously mentioned PPTP, to then evaluate which modality is the most efficient
and effective. The present project should also be seen as a pilot providing a
learning opportunity for the institution. The lessons learned from project evaluation
and systematization will be invaluable to the Government in refining the productive
inclusion strategy. Accordingly, knowledge management is a central activity for the
project and, indeed, one of its reasons for being.

27. Ensuring the kind of learning that enables continuing improvement – based on
results and experiences in implementation of the project and other pilots – is
critical. To this end, beginning in year one, a total of three seminars will be held on
public policy and productive inclusion, as well as to share experiences, analyse
project results and promote discussion and dialogue on comprehensive policies for
productive inclusion.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
28. Financial management. The project's financial management, including budgeting,

procurement, flow of funds, disbursements, internal controls, accounting, financial
reporting and audit, will be the responsibility of Prospera’s DGAF, under the
supervision of a federal financial entity, to be nominated by SHCP. Project
execution will be carried out according to Prospera’s operational rules and
procedures and the implementation manual. The project will use Prospera's
accounting software, ensuring compliance with IFAD's financial reporting
requirements.

29. Flow of funds. Loan funds will be disbursed using the reimbursement method of
disbursement, whereas a designated account denominated in euro, and
administered by the designated federal financial entity, will be opened for advance
receipt of grant funds. The financial entity will open and administer a project
account, which will receive both IFAD and counterpart funds.

30. Procurement. Procurement of goods and services will follow national procurement
procedures and regulations to the extent that they are consistent with IFAD’s
procurement guidelines.

31. Audit. Consolidated project financial statements will be audited annually by an
independent auditor in accordance with current procedures and terms agreed by
the Ministry of Public Administration and international financial institutions, to the
extent that they are consistent with IFAD guidelines on project audits. All project
accounts will be audited, including those relating to IFAD funds and those relating
to national counterpart funding. Audit reports will be delivered to IFAD within six
months of the end of each fiscal year.

E. Supervision
32. The project will be directly supervised by IFAD, in accordance with its Policy on

Supervision and Implementation Support. This arrangement will facilitate two
supervision missions per year. Moreover, continuous implementation support and
problem-solving is envisaged, including initial support for the implementation
manual and annual workplan and budget.

IV. Project costs, financing and benefits
A. Project costs
33. Total project costs amount to US$19.5 million, of which component 1: productive

inclusion, costs approximately US$17.2 million, and component 2: institutional
strengthening, costs approximately US$2.3 million.



EB 2015/LOT/P.31/Rev.1

6

Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant
Counterpart
(Prospera) Beneficiaries

Productive
programmes Total

Component Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount

1. Productive Inclusion 5 516 - - 1 060 10 595 17 171
2. Institutional
strengthening 1 067 500 788 - - 2 355

Total 6 583 500 788 1 060 10 595 19 526

B. Project financing
34. The total cost of the project will be financed by five sources. IFAD is financing

approximately US$7.1 million through its loan and grant, while Prospera is financing
roughly US$0.8 million in counterpart funds. Given that one of the project
objectives is to promote access by the Prospera population to current productive
development programmes, an estimated US$10.6 million will be made available to
beneficiaries under such programmes over and above the IFAD and Prospera
contributions, and a beneficiary contribution is estimated in the amount of
US$1.1 million to cofinance the productive investments.

35. The IFAD loan will be made available to the Government on ordinary terms and will
have a maturity period of 15 years, including a grace period of 3 years, with an
interest rate equal to the reference interest rate determined semi-annually by the
Fund.

36. IFAD financing for this project will also cover taxes, as requested by the
Government, given the impracticability of exempting the project from taxes from a
budgetary, operational and accounting viewpoint – and given that the World Bank
currently applies this practice in the country.

37. Retroactive financing will apply for eligible expenses incurred previous to loan entry
into force but after the date of Executive Board approval, of up to EUR 587,000 for
expense category 2 "Consultancies".

Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD loan IFAD grant
Counterpart
(Prospera) Beneficiaries

Productive
programmes Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Equipment, material
and communication 138 2 - - - - - - - - 138
2. Consultancies 6 445 98 500 100 788 100 - - - - 7 733
3. Productive
investments - - - - - - 1 060 100 10 595 100 11 655

Total 6 583 500 788 1 060 10 595 19 526

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
38. This section describes the benefits expected from project interventions. The main

indicators of the analysis are as follows: (i) 12,800 Prospera families benefit from
the project in the form of basic advisory assistance on production issues and
information on access to financial services; (ii) about 8,400 families benefiting from
the project prepare and submit some 1,400 projects (averaging six families per
project) to productive development programmes, of which approximately two thirds
(approximately 900 projects) are approved, benefiting some 5,400 families;
(iii) 5,400 families access technical assistance for successful implementation of



EB 2015/LOT/P.31/Rev.1

7

their productive projects, as well as financial education; (iv) 75 per cent of the
productive projects approved are still operating after two years; (v) 400 young
people (Prospera beneficiaries and their children) are trained in project
management and leadership; and (vi) approximately 3,400 Prospera officers and
project operators have strengthened their capacity to implement the national
strategy of productive inclusion.

39. The economic analysis shows that the project represents a profitable investment,
with an economic internal rate of return of 29.5 per cent and a net present value of
US$164.6 million.

D. Sustainability
40. The project design points to the economic and social sustainability of productive

investments of the target group. The project strategy promotes development of
their technical, organizational and administrative skills, which will enhance the
sustainability of their activities.

41. On the institutional level, component 2 has the objective of strengthening
Prospera’s capacity to successfully carry out its mandate to promote the national
agenda for productive inclusion. In that regard, the project seeks to institutionalize
skills for and knowledge of productive inclusion, which will effectively ensure the
sustainability of the institutional approach to the subject.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
42. The main project risks are as follows:

Risk Mitigation strategy

Lack of normative provisions and
agreements with some productive
development programmes to ensure
priority and effective access for
Prospera beneficiaries to these
programmes.

Resistance by operators of productive
development programmes – which
have traditionally not worked with poor
populations – to facilitating access by
the Prospera population to such
programmes.

Through STEIA, which includes SHCP,
Prospera and representatives of these
programmes, an ongoing dialogue will be
maintained to strengthen their
commitment to the Government’s
objective of productive inclusion.

Awareness-raising will be provided for
programme operators in the field to
ensure their inclusion of the Prospera
population.

The isolated conditions of many
localities prevent families from learning
about opportunities to undertake
productive projects and access to
productive development programme
resources.

The project will incorporate promoters of
productive and financial inclusion within
its geographical coverage area to
disseminate information about these
programmes and facilitate liaison of
families with technical service providers.

Beneficiaries do not wish to formalize
new economic activities supported by
the project for fear of losing their
Prospera transfers and having to pay
taxes.

The project will emphasize the provision
of accurate information on the rights and
responsibilities of beneficiaries in two
areas: (i) receipt of conditional cash
transfers; and (ii) tax treatment of their
productive initiatives.

Insufficient quality of technical
assistance services are available in the
project area to support families in
developing and implementing their
productive projects, as well as
insufficient incentives to attract service
providers.

Lessons learned in Mexico and other
countries show the importance of having
technicians that are familiar with, and
ideally live in, the project area. A
preliminary assessment carried out
during project design shows that quality
services are available in the project area,



EB 2015/LOT/P.31/Rev.1

8

having work experience within the area,
and with populations with a similar profile
to that of Prospera.

Project management is hampered by:
(i) delays and/or deficiencies in budget
availability and changes in
programming structure that place
constraints on access by the Prospera
population; and (ii) unsafe conditions in
some parts of the project area.

Project management risks will be
mitigated by ongoing dialogue between
government authorities and IFAD, and
full ownership by Prospera during
execution. The security risk will require
constant monitoring of conditions in the
field.

Degradation of natural resources
caused by the implemented production
projects, particularly sheep breeding.

This risk will be mitigated by the
inclusion of criteria of environmental
impact on the design of productive
projects. In the case of sheep breeding,
mitigation actions will be included, and
compliance with an adequate ratio of
animals per designated grazing area will
be ensured.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

43. The project is aligned with the IFAD Strategic Framework 2011–2015 in promoting
an economic asset base that is resilient to market and climate change, and in
improving access to technical assistance services in support of smallholders. The
project is also compliant with IFAD’s policies on: (i) targeting, by applying a
geographical, direct and self-targeting strategy; (ii) gender and age equality,
through the strategy to target women; (iii) rural finance, through greater access by
smallholder farmers to the rural financial services they need to meet their
production requirements; (iv) engagement with indigenous peoples, respecting the
principle of free, prior and informed consent; and (v) environment and natural
resource management, through the promotion of good environmental practices in
production.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
44. This project is intended to contribute to effective implementation of the

Government’s national strategy for productive inclusion and to reducing rural
poverty and food insecurity. The project has been formulated in the framework of
the country’s National Development Plan 2013-2018, more specifically the Special
Program to Democratize Productivity, which coordinates government actions aimed
at carrying out public policies that remove barriers limiting the productive potential
of citizens and enterprises. Moreover, the project area falls within the areas of the
National Crusade against Hunger, which comprise the Government’s priority areas
for poverty reduction.

45. The project will be implemented in close coordination with other initiatives in
Prospera, such as the PTPP, among others.

Innovations and scaling upC.
46. The approach of this project is innovative in that it seeks to bridge the gap between

social transfer programmes and productive development programmes, allowing the
beneficiaries of the first to access the latter and implement sustainable productive
projects. In that way, the project will not directly finance productive investments,
but will facilitate access to already-existing funds in the country.

47. This project is being designed as a pilot project to contribute to the government
strategy for productive inclusion. If proven successful, it can be scaled up in



EB 2015/LOT/P.31/Rev.1

9

accordance with government priorities. As mentioned above, Prospera has not yet
defined a single operating modality for implementation of the productive inclusion
strategy, but is testing different approaches of which this project is one. The idea is
to evaluate the diverse modalities and scale up the option that has proven the most
efficient and effective.

Policy engagementD.
48. Being a pilot, the project will have a strong focus on learning. At strategic points in

time, and at least once per year, during the annual seminar on public policy and
productive inclusion organized by the project, policymakers will be updated on
progress and lessons learned and on concrete, evidence-based policy
recommendations.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
49. A financing agreement between the United Mexican States and IFAD will constitute

the legal instrument for extending the proposed loan to the borrower. A grant
agreement between the United Mexican States and IFAD will constitute the legal
instrument for extending the proposed IFAD grant to the recipient. Copies of both
negotiated agreements are attached as appendix I.

50. The United Mexican States is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD.

51. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
52. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the United
Mexican States in an amount equivalent to five million eight hundred and
seventy thousand euros (EUR 5,870,000), and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the United
Mexican States in an amount equivalent to five hundred thousand United
States dollars (US$500,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President




















































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of the
Union of Myanmar for the Eastern States
Agribusiness Project

Eastern States Agribusiness Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Ministry of Finance

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation

Total project cost: US$65.2 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 20 million (equivalent to approximately US$27.6
million)

Amount of IFAD grant: SDR 1.1 million (equivalent to approximately US$1.5
million)

Terms of IFAD loan: 40 years, including a grace period of 10 years, with a
service charge of three fourths of one per cent (0.75 per
cent) per annum

Cofinancier(s): Export-Import Bank of Korea (KEXIM)1

Amount of cofinancing: US$29.2 million

Terms of cofinancing: To be confirmed

Contribution of borrower: US$4.9 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$2.0 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD

1 Subject to successful negotiations between the Government of the Republic of the Union of Myanmar and KEXIM.



Annex EB 2015/114/R.12/Rev.1

1

11

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendations for the proposed
financing to the Republic of the Union of Myanmar for the Eastern States
Agribusiness Project, as contained in paragraph 57.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of the Union of
Myanmar for the Eastern States Agribusiness Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Emerging from 50 years of isolation, Myanmar has embarked on a comprehensive

path of political and economic reforms. These aim to introduce elements of popular
representation into the political sphere, foster economic growth and inclusive social
development, improve the business environment, attract foreign investment and
reduce poverty.

2. Myanmar is the largest country in South-East Asia, with rich endowments of land
and water, and favourable conditions for agriculture. Its population was estimated
at 51.5 million in 2014, with an annual growth rate of 1 per cent. Some 67 per cent
of the population is rural. Myanmar is ethnically diverse, with eight major ethnic
groups and 135 subgroups.

3. Despite being rich in resources, Myanmar is one of the poorest nations in South-
East Asia. An estimated one third of the population lived below the poverty line in
2005, decreasing to one fourth in 2010. The 2014 Human Development Report
ranked the country 150th among 186 nations rated, with a human development
index of 0.524. In 2013, Myanmar's GDP amounted to US$53 billion, with an annual
growth rate of 6.8 per cent.

4. The agriculture sector constitutes the core of the economy, representing 38 per
cent of GDP and employing about 70 per cent of the working population. There is a
strong association between agriculture and poverty in Myanmar, and there is
significantly greater poverty in rural areas. The incidence of poverty is also greater
among diverse ethnic groups compared with the majority ethnic population.

5. While, in aggregate terms, Myanmar produces a surplus of food, many rural areas
suffer from chronic food insecurity. Disparities exist among and within states and
within communities, where household food insecurity and poverty are closely
linked. Rural poverty is largely a function of lack of resource endowments. Poor
rural people typically consist of landless people and small and marginal farmers,
usually owning less than an acre to up to five acres of land. They lack access to
adequate and nutritious food, as well as to essential non-food items. Many of the
poorest live in isolated hill tracts of ethnic states in the eastern regions. These
states were previously affected by decades of civil conflict that left them isolated
and without development investment.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

6. As requested by the Government, the 2013-2015 PBAS allocation for Myanmar is
being applied to two loan-financed projects to develop scalable models in diverse
agroecological zones. The first, Fostering Agricultural Revitalization in Myanmar,
focuses on creating a sustainable agricultural development model for the central
dry zone. The second, the Eastern States Agribusiness Project (ESAP), focuses on



Annex EB 2015/114/R.12/Rev.1

2

22

creating a smallholder agriculture and community agroforestry model for the
upland/highland zone, with potential for scaling up across the eastern states.

7. The project's rational is anchored in IFAD’s mandate of poverty reduction and the
Government's policies to reduce economic and social disparities in rural areas. It is
consistent with the National Comprehensive Development Plan, the Framework for
Economic and Social Reforms, and the Poverty Alleviation and Rural Development
Action Plan. Specifically, the rationale has four dimensions: (i) to create a model at
the state level for post-conflict economic reintegration that lays the foundation for
sustained peace; (ii) to create a model for environmentally sustainable agricultural
modernization in degraded areas; (iii) to forge pathways for supporting poor
communities in the transition from subsistence to commercial agriculture; and
(iv) to better link Myanmar's eastern states with regional markets and technology
flows.

8. The project is consistent with the 2014-2018 country strategic opportunities
programme (COSOP) for Myanmar, which aims to contribute to reducing rural
poverty, specifically of smallholders, landless people, and ethnic and other
marginalized groups. The COSOP defines three strategic objectives for IFAD’s
engagement: (i) empower rural women and men to access agricultural resources,
technologies, services and markets; (ii) create business and employment
opportunities for rural women and men; and (iii) promote the social and economic
empowerment of marginalized groups, particularly ethnic groups. The project
addresses all three strategic objectives.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
9. The project will be implemented in selected areas of Kayin and Shan (South) States

in the eastern part of Myanmar. These two states were affected by decades of civil
conflict and insecurity, which adversely affected their socio-economic development.
With recent peace-building efforts, the two states have been selected for
agribusiness development due to their good security, relatively stable political
context and economic potential.

10. In Kayin State, the project encompasses 12 irrigation schemes covering three
townships (Hpa-an, Hlain Bwe, Kaukarate) and the forest communities of
Thandaunggyi township in the northern mountains, for an aggregate area of some
108,000 acres. In Shan State, the project covers the Ho-Pong irrigation scheme
and its upland watershed areas (Ho-pong, Taunggyi, Siseine townships) as well as
the Hekke irrigation scheme (Taunggyi, Kyauk Talon Gyi townships), for an
aggregate area of about 79,000 acres.

11. The target group consists of poor rural women and men in the project areas.
Specifically, it covers: (i) farmers in irrigated lowlands with marginal, small and
medium-sized landholdings ranging from less than an acre to up to 10 acres each;
(ii) farmers in the rainfed uplands with marginal, small and medium landholdings
ranging from less than an acre to up to 10 acres each; (iii) agroforestry households
in mountainous areas of northern Kayin; and (iv) landless households, which will
have access to job opportunities as agricultural labourers or as workers in
agribusiness. The project will ensure that employment opportunities facilitate the
economic reintegration of returning migrants, ex-combatants and displaced people.

12. An inclusive targeting approach will be applied that encompasses geographical, self-
and direct targeting, and social and gender inclusion. The project is expected to
benefit 62,400 households or 315,000 rural men and women.

B. Project development objective
13. The project will develop an inclusive, sustainable and scalable model for smallholder

agriculture and community agroforestry in the eastern states of Kayin and Shan



Annex EB 2015/114/R.12/Rev.1

3

33

(South). It will promote commercialized smallholder agriculture linked to
agribusiness, improve living standards in forest communities, and reverse
environmental degradation in sloping areas. It will generate substantial benefits for
households belonging to the Karen, Shan, Paoh, Intha and Mon ethnic groups.

14. The project’s goal is to improve the economic status of poor rural women and men
in selected areas of Kayin and Shan States. Its objective is to increase the incomes
of smallholder and agroforestry households in these areas in an environmentally
sustainable manner.

C. Components/outcomes
15. The project has two components. Component 1. Strategic investments. This

component will finance strategic investments in land development and community
agroforestry (approximately US$42.6 million, 65 per cent of total project costs).

16. Subcomponent 1.1: Land development. The project will contribute to the
expansion of irrigated areas served by primary and secondary canals, with
complementary investments in land development identified through a participatory
process. The objectives are to improve drainage networks, irrigation water delivery
and field access, and to create opportunities for crop diversification in response to
market signals. A participatory land-use planning approach will be applied, and
free, prior and informed consent will be introduced. Farmer empowerment and
participatory water management will be strengthened in all irrigation works.

17. Subcomponent 1.2: Community agroforestry. Project investment in
agroforestry will improve living conditions, generate economic benefits for forest
and upland villages and reduce encroachment on primary forest. The introduction of
sloping agricultural land technology (SALT) will protect ecosystems, increase soil
water infiltration and reduce soil erosion. In particular, SALT will generate
substantial positive environmental impact by reducing sedimentation in Inle Lake
and the Ho-Pong valley drainage system. Upland and agroforestry activities will be
defined and implemented on the basis of a participatory and culturally sensitive
approach.

18. Component 2. Enabling investments. This component will improve target group
access to knowledge, technology and services, and will maximize the benefits
generated from strategic investments (approximately US$15.7 million, 24 per cent
of total project costs).

19. Subcomponent 2.1: Knowledge and technology. The project will improve
farmer access to the technologies, inputs and services required to improve the
productivity of staple, fodder and high-value crops. It will promote a pluralistic
participatory extension platform in support of smallholder households. A network of
knowledge centres (KCs) will be established to broker service delivery to farm and
forest households through linkages with public institutions and the private sector.
These centres will operate on the basis of: a decentralized and bottom-up
approach; pluralism of actors in service delivery; promotion of public/private
partnerships (PPPs); and a clear market orientation comprising cost recovery and
sustainability.

20. Subcomponent 2.2: Services. Smallholders and entrepreneurs will be provided
access to markets and to adapted and affordable financial products. Contractual
arrangements among farmers and agribusinesses, such as contract farming or
outgrower schemes, will be promoted for commodities with a comparative
advantage, market demand and growth potential. A competitive grant scheme will
attract processors to the project area, and a credit guarantee mechanism will
improve smallholder access to bank financing. Financial inclusion will be promoted
by fostering savings and credit groups and providing financial literacy training.



Annex EB 2015/114/R.12/Rev.1

4

44

21. The remaining project financing (US$6.9 million, 11 per cent of total project costs)
is allocated to central project coordination and decentralized project management,
described below.

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

22. Based on institutional assessment at the state level, experience in similar contexts
and the country strategy, the ESAP implementation approach is to: (i) strengthen
state-level Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation (MOAI) departments and other
agencies involved in agricultural and rural development; (ii) increase the
responsibility of state-level MOAI departments in phased implementation of
activities; (iii) establish a small, state-level project implementation office (PIO) in
each state to manage activities; (iv) organize implementation through contracts
with public and private service providers; and (v) implement project activities in
phases.

23. Project activities will be implemented through contracts with service providers such
as ministries/departments, NGOs and the private sector. Service providers will
enter into performance-based contracts, and their performance will be assessed by
project management and by community representatives where applicable.

B. Organizational framework
24. The project's governance framework will consist of: (i) a national project steering

committee composed of representatives of relevant central-level ministries, to
provide policy and strategic guidance; (ii) state project coordination committees
composed of directors of relevant state-level departments and representatives of
community organizations, to oversee project coordination at the state level; and
(iii) village groups, composed of representatives of community organizations,
partner NGOs and service providers, to monitor and ensure effective participation,
poverty targeting and gender mainstreaming.

25. In alignment with the Government's decentralization policy, project management
and implementation are decentralized to the state level. A PIO will be established in
each state – responsible and accountable for state-level management of the project
and achievement of its results. PIOs will be structured around project components
and investments, and will have a certain level of financial autonomy. Their staff will
be recruited on a competitive basis in compliance with IFAD guidelines. PIOs will be
supported by a central project coordination unit (PCU), established in Nay Pyi Taw
for all IFAD-financed projects. The PCU will support PIOs in planning, financial
management, procurement, and monitoring and evaluation (M&E).

C. Planning, M&E, and learning and knowledge management
26. The state-level annual workplans and budgets (AWP/Bs), supplemented by activity

calendars, will be the key planning instruments for the project. They will identify
annual targets and activities, set implementation priorities, forecast procurement
requirements and facilitate the mobilization of staff and financial resources. These
AWP/Bs will be prepared through a consultative approach involving community
organizations, KCs and stakeholders. The planning process will be coordinated with
national planning procedures, as the project budget is being incorporated into the
national budget.

27. The M&E system is designed to offer comprehensive and reliable information for
results-based management. The system will be participatory and decentralized, and
compliant with the Results and Impact Management System (RIMS) framework. It
will have a three-tier structure: (i) output monitoring – focusing on physical and
financial inputs, activities and outputs; (ii) outcome monitoring of the use of
outputs and measurement of benefits at household and community levels; and
(iii) impact assessment – evaluating project impact on target groups. All M&E data,



Annex EB 2015/114/R.12/Rev.1

5

55

analysis, and reporting will be disaggregated by gender and ethnic group.
Considering the well-known problems with data availability and quality in Myanmar,
a data acquisition plan for the project area will be developed at the outset of
implementation.

28. The project will use locally adapted RIMS surveys as the main quantitative survey
tools at baseline, midterm and completion. Ad hoc surveys, qualitative case studies
and thematic reviews will be outsourced to independent institutions to verify results
and draw lessons on themes such as: food security, cropping patterns, climate
resilience; small and micro-business sustainability; participatory water
management; and impact on incomes. An external independent third party (such as
a national university or NGO) will be engaged to assess project impact periodically.

29. Learning and knowledge management. The project’s operational experiences
will create valuable knowledge, which will be captured by the PIO and PCU and
used to generate lessons and best practices. Once documented, the project’s model
of upland/highland agricultural development may be scaled up across the eastern
states. The project will share knowledge and experiences with the wider community
of development practitioners across Asia through the IFADAsia knowledge
management portal.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
30. Project financial management arrangements will ensure that: (i) funds are used for

intended purposes efficiently and cost-effectively; (ii) disbursement of funds
facilitates rapid implementation of activities; (iii) funds are well managed and flow
smoothly; (iv) financial statements are prepared in conformity with internationally
recognized accounting standards; (v) a robust flow of reliable information on
project activities facilitates accountability, transparency and disclosure; and
(vi) project resources and assets are safeguarded.

31. As fiduciary risks are high in Myanmar, the project will apply a number of mitigating
measures: (i) installation of professional accounting software; (ii) competitive
recruitment of qualified staff; (iii) preparation of a financial management manual
integrating controls linked to operations; (iv) state-level PIOs with delegated
authority to manage and disburse project resources, and confirmation of PCU
delegated authority; (v) technical assistance and external oversight; (vi) a control
framework integrating periodic internal audits, independent external audits and
social elements; and (vii) a good governance framework to ensure accountability
and transparency.

32. Retroactive financing. As an exception to section 4.08 of the General Conditions
for Agricultural Development Financing, a maximum amount of SDR 100,000 for
otherwise eligible project expenditures incurred after the date of project approval
by the Executive Board and before the entry into force of the financing agreement
will be financed. Such financing will be mainly for the implementation of start-up
activities in respect of expenditures for: (i) capacity-building for PCU/PIO staff and
target groups; (ii) consulting services for studies and field surveys; and (iii) other
consultancy services. Such expenditures are pre-financed by the Government, and
will be reimbursed by IFAD only after the financing agreement has entered into
force and conditions precedent to disbursement have been met.

33. The project will use the imprest fund method in operating the two designated
accounts (for the loan and grant respectively). The Government will ensure that
counterpart funds are contained in the national allocations for MOAI at central and
state levels and that they are released to the project promptly.

34. Flow of funds to the two states will be decentralized. This will strengthen
governance structures while maintaining transparency of activities and central
controls. The bank account signatory powers for state-level expenditures will be set
at a sufficiently senior level. Control of expenditures at the state level will be



Annex EB 2015/114/R.12/Rev.1

6

66

maintained by retaining centralization of withdrawal application preparation and
approval, access to state-level accounting data, and consolidation of AWP/Bs and
reporting.

35. External audit will be carried out in compliance with International Standards on
Auditing and IFAD’s Guidelines on Project Audits, and independent external auditors
will be appointed on a timely basis. Audit reports will be furnished to IFAD within
six months of the end of the relevant fiscal year.

36. The PCU will oversee project procurement at central and state levels. The
procurement of goods, works and services will be handled by the state-level PIOs,
with support from the PCU for consolidated or international purchases. Procurement
will be carried out in compliance with the IFAD procurement guidelines and
handbook. Procurement methods, prior review arrangements, cost and time
estimates, and risk mitigation measures will be defined in the letter to the borrower
and reflected in the procurement plan. The project implementation manual will
detail procurement procedures, processes and management arrangements.

E. Supervision
37. The project will be directly supervised by IFAD. A supervision and implementation

support mission will be undertaken annually. MOAI departments at central and
state levels will support and participate in these missions.

38. Supervision will be applied as a continuous process requiring ongoing
communication and engagement with the central Government, state governments,
the PCU and PIOs. It will encompass three functions: (i) fiduciary compliance –
covering legal conditions, financial management, procurement and contracting;
(ii) supervision – focusing on performance, progress towards objectives, activities
and outputs, planning and budgeting, monitoring and reporting, governance and
management, targeting and gender equality; and (iii) implementation support.
Implementation support will incorporate a country programme perspective by:
introducing a broad view of development investments; influencing policy based on
operational experiences; developing systems and institutions for poverty reduction;
facilitating financial and knowledge partnerships; and generating lessons and best
practices.

39. Considering the limited implementation experience in Myanmar, two midterm
reviews (MTRs) will be undertaken, at year two and year four, to assess the
progress, achievements, constraints, emerging impact and likely sustainability of
project activities and to make recommendations and necessary adjustments for the
remaining project periods. MTRs will be carried out jointly by the Government, the
PCU, PIOs and IFAD. At the end of the project, a project completion report will be
prepared by the Government, with support from IFAD.

IV. Project costs, financing, benefits
A. Project costs
40. Total investment and incremental recurrent project costs, including physical and

price contingencies, are estimated at US$65.2 million over the six-year project
implementation period. The exchange rate has been set at 1,000 Myanmar kyats to
one United States dollar (the average rate prevailing at final design), and a
constant purchasing power parity exchange rate is assumed.

B. Project financing
41. The project will be financed by an IFAD loan on highly concessional terms of about

US$27.6 million (42 per cent of total costs), an IFAD grant of about US$1.5 million
(2 per cent), cofinancing of US$29.2 million (45 per cent), a government
contribution of about US$4.9 million (8 per cent), and a beneficiary contribution in
kind of US$2.0 million (3 per cent). The Export-Import Bank of Korea (KEXIM) has



Annex EB 2015/114/R.12/Rev.1

7

77

participated in the project design process and has expressed its intention to
cofinance the project.

Table 1
Indicative programme costs by component and financier*
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Borrower /
counterpart IFAD loan IFAD grant Cofinancier Beneficiaries Total

Component Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount %
A. Strategic investments

1. Land development 3 042.5 4 513.5 - 29 172.5 - 36 728.4 56.3
2. Community agroforestry 134.2 4 457.0 - - 1 243.2 5 834.3 8.9

Subtotal 3 176.6 8 970.5 - 29 172.5 1 243.2 42 562.8 65.3
B. Enabling investments

1. Knowledge and technology 513.7 3 668.5 251.7 - 211.9 4 645.8 7.1
2. Services 113.4 10 292.5 95.0 - 566.4 11 067.3 17.0

Subtotal 627.1 13 961.0 346.7 - 778.3 15 713.1 24.1
C. Project management 1 126.5 4 632.6 1 154.4 - - 6 913.6 10.6

Total project costs 4 930.2 27 564.1 1 501.2 29 172.5 2 021.5 65 189.5 100.0

* Final disbursement categories will be decided during negotiations based on IFAD’s procedures, which will
include a maximum of five cost categories for reasons of efficiency.

Table 2
Indicative programme costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Borrower/
counterpart IFAD loan IFAD grant Cofinancier Beneficiaries Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %
1. Works 3 042.5 7.6 8 798.3 21.9 - - 28 407.6 70.6 - - 40 248.3 61.7
2. Vehicles 716.9 71.0 292.8 29.0 - - - - - - 1 009.7 1.5
3. Equipment and materials 7.1 7.6 86.6 92.4 - - - - - - 93.7 0.1
4. Consultancies 28.9 0.8 1 925.0 53.8 847.1 23.7 764.9 21.4 11.0 0.3 3 577.0 5.5
5. Training 197.9 1.6 2 943.5 64.5 654.1 14.3 - - 767.3 6.0 4 562.8 7.0
6. Goods services and inputs 235.3 6.9 1 945.6 56.8 - - - - 1 243.2 36.3 3 424.0 5.3
7. Matching grants and

associated investments - - 5 155.5 100 - - - - - - 5 155.5 7.9
8. Credit guarantee scheme - - 2 978.3 100 2 978.3 4.6
9. Staff salaries and

allowances 528.4 14.1 3 224.7 85.9 - - - - - - 3 753.1 5.8
10. Operating costs 173.3 44.8 213.9 55.2 - - - - - - 387.2 0.6

Total project costs 4 930.2 7.6 27 564.1 42.3 1 501.2 2.3 29 172.5 44.8 2 021.5 3.1 65 189.5 100.0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
42. The project will directly impact an area of some 187,000 acres, of which

58,000 acres are irrigated, 104,000 are upland rainfed, and 25,000 are forest. It
will provide a range of economic and social benefits to 62,400 households
consisting of 315,000 rural women and men. Projections indicate that incremental
agricultural production in the project area from 2015 to 2021 will have an
estimated value of US$38.2 million at farm gate prices. The acreage cultivated is
expected to increase by 21 per cent, and cropping intensity by 22 per cent. Net
income per acre will increase by 64 per cent, while net income per household will
increase by 100 per cent.

43. The project's financial internal rate of return is estimated at 15.1 per cent. Its
economic internal rate of return is estimated at 13.4 per cent.

D. Sustainability
44. The sustainability of project investments will be fostered through: (i) access to

knowledge – KCs will be low-cost facilities that will eventually operate on a cost-
recovery basis, evolving into PPP ventures in the medium term; (ii) access to
markets – upgraded commodity chains, contract farming and outgrower schemes



Annex EB 2015/114/R.12/Rev.1

8

88

will ensure smallholder access to markets sustained through underlying business
relationships; (iii) access to water – irrigation and drainage improvement, combined
with participatory water management, will improve water distribution, and
operation and maintenance; (iv) access to finance – financial inclusion activities will
eventually link smallholders and agroforestry households with the formal financial
sector; and (v) extension services – use of MOAI extension officers trained by the
project will ensure continuity in delivery of services.

45. The project’s exit strategy is to: strengthen public institutions at central and state
levels; rely on a range of institutional service providers for implementation of
activities; foster profitable business relationships between producers and markets;
and improve the capabilities of poor rural women and men.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
46. The key risks identified relate to: (i) insecure land tenure; (ii) political interference

in project management; (iii) poor governance capacity; and (iv) fiduciary risk.
These risks are mitigated by a set of assurances negotiated with the Government,
decentralization to the state level, participation in planning and implementation,
robust fiduciary compliance procedures, capacity-building of relevant institutions at
the state level, and intensive supervision and implementation support by IFAD.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

47. The ESAP is compliant with all relevant IFAD policies, in particular: (i) its targeting
strategy is consistent with the IFAD Targeting Policy approach of focusing on
economically active poor rural women and men; (ii) its investments in rural
economic growth are compliant with the IFAD Rural Finance Policy focus on
promoting inclusive financial systems; (iii) its participatory approach to land
development is consistent with the principles of free, prior and informed consent
and community-driven development stated in the IFAD policies on Improving
Access to Land and Tenure Security and Engagement with Indigenous Peoples;
(iv) its evolving gender mainstreaming strategy is in compliance with the IFAD
Policy on Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment; (v) its focus on promoting
PPPs for private-sector development and policy dialogue is in line with the IFAD
Partnership Strategy; and (vi) its environmental impact assessment procedures for
infrastructure investment are aligned with the IFAD Climate Change Strategy for
proper adaptation and mitigation measures.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
48. The project's rational is anchored in IFAD’s mandate of poverty reduction and the

Government's policy on reducing economic and social disparities in rural areas. It is
consistent with Myanmar's National Comprehensive Development Plan, the
Framework for Economic and Social Reforms, and the Poverty Alleviation and Rural
Development Action Plan. It is closely coordinated with the emerging agriculture
sector investments of partners such as the World Bank and the multi-donor
Livelihoods and Food Security Trust Fund (LIFT).

Innovations and scaling upC.
49. The project is the first investment of its kind in the states inhabited primarily by

ethnic groups. It introduces several innovations in its model for sustainable
agricultural development in the upland/highland areas of Myanmar's eastern states.
Key innovations in the Myanmar context include: (i) introduction of a participatory
development approach; (ii) targeted delivery of technologies and services;
(iii) promotion of climate-smart agricultural practices and technologies;
(iv) livelihood diversification, with potential for higher value addition; (v) promotion
of smallholder-driven small and micro-businesses; and (vi) support for adapted
rural finance products and services.



Annex EB 2015/114/R.12/Rev.1

9

99

50. The Government considers the project a model that will eventually be scaled up in
upland/highland areas of Myanmar. The project adopts a modular approach, to the
extent feasible, in which a standard package of investment is designed to expand,
replicate, adapt and sustain successful investments. Through its investment tools
and forward-looking policy support, the project will create the pathways, drivers
and spaces for scaling up.

51. The Italian Development Cooperation has indicated its interest, in principle, in
providing parallel cofinancing to the Government to scale up the ESAP to an
additional eastern state.

Policy engagementD.
52. Policy engagement will take place on two levels. First, the project will contribute to

the analysis of policy issues related to implementation experiences. It will also
foster stakeholder alliances to generate policy proposals, build capacity for policy
development and promote policy advocacy within national processes. Specifically,
the project is expected to provide evidence-based policy advice on agricultural and
rural development across upland areas – especially with regard to ethnic states.
The project will also support dialogue on technology, knowledge resources and
financial services in support of poor farm and landless households.

53. Second, the project will enhance IFAD’s direct policy engagement with the
Government and partners by channelling operational experiences in poverty
reduction to the appropriate policy and strategy discussions through platforms such
as sector working groups. These experiences provide unique opportunities to
identify policy gaps and formulate policy recommendations on issues affecting poor
rural people, and to generate an evidence base to inform policy discussions.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
54. A project financing agreement between the Republic of the Union of Myanmar and

IFAD will constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as an
annex.

55. The Republic of the Union of Myanmar is empowered under its laws to receive
financing from IFAD.

56. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
57. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Republic of the Union of Myanmar in an amount equivalent to 20 million
special drawing rights (SDR 20,000,000), approximately US$27.6 million, and
upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with
the terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
the Union of Myanmar in an amount equivalent to 1.1 million special drawing
rights (SDR 1,100,000), approximately US$1.5 million, and upon such terms
and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President






















































President’s Report

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of
Niger for the Family Farming Development
Programme (ProDAF) in Maradi, Tahoua and
Zinder Regions

Republic of Niger

Family Farming Development Programme (ProDAF) in
Maradi, Tahoua and Zinder Regions

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower/beneficiary: Republic of Niger

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture

Total programme cost: US$207.2 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 17,250,000 (equivalent to approximately
US$24.25 million)

Amount of IFAD grant: SDR 17,250,000 (equivalent to approximately
US$24.25 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: 40 years, including a grace period of 10 years, with an
annual service fee of three quarters of a point (0.75%)
per annum

Amount of Adaptation for Smallholder
Agriculture Programme (ASAP):

SDR 9,250,000 (equivalent to approximately
US$13.0 million)

Cofinanciers: OFID, Italian Cooperation, GEF, ongoing IFAD projects

Amounts and terms of cofinancing: OFID: US$6.0 million (loan)

Italian Cooperation: US$28.2 million (loan)

GEF: US$8.0 million (grant), to be confirmed

Ongoing IFAD projects: US$10.5 million (loan)

Contribution of borrower/beneficiary: US$33.4 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$11.1 million

Funding gap US$48.5 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/114/R.8/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval
The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of Niger for the Family Farming Development Programme
(ProDAF) in Maradi, Tahoua and Zinder Regions, as contained in paragraph 49.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Niger for the
Family Farming Development Programme (ProDAF) in
Maradi, Tahoua and Zinder Regions

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Niger, a landlocked country with a territory of 1,267,000 km², is counted among

the world’s least developed and low-income food-deficit countries. Approximately
80 per cent of its estimated population of 17.13 million lives in rural areas, with
more than 60 per cent inhabiting three regions: Maradi, Tahoua and Zinder. The
latest Human Development Index ranks Niger in last place at 186th, with
75.9 per cent of its population living on less than US$2 per day.

2. In a natural environment marked by an arid climate with little rainfall and high
temperatures, the agricultural sector accounted for nearly 45.2 per cent of the
country’s GDP in 2010, exhibiting higher growth than the rest of the economy
during the period. Agriculture is Niger’s main source of export earnings after
mining.

3. Agriculture in Niger is based primarily on small-scale family farms, which vary in
size according to region and combine rainfed crops with irrigated crops. Irrigated
cropping is increasing and accounts for 30 per cent of agricultural production and
90 per cent of sector exports.

4. The major agricultural constraints are climate-based, economic and technical, not
to mention organizational. Access to the factors of production (inputs, equipment),
advisory assistance, rural financing and markets is still limited. Forecasting models
are projecting a significant drop in cereal yields if nothing is done to better adapt
the country's production systems to climate change.

5. Despite these sectoral constraints, opportunities to boost agro-sylvo-pastoral
productivity and to promote farming exist. Cereal and horticultural crop yields could
be substantially increased with the use of improved cropping techniques, better
seed, the introduction of animal-drawn ploughing, the dissemination of innovations
and better irrigation techniques. These significant increases in yield could enable
rural families to produce enough for household consumption and the sale of
surplus, while at the same time improving their resilience to climate change.

6. Niger has policies for development and support of the various sectors of the
economy, especially the agricultural sector. These policies include the Sustainable
Development and Inclusive Growth Strategy (SDDCI), Vision 2035, the Economic
and Social Development Plan (PDES) 2012-2015 and the 3N Initiative (I3N) for
food and nutrition security and sustainable agricultural development. With support
from its technical and financial partners, the Government of Niger drafted its
National Nutrition Policy and its National Food and Nutrition Security Policy, revised
in 2011, placing particular emphasis on interventions to guarantee the population
sufficient, varied and quality food.



EB 2015/114/R.8/Rev.1

2

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
Results-Based COSOP

7. ProDAF was conceived in a global context in which 2014 was declared the
International Year of Family Farming, aimed at restoring the central position of
family farming in the agricultural, environmental and social policies of national
action programmes. IFAD operations in Niger implemented under the country
strategic opportunities programme (COSOP) 2013-2018 are in line with and
contribute to meeting the aims of national development policies and their
objectives, actions, and strategies. The strategic coherence between I3N and IFAD
operations in Niger derives from the lessons learned from 11 projects implemented
over the past 30 years and the experiences of the Government and other technical
and financial partners with whom IFAD implements its interventions.

8. With the object of providing the Government of Niger with substantial coordinated
support in the implementation of its agricultural policies, IFAD established
operational and financial partnerships by working in close collaboration with the
Belgian Fund for Food Security (FBSA), Italian Cooperation/DGCS, Spanish
Cooperation/AECID, the World Food Programme (WFP), the OPEC Fund for
International Development (OFID) and the Global Environment Facility (GEF), and
by making overtures to private funds (SINERGI) and the banking sector (BAGRI,
ASUSU, etc.).

9. IFAD has built its strategy in Niger on family farming adapted to a context of
structural risks and potential external shocks. This model is capable of tackling the
challenges of improving population food and nutrition security and fostering poverty
reduction, economic growth, sustainable rural development and resilience to
climate change.

10. Family farming remains highly vulnerable to the effects of climate change, with its
negative impact on population food and nutrition security. Forecasting models are
projecting a significant reduction in yields if no action is taken to adapt the
country's production systems to climate change. The programme focuses on
increasing the resilience of the family farming model by stressing sustainability at
the economic, social, environmental and climate level. The rationale for including
ASAP funding in ProDAF is the need to guarantee the sustainability of the targeted
production systems by ensuring their resilience to climate change. Likewise, the
rationale for the ProDAF intervention is the vulnerability of its target populations.

II. Programme description
A. Project area and target group
11. ProDAF will be implemented in IFAD’s area of concentration in Niger, identified by

COSOP 2013-2018 as the south-central corridor of the Maradi, Tahoua and Zinder
regions. The population directly targeted by the programme will be that of the
economic development poles, with the population of bordering areas indirectly
benefitting from the dynamic generated by programme activities. Some 2,030,000
people – or 290,000 households – are involved in agro-sylvo-pastoral activities.
ProDAF will focus particularly on 240,000 family farms.

12. Three types of family farms have been identified and targeted: (i) highly vulnerable
family farms; (ii) moderately vulnerable family farms; and (iii) family farms with
little vulnerability. The programme also targets two demographic groups: women
and young people. Among the latter, special attention will be paid to young women
particularly affected by early marriage. Women and young people must respectively
represent at least 30 per cent of the beneficiaries of all programme activities.

B. Programme development objective
13. The programme’s general objective is to help sustainably guarantee food and

nutrition security and rural households’ resilience to crises in the Maradi, Tahoua



EB 2015/114/R.8/Rev.1

3

and Zinder regions. The development objective is to sustainably increase the
income of 240,000 family farms, their resilience to external shocks, including
climate change, and their access to local, urban and regional markets in the three
regions.

C. Components/outcomes
14. In order to meet the development objective, the programme is built on three

components: (i) strengthening sustainable family farming; (ii) improving access to
markets; and (iii) programme management and coordination, monitoring and
evaluation, and knowledge management.

15. Component 1: Strengthening sustainable family farming. This component is
geared to sustainably boosting the productivity of family farms.

16. Subcomponent 1.1: Structured, productive farms resilient to climate risks.
Interventions will be carried out in 22 watersheds in the programme area. These
activities will consist of: (i) recovering 16,000 ha of degraded land; (ii) stabilizing
dunes around watersheds in a 2,000 ha area; (iii) creating 2,500 ha of sylvo-
pastoral space; and (iv) planting hedgerows on 400 ha of land. To make better use
of the available water resources, the programme will: (i) build/rehabilitate
139 dams in series to recover approximately 700 ha of land for irrigation; (ii) build
seven multipurpose mini-dams; and (iii) create four ponds. The programme will
furnish equipment for 6,800 ha of small-scale irrigation and get it up and running.
Thus, the programme will generate a total of 7,500 ha of irrigated land.

17. Subcomponent 1.2: Capacity building for rural dwellers. These activities are
designed to strengthen the institutions and organizations that provide assistance to
family farms: rural civil society organizations (farmers’ organizations, CRA/RECA),
decentralized technical services and the territorial authorities (communes, regional
boards). The programme anticipates a 30 per cent increase in current yields in
eight years through two complementary outreach mechanisms: 805 farmer field
schools and agricultural advisory assistance. These mechanisms will benefit
240,000 growers and cover some 190,000 ha.

18. The programme anticipates a 40 per cent increase in the yield of the principal
irrigated crops. It will take advantage of the mechanism of horticultural field
schools (CEPM), with 945 CEPM providing support to 30,000 growers on an
estimated 7,500 ha of vegetable farms.

19. In order to improve small-animal husbandry and poultry farming, the programme
will include three intervention measures: (i) the creation of six new private
veterinary services in the vicinity; (ii) advisory assistance in poultry farming and
small-animal husbandry, with the introduction of 210 innovations in small-animal
husbandry, benefitting 15,750 households; and (iii) the distribution of animals to
reconstitute the livestock capital of 13,500 non-resilient two-person households
(women and young people).

20. RECA and the CRAs will remain favoured ProDAF partners. Through operational
partnerships with the agricultural world (that is, the rural farming community of the
three intervention regions), the following will be actively involved in project
implementation: FUCAP and FUFO in Tahoua; FUMA Gaskiya, Sa’a and Albishirinku
Manoma in Maradi; FUBI and CSAOCP in Zinder; as well as the regional branches of
FCMN-Niya. The Chamber of commerce, industry, and handicrafts of Niger (CCIAN)
and connections with bordering countries (Niger-Nigeria Chamber of Commerce)
will be strategic priorities.

21. Subcomponent 1.3: Women’s leadership and the improvement of nutrition
security. These activities are geared to sustainably improving the nutritional status
of rural households and reducing chronic malnutrition among the most vulnerable
groups through the creation of 1,350 women’s groups under the Mata Masu Dubara
Programme. This programme will set up 90 new women-operated granaries for food



EB 2015/114/R.8/Rev.1

4

security and 4,500 home gardens for nutritional support and provide 5,500
households with farming tool kits. In all, these activities will benefit the 12,500
most vulnerable households. Nutrition awareness activities will touch roughly
100,000 households through the nutritional monitoring of children under 5 and
cooking demonstrations.

22. Component 2: Access to markets. This component is designed to improve the
access of family farms to markets through the construction/rehabilitation of rural
infrastructure.

23. Subcomponent 2.1: Structures for access to marketing platforms. A
semi-wholesale market will be built in nine new economic development poles, and
18 supplementary satellite hubs have been identified. The programme will
rehabilitate/build 850 km of rural roads. Routine and periodic maintenance of these
roads will be performed by independent road maintenance teams in cooperation
with the management of the semi-wholesale market, the Community Advisory
Assistance Directorate, the Ministry of Equipment and the Autonomous Road
Maintenance Financing Fund.

24. Subcomponent 2.2: Modes of infrastructure management and the financing
of economic operators. The programme will include the creation of management
structures for all commercial rural infrastructure created or rehabilitated and
provide the requisite assistance. The social engineering process will include the
implementation of a cooperation framework (Hadin Gwiwa in Hausa) involving all
economic operators at the site. A local cooperatives union will be responsible for
managing each satellite hub. The programme will also provide assistance to the
promoters of farming activities or collaborate with agricultural activities leading to
profitable sales-oriented ventures. This support will be provided through the
creation of a cost-sharing financial mechanism.

25. Subcomponent 2.3: Regional trade integration. The programme will work to
facilitate cross-border trade, increase knowledge about cross-border trade
constraints and propose and test solutions with economic operators. The activities
will be carried out in partnership with the Nigeria-Niger Joint Commission for
Cooperation, as well as consular trade offices, economic operators and professional
organizations.

26. Internal programme funding mechanisms. The programme’s support and
investments are financed in the following manner: (i) activities directly managed by
the programme, as in the case of infrastructure, are fully funded by subsidies;
(ii) activities targeting the most vulnerable households are funded by grants; and
(iii) activities that support economic activities are funded by cost-sharing
mechanisms.

III. Programme implementation
A. Approach
27. The ProDAF approach is grounded in the following three intervention principles:

(i) improvement of food and nutrition security; (ii) territorial continuity of the
interventions through the economic development pole; and (iii) scaling up the
current project activities of IFAD and its partners. The programme will promote a
strategy for learning, capitalizing on lessons learned, and communication that will
be evaluated during the course of the activities. Public-private sector
complementarity in the various intervention domains is guaranteed. ProDAF will be
implemented in collaboration with other technical and financial programmes under
way in Niger’s agricultural sector through strategic and operational partnerships.

28. The programme will be implemented in phases based on: (i) coordination with the
activities of the PASADEM and Ruwanmu projects; (ii) the maturity of local partners
– the local authorities and economic operators – that will be jointly involved in the



EB 2015/114/R.8/Rev.1

5

programme; and (iii) the ability of teams on the ground to manage the
administrative and financial processes involved in implementing the activities.

B. Organizational framework
29. ProDAF will be placed under the Ministry of Agriculture. The National Steering

Committee is responsible for strategic orientation and will verify the coherence of
the programme in this respect with national strategies; it will also approve the
annual workplans and budgets (AWPBs). The Ministry in charge will delegate project
management by decree to the three autonomous regional project management
units (URGPs), whose operations it will oversee. These units will be set up in
Maradi, Tahoua and Zinder and will enjoy administrative and financial autonomy. A
national advisory assistance unit (CENAT) has been created and tasked with
providing support for project engineering, political dialogue, rural roads, monitoring
and evaluation and financial consolidation of the programme.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

30. Programme planning will be an ongoing process based on the AWPBs. The
monitoring and evaluation system will be designed using the logical framework as a
tool for management, planning and decision-making by the partners in programme
implementation. The programme’s computer database will be linked directly to the
geographic information system (GIS) to allow for map-based visualization of
programme results.

31. ProDAF’s planning and monitoring and evaluation system will scale up IFAD’s
existing systems in Niger and merge them into a single database for a GIS and
common manual of procedures. During the preparation of the AWPB, quantitative
objectives will be broken down by region and implementation phase at programme
launch after a review of the logical framework with the stakeholders involved. Two
reviews at, respectively, one third and two thirds of the way into the programme
and a final evaluation are planned to compare the changes observed with the
baseline situation.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
32. ProDAF has a reliable and rigorous internal fiduciary management and control

environment, along with a qualified team inherited from ongoing IFAD projects,
which have resulted in remarkable performance levels. An account in CFA francs
(CFAF) will be opened in the name of the programme at a commercial bank in
Niamey acceptable to IFAD. An operations account in CFAF will also be opened for
each regional project management unit and CENAT itself (four in all). Based on
quarterly cash flow needs, each of the accounts will receive funds from accounts
designated (by a lender or donor), opened in response to a request for funds by the
URGPs. At the request of CENAT, tasked inter alia with quality control, coherence
and financial consolidation, the account will be activated and managed in
accordance with the renewable funds mechanism.

33. This innovative procedure will enable the programme to receive a substantial
advance corresponding to funds for expenditures equal to six months of the AWBP.
These funds will be subject to regular and periodic verification of payments. The
teams of the ongoing projects regularly and optimally use the latest version of the
Tompro financial management software, which has proved entirely satisfactory for
preparing reimbursement requests and monthly reports.

34. The procurement system is governed by current laws, decrees and legal provisions,
which contain general principles, controls and regulations for public procurement
and public service concessions and set public procurement thresholds for the state,
public establishments, state enterprises, and corporations with majority public
ownership, on the one hand, and territorial or local groups, on the other. A priori



EB 2015/114/R.8/Rev.1

6

control of procurement procedures is exercised by the General Directorate for the
Control of Public Procurement and Financial Liabilities.

35. ProDAF will be audited annually by a qualified firm.

E. Supervision
36. ProDAF will be under the direct supervision of IFAD. During the first 12 to

18 months, the supervision mission will verify that the main preparatory measures
have been adopted for the implementation of each component, as well as for
programme management, and monitoring and evaluation.

IV. Programme costs, financing, benefits
A. Programme costs
37. The total cost of the programme over an eight-year period, including provisioning

for unexpected physical contigencies and price increases, is CFAF 103.6 billion,
equivalent to US$207.2 million. It consists of a cost of CFAF 22.3 billion
(US$44.7 million), covered with financing that has already been approved, and
CFAF 81.3 billion (US$162.5 millions), to be covered with new financing. The
US$162.5 million to be covered with new financing is comprised of a base cost of
US$142.7 million and US$19.8 million (12 per cent) in provisioning for unexpected
physical contigencies and financial events. This figure includes taxes in the amount
of US$19.6 (12 per cent), and the foreign exchange cost is set at US$46.0 million
(28 per cent).

B. Programme financing
38. ProDAF’s total cost of US$207.2 million will be financed by: (i) IFAD, thanks to the

harmonization of the AWPB of its PASADEM and PPI-RUWANMU projects (US$10.5
million) with that of ProDAF, the performance-based allocation system (PBAS)
2013-2015 financing (US$48.5 million, 50 per cent grant and 50 per cent loan),
and ASAP funds (grant of US$13.0 million); (ii) the GEF (grant of US$8.0 million, to
be confirmed); (iii) OFID (loan of US$6.0 million); (iv) and Italian Cooperation
(loan of US$28.2 million); (v) the Government of Niger (US$33.4 million – US$18.6
million in tax exemptions and US$14.8 million in funding); and (vi) the beneficiaries
(US$11.1 million). A funding gap of US$48.5 million remains, which could be
financed by IFAD’s PBAS 2016-2018 (modalities to be determined).



EB 2015/114/R.8/Rev.1

7

Table 1
Programme costs by component and funding source
(Thousands of United States dollars)

PBAS IFAD
2013-2015

50% Loan–50% Grant Funding gap ASAP GEF Beneficiaries Government Total

Components Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

A. Strengthening of sustainable family farming
1. Structured,

productive farms
resilient to climate
risks

15 774.5 22.0 15 743.5 22.0 10 122.3 14.1 7 061.6 9.9 9 724.4 13.6 13 169.1 18.4 71 595.5 44.1

2. Capacity building for
rural dwellers

6 173.4 42.1 6 198.1 42.2 1 365.4 9.3 - - 128.0 0.9 815.7 5.6 14 680.6 9.0

3. Women’s leadership
and the
improvement of
nutrition security

2 812.6 44.0 2 812.6 44.0 - - - - - - 762.9 11.9 6 388.0 3.9

Subtotal Strengthening
of sustainable family
farming

24 760.5 26.7 24 754.1 26.7 11 487.7 12.4 7 061.6 7.6 9 852.4 10.6 14 747.8 15.9 92 664.1 57.0

B. Access to markets
1. Structures for

access to marketing
platforms

12 662.4 32.5 12 662.4 32.5 - - - - - - 13 670.6 35.1 38 995.4 24.0

2. Management of
infrastructure and
the financing of
market operators

3 267.3 39.4 3 267.3 39.4 - - - - 1 286.0 15.5 469.3 5.7 8 289.8 5.1

3. Regional trade
integration

1 720.6 44.0 1 720.6 44.0 - - - - - - 466.6 11.9 3 907.8 2.4

Subtotal Access to
markets

17 650.2 34.5 17 650.2 34.5 - - - - 1 286.0 2.5 14 606.5 28.5 51 192.9 31.5

C. Programme
management and
coordination,
monitoring/
evaluation and
knowledge
management

6 084.2 32.6 6 084.2 32.6 1 482.8 7.9 964.4 5.2 - - 4 045.4 21.7 18 660.9 11.5

Total 48 494.9 29.8 48 488.5 29.8 12 970.5 8.0 8 026.0 4.9 11 138.4 6.9 33 399.7 20.6 162 518.0 100.0

Table 2
Programme costs by expense category and funding source
(Thousands of United States dollars)

PBAS IFAD
2013-2015

50% Loan–50% Grant Funding gap ASAP GEF Beneficiaries Government Total
Expense Category Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Works 20 991.3 31.3 20 638.2 30.8 1 893.9 2.8 3 023.8 4.5 128.0 0.2 20 285.3 30.3 66 960.6 41.2

2. Vehicles 1 277.1 30.2 1 429.2 33.8 293.9 7.0 87.8 2.1 - - 1 135.0 26.9 4 223.0 2.6

3. Equipment and
materials

1 000.6 34.0 1 000.6 34.0 109.1 3.7 67.5 2.3 - - 765.2 26.0 2 943.0 1.8

4. Training 1 827.7 37.4 1 833.7 37.5 376.9 7.7 36.1 0.7 - - 815.5 16.7 4 890.0 3.0

5. Consultations 6 930.7 33.5 6 908.7 33.4 1 693.3 8.2 500.4 2.4 - - 4 675.8 22.6 20 708.9 12.7

6. Goods & services &
inputs

7 154.4 25.7 7 365.1 26.4 6 907.1 24.8 3 792.8 13.6 - - 2 645.1 9.5 27 864.5 17.1

7. Grants & subsidies 2 634.3 16.2 2 634.3 16.2 - - - - 11 010.3 67.6 0.0 - 16 278.9 10.0

8. Salaries &
indemnities

5 637.2 36.4 5 637.2 36.4 1 324.9 8.6 382.4 2.5 - - 2 498.6 16.1 15 480.3 9.5

9. Operating costs 1 041.4 32.9 1 041.4 32.9 371.5 11.7 135.2 4.3 - - 579.2 18.3 3 168.7 1.9

Total 48 494.9 29.8 48 488.5 29.8 12 970.5 8.0 8 026.0 4.9 11 138.4 6.9 33 399.7 20.6 162 518.0 100.0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
39. A total of 290,000 rural households – that is 2,030,000 people – will benefit from

programme activities and sustainably increase their productivity, resilience to
climate risks and access to local and urban markets. In particular, the programme’s



EB 2015/114/R.8/Rev.1

8

overall IRR is 15.7 per cent. A sensitivity analysis was conducted; it found that the
IRR is sensitive to a drop in sales prices or yields. A drop of 30 to 40 per cent in
yields results in IRRs of 11.4 per cent and 9.9 per cent respectively, while a
30 per cent drop in sales prices results in an IRR of just 10.4 per cent.

D. Sustainability
40. The sustainability of ProDAF’s intended outcomes is ensured by its effective

partnership with local public institutions, organized rural civil society and the
private sector in designing and implementing the activities. Additional factors
include: the guarantee of the economic and financial profitability of the commercial
infrastructure built or rehabilitated; the microprojects financed; watershed
management for sustainable use of land and water resources; and investments in
small-scale irrigation equipment financed through cost-sharing under local market
conditions by local financial institutions capable of renewing such financing.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
41. The main risks and the mitigation measures adopted are as follows:

(i) The political and security situation in the programme area is
deteriorating. The programme strategy is based on an intervention that
targets local organized economic actors and communities capable of ensuring
the sustainability and continuity of the investments. The operational
mechanism boosts national and local technical and operational capacity in
collaboration with the IFAD Country Office in Niamey.

(ii) Adverse weather events. ProDAF will contribute to better forecasting of
changing weather patterns by producing and distributing meteorological
information to prevent/anticipate crises and provide adaptive technologies
that will enable producers to practice farming that is resilient to shocks
associated with climate change.

(iii) Vulnerable beneficiaries can survive crises produced by severe
weather events resulting in their decapitalization. The programme will
help anticipate, absorb, and respond to shocks by increasing the resilience of
households vulnerable to crises and contributing to the social safety net
programme.

(iv) Lack of support from territorial authorities. The programme retains the
commune as the administrative gateway for all interventions while involving
the authorities in local public-private partnerships.

(v) The fees paid by market operators are essential for guaranteeing the
sustainability of the semi-wholesale markets. Implementation partners
will employ financial analysis to help economic operators and mayors’ offices
negotiate contribution/fee levels.

(vi) Social divisions and conflicts in communities/communes. Social
engineering by ProDAF prior to any civil intervention will facilitate local
consensus building between the authorities and organized economic
operators. In the long term, this process will lead to the creation of local
public-private partnerships.

(vii) The security situation in the programme area. The risk that the security
situation will deteriorate and hinder overland travel by the supervision
missions is real. The programme will therefore strengthen the operational
capacity of the IFAD Country Office and national advisory assistance to carry
out these missions.



EB 2015/114/R.8/Rev.1

9

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
42. The programme is fully integrated into IFAD’s Strategic Framework 2011-2015 and

aligned with IFAD policies, especially its targeting policy, its policy on improving
access to land and tenure security and its environment and natural resource
management policy, as well as the Fund’s basic principles and strategies related to
climate change, gender and knowledge management. ProDAF is classified as an
environmental Category B programme.

B. Alignment and harmonization
43. The programme, like all other IFAD activities in Niger, is implemented within the

framework of its COSOP 2013-2018. It is in alignment with the objectives and
intended outcomes of the PDES, the I3N, and the I3N Acceleration Plan and
contributes to their attainment. In order to offer substantial and coordinated
support to the Government of Niger for implementation of its agricultural policies,
IFAD is working in financial and/or operational partnership with Italian and Spanish
Cooperation, KfW, the World Food Programme (WFP), FAO, the OPEC Fund for
International Development (OFID) and the GEF. ProDAF is also developing
synergies and complementarities with other donors and lenders active in the sector,
such as the French Agency for Development (AFD); Swiss (SDC), Danish (DANIDA),
and Luxembourg (LuxDev) bilateral cooperation agencies; the GIZ, the European
Union, the World Bank, IFC, USAID and the Millennium Challenge Corporation
(MCC).

C. Innovations and scaling up
44. ProDAF’s scaling up approach falls under the programme’s development objective,

which is to sustainably increase the income of family farms and improve their
adaptation to climate change and access to local, urban and regional markets. In
order to accomplish this, ProDAF capitalizes on proven, measured, and documented
outcomes obtained through the operations of IFAD or other partners in Niger, while
at the same time improving tools and approaches based on the lessons learned to
boost efficiency, impact, and sustainability. ProDAF’s scaling up is part of the
ongoing dynamic process of innovation, learning and scaling up launched after the
formulation of the two earlier projects and COSOP as part of the long-term vision
for IFAD activities in Niger. The tools for scaling up IFAD activities in Niger are not
only the operations financed by the Fund but the political dialogue and knowledge
management established in the various domains. The partners are another key
vehicle for scaling up to mobilize additional financial resources and/or
supplementary expertise.

D. Policy engagement
45. ProDAF’s intervention logic is to facilitate political dialogue and institutional

improvements through advocacy built on its activities in the field. The activities for
promoting political dialogue are designed to give ProDAF the opportunity to
participate in the strengthening of national public policies for sustainable
agricultural development and food and nutrition security (I3N), financing of the
agricultural sector (in association with the public and private sectors) and
administrative decentralization (support to local groups, communes, etc.), moving
toward a subregional dimension in the areas of transportation corridors and
cross-border trade (CEDEAO, UEMOA, CILSS, NEPAD).

VI. Legal instruments and authority
46. A financing agreement between the Republic of Niger and IFAD will constitute the

legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower/beneficiary.
A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as an annex.

47. The Republic of Niger is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.



EB 2015/114/R.8/Rev.1

10

48. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Lending Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
49. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Republic of Niger in an amount equivalent to seventeen million two
hundred fifty thousand special drawing rights (SDR 17,250,000) and upon
such terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the
terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
Niger, within the Debt Sustainability Framework, in an amount equivalent to
seventeen million two hundred fifty thousand special drawing rights
(SDR 17,250,000) and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that, under the Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture
Programme (ASAP), the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of Niger in
an amount equivalent to nine million two hundred fifty thousand special
drawing rights (SDR 9,250,000) and upon such terms and conditions as shall
be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President

























































President’s report

Proposed loan to the Republic of Nicaragua for
the Nicaraguan Dry Corridor Rural Family
Sustainable Development Project (NICAVIDA)



Republic of Nicaragua

Nicaraguan Dry Corridor Rural Family Sustainable
Development Project (NICAVIDA)

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of Nicaragua

Executing agency: Ministry for Family, Community, Cooperative and
Associative Economy (MEFCCA)

Total project cost: US$48.460 million

Amount of IFAD loan: US$20.504 million

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional: 40 years, including a grace period
of 10 years, with a service charge of 0.75 per cent per
annum

Cofinancier: Central American Bank for Economic Integration

Amount of cofinancing: US$15 million

Contribution of borrower: US$5.97 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$6.99 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/LOT/P.7/Rev.1

1

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
loan to the Republic of Nicaragua for the Nicaraguan Dry Corridor Rural Family
Sustainable Development Project (NICAVIDA), as contained in paragraph 33.

Proposed loan to the Republic of Nicaragua for the
Nicaraguan Dry Corridor Rural Family Sustainable
Development Project (NICAVIDA)

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. The Republic of Nicaragua covers an area of 129,494 km² and has a population of

6.17 million people. The country has experienced macroeconomic stability and
sustained economic growth over recent decades. GDP increased between 2010 and
2014 by an average of 4.7 per cent per annum, reaching US$1,904 per capita in
2014. The agricultural sector accounted for 17 per cent of national GDP in 2014,
following a gradual reduction begun in the 1990s. Nonetheless, the sector
generates 31 per cent of employment and 70 per cent of overall exports, signalling
that Nicaragua’s economy remains in transition, with a significant presence in the
productive agricultural sector.

2. The 2014 National Household Living Standards Survey (NHLSS) found 29.6 per cent
of the population to be living below the poverty line and 8.3 per cent in extreme
poverty. These figures reflect a significant improvement on those from the 2009
NHLSS (42.5 per cent and 14.6 per cent, respectively). In rural areas over the
same period, the overall poverty rate decreased from 63.3 per cent to
50.1 per cent of rural population and the number affected by extreme poverty
declined from 26.8 per cent to 16.3 per cent. Despite this significant progress in
poverty reduction, half of the rural population still lives in poverty. Nicaragua is
highly vulnerable to extreme weather events: 25 per cent of the population lives in
locations at risk of hurricanes and tropical storms while 40 per cent is affected by
recurrent drought, with Dry Corridor inhabitants and food production feeling the
greatest effects.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

3. The proposed project is aligned with the IFAD country strategy as articulated in the
results-based country strategic opportunities programme (COSOP) (2013-2017).
NICAVIDA is further aligned with current policy priorities and follows the axes of the
national “Dry Corridor Strategic Framework” implemented by the Government in
response to the severe social, productive and environmental conditions affecting
the area. Under that Framework and in support of the Government’s programmatic
approach, the Ministry of Finance and Public Credit will coordinate the investments
of international and development organizations, such as the World Bank, the Inter-
American Development Bank, the Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation,
the Central American Bank for Economic Integration (CABEI) and IFAD.

4. As the factors contributing to rural poverty in the Dry Corridor not only persist but
worsen, the incidence of malnutrition in rural areas must be addressed. According
to the National Demographic and Health Survey 2011-2012, 21 per cent of boys
and girls aged less than five years in rural areas exhibit overall chronic
malnutrition. The Dry Corridor has a higher overall incidence (for rural and urban



EB 2016/LOT/P.7/Rev.1

2

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

areas combined) of chronic malnutrition (29.5 per cent in Madriz and 27.7 per cent
in Nueva Segovia). Agricultural activities are carried out against a backdrop of
deteriorating micro/sub-basins, depleting water resources and plant cover, and soil
degradation. The situation is further exacerbated by climate change and volatility,
with production projected to decline significantly.

5. NICAVIDA will support the economic diversification and productive transformation
strategies of families in rural areas, developing articulated links between the
diversification of their sources of income, environmental protection, adaptation to
climate change and food and nutrition security. To that end, the project builds on
lessons learned from previous IFAD-financed operations, including the Programme
for the Economic Development of the Dry Region in Nicaragua (PRODESEC), the
Technical Assistance Fund, the Inclusion of Small-scale Producers in Value Chains
and Market Access Project (PROCAVAL), the Agricultural, Fishery and Forestry
Productive Systems Development Programme in RAAN and RAAS Indigenous
Territories and the Adapting to Markets and Climate Change Project (NICADAPTA).
Those operations contributed to the implementation of national public policies and
proved successful in facilitating public investment processes, increased production
and productivity, food production, climate change-adaptation investments and
income generation.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
6. The NICAVIDA project area covers 58 municipios in the Dry Corridor. As per

agreement with the Government, initial project phases will prioritize the 37
municipios with the highest rates of poverty and at greatest risk of food and
nutrition insecurity and climate vulnerability. Natural ecosystems in the Dry
Corridor are undergoing severe degradation, with 52 per cent of soils overused and
40 per cent strongly or severely eroded. Falling production has led to food
insecurity and a decline in household incomes in rural parts of the area.

7. The target population of NICAVIDA comprises poor rural people and indigenous
peoples, with or without land, with a particular focus on women and young people.
The project will directly benefit 30,000 families, approximately 152,000 people,
characterized by the diversity of the activities in which they engage, combining
strategies for agricultural production with labour market integration. Rural
households living in the 37 priority municipios in 2015 were estimated to total
122,000, 11.2 per cent of which identified as indigenous.

B. Project development objective
8. The overall objective of NICAVIDA is to contribute to the attainment of national

targets to improve the living standards of rural families and indigenous peoples in
the Dry Corridor. The development objective is to support poor rural families in the
project area, including indigenous peoples, in boosting their incomes, enhancing the
nutritional content of their diets and strengthening their capacities to adapt to
climate change. Beneficiary incomes will be increased through the productive and
economic diversification of their activities, while their resilience to climate change
will be enhanced by the sustainable management of natural resources.

C. Components/outcomes
9. NICAVADA will be organized around the following three components:

 Component 1. Capacity-building and planning. This component will put in
place the conditions to allow families and their organizations, taking into
account their resources and climatic, economic and social context, to map their
own paths towards development that will allow them to improve their incomes,
strengthen their food and nutrition security, and enhance their resilience and
capacities to adapt to climate change.



EB 2016/LOT/P.7/Rev.1

3

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

This component will address two strategic themes: (i) the food and nutrition
security of families, ensuring access to nutritious food and an adequate diet;
and (ii) natural resource management and adaptation to climate change,
strengthening capacities to manage natural resources sustainably,
incorporating climate change-adaptation practices and adopting strategies to
reduce vulnerability to production- and climate-related risks. This component
will achieve: (i) project targeting, both geographically and towards families,
indigenous peoples and communities, prioritizing women and young people;
(ii) adaptation to the territorial, socioeconomic and environmental context of
the Dry Corridor; (iii) the provision of training to build families’ capacities to
manage economic and social strategies; and (iv) capacity-building to increase
employment, business and productive opportunities.

The implementation of this component will be based on participatory
assessments used to develop family plans and business plans to promote
productive diversification and agricultural and non-agricultural income-
generating activities. Moreover, territorial plans will be developed, based on the
demands of families, organizations and institutions, to meet needs in terms of
productive infrastructure, the stewardship and management of natural
resources, access to water, road improvement and management of
microbasins.

 Component 2. Family, territorial and business investments. This
component includes the activities and resources for the implementation of the
family, business and territorial plans. Once approved by the project
management unit (PMU) within the Ministry for Family, Community,
Cooperative and Associative Economy (MEFCCA) pursuant to the relevant
approval mechanism detailed in the project implementation manual (PIM),
these plans will be financed under this component with funds allocated under
the Project’s Family, Territorial and Business Investment Fund (FTE). The PMU
will manage the FTE directly, in accordance with the standards and procedures
defined in the PIM.

The FTE will be able to finance: (i) territorial plans targeting investments in
public goods and services that will create conditions conducive to improving the
living standards of families in rural areas and of indigenous peoples; (ii) family
plans, seeking to improve how families use and manage their resources (land,
manpower, cash), agricultural and non-agricultural activities, and food and
nutrition security, and to boost income and quality of life; (iii) business plans,
aiming to promote the link between family income strategies, environmental
protection and adaptation to climate change. Such plans may include
productive agricultural activities, value-addition, access-to-market and small
business development activities, as well as commercial, service and
microenterprise activities.

 Component 3. Project management. This component seeks to ensure
effective and efficient project implementation and to build capacity for the
monitoring and evaluation (M&E) of project activities, results and impact. A
timely, efficient and effective implementation system will be established within
MEFCCA at the central and district levels, with attention to inter-institutional
coordination. With regard to planning, monitoring and evaluation (PM&E), it is
hoped that IFAD-financed MEFCCA projects will have a single M&E system. This
component includes project management and administration, which comes
under MEFCCA’s institutional responsibilities, and shall be in coordination with
other IFAD-financed projects.



EB 2016/LOT/P.7/Rev.1

4

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

10. Project activities follow an approach that places central importance on families and
on the territory of the project area. In this context, through the family, territorial and
business plans, it is hoped that the following will be achieved: (i) at the family level,
families are able to make adequate use of their resources (land, manpower, cash)
and pursue their own development strategies, improving food and nutrition security
and building resilience to climate change; (ii) at the territorial and indigenous
community levels, investments in public goods and services create an environment
conducive to improving the living standards of rural families and indigenous peoples,
including behavioural changes that enhance natural resource management, resilience
to climate change and inhabitants’ nutrition; and (iii) in the context of business plans,
families and their organizations embark on a process of rural transformation, linking
income generation and diversification with environmental protection and food and
nutrition security, and strengthening their resilience to climate change.

B. Organizational framework
11. MEFCCA will be responsible for project implementation. A PMU will be established

under the MEFCCA Project Division to coordinate and manage the project. In
coordination with IFAD operations already under way, a number of specialized units
will be set up to deal with financial management, procurement, PM&E and
knowledge management and will service all projects in IFAD’s portfolio. District-
level MEFCCA offices will play a key operational role and will be responsible for the
activities in their respective districts. The project will involve measures and
activities requiring the active participation of specialized entities – such as the
Ministry for the Environment and Natural Resources (MARENA), the Nicaraguan
Institute of Agricultural Technology (INTA) and the Nicaraguan Institute of
Territorial Studies (INETER), among others – with which specific agreements will be
established.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

12. NICAVIDA will implement a PM&E and knowledge management system based on
lessons learned from previous IFAD operations in the country. The project will
establish an M&E system, with short-term reporting (institutional, administrative
and first-level Results and Impact Management System (RIMS) reports), medium-
term reporting (national and sectorial statistics and second-level RIMS reports) and
long-term reporting (National Human Development Plan indicators and third-level
RIMS reports). Knowledge management will ensure the use of information and the
incorporation of lessons learned on key issues such as fiduciary aspects, business
plan implementation, climate change adaptation and food and nutrition security.
The project will complement and support the NICADAPTA efforts to establish a
MEFCCA PM&E system. A baseline study will be carried out immediately following
the adoption of the financing agreement by the IFAD Executive Board and prior to
project launch.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
13. Financial management. MEFCCA will be charged with the financial management

of all project resources, in particular flow of funds, disbursements, internal controls,
accounting, financial reporting and audit. A specialized financial management unit
will be established within MEFCCA for all projects financed or cofinanced by IFAD.

14. Flow of funds. IFAD will open and deposit the loan principal in an account in
United States dollars in the name of the borrower. To receive the loan funds, the
borrower shall open and maintain in the Central Bank of Nicaragua an account
designated in United States dollars, under the control of the General Treasury of
the Republic, in which advance funds shall be deposited and from which funds will



EB 2016/LOT/P.7/Rev.1

5

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

be transferred to the operational account(s) of the project in MEFCCA. The latter
accounts will be opened by the borrower on terms acceptable to the Fund.

15. Retroactive financing. Expenses incurred prior to the date of entry into force of
the financing agreement will be considered eligible up to a total amount of
US$250,000, in accordance with and as specified in the financing agreement.

16. Procurement. Project procurement of goods and services will be carried out in
accordance with IFAD Project Procurement Guidelines and in accordance with the
provisions of the loan agreement. The specialized procurement unit will plan and
execute procurement processes. Any procurement required under the plans
developed by beneficiary families and organizations will be completed in compliance
with private commercial practices, in accordance with the procedures set out in the
PIM and the MEFCCA “Technical and Financial Administrative Rules”, and shall be
compatible with IFAD Guidelines. Any procurement to be carried out under the
territorial plans through agreements or contracts with public or private institutions
shall be governed by the applicable laws and must comply with IFAD guidelines.

17. Audit. The annual accounts and financial statements of the project will be
independently audited, pursuant to the terms of reference and in accordance with
International Standards on Audit and the IFAD Guidelines on Project Audits. Within
a period not longer than three (3) months from the effective date of project launch,
MEFCCA will engage an independent, external private company acceptable to IFAD
to audit the project. The annual report shall be submitted to IFAD within the six
months following the close of the fiscal year.

18. Governance and control. Principles of good governance, transparency and
participation will be agreed by all relevant parties, primarily MEFCCA and the
groups, organizations, communities and institutions involved in the project. These
agreements and procedures will be reflected in the PIM.

E. Supervision
19. IFAD will directly supervise the project and carry out implementation support

missions. As far as possible, such missions will be conducted in combination with
the supervision of other projects of the IFAD-financed portfolio in the country. The
first project supervision mission will take place approximately six months from the
entry into force of the project financing agreement. That mission will evaluate
progress against the timeline established in the implementation plan, and verify
progress on fiduciary aspects, expenditures, counterpart contributions and
compliance with the terms of the loan agreement. The second mission will take
place six months after the first.

IV. Project costs, financing and benefits
A. Project costs
20. The total cost of NICAVIDA over the six-year implementation period will be

US$48.46 million, comprising US$45.54 million in baseline costs (94 per cent of the
total cost) and US$2.92 million for physical and price contingencies (6 per cent of
total cost). Components 1 and 2 account for 93 per cent of base costs of the
project, with the majority of these funds going directly to beneficiaries and their
organizations. Project management (component 3) accounts for 8 per cent of base
costs.



EB 2016/LOT/P.7/Rev.1

6

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Government of
Nicaragua IFAD loan CABEI Beneficiaries Total

amountComponents Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Capacity-building
and planning 1 731 15.9 5 811 53.4 3 330 30.6 - - 10 873
2. Family, territorial
and business
investments 2 985 8.9 11 873 35.4 11 670 34.8 6 984 20.8 33 512
3. Project
management 1 258 30.9 2 819 69.1 - - - - 4 078
Total project costs 5 974 12.3 20 504 42.3 15 000 31.0 6 984 14.4 48 463

B. Project financing
21. NICAVIDA will be financed by: (i) the Government of Nicaragua, with a contribution

of US$5.9 million; (ii) IFAD, through a loan of US$20.5 million; (iii) CABEI, with a
loan of US$15.0 million; and (iv) the project beneficiaries, with US$6.9 million.
IFAD will finance 39 per cent of the investments, with IFAD’s highest allocation by
expenditure category corresponding to FTE (US$11.35 million, equivalent to 55 per
cent of IFAD financing).
Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Government of
Nicaragua IFAD loan CABEI Beneficiaries Total

Expenditure category Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

I. Investments
A. Vehicles 70 15.0 395 85.0 - - - - 465 1.0
B. Equipment 60 15.0 342 85.0 - - - - 403 0.8
C. Training 752 15.0 2 961 59.1 1 301 25.9 - - 5 015 10.3
D. Consultations 696 15.0 1 916 41.3 2 029 43.7 - - 4 641 9.6
E. Grants (FTE) 2 811 8.6 11 351 34.6 11 670 35.6 6 984 21.3 32 816 67.7

Total investments 4 389 10.1 16 966 39.1 15 000 34.6 6 984 16.1 43 340 89.4
II. Recurrent costs

A. Salaries 1 402 35.9 2 499 64.1 - - - - 3 901 8.0
B. Operating costs 183 15.0 1 039 85.0 - - - - 1 222 2.5

Total recurrent costs 1 585 30.9 3 538 69.1 - - - - 5 123 10.6
Total project costs 5 974 12.3 20 504 42.3 15 000 31.0 6 984 14.4 48 463 100.0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
22. NICAVIDA will benefit 30,000 families in rural areas (approximately 152,100

people). It is estimated that: (a) 13,450 families will receive support to improve
their nutrition and food security, acquire non-agricultural income-generating
activities and improve their working conditions; (b) 14,500 families will receive a
combination of support in the areas of food security and agricultural production and
diversification, agricultural and non-agricultural income generation, and business
plans; (c) 2,050 families will receive a combination of the support above and will
develop productive processes and agricultural diversification through business plans
incorporating technology and cash crops. The economic internal rate of return is
22.7 per cent and the net present value is US$20.8 million.

D. Sustainability
23. The sustainability of the project will be ensured by: (i) its integration with the

Government's policy for fighting rural poverty and the strengthening and expansion
of that policy, and its response to the conditions affecting the Dry Corridor; (ii) its



EB 2016/LOT/P.7/Rev.1

7

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

coherence and alignment with the Dry Corridor Strategic Framework; and (iii) its
approach seeking to ensure the sustainability of families in terms of food and
nutrition security, income, climate change adaptation and natural resource
management.

24. The sustainability of food security, enhanced nutrition and increased production will
be ensured by the central importance given to rural families as the focus of
NICAVIDA activities and interventions, and by the resources allocated to food
security and nutrition. At the same time, NICAVIDA also supports income-
generating activities for families through small businesses, value addition and
access to better employment opportunities through training. The project has a solid
strategic direction and dedicates resources to climate change adaptation and
climate variability-risk reduction. The integration of these measures with productive
agricultural activities will promote their sustainability.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
25. The approach and activities proposed under NICAVIDA aim to reduce risks relating

to food security, nutrition and climate change. The territorial investments and those
in farms aim to promote the sustainable management of natural resources, in
particular soil and water. The planned productive activities take into account
limitations reflecting the availability of tested technologies and the environmental
fragility of the land, and include measures for continuous monitoring and analysis
so timely preventative measures can be taken to mitigate such risks. Interventions
to improve access to water resources for human consumption and irrigation will be
accompanied by measures to improve the replenishment and protection of water
sources and analysis to ensure that improving access to water for irrigation does
not compete with its use for human consumption. In the present context,
institutional and political risks are limited. Risks relating to the efficiency of
management and administration, institutional coordination and agreements with
specialized institutions will be minimized by the application of measures drawn from
IFAD’s long experience implementing projects with MEFCCA and the Government.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

26. The approach, objectives and implementation modalities of NICAVIDA are
consistent with IFAD policies and strategies. The project pursues the objectives of
the COSOP 2013-2017 and is aligned with IFAD’s core policies: (i) the IFAD policy
on targeting, applying direct targeting mechanisms based on analyses of poverty,
food and nutrition insecurity and climate change risk, geographic targeting so as to
include indigenous peoples, and self-targeting within these groups and
communities; (ii) the IFAD policy on gender and youth, replicating and scaling up
lessons from previous projects applied directly to the beneficiaries;( iii) the IFAD
Policy on the Environment and Natural Resource Management, as well as the
Strategy on Climate Change, which includes the objective of maximizing the impact
of IFAD investments in rural poverty in the context of climate change and volatility;
iv) the policies on food and nutrition security, around which the project’s strategies
are built; and (v) the IFAD Policy on Engagement with Indigenous Peoples, applying
the principal of free, prior and informed consent, and with local territorial and
community authorities, recognizing the distinctive cultural identities of the
populations located in the project areas. The project is also fully aligned with IFAD
strategies devoting particular attention to building social capital, guiding
agricultural and non-agricultural productive activities and promoting market-
oriented small business.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
27. The project is aligned with: the National Human Development Plan; the Dry

Corridor Strategic Framework, which is the Government's instrument for addressing
development challenges in the dry zone; and the Government’s main rural
development and poverty-reduction initiatives and policies, such as asset-transfer



EB 2016/LOT/P.7/Rev.1

8

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

and -recovery mechanisms, systems for the provision of technical assistance and
training. Designed in close consultation with the Ministry of Finance and Public
Credit and other relevant institutions, NICAVIDA will support the process of
transforming the productive capacities of families in rural areas, thereby
contributing to the achievement of Government policy objectives promoting the
links between the diversification of agricultural and non-agricultural income,
environmental protection, family nutrition and income generation for poor rural
people looking for an opportunity to get out of poverty.

Innovations and scaling upC.
28. The project is in line with the joint Government-IFAD strategy aiming to establish a

rural development model that ensures food security, improves nutrition, supports
families in adapting to climate change and promotes sustainable income-generating
activities. The project contributes to the building of a robust joint approach in the
Dry Corridor, with close collaboration between the Government, MEFCCA, other
institutions — such as the MARENA, INTA and INETER — and IFAD, under the policy
guidance of the Ministries of Finance and Public Credit and of Foreign Affairs. The
model aims to build, by replicating and scaling up experience gained in previous
projects, a broad rural development framework of policies, programmes and
projects that the Government and IFAD plan to replicate and expand.

Policy engagementD.
29. NICAVIDA builds on the success of previous projects, in particular PRODESEC,

PROCAVAL and NICADAPTA, and is aligned with Government and IFAD policies. The
planned implementation methodology and instruments comply with IFAD
guidelines. The proposal is aligned with and supported by the Government in its use
of MEFCCA’s decentralization system and a system for partial asset transfers in the
form of incentives, as well as provisions for the recovery of transferred resources
and policies on the environment and climate change adaptation, inter-institutional
cooperation and improved access to the financial system for beneficiaries and their
organizations. The project is aligned with the policy, institutional and regulatory
framework and with the policies and instruments implemented by the Government
and MEFCCA.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
30. A financing agreement between the Republic of Nicaragua and IFAD will constitute

the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower. A copy
of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as appendix I.

31. The Republic of Nicaragua is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD.

32. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
33. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Republic of Nicaragua in an amount equivalent to twenty million
five-hundred and four thousand United States dollars (US$20,504,000), and
upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with
the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President



























































President’s report

Proposed loan to the Islamic Republic of
Pakistan for the Economic Transformation
Initiative - Gilgit-Baltistan

Islamic Republic of Pakistan

Economic Transformation Initiative - Gilgit-Baltistan

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Islamic Republic of Pakistan

Executing agency: Planning and Development Department, Provincial
Government of Gilgit-Baltistan

Total programme cost: US$120.15 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 48.55 million (equivalent to approximately
US$67 million)1

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional

Cofinancier(s): To be determined

Amount of cofinancing: US$22.98 million

Terms of cofinancing: To be determined

Contribution of borrower: US$23.63 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$6.54 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: IFAD

Retroactive financing: For eligible expenditures not exceeding US$0.5 million
incurred between the date of Executive Board approval
and the date of entry into force of the financing
agreement

1 Including US$10 million cancelled, upon request by the Islamic Republic of Pakistan as the borrower, from the
financing for the Southern Punjab Poverty Alleviation Project (approved by the Executive Board at its 101st session, EB
2010/101/R.27/Rev.1). The proposed recommitment of the funds cancelled as such is in compliance with the rules and
procedures approved by the Executive Board in “Revision of IFAD approach to use of cancellation of approved loans
and/or grants” at its 111th session (EB 2014/111/R.12/Rev.1).



EB 2015/114/R.14/Rev.1

1

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
loan to the Islamic Republic of Pakistan for the Economic Transformation Initiative –
Gilgit-Baltistan, as contained in paragraph 43.

Proposed loan to the Islamic Republic of Pakistan for the
Economic Transformation Initiative – Gilgit-Baltistan

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Pakistan has a total land area of 769,095 square kilometres. The estimated

population in 2013 was 184 million,2 of whom over 60 per cent live in rural areas.
In 2014, nominal GDP was an estimated US$ 246.6 billion and per capita GDP was
US$1,275.3 The services sector contributes the largest share to GDP – 53 per cent
– while agriculture and industry contribute 21 per cent and 24 per cent
respectively.

2. Pakistan is a relatively “young” country with over 55 per cent of the population
below the age of 25 and over 35 per cent between 25 and 54 years. Considerable
gender disparities exist on account of socio-economic, political and health factors,
and Pakistan is ranked 141st among 142 countries evaluated by the World
Economic Forum’s Global Gender Gap Index in 2014. The adult literacy rate is 56
per cent but there are huge variations between the urban and rural population and
across regions. The unemployment rate is 6.7 per cent.4

3. The official poverty line in Pakistan is calorie-based and is defined as per capita
food and non-food expenditures per month to support food consumption equal to
2,350 calories per adult per day.5 A report based on the Household Income and
Expenditure Survey (HIES) of 2011 calculates the overall incidence of poverty to be
36.55 per cent, with rural poverty standing at 37.08 per cent and urban at 35.49
per cent.6 Poverty in remote and geographically challenging areas like Gilgit-
Baltistan is largely driven by the small size of landholdings, poor access to
markets, lack of access to credit, inputs and support services, limited off-farm
employment opportunities, and policy and institutional constraints.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and RB-
COSOP

4. The Economic Transformation Initiative – Gilgit-Baltistan (ETI-GB) will directly
support the Government’s second poverty reduction strategy paper (2010), which
includes agriculture as one of the nine core pillars and which places special
emphasis on rural finance and on support for agriculture and small farmers,
microenterprises and small businesses, rural infrastructure, women’s development
and education as important means of poverty reduction.

2 Pakistan Bureau of Statistics, 2013.
3 Economist Intelligence Unit Report, 2014.
4 Pakistan Economic Survey, 2013-14, Finance Division, Government of Pakistan.
5 Ibid.
6 Haroon Jamal, Pakistan Poverty Statistics: Estimates for 2011, Research Report No.84.



EB 2015/114/R.14/Rev.1

2

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

5. The ETI-GB is also aligned with IFAD’s country strategic opportunities programme
(COSOP) for 2010-2015 , in which Gilgit-Baltistan was prioritized in view of its
comparative deprivation and higher incidence of poverty and the earlier success of
the IFAD-funded Northern Areas Development Programme in improving the
livelihoods of the hard-to-reach poor in Gilgit-Baltistan.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
6. Gilgit-Baltistan is a highly mountainous and remote region in northern Pakistan

covering 72,500 square kilometres, with a population of about 1.3 million. A
distinctive feature of the region is that over 90 per cent of the inhabitants own
some agricultural land, as compared to 52 per cent in rest of the country. However,
the per capita holding is very small at 0.6-0.8 acres. Small farm sizes, long harsh
winters, mountainous terrain and other physical challenges result in consumption
levels that are lower than the national average. Dietary diversity is the poorest in
the country, and the incidence of stunting among children is estimated at an
alarming 36 per cent. A survey by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations (FAO) in 2014 registers only 26 per cent of the population as food-
secure, 41 per cent as moderately food-insecure and 32 per cent as highly food-
insecure. The adult literacy rate is low, at 36 per cent, and the poverty incidence is
29 per cent as compared to 21 per cent for Pakistan overall.

7. Over 90 per cent of the region’s population is engaged in agriculture; therefore the
sector has a very important role for growth and poverty reduction. Traditionally,
apricot has been the most commonly produced food item in the region and this
continues to be the case. To capitalize on seasonal and elevation advantages, there
has been a move towards production of other high-value cash crops like fruits and
vegetables. Potato is the leading crop after apricots in terms of cultivated area and
production.

8. Smallholder farming households engaged in apricot and potato production with an
average landholding of less than one hectare (ha) will be the primary target group.
Other beneficiaries will include small-scale processors, trading and export
cooperatives, people engaged in value adding activities, input suppliers and
transporters. Gender will be mainstreamed in all aspects of the ETI-GB and youth
and women will be specifically targeted in skill development for relevant income
generation opportunities. The entry point for the initiative will be organized village
producers’ groups and marketing associations. In organizing these groups and
associations, the ETI-GB will build on the existing social capital generated by the
community organizations organized under other programmes in the region since
1982. An estimated 100,000 smallholder households, including women and youth,
will benefit directly from value chain and irrigation development activities. In
addition, about 100 local entrepreneurs will be assisted in scaling up their services
for different segments of value chains. About 10,000 persons will draw indirect
benefits from the upgrading of farm-to-market roads, extension, research and
other investments.

B. Development objective
9. The development objective is to increase agricultural incomes and employment for

at least 100,000 rural households in Gilgit-Baltistan region, as part of the overall
goal to improve incomes and reduce poverty and malnutrition in the region.

C. Components/outcomes
10. The seven-year operation will comprise of three mutually reinforcing components:

productive infrastructure; value chain development; and programme management
and policy support. These components will deliver five key outcomes: (i) 100,000
households increase their production, productivity and sales in key agricultural
commodities; (ii) a sustainable and community-driven development approach is



EB 2015/114/R.14/Rev.1

3

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

introduced, which is pro-poor and youth-, gender- and nutrition-sensitive; (iii) agri-
business actors invest in local production, processing and value addition to improve
marketing of local food products; (iv) government and private agricultural services
are sustainably improved and outreach expanded; and (5) the Government
formulates and enforces pro-poor agriculture policies.

11. The productive infrastructure component consists of two interlinked
subcomponents that will be underpinned by community mobilization and planning
activities in the four poorest districts, with the support of a competitively selected
social mobilization partner. These are, first, an irrigation subcomponent to scale up
the tried and tested community-based irrigation development approach, adding
50,000 acres of new irrigated land and providing an average of one acre of
irrigated land to participating households, including women-headed and landless
households. Participating households will also receive support in developing the
land. Second, a farm-to-market roads subcomponent will link existing production
areas and newly developed irrigated areas to main valley roads and trunk roads.
This will be achieved by upgrading 400 km of existing pony tracks to a standard
that allows use by all-terrain vehicles, and upgrading roads currently fit solely for
all-terrain vehicles to a standard that allows for truck transportation.

12. The value chain development component will be driven by a commercial and
market-centered approach whereby the initiative will identify priority valleys in
each of seven districts based on criteria that will include total population, number
of poor households, total production of priority crop, total cropped area, area
available for irrigation development and farm-to-market road needs. Coverage may
be expanded from the third year depending on progress and results. Within a
valley, interventions will start with villages with existing community organizations
that can be consolidated into larger village producer groups (VPGs). These
producer groups will provide the foundation for gradual expansion to all villages in
the valley and the organization of valley producers’ associations (VPAs).

13. The component will facilitate VPA engagement with private actors and other
partners. Contracts between VPAs and their purchasing partners will drive the
business plans of producers’ associations and the support from programme
implementing agencies. In particular, through its value chain technical assistance
team, the initiative will assist producers’ associations, processors and related
service providers in developing business plans and marketing strategies, increasing
product volume at an agreed quality standard, and accessing capital for
development to realize the full potential of their products. Where justified, capital
investments will be complemented by a value chain development fund using a
matching grants mechanism. The initiative will also build the capacity of
government extension and research agencies to effectively provide services to
VPGs and VPAs. Finally, the component will assist the Government in formulating
pro-poor policies and regulations for land records and titling, irrigation water usage
and management, road operation and maintenance, and developing effective
models for extension and research services.

14. The programme management and policy support component will put in place an
effective management and coordination system led by a steering committee
headed by a chief secretary of Gilgit-Balistan. A programme coordination unit
(PCU) will be established and will operate as an autonomous institution under the
guidance of the steering committee, and will be responsible for programme
planning and budgeting, coordination, monitoring, procurement and annual audits,
as well as management of the value chain development fund. The PCU will also
assist government departments with policy development and implementation. The
PCU will ensure that gender, youth, environment, knowledge management and
communication considerations are integrated into all aspects of programme
management and implementation.



EB 2015/114/R.14/Rev.1

4

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

III. Programme implementation
ApproachA.

15. The ETI-GB’s approach is founded on expanding the crop area, improving per-
household land holdings, and modernizing agricultural practices, thereby
transforming the rural economy from deficit/subsistence agriculture to commercial
production with marketable surpluses and more specialized, high-value agriculture
that is responsive to market demands and appropriate for the region’s comparative
advantages. A participatory and community-centered approach to land and water
development will be followed, consistent with the existing traditional practices and
community-based systems in Gilgit-Baltistan. Once a scheme is selected in
accordance with the initiative’s results-based criteria, the social mobilization
partner and implementing agency staff will involve selected communities in
decisions on terms and conditions that relate to them; the implementing agency’s
roles and responsibilities; land ownership; water availability and ownership;
equitable distribution of developed land; identification of beneficiaries including
women-headed and landless households; irrigation scheme implementation
strategy and timelines, etc. Before construction is initiated, a water users’
association, representative of all the beneficiaries, will be established to engage
with the implementing agency, the social mobilization partner and (where one is
required) the contractor. The initiative will also invest in training and equipping 40
youth construction groups for irrigation schemes, to be engaged by communities/
contractors for construction works.

16. Complementing the increase in production, the initiative will support a holistic and
demand-driven approach to value chain development (initially for apricot and
potato; subsequently, other promising products may be pursued). The entry point
for the value chain support will be the organized groups of farmers at village level,
with due regard for women and youth. Organizing smallholder farmers into
producers’ groups and formulating value chain development plans will be the key
elements to address aggregation, quality and marketing challenges. This approach
will involve education, capacity-building and networking of key stakeholders along
the entire value chain, backed by enabling policy support. At the core of this
approach will be a partnership brokerage model, whereby producers and farmers,
public services and private actors will be linked in mutually responsible
partnerships. The strategy is expected to develop capacity and networks for
sustainable expansion of production and marketable surpluses, resulting in
increased incomes and poverty reduction.

17. The initiative will actively engage existing and newly formed women producers’
groups within the target valleys to ascertain women’s priorities in terms of value
chain development, irrigation development and social development. Apart from
actively encouraging and creating opportunities for participation in VPGs, the
initiative will establish 20 women producers’ groups. Suitable opportunities for
women in the local socio-cultural setting will also be identified, such as grading,
packaging, polishing, processing, and women will receive training for such jobs.
Women-centered value chain activities will be another area of focus, including milk
marketing groups and apricot by-product processing. The initiative will introduce
labour-saving devices/equipment for women in order to address the constraints
that result from their disproportionate burden of harvesting, post-harvest shelling,
processing, drying of products, etc. To complement the anticipated effects of
improved infrastructure and higher incomes on nutrition, the ETI-GB shall also
provide training in nutrition to participating households.

B. Organizational framework
18. While the Government of Pakistan’s Economic Affairs Division will be the main

coordinating agency for IFAD financing, the Planning and Development Department
of the provincial government of Gilgit-Baltistan will be the lead executing agency,



EB 2015/114/R.14/Rev.1

5

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

overseeing implementation through an empowered and autonomous PCU.
Implementation will follow a hybrid model where different components/activities
will be implemented by different public agencies, NGOs and private-sector service
providers, coordinated by the PCU.

19. Subregional coordination units will be established in each of the three regions, i.e.
Gilgit, Diamer and Baltistan. These units will be responsible for planning,
coordination and monitoring of activities in the target valleys and villages in
collaboration with the social mobilization partner, the value chain technical
assistance team and line departments. The main implementing partners will be
(i) social mobilization partners/NGOs, competitively selected; (ii) a value chain
technical assistance team; and (iii) a range of private-sector partners including
local entrepreneurs, apricot processors and exporters, corporate and commercial
buyers of seed and table potato, input supply companies; and (iv) around 220
VPGs (20 of which will be women’s associations), 20 VPAs and four to five regional
producers’ associations.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

20. The annual workplan and budget (AWPB) represents the key planning document for
the initiative. The plan’s format will follow the logical framework, including clearly
spelled out monitoring indicators that can be easily measured and reported. The
overall responsibility for monitoring and evaluation (M&E) activities will lie with the
PCU. The planning, monitoring and evaluation (PME) system will be finalized and
made operational, in consultation with all implementing partners, within the first
six months of start-up. The PME system will be part of an overall information,
knowledge management and communication system that will provide timely and
accurate information on implementation progress and feedback for management
decision-making. A baseline survey will be conducted, preferably before start-up,
but at the latest by the end of the third month of implementation to establish
benchmarks based on the logical framework/Results and Impact Management
System (RIMS) related to outcomes and results vis-à-vis beneficiaries. Indicators
will be disaggregated by gender and socio-economic status to the extent possible
to allow for a proper assessment of whether the target beneficiaries are being
reached.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
21. An assessment of the financial management system was carried out to verify

compliance with IFAD’s requirements in terms of fiduciary risk. This risk,
considered high due to the remote location and weak capacity at the decentralized
level, is deemed mitigated to “medium’’ by a set of measures. These include
recruitment of qualified financial staff under performance-based contracts;
quarterly financial reporting; issuance of payments to implementing partners based
on certified statements of expenditure subject to internal and external audit; and
regular joint monitoring of ETI-GB accounts by the PCU, IFAD, the Government of
Gilgit-Baltistan, each within the context of its remit.

22. The PCU will be responsible for financial management and for coordinating and
consolidating all financial reports from implementing partners. The PCU will
maintain a full set of accounts in accordance with IFAD’s requirements and
internationally accepted accounting standards.

23. The annual external audit of expenditures will be carried out by the Auditor-
General of Pakistan, whose role includes the audit of all public resources. These
audit reports will be made available within six months of the close of financial year,
in line with IFAD’s guidelines.



EB 2015/114/R.14/Rev.1

6

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

24. Internal audit services will be provided by a specialized private firm in the first two
years of implementation, with reports made available to the PCU, IFAD and the
Government of Gilgit-Baltistan.

25. Budgeting. AWPBs will be prepared by the PCU in collaboration with the
implementing agencies, for the approval of the programme steering committee and
IFAD.

26. Flow of funds. A designated account will be opened in the State Bank of Pakistan
for receipt of loan proceeds, with a sub-account in Pakistani rupees. A PCU-
operated programme account will receive funds from the sub-account in order to
meet the PCU’s procurement and implementation obligations. Each of the PCUs and
partner agencies will open dedicated sub-accounts for the receipt of funds against
agreed AWPBs, periodic expenditure statements and expenditure returns. All fund-
flows will be based on the imprest account modality.

27. Procurement. The PCU will be responsible and accountable for procurement of
goods, works and consultancy services, which will be carried out in accordance with
IFAD’s Procurement Guidelines and Procurement Handbook (2010). Procurement
will follow procurement plans approved by IFAD. Specific procurement methods,
prior review arrangements, estimated costs and time frames, and risk mitigation
measures will be defined in the letter to the borrower and reflected in the
procurement plan. The programme implementation manual will detail procurement
procedures, processes and management arrangements.

E. Supervision
28. Supervision will be carried out directly by IFAD, in collaboration with the

Government and the cofinanciers. The supervision plan will include two supervision
missions annually in the first two years. Additional implementation support
missions will be organized by the IFAD country office as needed. Supervision and
implementation support will encompass: (i) fiduciary compliance with attention to
legal conditions, financial management, disbursement, procurement and
contracting; (ii) implementation performance, progress towards objectives,
investments and outputs, governance and management, targeting and gender
mainstreaming; and (iii) implementation support to provide guidance and
assistance. Implementation support will incorporate a country programme
perspective by introducing a broad view of development investments, influencing
policy and practices based on operational experiences, developing systems and
institutions for poverty reduction, facilitating financial and knowledge partnerships,
and generating lessons and best practices.

IV. Costs, financing, benefits
A. Costs
29. The total cost of the initiative, including price contingencies (16 per cent) and

physical contingencies (3 per cent), is estimated at US$120 million. The foreign
exchange component is estimated at US$8 million.



EB 2015/114/R.14/Rev.1

7

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Table 1
Component cost summary

B. Financing
30. Total costs are estimated at US$120 million. Of this, the Government will

contribute US$24 million (20 per cent) to finance taxes, salaries, operating costs
and certain other expenditures. IFAD will provide highly concessional financing
equivalent to US$67 million and the beneficiaries an estimated US$7 million.
Several donors have expressed an interest in cofinancing the initiative.
Negotiations are currently ongoing to fund the remaining financing gap of US$23
million.
Table 2
Costs by expenditure category and financier
(Millions of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD loan
Other

cofinanciers Beneficiary
Borrower/

counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

Investment cost
1. Civil works 35.03 50.7 13.29 19.2 6.54 9.5 14.26 20.6 69.12
2. Equipment and materials 0.38 60.0 0.14 23.0 - - 0.11 17.0 0.63
3. Trainings 3.67 50.9 1.39 19.2 - - 2.16 29.9 7.22
4. Vehicles 0.25 32.5 0.09 12.0 - - 0.42 55.5 0.76
5. Grants and subsidies 16.28 81.0 3.82 19.0 - - - - 20.10
6. Consultancy 0.19 52.0 0.08 23.0 - - 0.09 25.0 0.36
7. Technical assistance 0.95 51.0 0.35 19.0 - - 0.56 30.0 1.87

Total investment cost 56.76 19.17 6.54 17.60 100.06
Recurrent cost
8. Salaries and allowances 6.51 51.0 2.43 19.0 - - 3.83 30.0 12.77
9. Operating costs 3.73 51.0 1.39 19.0 - - 2.19 30.0 7.32

Total recurrent cost 10.25 3.82 - 6.03 20.09
Total 67.00 55.8 22.98 19.1 6.54 5.4 23.63 19.7 120.15

31. Retroactive financing. An exception to the IFAD General Conditions is foreseen
to allow retroactive financing of eligible expenditures for certain activities before
the financing agreement enters into force. Such expenses will be reimbursable by
IFAD when the financing becomes disbursable. The exact activities and amounts to
be considered eligible for retroactive financing include limited operating costs; the

(Pak Rs '000) (US$ Million)
% % Total % % Total

Foreign Base Foreign Base
Local Foreign Total Exchange Costs Local Foreign Total Exchange Costs

A. Productive Infrastructure
1. Irrigation & Land Development 4 112 473 434 811 4 547 284 10 44 40.12 4.24 44.36 10 44
2. Farm to Market Roads 1 576 450 174 506 1 750 956 10 17 15.38 1.70 17.08 10 17

Subtotal Productive Infrastructure 5 688 923 609 317 6 298 241 10 61 55.50 5.94 61.45 10 61
B. Value Chain Development

1. Vaue Chain Fund 1 986 966 92 570 2 079 535 4 20 19.39 0.90 20.29 4 20
2. Social Mobilization 398 893 12 337 411 230 3 4 3.89 0.12 4.01 3 4
3. Agri Extension 210 673 7 580 218 253 3 2 2.06 0.07 2.13 3 2
4. Agri Research 262 382 13 415 275 797 5 3 2.56 0.13 2.69 5 3
5. Land Titling & Record system 214 861 3 208 218 069 1 2 2.10 0.03 2.13 1 2

Subtotal Value Chain Development 3 073 774 129 110 3 202 884 4 31 29.99 1.26 31.25 4 31
C. Programme Coordination Unit 830 692 22 733 853 425 3 8 8.10 0.22 8.33 3 8
Total BASELINE COSTS 9 593 389 761 161 10 354 550 7 100 93.59 7.43 101.02 7 100

Physical Contingencies 297 229 30 028 327 256 9 3 2.90 0.29 3.19 9 3
Price Contingencies 2 118 263 56 082 2 174 346 3 21 15.74 0.20 15.94 1 16

Total PROJECT COSTS 12 008 881 847 271 12 856 152 7 124 112.23 7.92 120.15 7 119



EB 2015/114/R.14/Rev.1

8

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

cost of the recruitment process and key equipment; the cost of installing
accounting software and preparing a finance manual; and the costs of carrying out
baseline surveys and recruiting a service provider for social mobilization. The
amount of retroactive financing will be determined during negotiations and will not
exceed US$500,000. The Government of Pakistan agrees to make provision for this
financing initially and will be reimbursed for all eligible expenditures from IFAD
financing. The effective date for the retroactive financing will be the date of the
Executive Board’s approval of the financing.

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
32. About 100,000 smallholder households, landless households with unemployed

youth, and women-headed households will benefit directly from the ETI-GB
interventions. Another 10,000 smallholders, daily wage workers, artisans, masons,
etc. will also derive direct and indirect benefits from the interventions. Around 100
people involved in processing, adding value and providing other services along the
value chain will also benefit. The main benefits will be derived from:

(a) An additional 50,000 acres of newly irrigated land, increasing the local
irrigated area by around 30 per cent;

(b) The upgrading of 400 km of roads, which will reduce transportation costs and
enable farmers to transport bigger quantities of better quality;

(c) The injection of about US$25 million into the rural economy through labour
payments for irrigation development, of which about US$23 million will be
recovered and reinvested in the same villages for socio-economic
development, in addition to employment generated in upgrading roads and
food processing;

(d) The provision of a range of capacity-building, local processing, storage and
value addition facilities in support of 220 village producers’ associations;

(e) Sustainable, market-oriented improvements in potato seeds and fruit plant
production, processing and marketing systems;

(f) Strengthening of agriculture extension and agriculture research, and
capacity-building of the Water Management Directorate, Public Works
Department for better service delivery, commensurate with the status of a
provincial agency; and

(g) Policy formulation and reform in critical areas of water management, road
O&M, and land records and titling to ensure improved service delivery, better
governance and sustainability.

D. Sustainability
33. Sustainability will be promoted by engaging community-based groups and

organizations in all activities; upgrading existing systems, practices and structures
already present in the region; achieving scale efficiencies; and investing in
improving access and reducing the high transaction costs prevailing in this remote
region; and generating a commercial basis for future revenue generation by local
governments. Complementary features aimed at strengthening prospects for
sustainability include: (i) emphasizing creation of independent commercial win-win
relationships between the producers and private-sector buyers; (ii) developing
private local processing and value addition industry to create alternative avenues
for marketing of products; and (iii) strengthening the enabling environment
through support to development of local policy and regulatory systems.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
34. Security is a key area of concern for IFAD’s country programme in Pakistan. By

providing an inclusive and expansive development initiative that benefits rural
communities across the region, the ETI-GB is expected to mitigate possible ethnic,



EB 2015/114/R.14/Rev.1

9

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

religious or tribal tensions. Moreover, as the target area is of strategic importance
for the Pakistan-China economic corridor and for the national water and power
supply, both the federal Government and the provincial government of Gilgit-
Baltistan are placing significant emphasis on ensuring adequate security personnel
to maintain law and order in the area.

35. As this will be the largest development initiative to date in Gilgit-Baltistan, the
capacity of a relatively young provincial government to implement such a large-
scale intervention is another area of risk. The region has only recently been
granted provincial status, and its institutional capacities may still not be up to the
level needed to effectively implement a large development operation. The design
has therefore made provisions for capacity-building of Government services,
competitive packages for key programme staff to be recruited from the private
sector and engagement of experienced NGOs as service providers for field
implementation.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

36. The initiative is in line with the IFAD Strategic Framework 2011-2015. The
activities, implementation arrangements and M&E system have been designed in
compliance with the IFAD Policy on Targeting, and in line with the approaches
outlined in the Framework for Gender Mainstreaming in Programme Management
Department (PMD) Operations. The initiative is consistent with the IFAD Private-
Sector Development and Partnership Strategy. Management and operation of the
proposed value chain development fund are aligned with the IFAD Rural Finance
Policy and the IFAD decision tools for rural finance. A detailed environmental
assessment has been undertaken, which determined that the intervention is
aligned with both the IFAD Climate Change Strategy and the Environment and
Natural Resource Management Policy. The assessment confirmed that the water
sources that would be tapped for irrigation are not at threat; and that the
incremental effect of additional water use is negligible. Although some scientific
projections expect overall faster glacial melt in the Himalayas, studies specific to
the Karakoram region (where this programme is located) find that glaciers are
expanding due to different climatic phenomena as compared to the western
Himalayas. The ETI-GB’s environmental classification is Category B.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
37. IFAD will coordinate activities closely with other donor agencies active at present or

in the recent past in the area and will also pursue possibilities of cofinancing from
such sources as Italy, the United States Agency for International Development, the
Japanese International Cooperation Agency and the World Food Programme (WFP).
The design has already benefited from lessons learned in the past and ongoing
programmes of these agencies. IFAD is also working in partnership with WFP to
carry out hazard mapping of the target area and related communication
infrastructure. The possibilities of extending WFP’s school feeding programme and
food-for-work programme to the ETI-GB target area are being discussed with the
WFP country office.

Innovations and scaling upC.
38. Attempts will be made to introduce several innovative aspects to the target area:

(a) Mutually responsible commercial relationships between the private/corporate
sector and groups of smallholder farmers that address the quality and volume
concerns of the buyers and price, market predictability and trust concerns of
the sellers;

(b) Instead of following the traditional 20 per cent community contribution
approach, the ETI-GB will sponsor construction of water schemes and land



EB 2015/114/R.14/Rev.1

10

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

development at full cost, thereby injecting about US$30 million into the local
rural economy in the shape of wages. Benefiting households will be required
to pay back 50 per cent of these costs, but over three crop seasons and into
a community account that would be used for additional infrastructure, value
chain facilities, and social development needs as per agreed village
development plans;

(c) A value chain development fund, operating on a matching grant basis,
covering the full range of products and entire region;

(d) Piloting of cost-effective water-lifting systems along main rivers with the
potential to add thousands of additional acres to agriculture production
system.

Policy engagementD.
39. Policy formulation support will be provided to the Government in relation to value

chain development and priority areas for investments. These include land
settlement and titling, irrigation water policy, road O&M policy, seed and product
certification and quality certification. The IFAD Country Office in Islamabad will
facilitate cross-fertilization between the proposed initiative and other IFAD-funded
projects in the country in these policy areas. In particular, the IFAD-funded
Livestock and Access to Markets Project in Punjab incorporates a value chain
approach that also seeks to engage with government policies, allowing IFAD to
feed bottom-up, pro-poor perspectives into national policy dialogue processes in
areas of key concern for rural poverty reduction in the country.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
40. A financing agreement between the Islamic Republic of Pakistan and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as an annex.

41. The Islamic Republic of Pakistan is empowered under its laws to receive financing
from IFAD.

42. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
43. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms
to the Islamic Republic of Pakistan in an amount equivalent to forty-eight
million five hundred fifty thousand special drawing rights (SDR 48,550,000),
and upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance
with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President























































President’s report

Proposed loan to the Republic of the
Philippines for the Convergence on Value
Chain Enhancement for Rural Growth and
Empowerment Project (CONVERGE)

Republic of the Philippines

Convergence on Value Chain Enhancement for Rural
Growth and Empowerment Project (CONVERGE)

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of the Philippines

Executing agency: Department of Agrarian Reform

Total project cost: US$52.53 million

Amount of IFAD loan: EUR 22.8 million (equivalent to approximately
US$25.01 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Ordinary: Maturity period of 15-18 years, including a
grace period of 3 years, with an interest rate per annum
equal to 100 per cent of the IFAD reference interest
rate

Contribution of borrower: US$9.59 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$17.93 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/115/R.13

1

Recommendation for approval
The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of the Philippines for the Convergence on Value Chain
Enhancement for Rural Growth and Empowerment Project (CONVERGE), as
contained in paragraph 37.

Proposed loan to the Republic of the Philippines for the
Convergence on Value Chain Enhancement for Rural
Growth and Empowerment Project (CONVERGE)
I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. In 2009 the population was 92.2 million and growing at 2.04 per cent annually. In

2010, gross national income per capita was US$4,002 (in 2008 dollars). Since 1981
GDP growth has averaged 3.1 per cent per annum, but only 2.3 per cent per
annum from 2001 to 2010. Over the period 2004-2010, the headline inflation rate
averaged 5.6 per cent. The Human Development Index of 0.638 in 2010 ranked
the country 97th among 169 countries, whereas in 1998 it was 0.744, which shows
that, over those 12 years, development efforts were unable to improve the human
development status. The gender development index decreased from 0.768 in 2005
to 0.742 in 2008 and the gender empowerment measure fell from 0.590 in 2005 to
0.560 in 2008. The national poverty incidence decreased slightly, from
21.1 per cent of families in 2006 to 20.9 in 2009. But with population growth, the
number of poor families rose from 3.67 million to 3.86 million in the same period,
higher than in 2003. Farmers and fishers were the poorest groups in the country,
with a poverty incidence of 44 and 50 per cent, respectively, in 2006. Nationally,
income inequality remains high, with a Gini coefficient of 0.448.

2. The failure to reduce poverty in recent years reflects underinvestment and the slow
growth of per capita incomes, high population growth and dependency rates,
natural disasters and inflationary pressures, mainly from rising fuel and food
prices. Despite the recent lack of progress in reducing the incidence of poverty, the
Philippines Development Plan (PDP) 2011-2016 envisages that the country can still
achieve Millennium Development Goal poverty reduction targets by 2015.
Favourable factors exist that may help the country break out of its perennial
condition of widespread rural poverty, inequity and lagging human development,
including a healthy external payments situation, years of trade reform (leaving an
industrial sector fairly undistorted by subsidies and heavy protection), a stable
currency, low inflation and positive political developments.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and RB-
COSOP

3. The proposed project is consistent with the PDP 2011-2016, the IFAD Strategic
Framework 2011-2015 and the IFAD country strategy for the Philippines for 2010-
2014. The rationale for IFAD’s help in financing the project is to: (i) exploit
opportunities to support the agrarian reform process and help meet the needs of
under- and unserved agrarian reform beneficiaries (ARBs) – through a value chain
approach to enhance agricultural growth and agribusiness development – in order
to maximize benefits from the land distribution programme; (ii) support
harmonization of rural development efforts by the Departments of Agrarian Reform
(DAR), Agriculture (DA) and Environment and Natural Resources (DENR), and
other agencies engaged in agribusiness development, in order to maximize impact
in rural poverty reduction; and (iii) support the DAR approach of clustering
agrarian reform communities to realize economies of scale for production, access to



EB 2015/115/R.13

2

markets and service provision in order to benefit from value chain development.
The project will contribute to the PDP’s goal of a competitive and sustainable
agriculture and fisheries sector through improved food security and increased rural
incomes, and it supports the national Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Programme.

4. The project is part of the National Convergence Initiative (NCI), which seeks to
synchronize the initiatives of the three departments engaged in rural development
– DAR, DA and DENR – and optimize use of the resources available to support
sustainable rural development. Linkages will be built with the Department of Trade
and Industry (DTI) under the Rural Microenterprise Promotion Programme, with
the DA under the Second Cordillera Highland Agricultural Resource Management
Project and with the DENR under the Integrated Natural Resources and
Environmental Management Project approved by the Executive Board in December
2012. Lessons learned in ongoing and previous projects have been incorporated
into the design.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
5. The project will target Regions IX, X and Caraga, located in the west, north and

north-east of Mindanao, which are the three poorest regions of the country,
accounting for 18 per cent of those living below the national poverty line. Within
the three regions, the project will target 11 agrarian reform community (ARC)
clusters, including 93 ARCs in 48 municipalities in 10 provinces. The target group
includes ARBs, other smallholders, under- or unemployed rural youth, indigenous
peoples (IPs), women, and business development partners, including eligible
people’s organizations (POs). The total size of the target group is estimated at
144,732 agricultural households (about 773,106 people), including non-ARC
barangays (villages) and IP households. Of this total, ARBs account for 59,217
households, of which 30 per cent are headed by women. The major crops
cultivated include coconut, rice, maize, rubber, banana, high-value vegetables, oil
palm, coffee and cassava. Some 29 per cent of ARC average incomes are below the
poverty line.

B. Project development objective
6. The overall goal of the project is to contribute to the reduction of poverty incidence

in the 10 target provinces of Regions IX, X and Caraga. The project’s development
objective is to enable ARBs and other smallholder farmers in the 10 target
provinces of Regions IX, X and Caraga to become highly productive and
competitive entrepreneurs and contribute to the achievement of broad-based rural
economic growth. The expected impact and outcome indicators for the
approximately 35,000 households and 100 POs (e.g. farmers’ cooperatives and
associations) in the 11 ARC clusters include: (i) average annual income increased;
(ii) increased farm income derived from new farming activities; (iii) increased
ownership of household assets; and (iv) reduced prevalence of child malnutrition.

C. Components/outcomes
7. The project has the following components: (1) participatory value chain analysis

and planning; (2) integrated smallholder agricultural and rural enterprise
development; (3) subdivision of collective certificates of land ownership award and
facilitation of land transfer programme; and (4) project management, monitoring
and evaluation and knowledge management.

8. Component 1: Participatory value chain analysis and planning. The expected
outcome of this component will be that value-chain business development plans for
selected crops are validated and implemented, resulting in improved farm income.
In each of the 11 ARC clusters, the component will support: (i) validation of the
proposals for value chain development as identified by the feasibility studies;
(ii) identification of the gaps and inefficiencies in the value chains and of the
solutions and investments required; (iii) identification of POs and private-sector



EB 2015/115/R.13

3

organizations wishing to and capable of participating in value chain development;
and (iv) updated ARC value chain investment plans (ARC-VIPs).

9. Component 2: Integrated smallholder agricultural and rural enterprise
development. The expected outcome of this component is improved production,
value addition and marketing of selected agricultural commodities. The component
has two subcomponents: (i) farm and value chain enterprise development; and
(ii) investment in value chain-related rural infrastructure.

10. Under farm and value chain enterprise development, the project will support
improvement of the quantity and quality of production at the farm level and the
phasing of production to meet market demand. It will achieve this through farmer
training, capacity-building and the provision of technical and farm management
advice in product testing, soil analysis, production technologies and management,
adaptation to threats from climate change, environmental awareness-raising and
good agricultural practices. This will involve the private sector (e.g. extension
personnel employed by buyers or consolidators) and/or public-sector agencies (e.g.
DAR development facilitators, technical staff of local government units (LGUs) and
the Agricultural Training Institute). In the area of value addition and diversification,
the project will facilitate the creation of appropriate business models and of the
institutional structures required to enable smallholders and their organizations to
engage in value addition and enterprise development, with private-sector
management of these value chains. The project aims to increase farmer share in
value chains through product differentiation and the already-mentioned value
addition and diversification. Project interventions will be implemented through the
provision of matching grants when there is a clear opportunity to improve
profitability for the target group. Other investments to enhance value addition
include the provision of assistance for product development, branding, packaging,
logistics, certification/accreditation, technology and equipment upgrading, and
organizational development through training with a focus on meeting market
requirements. The project will provide investments, on a cost-sharing basis, to
match the contributions of private-sector participants for eligible proposals and for
financing the equipment associated with post-harvest facilities.

11. In the area of market and investment facilitation, the project will develop linkages
within the value chain among input providers, producers and buyers to enhance
the profitability of farm enterprises. Assistance in consolidating supplies to meet
the volume and frequency requirements of buyers and investors is part of this
process. The assistance provided will include support for improving and/or
extending existing market information systems, trade fairs, business and investors’
forums, and assistance in negotiations with buyers and investors for leasehold,
contract growing, joint venture or marketing arrangements. The project will make
use of the expertise of agencies such as DA, DENR, DTI and the Department of
Science and Technology (DOST) to enable target beneficiaries to optimize
production of their chosen commodities, improve their market access and
competiveness, generate greater profits and provide a more integrated package of
services in the priority chains to be developed. The project will also assist project
beneficiaries in accessing funding from the banking and microfinance sectors using
a combination of approaches: private-sector enterprises involved in the value
chain; project matching grant funds to farmers, POs and private-sector
organizations meeting strict eligibility criteria for investments; development of the
capacity of viable farmers’ organizations to access finance from the formal banking
sector, government finance institutions and microfinance institutions; and linkages
with financial institutions to develop appropriate financing packages and products
for the value chain initiatives.



EB 2015/115/R.13

4

12. Under investment in value chain-related rural infrastructure, after participatory
planning with target ARCs and target group members, the project will invest in
rural infrastructure subprojects meeting eligibility and priorities criteria to support
value chain development. Eligible infrastructure includes farm-to-market roads,
rehabilitation/restoration of communal irrigation schemes (CISs), water-harvesting
and management, post-harvest facilities (storage, auction centres, etc.) and water
supply required to process local produce for value chain development. Irrigators’
associations and farmers’ groups/associations will operate and maintain CISs and
post-harvest facilities, while LGUs will maintain the farm-to-market roads.
Investments in additional road construction will take place only after firm funding
has been secured from participating LGUs. In addition, the capacity of LGUs to fund
and undertake maintenance of the roads will be closely monitored.

13. Component 3: Subdivision of collective certificates of landownership
award (CLOA) and facilitation of land transfer program. This component will
cover the subdivision of CLOAs and facilitation of land transfer action to stabilize
ownership and property rights in the project areas. This will provide incentive to
farmers to make their lands more productive and enable them to access credit and
engage in agribusiness projects with private investors. Target outputs and
outcomes for this component will be under the regular programme of DAR and will
be funded under the regular budget of DAR.

14. Component 4: Project management, monitoring and evaluation and
knowledge management. The expected outcome of this component is that the
project is completed on time, within the agreed budget, and to the satisfaction of
beneficiaries. The output will be timely, cost-effective and transparent
management that is gender and culturally sensitive. The component will finance
the costs of project management and coordination, monitoring and evaluation
(M&E) and reporting activities at national, regional and provincial levels. It will also
finance the costs of contracted project staff based in the central project
management office (CPMO) in Mindanao, the three regional project management
offices (RPMOs) and in the 11 provincial project management offices (PPMOs),
honorariums of DAR regular staff assigned to the project, equipment, vehicles,
short-term consultants, training, preparation of project manuals, case studies and
operating costs.

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

15. The key elements of the overall project approach are: (i) use of a participatory
value chain development approach to enable target beneficiaries to optimize
production of their chosen commodities, sustainably improve the profitability of
household farm enterprises, improve their market access and competiveness and
generate greater profits; (ii) application of convergence in implementing project
activities under the leadership of DAR to enhance the investment and opportunity
climate for agribusiness; (iii) use of the ARC clustering approach for the provision
of support to ARCs for value chain development; (iv) implementation through DAR,
at all levels, with the participation of the other agencies (e.g. DTI, DOST, LGUs and
the National Commission on Indigenous Peoples [NCIP]); and (v) emphasis on
knowledge management (KM) and learning to ensure that experience and lessons
learned are available to improve project performance and for scaling up and wider
dissemination.

16. The project implementation period is six years. The implementation strategy will
include: (i) geographic targeting to identify the project areas and provide a
preliminary list of target commodities based on the 11 feasibility studies and
investment plans already prepared; (ii) selection of private sector organizations to
provide marketing and/or other services that meet the proposed eligibility criteria
during the initial participatory value chain analysis and planning phase; (iii) self-
targeting by members of the target group based on their interest in participating in



EB 2015/115/R.13

5

project activities; (iv) non-poor households will be targeted through their inclusion
in the POs or other types of organizations formed; and (v) provision of public
goods, such as improved farm to market roads, rehabilitated CISs, post-harvest
facilities, etc. Consultations were held with the NCIP, the organization charged with
supporting the integration of IPs in the mainstream. The approach to working with
IPs as a sub-group of the target group will work within the framework of the NCIP’s
Ancestral Domain Sustainable Development and Protection Plan. This approach
involves putting into practice the principle of free and prior informed
consultation/consent on all project activities by providing adequate information.

B. Organizational framework
17. DAR will be the lead agency for project implementation, in cooperation with DA,

DENR, DTI and DOST. DAR has the necessary institutional capacity and structure to
undertake this role and the experience gained from implementing over 60
externally funded projects – including two recently completed IFAD projects that
were implemented satisfactorily in Mindanao. DAR has staff at all levels of
government, down to the municipal level (municipal agrarian reform officers), and
a development facilitator assigned to each of the 11 ARCs to work with
beneficiaries. The project management structure involves a CPMO based in
Cagayan de Oro (Region X); RPMOs in each of the three regions; and PPMOs in
each of the 10 provinces (two operational divisions in Bukidnon). The oversight
structure includes a project steering committee at the national level as the
project’s policymaking body; a regional multi-stakeholders committee (RMSC) in
each of the three regions to advise regional project implementers on major policy
considerations and technical and operational issues and to ensure participation of
the region-based agencies in project implementation; and a cluster project
operations team (CPOT) in each of the 11 ARC clusters to serve as coordinating
mechanisms for delivery of government services to the clusters.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

18. At start-up, project staff and stakeholders at national and regional levels will
prepare a multi-year global workplan and budget for achieving project objectives
and targets, for approval by the project steering committee. Participatory planning
of annual workplans and budgets (AWP/Bs) will start at the barangay and ARC
cluster levels, involving representatives of the ARCs, CPOTs and PPMOs. The
project will have a results-based M&E system to report the status of project
implementation and progress on outputs, outcomes and impact. The overall M&E
system will consist of regular reports and process monitoring by the CPMO, based
on data provided by RPMOs, PPMOs and implementing agencies, and
communicating the project’s physical progress data and financial accounts,
maintained by the CPMO and regional/provincial offices. During the first project
year (PY1), DAR will undertake a baseline survey to cover all indicators of the
logical framework, including RIMS indicators, and, subsequently, midterm impact
and completion impact surveys. M&E and KM units will be established in all
implementation levels. M&E documentation results will contribute to policy studies
to improve the business environment for smallholder farmers in the Philippines,
with a view to scaling up within the country.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
19. Financial management of the project will follow government systems, rules and

regulations for receipts and disbursements of proceeds from the loan – to the
extent that they are consistent with IFAD’s standard disbursement procedures. The
Bureau of the Treasury, through DAR, will maintain one designated account
exclusively for the loan. DAR, through the CPMO, will be responsible for overall
management of project funds, which includes: oversight of project operations,
procurement, internal control, accounting, review and consolidation of project
AWP/Bs, physical and financial reporting, audits; and consolidation of accounts and



EB 2015/115/R.13

6

withdrawal applications. RPMOs and PPMOs will be accountable for project funds
received for implementation of the project. DAR will execute a memorandum of
agreement with each of the partner implementing agencies at national, regional,
provincial and municipal levels to specify the services and support to be provided
by each agency and by the project.

20. IFAD’s review of the project implementation manual (PIM) will be a precondition of
disbursement. Guidelines in the PIM will be consistent with the Government’s and
IFAD policies, systems and procedures. Annual financial statements on project
funds will be prepared in accordance with acceptable accounting standards, such as
the International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS), the International Public
Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS), or national standards where these are
converging towards internationally recognized best practice and/or are deemed to
provide minimum disclosures.

21. The project’s consolidated financial statements will be audited annually in
accordance with IFAD Guidelines on Project Audits. All project accounts will be
audited, including all sources of funding. Annual audit reports will be submitted to
IFAD within six months after the end of each fiscal year.

22. The project will follow government procurement regulations (RA 9184) using the
latest implementing rules and regulations – to the extent that they are consistent
with IFAD’s Project Procurement Guidelines. IFAD will apply a zero-tolerance policy
to fraudulent, corrupt, collusive or coercive actions.

E. Supervision
23. Annually, IFAD and the National Economic Development Authority will jointly

conduct a full supervision and implementation support mission, and a post-
supervision mission 6 to 9 months later, depending on progress.

IV. Project costs, financing, benefits
A. Project costs
24. Project costs are estimated at about US$52.53 million over a six-year

implementation period, including taxes and duties estimated at US$5.96 million or
11 per cent of total costs. Price contingencies of 3 per cent, and physical
contingencies have been computed at 3.5 per cent of base costs on all items, both
decided by the National Economic and Development Authority.

Table 1
Indicative project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD
Loan Government LGUs

Beneficiary/
proponent Total

Components Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Participatory value chain analysis and planning 0.58 63.5 0.34 36.5 - - - - 0.92 1.8
2. Integrated smallholder agricultural and rural

enterprise development

i. Farm and value chain enterprise development 11.78 35.6 1.72 5.2 2.01 6.1 17.56 53.1 33.07 63.0

ii. Value chain related rural Infrastructure 10.86 79.0 1.05 7.6 1.47 10.7 0.37 2.7 13.74 26.2

Subtotal 22.63 48.3 2.77 5.9 3.48 7.4 17.93 38.3 46.81 89.1

3. Project management, M&E and KM

1. M&E and KM 0.93 50.9 0.90 49.1 - - - - 1.83 3.5

2. Project management 0.86 29.0 2.10 71.0 - - - - 2.96 5.6

Subtotal 1.80 37.4 3.00 62.6 - - - - 4.80 9.1
Total 25.01 47.6 6.11 11.6 3.48 6.6 17.93 34.1 52.53 100.0



EB 2015/115/R.13

7

B. Project financing
25. Project financing comprises: (i) an IFAD loan of US$25.01 million (47.6 per cent);

(ii) contribution of the borrower for US$9.59 made of national government
counterpart funding of US$6.08 million (11.6 per cent) and LGU financing of
US$3.51 million (6.6 per cent); and (iii) contributions from proponents and
beneficiaries of about US$17.93 million (34.1 per cent). The financing plan by
expenditure category and financier is presented in table 2 below. The categories of
expenditures may be merged into broader categories in the financing agreement.

Table 2
Indicative project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD
Loan Government LGUs

Beneficiary/
Proponent Total

Expenditure categories Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1.   Works 9.79 80.0 0.61 5.0 1.47 12.0 0.37 3.0 12.24 23.3

2.   Equipment and materials (for farms and
enterprise development)

8.17 30.0 0.68 2.5 1.50 5.5 16.88 62.0 27.23 51.8

3.   Equipment and materials (for value
chains)

1.87 55.0 0.34 10.0 0.51 15.0 0.68 20.0 3.40 6.5

4.   Consultancies 3.69 73.0 1.36 27.0 - - - - 5.05 9.6

5.   Training and workshops 1.32 71.7 0.52 28.3 1.85 3.5

6.   Equipment 0.17 35.0 0.32 65.0 - - - - 0.49 0.9

7.   Government support staff - - 0.80 100.0 - - - - 0.80 1.5

8.   Operation and maintenance - - 1.48 100.0 - - - - 1.48 2.8

Total 25.01 47.6 6.11 11.6 3.48 6.6 17.93 34.1 52.53 100.0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
26. It is estimated that about 35,000 rural households will benefit directly from the

project, including 3,000 jobs to be generated by the project in the value added
subsector. Some 15,000 households, not counted elsewhere, will benefit from
improved rural roads, bringing the total to 50,000 beneficiary households. The
main incremental outputs following project investment in the target ARC clusters
will derive from the priority products selected by the feasibility studies. Likely
benefits at the farm level will stem from increased production and improved
productivity, enhanced value added at the farm level and higher prices as a result
of both quality improvements and more efficient marketing. Additional benefits will
be generated by the project’s capacity-building programme, e.g. strengthened
capacity to participate in value chain and rural enterprise development, and for
implementing agencies, capacity to target and manage poverty reduction and rural
development programmes in a gender-sensitive and participatory manner.

27. The financial and economic impact of the project has been assessed by:
(i) preparing detailed feasibility studies for the value chain investments that are
likely to be undertaken under the project; and (ii) analysing each model to
ascertain probable impact at the individual farmer level, in comparison with typical
without-project incomes. The project shows an economic internal rate of return
(EIRR) of 44.6 per cent and a cost-benefit ratio of 1.57 discounting benefits and
costs at 15 per cent. The sensitivity analysis demonstrates that the results are
robust. For example, the project would still be viable if all costs increased by
20 per cent and benefits 20 per cent lower. The economic and farm budget
analyses will be updated based on market demand and value chain analysis
undertaken in the first year.

D. Sustainability
28. The following elements are built into project design to help ensure that the

proposed investments and benefits are sustainable: (i) dedication of the first year
of implementation to the analysis, identification and planning of the project’s
investments in priority value chains involving famers, their organizations and the



EB 2015/115/R.13

8

private sector; (ii) the experience and lessons learned in the implementation of the
11 feasibility studies contribute to ensuring that subsequent investments are
sustainable; (iii) the project has a strong focus on involvement of the private sector
on a long-term basis to enhance the sustainability of investments and benefits;
(iv) it will support contractual and other types of arrangements linking smallholders
with the private sector to enable them to move up the supply chain and incorporate
greater value addition; (v) beneficiaries and LGUs will be involved in providing
counterpart funds for infrastructure facilities and will be responsible for their
operation and maintenance; (vi) project design takes into account the knowledge,
systems and practices of IPs, which will also help ensure the sustainability of
project interventions in areas where IPs are present; and (vii) 18 months before
the completion date, the CPMO will work closely with all stakeholders at national,
regional, provincial and municipal levels, and with ARCs and barangays, to finalize
an exit strategy and sustainability plan based on specific mechanisms to ensure
sustainability after the end of the project.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
29. The first risk is that effective coordination among the three NCI agencies in the

field will be more difficult than at the national level. Project design counters this
risk as follows: (i) all agencies having a role in project implementation will be
members of the project steering committee to be able to resolve inter-agency
coordination issues; (ii) all implementing agencies will have an NCI focal point
through whom the project will interact with the NCI at the national level; (iii) the
three RMSCs will include representation of all relevant agencies to ensure effective
coordination of implementation in the regions and ARC clusters; and (iv) within
ARC clusters, CPOTs will include staff involved in day-to-day project
implementation. The second risk is the degree of willingness of the private sector
to be involved in implementation of component 2, which is essential for the success
of the project. This risk is addressed through: (i) component 1 and the
participatory analysis and planning process, which will involve all potential
participants, including representatives of private-sector agencies involved in the
particular value chains under analysis; and (ii) during the value chain analysis and
planning process, publication of the availability of grants for value chain
development to match investments from the private sector, the size of the grants
available, and the terms and conditions of the grants for diverse interventions. The
third risk is the weak capacity of poorer LGUs to provide the required counterpart
funds for rural infrastructure investment. The project counters this risk by reaching
an agreement with the Government on a financing plan for these investments
based on a financing ratio of 80 per cent for the IFAD loan, 5 per cent for national
government counterpart funds, 12 per cent on average for LGUs and 3 per cent for
beneficiary contributions.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

30. IFAD policies relevant to the project include: the IFAD Targeting Policy: Reaching
the Rural Poor; Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment; Engagement with
Indigenous Peoples; IFAD Rural Enterprise Policy; IFAD’s Private-Sector
Development and Partnership Strategy; IFAD Climate Change Strategy; IFAD Rural
Finance Policy; and IFAD Policy on Preventing Fraud and Corruption in its Activities
and Operations. Project design has reflected these policies and lessons learned in
the IFAD country programme. The project is classified as Category B and employs
the following mitigation measures: value chain development is resilient to climate
change, environmentally friendly and sustainable; training includes management
and adaptation to the threats of climate change and environmental awareness;
environmentally friendly and sustainable production systems will be promoted (e.g.
use of the farming systems approach, good agricultural practices and varieties that
can tolerate climate variability); and DENR and its local offices will be involved to
ensure that value chain development is in line with good practices for



EB 2015/115/R.13

9

environmental and natural resource management.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
31. The project objective is aligned with the PDP’s goal of a competitive and

sustainable agriculture and fisheries sector. The project will complement other
donors working in the same sector – such as the Asian Development Bank, Japan
International Cooperation Agency and World Bank – to increase project impact in
poverty reduction and on policy dialogue with the government and other
stakeholders. IFAD will also work with government programmes for an improved
policy environment and governance. The project will explore diverse types of
partnership arrangements between project beneficiaries and the private sector,
ensuring that such arrangements are fair to farmers and ARC communities.
Private-sector organizations and business development partners can take a leading
role as innovators in improving the returns from existing and emerging value
chains in an enterprise-oriented development approach.

Innovations and scaling upC.
32. The project will be the first foreign-assisted project under DAR to support the NCI.

Its investment is quite small when compared with the growth needed to make a
serious dent in rural poverty in Mindanao. However, the project could catalyse
improved household incomes and attract further investment for scaling up – in
order to fully realize the potential benefits of Mindanao’s comparative advantage in
key agricultural commodities.

Policy engagementD.
33. The project will finance policy/case studies – for policy dialogue and consultation

with relevant national and local institutions and with other stakeholders – on
planning and implementation of the value chain approach to agro-enterprise
development, mechanisms for convergence and other relevant studies. The studies
envisaged could include: (i) consolidation of smallholder production to achieve
economies of scale in production and marketing, appropriate business models, and
contractual and legal arrangements; and (ii) innovative engagement of the private
sector in providing rural infrastructure to support value chain development.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
34. A financing agreement between the Republic of the Philippines and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as an
appendix.

35. The Republic of the Philippines is empowered under its laws to receive financing
from IFAD.

36. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
37. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Republic of the Philippines in an amount equivalent to twenty-two million
eight hundred thousand euros (EUR 22,800,000), equivalent to approximately
US$25.01 million and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President


















































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the
Republic of Paraguay for the Project for
Improved Family and Indigenous Production
in Departments of Eastern Paraguay

Republic of Paraguay

Project for Improved Family and Indigenous Production
in Departments of Eastern Paraguay

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of Paraguay

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock

Total project cost: US$23.83 million

Amount of IFAD loan: EUR 15.80 million (equivalent to approximately
US$17.37 million)

Amount of Adaptation for Smallholder
Agriculture Programme (ASAP) grant:

SDR 3.65 million (equivalent to approximately
US$5.09 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Ordinary: Maturity period of 18 years, including a grace
period of 3 years, with an interest rate per annum equal
to 100 per cent of the IFAD reference interest rate

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$1.36 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/LOT/P.4/Rev.2

1

Recommendation for approval
The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed loan
and grant to the Republic of Paraguay for the Project for Improved Family and
Indigenous Production in Departments of Eastern Paraguay, as contained in
paragraph 30.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Paraguay for
the Project for Improved Family and Indigenous
Production in Departments of Eastern Paraguay

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country, rural development and poverty context
1. With a GDP per capita in 2013 of US$4,040, Paraguay has achieved an average

annual growth of 4.8 per cent in the past 10 years, albeit with wide variations
linked to climatic influence on the performance of the agriculture and livestock
sectors. Of the total population of 6.8 million people, 23.8 per cent are poor
according to the Continuous Household Survey conducted in 2012. Some 2.7 million
people live in rural areas, of whom 1.4 million are poor or extremely poor. Poor
producers are being displaced from their lands by the advance of export-based
farming, especially of soybeans. About two thirds of Paraguay’s 235,904
smallholder families are poor. Women stand out as particularly disadvantaged: out
of every 100 households in extreme poverty, 34 are headed by women. The
country has an indigenous population of 115,000, and over 90 per cent of these
people live in poverty.

2. The environmental situation is critical and exacerbated by the development model
followed by the country for decades, which is based on the extractive exploitation of
hardwoods coupled with deforestation to support the expansion of the agricultural
frontier on fragile soils and ecosystems. The projections of climate change models
predict higher temperatures and rainfall, which will increase the presence of disease
vectors and reduce the availability of water in the dry months, along with the
productivity of plants and animals.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
country strategic opportunities programme (COSOP)

3. The Project for Improved Family and Indigenous Production in Departments of
Eastern Paraguay (PROMAFI) is aligned with national policies and responds to
IFAD's strategic framework for Paraguay as defined in the 2004 COSOP. It is
complementary to the ongoing Inclusion of Family Farming in Value Chains Project
(Paraguay Inclusivo), which is financed by IFAD and the Government.

4. The project is also consistent with current government policy, which prioritizes the
fight against rural poverty. As a consequence, the Government requested that the
project design reflect the strategic objectives of the current COSOP, to be followed
by the preparation of a results-based COSOP in 2015. The proposed project is
aligned with the poverty reduction and social development pillar of the National
Development Plan and the objectives of the Strategic Agricultural Framework,
2009-2018, which supports the development of family farming, food security and
the substantial reduction of poverty and social exclusion. It also complements the
Government’s "Sowing Opportunities" programme aimed at reducing extreme
poverty. This programme coordinates all ministerial and institutional interventions



EB 2015/LOT/P.4/Rev.2

2

through the Technical Planning Secretariat, and includes the Tekoporã programme,
which offers conditional cash transfers to families in extreme poverty.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
5. The project area includes four departments in the northeast of the country. In each

department, priority will be given to districts with high poverty rates.

6. The project focuses on family farmers and indigenous communities. A high level of
participation by women and young people will be achieved through a positive bias
in the financing conditions. Environmental factors will be taken into account, and
specific measures will be introduced to increase producers’ responses to climate
change. The project will work exclusively with families that belong to rural
organizations (ROs), encompassing both existing productive organizations and
incipient committees of family farmers and indigenous communities.

B. Project development objective
7. The project’s purpose is to contribute to the sustainable reduction of poverty among

the vulnerable rural population. Its development objective is to increase incomes
sustainably through strengthened social capital, productivity and adaptation to
climate change. The specific objectives are to: (i) consolidate organizations of small
producers; (ii) facilitate the use of productive assets by ROs to increase their
production and marketing sustainably and in a way that is adapted to climate
change; and (iii) provide ROs with access to appropriate financial services.

C. Components and outcomes
8. The project has four components:

 Component 1: Organizational strengthening. Starting with committees at
a relatively low level of organization, the grass-roots organizations will be
strengthened to enable them to identify and undertake business activities.
The methodology will involve identification of rural representatives chosen by
the organizations’ members from among their membership, who will be
trained to lead the participatory process of strengthening ROs. Participatory
rural appraisals will culminate in plans aimed at increasing the ROs’ capacity
for participation, organization, management and administration, production,
commerce and finance, and for identifying investment opportunities in
business plans. For the indigenous communities, a similar process will result
in the participatory development of indigenous community diagnostics, which
will serve as a foundation for the strengthening process and for investment
planning activities in community development plans.

This component includes services for climate change adaptation, including a
plan to complement the national network of weather stations with 20
additional stations in the project area, a climate information service to be
accessed by text messages, training of technicians, and support for preparing
the sector policy and strategy for climate change adaptation.

 Component 2: Sustainable productive development. This component
provides cash transfers and support services for investments at the level of
ROs through regular business plans, business plans with climate change
adaptation activities, and community development plans for indigenous
communities. The business plans will include productive investments,
technical assistance and activities to strengthen the ROs. The community
development plans will cover productive investments, social investments and
strengthening of indigenous communities. Advisory services will be provided
in order to integrate climate change adaptation activities into business plans,
especially for the production of vegetables and milk. In addition, ROs will



EB 2015/LOT/P.4/Rev.2

3

receive technical support from the project implementation unit to ensure that
the business plans meet market demand for public procurement programmes.

In addition, a production and marketing information service will be
established, delivering text messages and audio recordings provided by
various government units through a strategic partnership with a mobile
network operator.

 Component 3: Rural financial services. This component aims to
strengthen the capacity of ROs to finance their working capital needs through
credit from intermediary financial institutions. To this end, a guarantee trust
will be established to provide guarantee certificates to ROs with approved
business plans.

The project will contribute to the National Financial Inclusion Strategy
promoted by the Central Bank, through training-of-trainers courses in rural
financial education. The course topics will include financial literacy and
consumer protection for borrowers.

 Component 4: Project management. For efficient project management, a
project implementation unit will be established with headquarters in the field,
possibly in the city of San Estanislao. This office will have a project manager
responsible for overall implementation and a technical field coordinator
responsible for managing the field staff and for liaising with the target group
and local authorities in implementing project activities and instruments.

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

9. The project will expand, deepen and replicate activities that were successfully
implemented under the Paraguay Rural Project (PPR), in view of high demand. The
participatory methodology applied by that project marked a substantive change in
the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock’s approach to rural development, and has
generated strong social capital through participatory assessments, institutional
strengthening plans and business plans that transfer authority for planning and
implementation to the ROs.

Organizational frameworkB.
10. The executing agency will be the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock through the

National Directorate for Project Coordination and Management (DINCAP), which will
constitute the project implementation unit. DINCAP will be responsible for project
implementation including planning, procurement and accounting. Since most of the
project activities are integrated into plans managed by ROs, supporting ROs in
planning, implementation and accounting for funds will be an important
responsibility of the project implementation unit.

Planning, monitoring and evaluation, learning and knowledgeC.
management

11. The planning, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), learning and knowledge
management system is based on experiences and lessons learned from the PPR,
especially in connection with applying participatory processes and assessing the
maturity of ROs and the use of participatory, community-owned dynamic maps as
graphical diagnostic tools for determining the baseline situation of ROs and families.
The system will promote results-based management in order to provide a coherent
framework for strategic planning and project management.

Financial management, procurement and governanceD.
12. Financial management. The Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock, through the

project implementation unit, will be responsible for the financial management of all
project resources, including the flow of funds, disbursements, internal controls,



EB 2015/LOT/P.4/Rev.2

4

accounting, financial reporting and audit. The project will implement an accounting
system acceptable to the Fund as a condition of disbursement from the loan and
grant accounts. The mechanism of start-up costs may be used for early project
expenditures, including to set up the accounting system.

13. Flow of funds. The Ministry of Finance will open two designated accounts in United
States dollars at the Central Bank of Paraguay exclusively for the loan and grant. In
addition, operating accounts (project accounts) in local currency will be opened at
the Banco Nacional de Fomento or other banks acceptable to the Fund.

14. Procurement. Procurement of goods, works and services will be carried out by the
project implementation unit on the basis of national standards and in accordance
with IFAD’s procurement guidelines. Procurement in the context of strengthening
plans, business plans and community development plans will be managed by the
ROs in line with the project implementation manual.

15. Audit. The project’s consolidated financial statements will be audited annually by
private independent auditors in accordance with IFAD’s Guidelines on Project
Audits. All project accounts will be audited, including all sources of funding. The
scope of the audit will include visits to the ROs and review of the guarantee fund.
Annual audit reports will be submitted to IFAD within six months after the end of
each fiscal year.

SupervisionE.
16. IFAD will be in charge of project supervision. The initial supervision tasks include

support for the rapid start-up of PROMAFI and setting up the accounting, planning
and M&E systems.

IV. Project costs, financing, benefits
A. Project costs
17. The total cost for six years of implementation will be US$23.8 million, including

contingencies, of which: US$4.6 million relates to the organizational strengthening
component; US$14.6 million to sustainable productive development; US$1.5 million
to improving rural financial services; and US$3.1 million to project management.
Management costs make up 13 per cent of the project cost. Costs include 3 per
cent for contingencies in respect of local price escalation for vehicles, goods,
services and operating expenses, and 2 per cent for physical contingencies in
respect of vehicles, goods and services.

B. Project financing
18. The project will be financed by IFAD through a loan of approximately

US$17.4 million and an Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme (ASAP)
grant of US$5.09 million. The beneficiaries will contribute US$1.4 million (in kind).
In line with World Bank and Inter-American Development Bank funding operations
in the country, where applicable, IFAD’s resources will be used to finance taxes.
The financing plans by component and category of expenditure are presented in
tables 1 and 2 below (some of the categories of expenditures may be grouped in
the financing agreement).



EB 2015/LOT/P.4/Rev.2

5

Table 1
Financing plan by component
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan ASAP grant
Beneficiaries

(in kind) Total
Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Organizational
strengthening 3 500 76 1 094 24 - - 4 594 19

2. Sustainable productive
development 9 569 65 3 705 25 1 361 9 14 634 61

3. Rural financial services 1 418 94 98 6 - - 1 515 6
4. Project management 2 888 94 197 6 - - 3 085 13

Total project costs 17 374 73 5 093 21 1 361 6 23 829 100

Table 2
Financing plan by category of expenditure
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan ASAP grant
Beneficiaries

(in kind) Total
Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Vehicles 72 100 - - - - 72 0
2. Goods, services and inputs 2 809 49 1 553 27 1 361 24 5 723 24
3. Grants and subsidies 8 121 77 2 463 23 - - 10 584 44
4. Credit and guarantee funds 3 654 77 1 077 23 - - 4 731 20
5. Administration 2 718 100 - - - - 2 718 11

Total 17 374 73 5 093 21 1 361 6 23 829 100

C. Benefit summary and economic analysis
19. The project will reach approximately 14,000 rural households (around 60,000

people), organized in approximately 303 productive organizations and
33 indigenous communities. It is estimated that 80 per cent of project activities will
generate the expected benefits, which is equivalent to a portfolio of 195 successful
business plans and 26 community development plans.

20. The financial and economic evaluation indicates the viability of the family-based
project-level activities. The economic internal rate of return is 16.5 per cent.

D. Sustainability
21. PROMAFI is sustainable from a variety of perspectives: (i) institutionally, since it

responds to the framework of a specific national policy and an explicit decision by
the Government of Paraguay to replicate and extend the experiences of the PPR
and strengthen beneficiaries’ organizations; (ii) from a productive and market point
of view, given the guaranteed steady demand for food and in light of the policy
support to family farming as a positive prospect for the sustainability of productive
investments and markets; (iii) socially, by facilitating the access of rural poor
people, indigenous communities, women and youth to public goods and services;
(iv) financially, by creating sustainable rural finance services; and
(v) environmentally, by implementing environmental standards and
recommendations based on the rational use and conservation of natural resources.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
22. The risks of failing to achieve the stated objectives are limited both in quantity and

in potential adverse impacts. The main risks are: (i) difficulties in ensuring inclusion
of poor people, indigenous populations or producers, to be minimized by the
territorial targeting of beneficiaries in segments and ongoing evaluation of results;
(ii) slow pace of territorial coverage due to operational and management difficulties,
to be mitigated by the early hiring of technical support teams and provision of
training; (iii) slow rate of project implementation linked to the time required for



EB 2015/LOT/P.4/Rev.2

6

ROs to mature and implement business plans, to be addressed by timely annual
planning to ensure achievement of targets without distorting results; (iv) market
risks, to be addressed by affording special attention to marketing and supporting
linkages with public procurement; and (v) climate risks that may affect volume and
quality of production, to be attenuated by supporting climate-smart technology and
disseminating appropriate farming practices and meteorological information.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

23. The project approach and implementation modalities are fully consistent with IFAD
strategies and policies. Specifically, they support IFAD’s fiduciary compliance and
are aligned with the IFAD Strategic Framework 2011-2015 and the policies on rural
finance, indigenous peoples, climate change, environment and natural resource
management, gender equality and women’s empowerment, and targeting. The
project is also fully compliant with the ASAP objectives.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
24. The project is in line with the Government's plans and the objectives of the

Strategic Agricultural Framework 2009-2018. It is also consistent with the
Government’s policy of financing transfers to communities with a 30 per cent credit
element.

Innovations and scaling upC.
25. PROMAFI is based on a broadening and replication of PPR activities in view of high

demand. The PPR has shown that, when appropriately supported, ROs can improve
their production and marketing, and achieve business continuity. The participatory
methodology that allowed the PPR to generate strong social capital will be improved
and scaled up. Project innovations include: scaling up the group-based credit
guarantee mechanism to a national system of credit guarantees; a mobile phone-
based production and marketing information service, which has the potential to
enhance the provision of extension services; and the creation of a system for
assessing the institutional maturity of productive and indigenous organizations,
which will facilitate the design of suitable capacity-building activities for
organizations.

Policy engagementD.
26. The project capitalizes on the successful experiences of the PPR, and is in line with

government and IFAD policies. It supports the Government’s policy of reducing
conditional cash transfers by including a credit element for financing investments,
and the strategic uptake of information technology for agricultural extension
services. In addition, in collaboration with the Central Bank of Paraguay, the project
backs the country’s financial inclusion policy by supporting rural financial education.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
27. A financing agreement between the Republic of Paraguay and IFAD will constitute

the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower/recipient.
A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached herewith as an appendix.

28. The Republic of Paraguay is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD and from the IFAD Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme (ASAP)
Trust Fund, acting through IFAD in its capacity of Trustee of the ASAP Trust Fund.

29. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.



EB 2015/LOT/P.4/Rev.2

7

VII. Recommendation
30. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Republic of Paraguay for an amount of fifteen million eight hundred thousand
euros (EUR 15,800,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant under the
Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme (ASAP) to the Republic of
Paraguay for an amount of three million six hundred and fifty thousand
special drawing rights (SDR 3,650,000) and upon such terms and conditions
as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions
presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President





















































President's Report

Proposed loan to the Republic of the
Philippines for the Fisheries, Coastal
Resources and Livelihood Project (FishCORAL)


Republic of the Philippines

Fisheries, Coastal Resources and Livelihood Project
(FishCORAL)

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of the Philippines

Executing agency: Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources,
Department of Agriculture

Total project cost: US$43.05 million

Amount of IFAD loan: EUR 27.31 million (equivalent to approximately
US$29.96 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Ordinary: Maturity period of 15-18 years, including a
grace period of 3 years, with an interest rate per annum
equal to 100 per cent of the IFAD reference interest rate

Contribution of borrower: US$11.76 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$1.33 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/115/R.12

1

Recommendation for approval
The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of the Philippines for the Fisheries, Coastal Resources and
Livelihood Project (FishCORAL), as contained in paragraph 34.

Proposed loan to the Republic of the Philippines for the
Fisheries, Coastal Resources and Livelihood Project
(FishCORAL)

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. The Philippines is a middle-income country, and in 2013 the GDP reached an annual

growth rate of 7.2 per cent. However, the recent increase in GDP has not translated
into a reduction of the incidence of poverty, indeed there has been little change
from 2009 to 2012; 22.9 per cent (2009) and 22.3 per cent (2012) of families in
those two years were living below the poverty line. The failure to reduce poverty
during the previous decade reflects underinvestment, slow growth of per capita
incomes, a high population growth rate, high dependency rates, inequitable
distribution of income, natural disasters and inflationary pressures, mainly from
rising fuel and food prices. Nationally, income inequality remains high, with a Gini
coefficient of 0.44. Despite the recent lack of progress in reducing the incidence of
poverty, the Philippines Development Plan (PDP) 2011-2016 envisages that the
country could still achieve the Millennium Development Goal poverty reduction
targets by 2015. In 2011, the Human Development Index for the Philippines was
0.644, ranking 112th among 187 countries. The country’s Gender Inequality Index
improved to 0.427 in 2011, ranking 75th in the world.

2. Fishers were among the poorest groups in the country, with a poverty incidence of
41.4 per cent in 2009, higher than the 35 per cent in 2003. Municipal fishers1 and
their families remained poor due to: (i) low coastal productivity owing to habitat
and watershed degradation; (ii) fish stock depletion due to illegal fishing practices,
pollution and overfishing; (iii) lack of access to basic services and institutional
support; (iv) high population density in coastal areas; (v) poor post-harvest
handling and distribution systems; (vi) lack of alternative income-generating
activities; and (vii) weak political will on the part of local leaders to enact and/or
enforce fishery laws.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and RB-
COSOP

3. The rationale for investing in the fisheries sector is that: (i) fishers, especially
municipal fishers, are among the poorest groups in the country; and (ii) the
fisheries sector is very important to the fishing communities as it is the source of
their livelihoods and a major source of dietary protein for the population as a
whole, and the main source of foreign exchange earnings for the national economy.
The project includes investments and activities to address the key issues that have
impoverished many fishing communities, such as coastal habitat degradation, use
of illegal fishing practices, overfishing, lack of enforcement of fishery ordinances,
pollution and a lack of viable livelihood activities alternative to fish capture. It will
adopt the ecosystem approach to fisheries and coastal resource management, and
a bay-wide approach to enabling the municipalities and fishing communities to

1 Those who fish within 15 km of the shoreline, 12 km in the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao.



EB 2015/115/R.12

2

improve the productivity and sustainable management of their fishery and coastal
resources. The project will link the livelihood enterprises it supports to the market
economy to help ensure their sustainability. It will assist the Bureau of Fisheries
and Aquatic Resources (BFAR) in improving its institutional capacity to support the
fisheries and coastal resources sector. The project is in line with the priorities
defined in the PDP 2011-2016 for the fisheries sector in the areas of inclusive
growth, poverty reduction, improving the economic status of poor coastal
communities, building the capacity of communities and local administrations to
better manage their coastal resources, improving the productivity of inshore
waters, exploring the export potential of fisheries, improving food security and
nutrition, and overall GDP growth. It also contributes to attainment of the goals and
targets of existing sectoral plans, such as the Agrikulturang Pilipino (AgriPinoy), the
Agricultural and Fisheries Modernization Programme (AFMP) and the Fisheries Road
Map. Investment in livelihood development supports the Agribusiness Road Maps
for the fisheries sector and the regional development plans.

4. The project is complementary to and supportive of the Government’s
Reconstruction Assistance to Haiyan and the Department of Agriculture’s
rehabilitation plan for the agriculture sector. These initiatives will help rebuild
fishing communities and rehabilitate coastal resources affected by Typhoon Haiyan
in the Eastern Visayas Region, through rehabilitation of the coastal and fishery
resources and recovery of the livelihoods of fishing communities – contributing to
increasing community resilience to natural disaster and climate change risks. The
project is consistent with the strategic objectives of the country strategic
opportunities programme (COSOP) 2010-2016 in: (i) improving fisheries and
coastal resource management and the livelihoods of poor coastal communities; and
(ii) managing natural resources within the context of climate change, gender
mainstreaming, policy dialogue and support for decentralization.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
5. The project will target 11 bays/gulfs from Regions 5, 8 and 13 in Luzon and

Visayas, and the Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao (ARMM). The targeted
bays are located in 14 provinces, with 103 municipalities or cities bordering the
bays/gulfs and 1,098 coastal villages/barangays. Approximately 724,000 poor
people or 188,000 households live in these coastal villages, of which 90,596 are
fishing households with an estimated 38,050 of them living below the poverty line,
including households headed by women and/or out-of-school youth. The main
criteria for selection of project beneficiaries will be based on the socio-economic
conditions of fishing households, using up-to-date lists of poor households from the
Department of Social Welfare and Development. The project will identify potential
beneficiaries by targeting existing, eligible registered people’s organizations (POs)
and their fishing community members. Members of the target group will include
memberships of the POs, either self-selected or based on their interest in the
proposed livelihood enterprise(s) or through participatory wealth ranking. The
project will also establish new POs in response to demand from the target group.

B. Project development objective
6. The overall goal of the project is to contribute to reduction of poverty in the target

coastal communities of the targeted bays/ecosystems by 5 per cent from the mean
poverty incidence of 42 per cent. The development objective is to realize (a) annual
income of participating fishing community households increase by 10 per cent from
baseline; and (b) employment of women engaged in income generating activities
increased to 40 per cent from the baseline of 20 per cent.



EB 2015/115/R.12

3

C. Components/outcomes
7. The project has three components: (i) coastal resource management; (ii) livelihood

development; and (iii) project management and coordination. The expected
outcomes for components 1 and 2 are: component 1: fishing communities adopt
sustainable management of fishery and coastal resources that increase overall
stocks; and component 2: fishing households in the target coastal communities
constantly engaged in diversified sources of income.

8. Component 1 will:

(a) Assess governance and legislation by the bay management councils (BMCs),
and facilitation of the formation, reactivation and management of the
operations of the BMCs, including the adoption of bay-wide fisheries
ordinances. The project will encourage the creation of integrated fisheries and
aquatic resource management councils (IFARMCs) where no such organization
exists, and will support their operation and that of the existing IFARMCs,
including capacity-building. It will also facilitate the participation of local
fishing communities in the management of municipal fisheries and coastal
resources, together with local government units (LGUs), by incorporating pre-
existing fisheries management systems. It will assist LGUs in introducing
and/or completing registration of municipal fishers, their motorized and non-
motorized fishing vessels and gear and the introduction of a municipal
licensing system for fishers, fishing vessels and gear, as well as collection of
associated licensing revenues and their use to support enforcement of
fisheries ordinances.

(b) Help control overfishing caused by illegal fishing and high population density
along the coastline and will support law enforcement and regulatory activities
of LGUs to manage fishing efforts and provide alternative marine and land-
based livelihood opportunities to contribute to a reduction in overfishing. It
will address the lack of landing, catch and effort statistics by having fishing
households record data to enable BFAR to propose policy measures to
appropriately address overfishing based on reliable and timely information.
The project will support a review of existing relevant legislation, including
municipal fishery ordinances, in consideration of the proposed changes in the
Fisheries Code.

(c) Reinforce fishery law enforcement teams (FLET) at village or community and
LGU levels. BFAR will organize and strengthen law enforcement teams
composed of coast guard and police personnel to apprehend violators. The
project will assess the types and social and economic characteristics of illegal
fishing, propose ways to address this complex issue, and provide equipment
and training as required. The project will assist LGUs in improving
coordination functions with BFAR and other relevant agencies; the fisheries
database and reporting system; and revenue generation from registration
fees, fines, and fees for resource use, etc. These steps will help institutionalize
the arrangements for funding law enforcement activities and fisheries coastal
resources management.

(d) Update coastal resource management plans through a participatory process
involving local communities, people’s and private-sector organizations and
local governments. They will become coastal resource management and
investment plans and will be part of a comprehensive land and water use plan
and of the municipal development plans of LGUs. All subprojects proposed for
financing and included in the municipal development plans will reflect the
need to address the expected impacts of climate change and to reduce the
risks of natural disasters. Assistance will be provided to help LGUs settle
disputes on municipal boundaries to establish clear municipal waters
delineation.



EB 2015/115/R.12

4

(e) Manage mangroves, sea grasses, coral reefs and beaches using an ecosystem
approach. New and existing fish sanctuaries and other types of protected
areas will be established and managed. The project will help protect, enhance
and rehabilitate resources, e.g. stock enhancement in protected areas using
juvenile and adult fish from hatcheries.

(f) Support coastal resource management – the project will finance the
infrastructure and equipment required, including delineation markers for
identified fish sanctuaries within targeted bays. LGUs will be fully responsible
for the operation and maintenance of the infrastructure and equipment
provided by the project – during and after the implementation period – with
the support of IFARMCs.

9. Component 2 will:

(a) Support/reactivate suitable existing POs and form new groups/POs as needed,
giving particular attention to the participation of women. Key elements of the
training modules will be group organization and management, basic
entrepreneurship, business management, value chain concepts and
approaches, coastal resource management and gender mainstreaming.

(b) Promote environmentally friendly livelihood enterprises identified in the
approved coastal resource management plans, for example fisheries-related
enterprises, sustainable tourism and other appropriate enterprises. There will
be no project support for increasing fishing activities or for provision of fishing
gear. Mitigation measures for identified feasible livelihood enterprises will be
put in place to prevent further environmental degradation, waste generation
and overexploitation of resources. Project-financed inputs for livelihood
enterprises will be provided as a package, combined with the provision of
training for the members of POs, including both technical skills and the
business development aspects of operating livelihood enterprises. Subsequent
cycles will be financed from the income earned, while successful enterprises
can access microfinance institutions or NGO sources to finance future
expansion.

(c) Finance the following: infrastructure facilities to support seaweed production;
access improvements, connecting coastal communities to the nearest all-
weather road for transport of marine products; improvements of selected
BFAR hatcheries; and, where needed and justified, construction of fish-landing
facilities; provision of mini ice plants with cold-storage facilities, smoke
houses, store houses and dryers. It will also assist in the identification of
potential private investors and the preparation of feasibility studies. POs will
be fully responsible for the operation and maintenance of the infrastructure
and equipment provided by the project – during and after the implementation
period.

10. Component 3 will assist BFAR in implementing its reorganization plan in the four
regions and will finance the project management and coordination structures and
associated monitoring and evaluation (M&E) mechanisms at national, regional, bay-
wide and city/municipality levels.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
11. The key elements of the project’s implementation approach include: (i) use of the

ecosystem approach for fisheries management; (ii) financing of activities identified
by coastal communities and municipal/city authorities and included in the LGU
development/investment plans; (iii) implementation arrangements that will follow
the Government’s procedures and mandate at all levels and will operate within the
government framework for decentralization and as part of the National



EB 2015/115/R.12

5

Convergence Initiative; and (iv) consultation with the National Commission on
Indigenous Peoples, if indigenous peoples (IPs) are found to live in any of the
target coastal communities – following the approach and procedures for engaging
IPs in development. The phasing of project implementation will be based on the
readiness of POs, LGUs, BMCs and regional agencies. The livelihood development
subprojects will be aligned with the priority commodities identified by the BFAR
Regional Roadmaps to ensure their suitability for the target locations and thus
contribute to their sustainability.

B. Organizational framework
12. BFAR will be the project’s lead implementing agency, with full responsibility for

project administration and management, and will use its existing structures at
national, regional, and provincial levels to implement project activities. The
municipalities and cities are responsible for managing municipal waters and coastal
zones. A high-level inter-agency project steering committee (PSC) at the national
level will provide policy guidance; approve project implementation guidelines,
annual workplan and budgets (AWP/Bs) and procurement plans; and resolve
implementation issues that cannot be decided at the regional level. A regional
coordination and steering committee (RCSC) will serve as the policy and
institutional advisory committee for project implementation at that level, and will
facilitate effective and efficient delivery of various agencies’ services in support of
the project. A bay coordination and support committee will coordinate project
activities within each bay. A project support and coordination office (PSCO) at BFAR
central office will be responsible for supporting, coordinating and monitoring project
implementation, coordinating within BFAR and with government oversight agencies,
LGUs, project management teams at regional, municipal and bay/gulf levels, and
IFAD. Regional project management offices (RPMOs) will be established in each
target region. Municipal/city project management offices (M/CPMOs) will be based
at the municipal or city LGU in Regions 5, 8 and 13, while in ARMM a municipal
project implementing unit (MPIU) will be based at the BFAR Provincial Fisheries
Office under the leadership of the provincial fisheries officer. The project will
operate as part of the National Convergence Initiative, with assistance from other
government agencies as needed.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

13. Planning. AWP/Bs will be prepared through a participatory process, starting at the
community level and involving representatives of POs, the CPMO/MPMO/MPIU and
the bay/gulf alliance. RPMOs will consolidate the provincial AWP/Bs into a regional
document. PSCO will consolidate the regional AWP/Bs into a national AWP/B for
IFAD review and subsequent PSC approval.

14. Monitoring and evaluation. Project M&E will be in accordance with the
Government’s harmonized, national Results-based Performance Management
System and IFAD’s Results and Impact Management System (RIMS). It will report
on project implementation status and progress in terms of outputs, outcomes and
impact. The RCSC and RPMO will provide regular reporting on accomplishments
regarding policy and major operational issues to regional development councils,
LGUs and other stakeholders. The project will conduct baseline and completion
impact studies. A rapid participatory resource and socio-economic assessment will
be conducted in each bay at project start-up and completion.

15. Learning and knowledge management. The project will generate and manage
knowledge in order to: improve implementation; contribute to BFAR’s body of
knowledge; aid in raising awareness of stakeholders; and enhance future policy
development and project/programme implementation. It will support innovative
approaches, document lessons learned and organize knowledge-sharing among
project staff, BFAR and other implementing agencies. It will also share knowledge



EB 2015/115/R.12

6

with other IFAD-assisted projects across the country and the region.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
16. Financial management. BFAR, through the PSCO, will be responsible for overall

financial management of the project, including AWP/Bs, procurement, flow of funds,
disbursements, internal control, accounting, financial reporting and audit. The
project will follow the government’s financial systems, rules and regulations under
the New Government Accounting System, consistent with IFAD’s standard
disbursement procedures, for receipts and disbursements of proceeds from the
IFAD loan and government counterpart funds. RPMOs will be responsible for
management of funds at the regional level. BFAR will execute a memorandum of
agreement with each LGU and other implementing agencies at national, regional,
provincial and municipal levels to detail responsibilities, required services and their
financing. In order to reduce fiduciary risks arising from insufficient experience and
capacity, the financial management capability of the central and regional offices of
BFAR and of LGUs will need to be strengthened through staff training and close
supervision.

17. Flow of funds. The Department of Finance, through the Bureau of the Treasury,
will open a designated account in United States dollars, in the central bank or
another bank acceptable to IFAD, exclusively for the loan. Project accounts in the
Philippine peso will be opened at central and regional levels.

18. Procurement. BFAR will undertake major procurement packages in line with the
annual procurement plans through the PSCO and RPMOs supported by their
respective BAC and Finance and Administrative Services Division. Procurement will
follow the Implementing Rules and Regulations of the Government Procurement
Reform Act (RA 9184) to the extent that they are consistent with IFAD’s Project
Procurement Guidelines. Smaller items, as defined in the procurement plans, will be
procured by regional offices.

19. Audit. Project consolidated financial statements will be audited annually by the
Commission on Audit in accordance with IFAD’s Guidelines on Project Audits. The
annual audit reports will be submitted to IFAD within six months of the end of each
fiscal year.

20. Governance. IFAD will apply a policy of zero-tolerance in respect of fraudulent,
corrupt, collusive or coercive action.

E. Supervision
21. IFAD and the National Economic Development Authority will jointly conduct annual

supervision and implementation support missions, and IFAD will conduct a post-
supervision mission 6-9 months later, depending on the project’s progress.

IV. Project costs, financing, benefits
A. Project costs
22. Total project costs are estimated at US$43.05 million over a five-year

implementation period, as shown in table 1. This includes taxes and duties
estimated at US$3.72 million or 8.8 per cent of total costs, which will be covered by
the Government’s contribution. Base costs were estimated at 2013 prices, with
price contingencies of 3 per cent per annum for pesos and dollars, and physical
contingencies of 3.5 per cent of base cost for all expenditures except staff costs.
Physical contingencies amount to US$1.14 million and price contingencies to
US$1.43 million, yielding total contingencies of US$2.57 million (6 per cent of total
baseline costs). The estimated average cost per target beneficiary household is
US$274 per household.



EB 2015/115/R.12

7

Table 1
Indicative project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan Government LGUs
Beneficiary/
proponent Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %
1. Coastal resources

management 18 751.2 77.7 2 537.4 10.5 2 725.8 11.3 128.3 0.5 24 142.6 56.1
2. Livelihood

development 10 988.2 72.7 1 721.1 11.4 1 199.8 7.9 1 199.8 7.9 15 109.0 35.1
3. Project management

and coordination 216.4 5.7 1 866.1 49.2 1 710.5 45.1 - - 3 793.0 8.8
Total project costs 29 955.7 69.6 6 124.6 14.2 5 636.1 13.1 1 328.1 3.1 43 044.6 100.0

B. Project financing
23. Project financing comprises: (i) an IFAD loan of US$29.96 million (69.6 per cent);

and (ii) a Government contribution of US$11.76 million (27.3 per cent), consisting
of the national government counterpart contribution of US$6.12 million
(14.2 per cent) and LGU financing of US$5.64 million (13.1 per cent); and
(iii) contributions in cash or in kind from proponents and beneficiaries of about
US$1.33 million (3.1 per cent).

Table 2
Indicative project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan Government LGUs
Beneficiary/

proponent Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Works 1 726.8 80.3 230.4 10.7 193.4 9.0 - - 2 150.6 5.0
2. Equipment,

materials, and
supplies 17 734.0 76.4 2 486.1 10.7 1 735.9 7.5 1 247.4 5.4 23 203.4 53.9

3. Consultancies 10 494.9 89.5 1 071.2 9.1 80.8 0.7 80.8 0.7 11 727.7 27.2

4. Government staff - - 367.1 16.1 1 915.5 83.9 - - 2 282.6 5.3
5. Operation and

maintenance - - 1 969.8 53.5 1 710.5 46.5 - - 3 680.3 8.5
Total project costs 29 955.7 69.6 6 124.6 14.2 5 636.1 13.1 1 328.1 3.1 43 044.6 100.0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
24. About 724,000 poor people or 188,000 households living in the 1,098 coastal

villages in the 11 targeted bays/gulfs will benefit directly from the project, of which
about 90,596 are fishing households, with an estimated 38,050 (146,495 people)
living below the poverty line. Project interventions are expected to improve the
productivity of municipal waters and coastal zones and generate livelihood benefits
for the members of coastal communities. Project benefits are expected to be
generated through: (i) effective law enforcement and regulatory activities with
respect to municipal fisheries; (ii) improved protection and management of coral
reef, mangrove, sea-grass ecosystems and other coastal resources; and
(iii) implementation of sustainable community-based livelihood enterprises.

D. Sustainability
25. To help ensure sustainability, the following are included in project design:

(i) assisting LGUs in developing sustainable sources of local revenues to finance
FLETs and provide funds for investment in the management of municipal fisheries
and coastal resources; (ii) ensuring the participation of POs and their members in
identifying and planning proposed livelihood activities; (iii) involving the private
sector on a long-term basis to enhance sustainability of the investments in



EB 2015/115/R.12

8

alternative sources of livelihoods for members of coastal communities and their
organizations; (iv) requiring beneficiaries, municipalities and cities to share in the
costs of the project’s investments; and (v) after the midterm review, preparing an
exit strategy and sustainability plan.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
26. The current lack of technical and management capacity within BFAR is a risk. It is

addressed by the inclusion of sufficient contract staff to manage the project
together with the assigned staff of BFAR. The project will support BFAR’s
reorganization plan through provision of the capacity development needed to
improve the technical capacities of BFAR’s offices in the target regions. A second
risk is unsustainability of project activities after the project ends, thereby repeating
the experience of many previous project interventions in various bays/gulfs. The
project design tackles this issue by focusing on the generation of sustainable
sources of local revenues to finance the necessary law enforcement activities and
investment in resource management. Another risk is that agencies concerned may
be unable to provide the coordinated approach needed at the local level. The design
counters this risk through the use of memorandums of agreement between BFAR
and all agencies engaged in project implementation to specify roles and
responsibilities, costs and sources of finance. It also includes all agencies with a
role in project implementation as members of the regional coordination and
steering committees; and indicates that all implementing agencies will have a
FishCORAL focal point at the national level. An associated risk concerns the
willingness of the private sector to be involved in supporting the development of
alternative livelihood enterprises for the members of fishing communities. This is
addressed by involving the private sector from the initial planning stages through to
the processing and/or marketing of the products, and by the availability of some
initial project finance for livelihood development production activities to match
investments from the private sector for processing, drying and marketing.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
27. The project design is consistent with the third strategic objective of the COSOP2 and

aligns well with the IFAD Strategic Framework 2011-2015, which focuses on:
secure access to natural resources; climate change adaptation and mitigation;
improved agricultural technologies and effective production services; more
comprehensive financial services; integration into value chains through competitive
agricultural input and produce markets; rural enterprise development and off-farm
employment opportunities; technical and vocational education and training; and
empowerment of rural poor people through effective and sustainable rural
producers’ organizations. In this context, agriculture includes fisheries. Under the
Philippine Environmental Impact Statement System, the project is classified both as
Category C and Category D, as it is intended to directly enhance the quality of the
environment or address existing environmental problems in coastal areas; and the
rural infrastructure components are small-scale and do not fall under other
categories.

B. Alignment and harmonization
28. The project objective is aligned with the PDP’s goal of a competitive and sustainable

agriculture and fisheries sector. It will complement and coordinate with existing and
planned projects of the Department of Agriculture and others (e.g. the Philippines
Rural Development Project (World Bank), Integrated Environment and Natural
Resource Management Project (AsDB/IFAD) and Ecosystems Improved for

2 “Selected marginalized and poor communities dependent on coastal resources in Bicol, eastern Visayas, northern
Mindanao and ARMM have sustainable access to fisheries and other productive coastal resources, use sustainable
management practices and diversify livelihood opportunities to meet their basic needs (in particular, food).”



EB 2015/115/R.12

9

Sustainable Fisheries (ECOFISH – USAID). IFAD will also work with government
programmes for an improved policy environment and governance. The project will
explore diverse types of partnership arrangements between project beneficiaries
and the private sector. Private-sector organizations and business development
partners will take a leading role as service providers in improving the returns from
livelihood enterprises.

C. Innovations and scaling up
29. Despite the relatively small investment in relation to the scale of the issues

involved, the project could be a catalyst for improving household incomes and
attracting further investment in scaling up. This in turn could realize the potential
benefits from good, sustainable management of city/municipal fisheries and other
coastal resources. A key innovation for scaling up will be the sustainable financing
systems to be developed and introduced at the municipal level to: (i) effectively
enforce the fisheries ordinances for municipal fisheries and coastal resources; and
(ii) improve conservation and management of fisheries and coastal resources by
local governments and fishing communities.

D. Policy engagement
30. The project will support policy/case studies for policy dialogue and consultation with

the relevant national and local institutions. Such communication will concern the
management by LGUs of municipal/city fisheries and coastal resources and
development of alternative livelihood enterprises for coastal communities. The
project will provide support in reviewing existing relevant legislation, covering the
parts of the Local Government Code related to: municipal fisheries; the Coastal
Zone and Fisheries Code of the Philippines; possible duplication between the roles
and responsibilities of the BMCs and IFARMCs; and the future management role of
pre-existing fisheries management systems. The project will also provide support to
review other relevant legislation such as the Agriculture and Fisheries Management
Act. After the midterm review, it would pilot proposed changes to the codes with
respect to municipal fisheries in selected locations.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
31. A project financing agreement between the Republic of the Philippines and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as appendix I.

32. The Republic of the Philippines is empowered under its laws to receive financing
from IFAD.

33. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
34. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Republic of the Philippines in an amount equivalent to twenty-seven million
three hundred and ten thousand euros (EUR 27,310,000) (equivalent to
approximately US$29.96 million), and upon such terms and conditions as
shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President


























































President's report

Proposed loan to the Republic of Peru for the
Public Services Improvement for Sustainable
Territorial Development in the Apurímac, Ene
and Mantaro River Basins Project (Sustainable
Territorial Development Project)

Republic of Peru

Public Services Improvement for Sustainable Territorial
Development in the Apurímac, Ene and Mantaro River
Basins Project (Sustainable Territorial Development
Project)

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of Peru

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation, through the
Agro Rural Programme

Total project cost: US$74.512 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 20.65 million (equivalent to approximately
US$28.5 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Ordinary: repayment term of 18 years, including a graceperiod of six years, with an annual interest rate
equivalent to 100 per cent of the IFAD reference rate

Contribution of the borrower: US$38.764 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$7.248 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/117/R.13

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation on the proposed
loan to the Republic of Peru for the Public Services Improvement for Sustainable
Territorial Development in the Apurímac, Ene and Mantaro River Basins Project
(Sustainable Territorial Development Project), as contained in paragraph 44.

Proposed loan to the Republic of Peru for the Public
Services Improvement for Sustainable Territorial
Development in the Apurímac, Ene and Mantaro River
Basins Project (Sustainable Territorial Development
Project)

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. The Republic of Peru, with GDP per capita in 2014 of US$6,541, is currently

classified among the middle-income countries. The Peruvian economy has been one
of the best performing in Latin America, and visible progress has been made on
poverty reduction in recent years according to the International Monetary Fund
(IMF). However, Peru faced a challenging external context in 2014, together with
problems in domestic supply and declining public subnational investment –
aggravating the external shocks and leading to a marked deceleration in growth.
Although real GDP growth declined to 2.4 per cent in 2014 compared to 5.8 per
cent the previous year, Peru still posted double the regional average of about 1.2
per cent. Estimates place real GDP growth in 2015 at 3.26 per cent.

2. Peru continued to reduce poverty and extreme poverty levels in 2014, although at
a slower pace than in previous years. According to the National Statistics and
Informatics Institute (, poverty in 2014 stood at an estimated 22.7 per cent, 1.2
percentage points lower than in 2013 – meaning that over a quarter of a million
(289,000) people exited poverty. Overall figures for 2014 show that there were
6,995,000 Peruvians living in poverty. Average monthly income per capita for the
poorest rose by 2.2 per cent, mainly as a result of cash transfers under the Juntos,
Pension 65 and Beca 18 programmes. The incidence of poverty was higher in rural
areas at 46.0 per cent, three times the urban rate. Among the major causes of
rural poverty, the fact that communities are poorly integrated with the market
economy has been identified as one of the greatest obstacles to local development,
particularly in the Sierra region, causing the population to emigrate towards urban
centres.

3. A World Bank study done in 2013 indicates that 4.3 per cent of Peru's surface area
is occupied by agricultural activities. The main crops are coffee, potato, rice,
cotton, asparagus, sugar and maize. A modern and competitive agro-export sector
along the coast coexists with more traditional or subsistence farming in the Sierra
and Selva regions. Primary agriculture accounts for 9 per cent of GDP. Over the
last 12 years, Peruvian agriculture has grown at an average rate of 4.3. An
estimated 2.35 million families – close to 10 million people – depend on
agriculture, most of them concentrated in the Sierra. Agriculture in the Sierra
poses major challenges: low yields; small and fragmented plots with high
transaction costs; fragile soil with drainage, salinity and erosion problems; limited
availability of water; a lack of connectivity and an unpredictable climate.



EB 2016/117/R.13

2

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and RB-
COSOP

4. The project is based on IFAD's past and current interventions in Peru, is consistent
with the strategic objectives set forth in the country strategic opportunities
programme (COSOP) and takes into account the recommendations of the midterm
review that took place in November 2011. The project complies with both IFAD's
own requirements and those of the National Public Investment System (SNIP), and
contributes to: (i) strengthening territorial planning and citizen management
processes; (ii) promoting strategic partnerships on public-private platforms for
access to markets; (iii) promoting the organization of productive linkages between
rural small enterprises; (iv) providing greater support for financial inclusion
through savings, insurance and financial education; (v) including initiatives that
favour sustainable natural resource management, with actions to mitigate and
prevent the effects of climate change; and (vi) promoting actions to increase water
availability and equal access to water, to help prevent social conflicts within the
territory.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
5. The project area covers the area of influence of the Apurímac, Ene and Mantaro

River Valley (VRAEM), corresponding to the periphery in contrast to the central part
or direct intervention area. Both of these areas are considered priorities by country
authorities in view of their high incidence of poverty and extreme poverty and their
exclusion from the country's development.

6. The selected area encompasses 27 municipal districts in seven provinces in the
departments of Ayacucho, Huancavelica, Junín, Apurímac and Cusco. Included are
a highland or Sierra area at between 3,000 and 4,500 metres, a number of inter-
Andean valleys at between 1,500 and 3,000 metres, a foothills or Ceja de Selva
area at between 300 and 1,500 metres and part of the Amazon plain or Selva at
less than 300 metres.

7. Within this area, 76.5 per cent of the population is rural, using the strict definition
of a disperse rural population. That percentage rises to 87 per cent if villages with
less than 2,000 inhabitants are included. In addition, 74 per cent of the population
in the area are living below the monetary poverty line. Of these, 39 per cent are
extremely poor and 33 are poor but not extremely poor – values that place these
districts among the country's most vulnerable. Among those living in the project
area, 73 per cent are under 29 years of age and 66 per cent are indigenous.

8. The 27 districts located in the project area have a combined population of 58,681
families. Of these, the project will serve 50,936 rural families who are living in
conditions of rural poverty according to the 2014 national household survey.

9. Among the around 50,000 poor rural families making up the project's target
population, 27,000 families will benefit from the development services to be
provided under components 1 (governance and investments in territorial natural
resources) and 2 (local economic initiatives), and 23,000 poor rural families will
benefit from activities under component 3 (connectivity and territorial
infrastructure). The remaining 7,745 families (13 per cent of the population in the
intervention area), who reside in areas considered urban in Peru, will not be
included in the project's target population.

B. Development objective of the project
10. The goal of the project is to contribute to reducing poverty among rural families

through social and productive inclusion. The development objective is to increase
the human, social, natural, physical and financial assets of the project
beneficiaries.



EB 2016/117/R.13

3

C. Components/results
11. The project will be implemented over six years and will include the implementation

of three major components, in addition to project management and administration:

(a) Component 1. Governance and investments in territorial natural
resources. This component will focus on communities and families and will
build institutional capacities in the territory, including in local and provincial
governments, supporting initiatives to improve communal goods and
properties. The component activities will contribute to improving the
endowment and quality of natural resources in territories owned by the
beneficiaries and their community and indigenous associations – including
adapting to and mitigating climate change, and building capacities and
competencies for sustainable natural resource management and
development.

(b) Component 2. Local economic initiatives. The objective of this
component is to build a sustainable network of associations among potential
project beneficiaries to promote and expand opportunities for economic
development and social inclusion, providing support for economic activities by
interest groups such as farmers organizations together with financial inclusion
of families and associations. In a fragile and diverse associational context, the
component will support the creation, development and consolidation of
economic associations of beneficiaries that are oriented towards improving
their livelihood strategies and achieving greater and better participation in
markets for goods and services. To this end, the component will implement a
flexible and cumulative strategy with specific arrangements to support rural
producers organizations, based on the different types and levels of
associative development among rural people.

(c) Component 3. Connectivity and territorial infrastructure. The objective
of this component is to maintain physical conditions in the area of influence
where the project beneficiaries are located, in order to generate synergies
with interventions under the other components. In a context of relative
isolation caused by deteriorating rural roads, scarce communication services
and limited development of water and natural resources as a result of low
levels of investment in irrigation, the project will, inter alia, facilitate market
access in the intervention area for rural people, create jobs with start-ups or
contracting of communal or associational microenterprises for routine
maintenance of roads, provide for irrigation infrastructure at community
level, and promote water harvesting and collection.

(d) Component 4. Project management and administration. Under this
component, support will be provided on a cross-cutting basis to the three
preceding components to achieve the results and meet the targets set by the
project. This component includes project administration, knowledge
management and M&E.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
12. The project will employ the following five main approaches:

(a) Territorial development: This approach combines two main aspects:
(i) institutional development to promote consultations among local and
external agents and include poor people in production transformation
processes and benefits; and (ii) production transformation to link the
territory's economy with dynamic markets.

(b) Community-driven development: Implies a degree of delegation of
accountability to communities to manage their own development, including
the design and implementation of subprojects. This approach facilitates



EB 2016/117/R.13

4

access to social, human, financial and physical capital and assets by rural
poor people, by transforming development agents from top-down planners to
bottom-up providers of client-oriented services.

(c) Geographical targeting: Takes into account government priorities defining
the VRAEM area of influence as a priority area in view of the high incidence of
poverty.

(d) Scaling up: The project is consistent with the scaling up approach adopted
by IFAD, encompassing the various dimensions of scaling up: (i) fiscal and
financial; (ii) political; (iii) policy-based; (iv) organizational; (v) cultural; and
(vi) learning-based.

(e) Social inclusion as cross-cutting intervention: The project benefits rural
women, men and young people in situations of poverty and recognizes the
tangible and intangible assets of campesino and indigenous populations. This
approach promotes the empowerment of the target groups and rural
associational development.

B. Organizational framework
13. The agency responsible for the project will be the Ministry of Agriculture and

Irrigation, through the Agro Rural programme acting as a central executing unit
(CEU) with the legal authority to administer the project, in close coordination with
three of its branches located in the regions of Huancavelica, Ayacucho and Cusco,
and with close coordination and collaboration from municipal and provincial
administrations.

14. Project implementation will be the responsibility of a project coordination unit
(PCU) reporting to Agro Rural through its agrarian development director and in
charge of coordinating physical and financial activities and monitoring progress on
meeting the targets set. The PCU will be composed of a project coordinator and
eight specialists in the following areas: (i) M&E; (ii) financial inclusion;
(iii) entrepreneurship; (iv) infrastructure; (v) natural resource management and
climate change; (vi) social inclusion; (vii) administration; and (viii) accounting and
support staff. Each local agency will have a team made up of a coordinator, an
administrative assistant and various specialists.

C. Planning, M&E, learning and knowledge management
15. The project will employ a system of planning, M&E, learning and knowledge

management that is in line with national regulations and with IFAD guidelines.

16. Planning. The project will be implemented on the basis of annual operating plans
(AOP) and procurement  plans subject to IFAD no objection. Progress made on
implementing the plans will be recorded in semi-annual progress reports.

17. M&E. The responsible agency, through the PCU, will conduct the baseline study
during the first 12 months of implementation, and will set up the M&E system and
an M&E plan that will be an integral part of the AOP. The system will report on
progress made in the process of strengthening associational social capital
throughout project implementation using participatory instruments. Agro Rural will
provide information to the SNIP monitoring operating system (SOSEM), which will
allow for verification of progress made on implementing public investment projects.

18. Knowledge management and learning. The main objective of learning and
knowledge management activities will be to enhance existing knowledge assets in
the project intervention area and disseminate content in an appropriate and timely
way to inform users.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
19. Financial management. The financial management of the project will be the

responsibility of Agro Rural under the CEU procedure, as follows: (i) include project
resource requirements in its annual budget and arrange for approval by the



EB 2016/117/R.13

5

Ministry of Economy and Finance; (ii) implement and supervise implementation of
the project; (iii) perform financial and accounting administration and disbursement
functions; (iv) conduct tenders and contracting processes; and (v) hire external
auditors. Project accounting will comply with the provisions of the integrated
financial information system that is mandatory for all public sector entities
including budget and administrative modules.

20. Flow of funds. The Ministry of Economy and Finance will open a sub-account in
United States dollars within the single Treasury account as a designated account to
receive IFAD loan proceeds. These funds will then be transferred to a project
operating account in local currency, to be opened at Banco de la Nación and
administered by Agro Rural. The borrower will open an account in local currency to
hold the counterpart funds. Agro Rural will transfer the project proceeds to the
CEU, which will make payments for procurement and allocate resources to fund
initiatives by the project users.

21. Procurement. The procurement of works, goods and services will take place in
accordance with IFAD guidelines on procurement of goods and services. The PCU,
together with the administrative office and procurement unit of Agro Rural, will
prepare a procurement plan as part of the AOP specifying the procurement method
and determining the goods and services required, in addition to timelines,
estimated costs, procedures and sources of financing. Procurement will be done
generally by the producers organizations benefiting from the project and hence
receiving specific technical training in areas such as procurement of minor works
and procurement of production equipment, information technology equipment and
others needed for management.

22. Audit. The audit arrangements will include internal processes and will adhere to
IFAD's guidelines on project audits. In accordance with national regulations, Agro
Rural is subject to internal audit by its internal control office, which reports to the
Office of the Comptroller General (CGR). The annual consolidated financial
statements of the project will be audited independently in accordance with terms of
reference acceptable to IFAD, in accordance with international auditing standards
and IFAD guidelines on project audits. An external auditor acceptable to both IFAD
and CGR will be employed. All project accounts will be audited, including both IFAD
financing and counterpart funds. The audit report will be submitted to IFAD within
six months after the close of each fiscal year. For audit purposes the fiscal year will
coincide with the calendar year.

E. Supervision
23. The project will be directly supervised by IFAD in accordance with the prevailing

guidelines on direct supervision.

24. Approximately six months after the start-up workshop, IFAD will organize a first
supervision mission with the following objectives: (i) detect possible problems or
difficulties encountered in the initial implementation; (ii) review progress made
against the targets set; (iii) review the AOP being implemented and proposals for
the subsequent AOP; (iv) consult with project users on their perceptions of the
project and their participation levels; (v) review expenses incurred and
procurement carried out to date; (vi) verify compliance with the financing
agreement; (vii) prepare the project status report; and (viii) perform the financial
management evaluation. Commencing in year two of project implementation, and
in accordance with the guidelines on direct supervision, IFAD will, together with
Agro Rural, organize monitoring activities, provide support for implementation and
supervision and, in addition to meeting the objectives outlined above, analyse the
process of social mobilization and formation of groups of possible beneficiaries,
paying special attention to rural women and young people and indigenous peoples.



EB 2016/117/R.13

6

IV. Project costs, financing, benefits
A. Project costs
25. The project will have a total cost of approximately US$74.512 million. The first

component calls for spending of US$6.046 million (equivalent to 8.1 per cent), and
the second for spending of US$51.011 million, representing 68.5 per cent of the
total. The third component will involve spending of US$8.849 million (11.9 per
cent) and the fourth component US$8.606 million (11.5 per cent).

Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD Beneficiaries Borrower/  counterpart Total

Component Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Governance and
investments in territorial
natural resources 5 627 93.1 419 6.9 6 046 8.1
2. Local economic
initiatives 21 507 42.2 7 248 14.2 22 256 43.6 51 011 68.5
3. Connectivity and
territorial infrastructure 8 849 100 8 849 11.9
4. Project management
and administration 1 365 15.9 7 240 84.1 8 606 11.5
Total 28 500 38.2 7 248 9.7 38 764 52.0 74 512 100

B. Project financing
26. Financing for the different project components includes: IFAD’s contribution, valued

at US$28.5 million, or 32.2 per cent of the total; the Government of Peru’s
contribution of ordinary resources in the amount of US$38.764 million, or 52.0 per
cent; and contributions by beneficiaries in the amount of US$7.248 million or 9.7
per cent of the total.
Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure
category

IFAD loan Beneficiaries
Borrower/

counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Works 1 568 8.8 16 242 91.2 17 810 23.9

2. Vehicles 338 100.0 419 0.5
3. Equipment and
supplies 168.5 45.3 203.5 54.7 372 0.5

4. Consultancies 2 965.5 63.5 1 707.5 36.5 4 673 6.3
5. Grants and
subsidies 21 360 51.2 7 248 17.4 13 087 31.4 41 695 56.0

6. Training 2438 72.2 937 27.8 3 375 4.5
7. Salaries and
benefits 4 699.5 100.0 4 699.5 6.3

8. Operating costs 1 549.5 100.0 1 549.5 2.1

Total 28 500 38.2 7 248 9.7 38 764 52.0 74 512 100.0

C. Economic analysis and benefit summary
27. Project implementation calls for obtaining the following benefits for participating

families and communities: an increase in physical assets for communities,
improved agricultural productivity, sustainable natural resource management, and
increased social capital promoting start-up and development of economic
associations to improve their access to value chains and promote their participation
in the benefits of territorial development. Over the long term, this will result in



EB 2016/117/R.13

7

higher incomes, greater employment, higher yields and better quality agricultural
products and by-products.

28. Financial analysis shows internal rates of return (IRR) for the activities funded by
the project at above the interbank rate of 13.19 per cent, ranging between 26 per
cent and 137 per cent. Net present values (NPV) range between US$45 and
US$12,456, showing that the project is financially feasible. Both models indicate
that family labour will be freed up, so that additional off-farm income and a
reduced workload for women can be expected.

29. An economic analysis indicates that the project is economically feasible, with the
following results: (i) an economic rate of return (EIRR) of 32.5 per cent; and (ii) an
economic NPV of US$214 million at a discount rate of 9 per cent, indicating a
profitable investment.

D. Sustainability
30. The project will ensure that its interventions are sustainable by increasing and

strengthening the social fabric and generating confidence by promoting
associational development processes. At the same time, it will build confidence and
open up opportunities for the development of individuals, families and
communities. Once conditions have been created for groups of individuals or
families to associate and carry out shared activities, the sustainability of such
groups will depend upon the social cohesion established and on external factors.
Political sustainability will be ensured by commitment on the part of national
authorities to address problems in the project area, promoting solid technical and
financial linkages with sector institutions and subnational governments.

31. Social sustainability will be based on already existing community organizations,
such as the campesino and indigenous communities present in the intervention
area, which will ensure social sustainability. At the same time, the sustainability of
the interest groups associating to undertake economic initiatives will be realized by
means of ongoing support to strengthen associative principles and consolidate
them.

32. Local governments will be strengthened and trained to improve the administration
of resources and respond to the population's needs, which will contribute to
institutional sustainability. The economic and financial sustainability of the
economic initiatives undertaken by associated groups is expected to be brought
about by providing specific advisory assistance in market analysis, support from
mentoring institutions and relationships with potential clients for the products or
services cofinanced by the project.

33. Technical sustainability will be ensured by promoting local talents to operate the
initiatives identified by the project clients. Environmental sustainability will be
ensured by promoting and adopting best practices in natural resource
management.

34. Finally, the sustainability of investments in road maintenance will be the
responsibility of the municipalities under the conditional programme transfers
managed by MTC with resources provided by the Ministry of Economy and Finance.
To ensure that the roads covered by scheduled and emergency maintenance are
included in regular maintenance plans, specific clauses will be included in the
agreements to be signed with provincial road authorities and municipalities in the
implementation area to ensure compliance with current Ministry of Economy and
Finance policy.

E. Risk determination and mitigation
35. Implementation of the project will involve moderate risks, and the measures

planned to mitigate them are outlined in table 3:



EB 2016/117/R.13

8

Table 3
Risks and mitigation measures

Risk Level Mitigation measures

Administrative and bureaucratic
constraints on implementation

Moderate Participation by all stakeholders

Limited institutional capacity at regional
and local levels

Moderate Training for provincial and local
governments

Restricted coverage by agency
responsible for implementation

Moderate Budget support

Limitations on the use of local talents
Moderate Creation of a mechanism to recognize

local talents

Limitations on process of empowerment
of communities and groups

Moderate Strengthening of community
representation and agreements with
local governments

Possibility of benefits capture Moderate Setting amounts of incentives or rewards
that do not incentivize capture and
filtration

Climate phenomena, including collapse
and landslide

Moderate Active participation in road upgrading by
community enterprises

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
36. The proposed project is aligned with the overarching goal of the IFAD Strategic

Framework 2016-2025 and contributes to all three strategic objectives: increase
rural people’s productive capacities, increase rural people’s benefits from market
participation, and strengthen the environmental sustainability and climate
resistance of rural people’s economic activities. Moreover, the project approach and
implementation strategies are in compliance with the policies and strategies on
targeting rural poor people, gender equality and women's empowerment,
engagement with indigenous peoples (including free, prior and informed consent),
natural resources and environmental management, climate change, social,
environmental and climate procedures (SECAP note, category B), rural finance, and
knowledge management and innovation.

B. Harmonization and alignment
37. The project is consistent with the national policy environment promoting rural and

territorial development, decentralization and development of production. The
proposed project, to be implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation
through Agro Rural, will be consistent with the Medium-term Plan 2013-2016 and
its objective to reduce poverty and extreme poverty, improve local institutions and
management, generate competitiveness in agricultural production, and improve the
inclusion of producers by facilitating the sustainability of natural resources. The
proposed project will also be harmonized with the Ministry of Economy and Finance
programme Strengthening the Competitiveness of Rural Associative Enterprises
(PROCOMPITE) and its objective to achieve sustainability in production value chains
through development, adaptation and technology transfer. In addition, the use of
technical teams of local governments will build capacity to mobilize resources from
the Rural Economic Inclusion Fund (FONIE) to rehabilitate rural roads.
Furthermore, the project is fully justified and responsive to the decision by country
authorities to address problems in the intervention area under the VRAEM
Comprehensive Territorial Plan, which pursues the overall objective of shaping an
environment of security, legality and social peace that will improve the quality of
life and social inclusion of the inhabitants by making production activities more
profitable in the area.

C. Innovation and scaling up
38. Implementing the project will involve the use of new mechanisms in addition to

those already used and proven effective in previous IFAD-funded projects in Peru –



EB 2016/117/R.13

9

such as allocating financial resources competitively and transferring them to hire
technical assistance, processing and commercialization services, following a
participatory approach to identify, formulate, implement and monitor subprojects
using local resource allocation committees, with financial inclusion and the creation
of collaboration mechanisms with local governments to invest in business
facilitation.

39. In this project, the innovations in implementation will include strong support for
local and provincial governments in defining territorial assets, and shared financing
by administrative agencies within those governments to improve planning and
implementation of territorial investment projects, including: investing in road
network maintenance to mitigate barriers of connectivity to market access; using
mobile banking as a way of facilitating financial inclusion on a massive basis; and
creating incentives for the development of new financial products and services. The
inclusion of indigenous communities will mean adopting new mechanisms for
managing natural resources and financing community initiatives, with technical and
financial assistance. A systematic strategy will also be followed to build associative
capacities among beneficiary people, supporting organizational development
processes with results-based incentives. Finally, in addition to reinforcing gender
equity, the project calls for strategies, actions and financial resources to diversify
economic opportunities, including access to employment and decent employment.

D. Policy engagement
40. The project calls for actions and resources to promote and facilitate policy dialogue

using lessons learned and recommendations arising from the project
implementation process – to remove barriers that prevent poor rural people from
sharing in the benefits of territorial development. To this end, policy dialogue will
seek to have an influence on the actors involved in decision-making processes at
the local, regional and national levels. Generally speaking, the project will seek to
build an enabling environment from a policy, institutional and regulatory point of
view to advance the interests of poor rural people. Special attention will be paid to
constructing platforms for dialogue between and by indigenous communities,
seeking to open up a space whereby they can have an influence and improve their
participation and their social and economic inclusion.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
41. A financing agreement between the Republic of Peru and IFAD will constitute the

legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower. A copy of
the negotiated financing agreement is attached as an appendix.

42. The Republic of Peru is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

43. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
44. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary conditions to the
Republic of Peru in an amount equivalent to twenty million six hundred and
fifty thousand special drawing rights (SDR 20,650,000), and upon such terms
and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President

























































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of
Rwanda for the Rwanda Dairy Development
Project

Republic of Rwanda

Rwanda Dairy Development Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning/ Republic of
Rwanda

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Resources

Total project cost: US$65.1 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 31.35 million
(equivalent to approximately US$43.6 million)

Amount of IFAD grant: SDR 0.79 million
(equivalent to approximately US$1.1 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional loan

Cofinancier: Heifer Project International (HPI)

Amount of cofinancing: Heifer Project International: US$4 million
Private sector: US$6.6 million

Terms of cofinancing: Grant

Contribution of borrower: US$3.9 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$5.9 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of Rwanda for the Rwanda Dairy Development Project, as
contained in paragraph 46.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Rwanda for
the Rwanda Dairy Development Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country, rural development and poverty context
1. Rwanda is a small, landlocked country in east-central Africa with a land area of

26,338 km2. Its estimated population in 2016 is 11.55 million with an annual
growth rate of 2.36 per cent. Population density has increased from 321 persons
per km2 in 2002 to 445 persons per km2 in 2015 – the highest in Africa.

2. While Rwanda has had an impressive record translating its sustained growth into
poverty reduction across the country, poverty remains a major challenge with
slightly over 4.4 million people estimated to be living in poverty. The country is
ranked 163rd out of 188 countries in the 2014 Human Development Index,
classifying Rwanda as a low human development country. The latest national
poverty survey identified 39.1 per cent of the population as poor and 16.3 per cent
as extremely poor (unable to afford the basic basket of goods and services
estimated at RwF 159,375 per household per year in 2014).1

3. Poverty is mostly a rural phenomenon: the incidence of poverty in rural areas is
estimated at 43 per cent compared to 22 per cent in urban areas. The country’s
land distribution is skewed – 36 per cent of households own 6 per cent of all farm
land, with an average of 0.1 hectare (ha) per household (compared to the national
average of 0.33 ha per household). The HIV prevalence rate has fallen below 3 per
cent as a result of concerted efforts to promote awareness and behaviour change,
coupled with ensuring that pregnant women living with HIV have access to
antiretroviral medicines.

4. Official estimates show that 19 per cent of Rwandan households are food insecure.
Food insecurity follows a similar distribution across districts as poverty and is
highest in the northern (46.2 per cent) and western (45.3 per cent) provinces. Food
insecurity is often related to the stability of rural incomes, access to land, animal
ownership and events such as crop failures and seasonal scarcities, which reduce
access to food. While there has been a marked reduction in the prevalence of
chronic malnutrition over the last decade, stunting continues to be above the World
Health Organization severity threshold and is a major public health concern. Almost
38 per cent of children under 5 are chronically malnourished, with stunting levels
above 40 per cent reported in over 30 per cent of districts in the country.

5. Dairy is a strategic commodity and the dairy subsector is crucial for rural
development, poverty reduction and food and nutrition security in Rwanda. It offers
a pathway out of poverty for the large number of households keeping livestock and
those who provide services and add value throughout the supply chain. The current
"farm gate" value of annual milk production is approximately US$153.90 million.
The dairy subsector is the largest segment of the livestock sector in Rwanda, which
accounts for 10.5 per cent of agricultural gross domestic product and is the fastest
growing subsector within agriculture.

1 National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda (NISR), Rwanda Poverty Profile Reports 2013/2014, 2015.



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

2

6. In recognition of the importance of dairy, the Government has made significant
investments in the industry over the past decade aimed at transforming it from
subsistence to a business-oriented, modern sector capable of meeting the country’s
demand for dairy products and producing surpluses for the regional market. The
results of these investments are clearly visible today and include the transformation
of the national cattle herd from 600,000 cattle dominated by local breeds with low
milk production potential in the 1990s to today’s national herd of 1.35 million,
which includes 54 per cent improved dairy breeds. In tandem with this
transformation of the sector, annual milk production increased from 50,000 metric
tons in 2000 to 731,000 metric tons in 2015. Per capita milk consumption has also
steadily increased from below 20 litres per year in the 1990s to 64 litres per year in
2015.

7. While the impressive growth of the dairy sector in Rwanda has enabled the country
to become a significant player in the regional dairy industry, the sector’s
performance still lags behind that of competing countries in the region, and there
are still many challenges to be tackled. The Government’s National Dairy Strategy
seeks to build on the gains made so far to address the remaining factors
constraining the dairy sector from achieving its potential. A key thrust of the
strategy is to formalize the dairy value chain and – considering the health benefits
– increase national consumption of processed milk instead of the raw milk currently
being consumed. The strategy also seeks to improve value addition and product
diversification based on the anticipated milk surplus. The National Dairy Strategy
aims to not only increase the number of improved breed cows but enhance their
productivity through improved feeding across seasons. The latter is important to
ensure consistent milk supply, particularly during the dry season when milk supply
has consistently been far below demand. The Government is also seeking to expand
the milk-collection infrastructure, including the establishment of more milk
collection centres (MCCs) and increased commercialization of their operations.
Improved productivity and efficiency along the dairy value chain are expected to
reduce costs, making Rwanda’s dairy products less expensive and more competitive
in regional markets.

8. The National Dairy Strategy emphasizes the importance of public-private-producer
partnerships in achieving its objectives. The Government has spearheaded the
development of the dairy industry through projects such as the African
Development Bank-funded Livestock Infrastructure Support Project and the Rwanda
Dairy Competiveness Programme I and II funded by the United States Agency for
International Development. In addition, the Netherlands Development Organisation,
Heifer Project International (HPI), Send-a-Cow and the recently completed East
Africa Dairy Development Programme funded by the Bill & Melinda Gates
Foundation have supported dairy development in Rwanda. The projects are being
implemented in prescribed districts, with the Rwanda Dairy Competitiveness
Programme II active in 17 districts across the country’s five milksheds.

9. Despite remarkable progress in developing the country’s dairy sector, significant
challenges remain. Key among them are: (i) low milk productivity, attributed to the
low number of improved dairy cattle and compounded by inadequate forage, animal
feeding practices and seasonal fluctuations in water availability; (ii) limited support
services (such as artificial insemination, veterinary services, extension and inputs),
and inadequate knowledge of dairy cattle management; (iii) limited organization of
farmers for collective action in marketing of milk and accessing inputs and services;
(iv) inadequate development and management of milk collection, processing and
marketing infrastructure for the supply of quality milk to domestic and regional
markets; (v) limited access to financing for dairy value chain actors, especially
women and youth; and (vi) a nascent policy and institutional framework and the
need for specific laws, regulations and institutional capacity development to
encourage the industry’s growth.



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

3

10. The dairy sector is susceptible to climate change on both the production and
marketing sides as water and land become more limited for fodder production and
temperatures increase, requiring changes in forage-feeding systems. This makes
the transport and safe storage of milk to consumers more complex and requires
more energy use. On the other hand, dairy farming contributes to climate change
since increasing dairy production may contribute to anthropogenic greenhouse gas
(GHG) emissions, biophysical degradation and loss of biodiversity if green
strategies are not promoted along with good dairy-management practices. For
these reasons, dairy production needs to be increased through well-managed
intensification rather than an extensification approach, and must incorporate
climate-smart measures and technologies to mitigate against adverse
environmental impacts.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
COSOP

11. The proposed Rwanda Dairy Development Project (RDDP) will address these
challenges and capitalize on the opportunities created by past investments in the
sector. At the current level of productivity, milk-supply projections show that the
country will not be able to meet the rapidly growing domestic demand for milk and
sustain the upward trend in cross-border exports to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Republic of Burundi. RDDP is expected to contribute to closing this
gap. The project design builds upon lessons learned in the dairy sector by
developing the value chain through: improving cattle productivity, milk quality and
the processing capacity of the dairy industry; and strengthening the policy and
institutional framework for the sector. RDDP supports all three strategic objectives
of the results-based country strategic opportunities programme (COSOP) 2013-
2018.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
12. The project area comprises 12 districts throughout Rwanda. Selection of the

targeted districts was based on: (i) the current cattle population and level of milk
production; (ii) current and projected market development potential, including
investments in MCCs, dairy processing plants and animal feed factories; and
(iii) levels of poverty, food insecurity and malnutrition. With an estimated
population of 4.6 million, poverty in the project area is higher than the national
average, with the highest poverty in targeted districts in the north and west.

13. The project’s primary target group comprises slightly over 100,000 resource-poor
rural households, of whom 80,000 will be involved in dairy farming and 20,000 in
off-farm activities along the dairy value chain. The target groups include:

 51,800 smallholder dairy farmers in zero-grazing systems who typically own
up to three cows – this is the predominant livestock system in Rwanda,
accounting for 92 per cent of all livestock keepers, producing mainly for home
consumption and selling a small surplus locally;

 22,200 smallholder dairy farmers in semi-extensive grazing systems with up
to 10 cows – they are principally located in the northern and eastern
provinces, and typically have 5-10 ha, which form a good base for sufficient
supply of forage for their cattle, but face challenges associated with shortages
of water and pastures during dry months;

 6,000 Girinka (one-cow-per-poor-family) beneficiaries, who will receive a cow
in-calf and pass on the first heifer to a qualifying neighbour – these
households meet the criteria set by the government programme, with some
land for forage production and ability to construct a cowshed;



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

4

 15,400 young farm assistants age 15 to 24 working as wage labourers on
dairy farms, especially in women-headed households with no male adults –
they are typically from very poor families, with little or no education, and a
limited skills base;

 5,400 rural women age 15-35, who will benefit from new economic
opportunities and the creation of small off-farm business opportunities; and

 640 livestock farmer field school (L-FFS) facilitators, 450 producers of forage
seeds and vegetative-planting materials, 175 veterinarians, 72 community
animal health workers and artificial insemination technicians, members of
dairy cooperatives, milk-collectors and dairy processors.

14. The gender strategy aims to provide equal opportunities for women and men to
participate in, and benefit from, development of the dairy value chain through
RDDP-supported activities. It is expected that women will account for at least
45 per cent of all project beneficiaries. Women-headed households and women in
men-headed households will be empowered to build small businesses or engage in
activities related to dairy farming. The Gender Action Learning System will ensure
that women fully participate in household decision-making, especially regarding
dairy activities. Women’s participation in L-FFS will encourage their membership
and leadership in dairy farmers’ organizations, apex organizations and policy
engagement. Climate-smart investments will support the use of labour-saving
technologies such as rainwater harvesting, and the intensification of dairy
production will provide opportunities for biogas systems, which can be used for
household energy.

B. Project development objective
15. The overall goal of RDDP is to contribute to pro-poor national economic growth and

improve the livelihoods of resource-poor rural households. This will be achieved by
focusing on food security and nutrition, empowering women and youth, increasing
smallholder dairy farmers’ incomes and developing a climate-resilient dairy value
chain. Specifically, the project seeks to increase the dairy sector’s competitiveness
and profitability through the provision of quality products from small-scale
producers to domestic and regional consumers, thus improving their livelihoods,
food security and nutrition while building overall resilience.

16. There are two specific objectives:

 Sustainably intensify dairy production and increase productivity among
participating smallholder farmers. This shall be achieved through: the
promotion of improved climate-smart dairy-farming practices and access to
quality dairy inputs; extension services including veterinary and artificial
insemination services; green technologies; and business and financial
services, following a hub-model approach.

 Increase incomes among 80 per cent of participating smallholder farmers
from dairy farming through the combined effects of increased milk production
and improved market access. This shall be achieved through the:
development of 30 dairy hubs; establishment and strengthening of dairy
farmers’ organizations; and facilitation of linkages to markets and dairy value
chain actors such as milk collectors, processors, transporters, traders and
investors in milk quality through public-private-producer partnerships.



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

5

C. Components/outcomes
17. To achieve its objectives, RDDP has three technical components:

18. Component 1: Climate-smart dairy production intensification aims at
increasing the capacity of smallholder dairy farmers and farm assistants to
sustainably produce and supply higher volumes of quality milk to the dairy market.
This component focuses on: (i) enhancing the capacity of smallholder dairy farmers
and farm assistants to improve their knowledge, attitudes and behaviours for
increased milk productivity and quality; (ii) providing smallholder dairy farmers with
sustainable access to public and private livestock services and inputs; and
(iii) supporting resource-poor households without cattle to acquire dairy assets so
that they can begin dairy farming through the Girinka programme and increase
their capacity to implement climate-smart investments aimed at sustainably
improving milk productivity and quality, as well as increasing household-level milk
consumption.

19. Component 2: Producer organization and value chain development is
designed to enable farmers to capitalize on productivity gains realized through
investments made under component 1. This component aims to increase their
earnings through: (i) organization and capacity-building of dairy-farmer
cooperatives for improved service delivery to farmers in milk collection and
marketing, input supply, animal-health services and financial services under the
hub model; (ii) investment in climate-resilient milk collection, processing and
marketing infrastructure aimed at reducing post-production losses and enhancing
the supply of quality milk in the domestic and regional markets; and (iii) leveraging
financing for climate-resilient dairy enterprise development aimed at catalysing
growth in all segments of the dairy value chain.

20. Component 3: Institutional and policy development aims to facilitate the
establishment of an evidence-based, inclusive policy framework and institutional
structure for the Rwandan dairy sector. It will achieve this by supporting:
(i) formulation of a national dairy policy and legislation necessary for improving the
regulatory environment of the sector; (ii) policy implementation and institutional
strengthening; and (iii) policy-related analysis and technical assistance.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
21. The starting point of RDDP will be the value chain for milk and milk products; it will

focus on supporting milk production, marketing and processing. In the process, it
will also support public and private production service providers such as
extensionists, input suppliers, artificial insemination and veterinary services,
smallholder dairy farmers and their organizations, informal traders and
transporters, small private dairy and MCC operators, and milk processors. The
project will facilitate the emergence of diverse subsector value chains offering a
range of products to different markets. In all of them, emphasis will be on:
increasing the quantity of milk marketed and processed; promoting efficiency in
value chains; ensuring the quality and safety of the final products; and increasing
household-level milk consumption.

B. Organizational framework
22. The lead agency in project implementation will be the Ministry of Agriculture and

Animal Resources (MINAGRI). Within the Ministry, daily operations will be managed
by the single project implementation unit (SPIU), which currently implements the
IFAD-supported Project for Rural Income through Exports, Post-harvest and
Agribusiness Support Project and the Kirehe Community-based Watershed
Management Project in Rwanda. In line with the sector-wide approach principles
and to mainstream project implementation within government agencies responsible
for dairy development, the main implementing body for the project will be the



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

6

Rwanda Agriculture Board (RAB), which will work closely with HPI in developing the
dairy-hub model. Other implementing partners will be the Rwanda Council of
Veterinary Doctors, the Rwanda Cooperative Agency, Rwanda’s Business
Development Fund and the Rwanda National Dairy Platform. These agencies will
provide facilitation and technical services in line with their mandated roles to
support project implementation. Collaboration will also be forged with the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) for technical support.

23. Performance-based contracts. Project implementation will be structured around
performance-based memoranda of understanding and partnership agreements with
government and non-governmental agencies, and service contracts with recruited
service providers. To ensure uninterrupted service delivery during implementation,
MINAGRI will enter into multi-year agreements with government implementing
partners and HPI, but provide annual reviews to ensure the achievement of results.
All service contracts for multi-year engagement will be issued on an annual basis,
and will be renewable only upon achievement of clearly set performance targets.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

24. Project management will be guided by a results-based management approach,
which aims to ensure that all processes, services and activities of the project and its
implementing partners contribute to achieving the project targets within the
framework of the project’s theory of change. As part of this approach, planning will
be guided by the project’s strategy, logframe and broader results framework, which
will inform the development of annual workplans and budgets.

25. The objectives of the project’s monitoring and evaluation system are to: (i) provide
information on progress towards results as required for results-based management
at all levels; (ii) enable the tracking of physical progress against the targets in the
annual workplan and budget; and (iii) collect and disseminate lessons for learning
purposes, including options for scaling up, replication and risk management. In line
with IFAD's Results and Impact Management System (RIMS), results will be
measured at the output, outcome and impact levels. The project logframe will be
extracted from the results framework and linked to the economic and financial
analysis in line with IFAD guidelines.

26. A knowledge management strategy for the dairy sector will be developed building
on three pillars: people, processes and technology. Quarterly reviews with
implementing partners will be organized by the SPIU to discuss progress towards
planned results in order to prepare quarterly progress reports, which will focus on
lessons learned, challenges and good practices. Study tours, exchange visits and
learning visits will be organized for lateral knowledge transfer.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
27. MINAGRI will have overall responsibility for the project’s financial management

system. It will be administered through the existing SPIU financial management
structure, which is regarded as a best practice in the region. The SPIU uses the
TOMPRO accounting system for both project and government reporting. The
financial reporting and audit standards are acceptable to IFAD.

28. Project audit. The SPIU will recruit an internal auditor to assess compliance of the
project's internal controls and procedures. The external audit will be performed by
the Office of the Auditor General.

29. Funds flow and disbursement arrangements. IFAD will disburse loan and grant
proceeds through a designated account to be opened at the National Bank of
Rwanda. The operational and counterpart funds accounts, denominated in Rwandan
francs, will also be opened at the National Bank of Rwanda, through which daily
payments to suppliers will be made. Funds will be transferred to other
implementing partners from the operational account. Implementing partners may



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

7

be required to open bank accounts specifically for RDDP funds depending on
whether they will receive substantial advances for activities under their
responsibility. Project funds will flow from the SPIU to the RAB and other
implementing partners only once memoranda of understanding are in place.

30. Start-up costs. Withdrawals for start-up costs are encouraged for eligible
expenditures to be incurred between the date of entry into force of the financing
agreement and the satisfaction of the conditions precedent to withdrawal.

31. Procurement. RDDP will adopt national procurement systems in line with the
international competitive-bidding threshold for goods, works and services, provided
that this system is in compliance with IFAD’s guidelines and in accordance with the
financing agreement and the letter to the borrower. The following actions will be
mainstreamed during RDDP implementation to ensure greater transparency and
accountability in financial management and procurement: (i) disclosure of
information to a wider audience, including at the community level;
(ii) beneficiary/civil society oversight for monitoring purposes and to ensure that
project-related information is discussed openly; (iii) a responsive complaints-
handling system; and (iv) sound accounting and audit measures within a context of
rigorous financial management.

E. Supervision
32. Project supervision will be carried out by IFAD jointly with MINAGRI, and with the

participation of HPI. Two implementation support/supervision missions will be
conducted every year and a midterm review will be organized by MINAGRI in the
third year. The IFAD Country Office will play an important role in supervising the
project by continually assessing bottlenecks and risks to successful implementation
and sustainability, and monitoring changes in implementation that require proactive
adjustments to the project design, implementation arrangements and logframe.

IV. Project costs, financing, and benefits
A. Project costs
33. Total project costs over six years, including physical and price contingencies, are

estimated at US$65.1 million, as presented in table 1 below, which summarizes
overall costs by component and financier. Component A represents 42 per cent of
total base costs, component B, 46 per cent and component C, 3 per cent; project
coordination and management costs are 9 per cent.



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

8

Table 1
Project costs by component and financier

(Thousands of United States dollars)
IFAD IFAD Private

loan grant Heifer banks Beneficiaries Government Total

Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount %
A. Climate-smart dairy
production intensification

- - - -

1. Knowledge, attitudes and
behaviour

8 973.6 - 840.4 9 814.1 15.1

2. Sustainable access to
public and private livestock
services

6 485.2 535.7 404.0 115.6 603.6 790.4 8 934.5 13.7

3. Asset building and climate-
smart productivity

6 084.4 - 594.0 1 584.8 - 625.5 8 888.7 13.7

Subtotal: Climate-smart dairy
production intensification

21 543.3 535.7 998.0 1 700.4 603.6 2 256.3 27 637.3 42.5

B. Producer organization and
value chain development

1. Organization and capacity-
building of farmer
cooperatives and other value
chain players

4 236.0 - 2 908.7 - - 283.5 7 428.2 11.4

2. Investment in milk collection
and processing infrastructure

3 146.2 344.7 90.2 - 928.2 1 036.7 5 546.0 8.5

3. Financing for dairy
enterprise development

7 368.1 - - 4 866.7 4 400.0 11.7 16 646.5 25.6

Subtotal: Producer
organization and value chain
development

14 750.2 344.7 2 998.9 4 866.7 5 328.2 1 332.0 29 620.7 45.5

C. Institutional and policy
development

1. Policy formulation 332.3 - - - - 3.9 336.2 0.5
2. Policy implementation and
institutional strengthening

1 073.4 - - - - 141.0 1 214.4 1.9

3. Policy-related knowledge
management

65.8 210.3 - - - 41.3 317.3 0.5

Subtotal: Institutional and
policy development

1 471.5 210.3 - - - 186.1 1 867.8 2.9

D. Project coordination and
management

1. Project management 4 767.4 - - - - 59.1 4 826.5 7.4
2. Monitoring and evaluation 1 086.5 - - - - 30.3 1 116.8 1.7

Subtotal: Project coordination
and management

5 853.8 - - - - 89.4 5 943.3 9.1

Total 43 618.8 1 090.7 3 996.9 6 567.1 5 931.8 3 863.9 65 069.1 100.0

B. Project financing
34. The project will be financed by: (i) IFAD in the amount of US$44.7 million

(69 per cent of the total cost) through a highly concessional loan of US$43.6 million
and a grant of US$1.1 million; (ii) HPI for US$4 million (6 per cent of the total
cost); (iii) the private sector/banks for US$6.6 million (10 per cent of the total
cost); (iv) the Government of Rwanda for US$3.9 million (6 per cent) in the form of
tax exemptions; and (v) beneficiaries for US$5.9 million (9 per cent). Table 2 below
details project costs by expenditure category and financier.



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

9

Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD IFAD Private
loan grant Heifer banks Beneficiaries Government Total

Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount %

I. Investment Costs
Works 510.2 - 112.0 622.2 1.0
Vehicles 145.4 - 36.4 181.8 0.3
Equipment and materials 5 095.1 344.7 248.9 115.6 952.5 1 689.2 8 445.9 13.0
Goods, services, and
inputs 9 796.3 210.3 1 476.2 - 579.3 2 026.4 14 088.4 21.7
Consultancies 5 842.5 535.7 1 133.6 - - 0.0 7 511.8 11.5
Training and workshops 9 505.6 - 1 138.2 - - 0.0 10 643.8 16.4
Grants and subsidies 7 777.2 - - 6 451.5 4 400.0 - 18 628.7 28.6

Total investment costs 38 672.3 1 090.7 3 996.9 6 567.1 5 931.8 3 863.9 60 122.5 92.4
II. Recurrent costs

A. Salaries and
allowances 3 737.9 - - - - 0.0 3 737.9 5.7
B. Operating costs 1 208.6 - - - - 0.0 1 208.6 1.9

Total recurrent costs 4 946.5 - - - - 0.0 4 946.5 7.6

Total 43 618.8 1 090.7 3 996.9 6 567.1 5931.8 3 863.9 65 069.1 100.0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
35. The economic and financial analysis shows that the project would be profitable with

an internal economic rate of return of 26.2 per cent and a net present value of
US$44.1 million at a 12 per cent economic discount rate. Sensitivity analysis shows
that the economic profitability of RDDP remains satisfactory even if the project
costs increase by 50 per cent, the project benefits decrease by 50 per cent or the
benefits lag behind by two years. The project is financially profitable at the
production, processing and marketing segments of the value chain, with the
financial internal rate of return for farmers ranging from 22 per cent to 43 per cent
depending on the production system (for small-scale processors, it is estimated at
43 per cent and for milk collection and marketing enterprises, it ranges from 25
per cent to 36 per cent).

D. Sustainability
36. RDDP will contribute to improving the livelihoods of targeted dairy-farmers and

strengthening the resilience of their production systems through the promotion of
dairy farming as a profitable business. The sustainability of project benefits will be
ensured through:

 Implementation by national bodies and utilization of national procedures to build
country ownership and sustain investment in the dairy value chain;

 A focus on empowerment of dairy groups through L-FFSs, which contributes to a
bottom-up approach for technology transfer, knowledge dissemination and
support service delivery, enabling dairy farmers to access these services at
affordable cost well beyond the project time frame;

 An emphasis on cost-sharing with farmer beneficiaries to ensure their ownership
and project investment support to enhance beneficiaries’ entrepreneurial
capacities so that farmer groups can access services and develop business
enterprises supported by financial institutions, and conclude contracts with
nationwide milk processors;



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

10

 Facilitation of dairy hubs’ access to financial services, which will enable them to
establish long-term business relationships with the financial sector so that
businesses can grow and advance to a commercial scale; and

 Promotion of partnerships with stakeholders such as HPI for dairy-business hub
development, FAO for technical assistance regarding animal-health and feeding,
and operational partnerships with the Business Development Fund and the
Rwanda Veterinary Doctors Council to ensure the continuity of project
interventions beyond IFAD support.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
Main risks Mitigation measures
Medium: Business management
capacity of dairy hubs does not
develop fast enough to cope with their
expansion and ensure that activities
are managed effectively in support of
dairy value chain development.

RDDP is expected to provide inputs appropriate to the needs of the hubs
that will be supported by an extensive training and business coaching
programme. Where appropriate, the project will support a "turnaround"
programme that has proved effective in other projects supporting
cooperative development.

Low: RDDP interventions encourage
non-commercial value chain
investments.

RDDP has been designed in accordance with a value chain approach. The
sustainability of this approach rests on commercial incentives and
private-sector participation. The project will support dairy-farmers, MCCs
and other dairy value chain stakeholders to build financially self-sustaining
commercial linkages based on commercial incentives rather than reliance
on subsidies. Results of the economic analysis show that the project has a
good and resilient economic profitability that should remain satisfactory
even in case of strong adverse developments in project costs, benefits and
implementation delays.

Medium: Under-investment in rural
roads, water and electricity
infrastructure perpetuates the
problems of low-quality milk for
processing, high production costs and
limited opportunities for export.

The Government has committed to provide additional resources through
the Feeder Roads Development project to finance feeder road
improvements under component 2, which are currently estimated at
US$12.8 million.

Low: Disease outbreak (e.g. foot-and-
mouth disease, Rift Valley Fever,
Contagious Bovine Pleuropneumonia)
can cause losses for dairy producers
and the dairy industry if contingency
and mitigation plans are not
implemented by national veterinary
authorities.

The Government has put in place disease-control measures that include
regular vaccination campaigns against these diseases and elaborate
movement control of livestock and livestock products. Lessons learned
from IFAD-funded projects in Zambia and Malawi on disease control have
been considered in formulating project activities to strengthen national
capacity for mitigating the risk of disease outbreaks.

Medium: The effects of climate change
can have significant impacts on
natural resources, especially pasture
and forage/crop production, affecting
seasonal available grazing and
reducing the nutrition and lactation of
cattle.

The project’s climate-smart dairy intensification approach will strengthen
community resilience through the sharing of dairy-farming best practices
and adoption of green innovations in order to cope with extreme climate
events. The project will train dairy farmers in forage conservation and
invest in pasture improvement and conservation at the farm level. The
project will also promote investments in climate-resilient and low-carbon
post-production procedures, cooling, processing and value addition to
reduce product losses and increase the incomes of farmers and rural
labourers.

Medium: Rwanda has been ranked as
maintaining a high level of integrity in
public administration and has made
significant progress in establishing
mechanisms to support integrity and
transparency in public procurement
systems. The 2015 Transparency
International Corruption Perception
Index score of 54 places the country at
medium risk.

Mitigation measures include strengthening the internal audit function,
performing financial management assessments of new implementing
agencies, upgrading accounting software and maintaining a project
implementation manual with all financial procedures.



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

11

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
37. RDDP complies with IFAD’s policies on targeting, gender equality and women’s

empowerment, private sector, climate change, environment and natural resource
management. The project is designed to be consistent with the IFAD’s Private
Sector Development and Partnership Strategy, its Rural Finance Policy and the
associated Decision Tools for Rural Finance. The project is also in line with the
approaches outlined in the Framework for Gender Mainstreaming in Programme
Management Department Operations.

38. The project’s Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP)
category is B considering that RDDP will promote enhanced natural resources
management and integration of livestock and crop production. It will ensure that
climate-resilience technologies (e.g. solar energy and biogas) are widely adopted
along with improved management of natural resources and dairy cattle herds,
which in turn will mitigate environmental risks.

B. Alignment and harmonization
39. RDDP investments will be integrated with ongoing IFAD, government and other

partner-supported initiatives related to livestock, dairy and rural infrastructure
development. The project is aligned with core programme areas of the
Government’s Strategic Plan for the Transformation of Agriculture (PSTA III),
including: (i) agriculture and animal resources intensification; (ii) research and
technology transfer, advisory services and professionalization of farmers; (iii) value
chain development and private sector investment; and (iv) institutional
development. In addition, RDDP will contribute to the goals of the Economic
Development and Poverty Reduction Strategy II and the National Strategy on
Climate Change and Low-Carbon Development.

C. Innovations and scaling up
40. RDDP builds on past and on-going experiences with improving the national dairy

industry through the dairy-hub model. Through the promotion and support of this
successfully-tested model, project interventions will seek to strengthen dairy-
farmers’ cooperatives and set up basic dairy infrastructure under a business
framework that will evolve into sustainable farmer-managed dairy hubs. These
dairy hubs will act as a nexus of private sector-led interventions designed to
increase access to productive services such as feed and other inputs, artificial
insemination and veterinary-extension services, output markets and dairy-related
business development services such as finance, insurance, and market support.

41. Scaling-up of results under the RDDP will be achieved through linking focused
project investment resources to leverage private co-investments and borrowing
from the commercial banking system through public-private-producer partnerships
– and in so doing, developing commercial value chain relationships and services
that are market driven and sustainable. RDDP will strengthen the dairy value chain
and, in particular, the linkages between smallholder dairy producers and their
organizations on one hand, and processors and traders on the other. It will also:
promote the development of a scalable model for integrating financial and non-
financial services into commercial relationships between smallholder dairy farmers
and processors; and support efforts to reduce the cost of doing business in the
dairy-processing industry, thus creating incentives for further investments in the
entire sector.

D. Policy engagement
42. By considering policy engagement as a full-fledged component of the project, IFAD

emphasizes the need for a conducive – and inclusive – institutional framework for
the Rwandan dairy sector in which smallholders are involved from the formulation



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

12

to the implementation of policies. The project will support dairy-farmer
cooperatives, the Rwanda National Dairy Platform and the Rwanda Council of
Veterinary Doctors in strengthening their technical and organizational capacities,
thereby ensuring continuity and sustainability of support after the implementation
period. The project will work across all phases of the national policy cycle –
including policy formulation, implementation and evaluation – and will emphasize:
partnerships and learning from previous experience; integration into national policy
processes and existing governance structures; and the generation and use of
evidence to inform policy decisions

VI. Legal instruments and authority
43. A project financing agreement between the Republic of Rwanda and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as
appendix I.

44. The Republic of Rwanda is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD.

45. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
46. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Republic of Rwanda in an amount equivalent to thirty-one million three
hundred and fifty thousand special drawing rights (SDR 31,350,000)
(approximately US$43.6 million), and upon such terms and conditions as shall
be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
Rwanda in an amount equivalent to seven hundred and ninety thousand
special drawing rights (SDR 790,000) (approximately US$1.1 million) and
upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with
the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President

















































President’s report

Proposed loan to the Democratic Socialist
Republic of Sri Lanka for the
Smallholder Tea and Rubber Revitalization
Project

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

Smallholder Tea and Rubber Revitalization Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

Executing agency: Ministry of Plantation Industries

Total project cost: US$65.4 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 18.45 million (equivalent to approximately
US$25.764 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Blend terms: Maturity period of 25 years, including agrace period of 5 years, with interest at a fixed rate of
1.25 per cent plus a service charge of 0.75 per cent per
annum

Cofinancier(s): Bank of Ceylon and People’s Bank

Amount of cofinancing: US$3.25 million

Contribution of borrower: US$32.76 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$3.61 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/116/R.20/Rev.1

1

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
loan to the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka for the Smallholder Tea and
Rubber Revitalization Project, as contained in paragraph 34.

Proposed loan to the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri
Lanka for the Smallholder Tea and Rubber Revitalization
Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. The Sri Lankan economy has grown at an impressive pace in recent years,

recording an annual average growth rate of about 7.4 per cent in 2014. The
country is on track to meet most of the Millennium Development Goals and
compares favourably with other countries in its income band in terms of gender
equality. The Government’s development policy framework is articulated in the
Public Investment Strategy 2014-2016, which sets the principal targets as raising
the per capita income to US$4,000 in 2016 and elevating Sri Lanka to the level of a
strong middle-income country. The new Government, initially appointed in January
2015 and then reappointed in September 2015, has maintained these targets.

2. Eighty per cent of Sri Lanka’s population resides in rural areas, and agriculture
remains the backbone of the economy despite its declining share of GDP.
Smallholder farmers are major contributors to food security. The government’s
strategic direction for agriculture is to achieve a sustained improvement in
production through increased productivity and market competitiveness. Poverty is
primarily a rural phenomenon, and the main population groups living in poverty
are: (i) smallholders in crop and plantation production; (ii) plantation workers in
estate areas; (iii) artisanal and small-scale fishers; (iv) women-headed households;
and (v) unemployed and underemployed labourers.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and RB-
COSOP

3. Rationale. The tea and rubber subsectors have been important contributors to the
national economy. Tea smallholders contribute 70 per cent of Sri Lanka's total tea
production while smallholder rubber growers make up 62 per cent of the land under
rubber cultivation. About 50 per cent of the smallholder tea lands are more than 20
years old with less than optimal production capacity. There is a dire need for
replanting, without which many of the smallholders will be pushed below the
poverty line. The Government has a subsidy scheme in place aiming to address
smallholders' difficulty in accessing appropriate financial products for tea replanting.
However, both the timeliness and level of financial support this government scheme
provides remain problematic, and additional financing is needed in order to
strengthen smallholders' participation in the replanting programme. The project will
complement the existing government scheme, and will make it more effective by
providing capital investment support to smallholders at the commencement of tea
replanting.

4. As part of the National Rubber Master Plan, the Government has been promoting
rubber in non-traditional rubber cultivation areas to provide a source of livelihood
for smallholders. This expansion is also a direct response to the demands of the



EB 2015/116/R.20/Rev.1

2

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

private sector, which has been calling for greater government support for rubber
production. The Government has introduced proactive policy that supports the
granting of land permits, land clearance and initial rubber cultivation. The project
serves to reinforce the Government's priority of rubber development in non-
traditional areas, focusing support on smallholder production.

5. Alignment with government priorities and the results-based country
strategic opportunities programme (RB-COSOP). The project is directly
aligned with the government’s development priorities as defined in the Public
Investment Strategy 2014-2016, particularly the policy directions for the tea and
rubber subsectors. It is consistent with the RB-COSOP for Sri Lanka (2015-2020)
and contributes directly to its two strategic objectives.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
6. The project area will cover eight neighbouring districts in central and southern Sri

Lanka, including Galle (tea), Matara (tea), Ratnapura (tea and rubber processing),
Badulla (tea), Kandy (tea), Moneragala (rubber) and Ampara (rubber) and Nuwara
Eliya (tea). A total of 144,000 people, or 32,000 households, are expected to
benefit from the project.

7. The target group of tea interventions will be existing poor smallholder tea growers
having less than one hectare of unproductive tea lands. The target group of rubber
interventions will be smallholders having a holding of one hectare of rubber, to be
selected by poverty level. Gender equality will be one of the criteria used in the
selection of beneficiaries, to ensure that at least 30 per cent of the tea and rubber
growers are women.

B. Project development objective
8. The project goal is to enable poor rural people to improve their food security,

increase their incomes and strengthen their resilience. The development objective
is to ensure that smallholders' economic activities in tea and rubber become more
productive, profitable and resilient.

C. Components/outcomes
9. The project will have three components: (i) tea smallholder development;

(ii) rubber smallholder development; and (iii) inclusive rural financing, to be
supported by project management.

(i) Component 1: Tea smallholder development (approximately US$44.44
million; 69 per cent of total base cost), will promote better organization
among tea smallholders to enable them to effectively and sustainably produce
and market their products. It has three subcomponents: (a) strengthening tea
societies in production and marketing; (b) market-driven production support;
and (c) income and market diversification for tea smallholders.

(ii) Component 2: Rubber smallholder development (approximately
US$14.78 million; 22 per cent of total base cost), will enhance rubber
production and processing of quality rubber products with better market
linkages. It has three subcomponents: (a) strengthening rubber societies,
including processing and market sensitivity, (b) market-driven production
support, and (c) income and market diversification for rubber smallholders.

(iii) Component 3: Inclusive rural financing (approximately US$3.5 million;
6 per cent of the total base cost), will facilitate access by the targeted
smallholders to available bank financing for production, harvesting and
marketing of green tea leaves and rubber products. It has two
subcomponents: (a) facilitating access to lending from the banking system;
and (b) supporting implementation arrangements.



EB 2015/116/R.20/Rev.1

3

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

10. The main project outcomes include: (i) 200 revitalized tea societies and 100
strengthened rubber societies able to effectively provide a range of services to their
members; (ii) high-yield tea crops replanted on 5,500 hectares and rubber planted
on 3,000 hectares by smallholders to provide a sustainable source of income and
diversified livelihoods; and (iii) strengthened smallholders undertaking sustainable
commercial business with the private sector.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
11. The project will adhere to the principles of demand-driven participatory

development to ensure that smallholders are the key decision-makers when they
participate in project activities. A value chain approach will be adopted in
identifying the relevant activities from production to processing and marketing.
Overall project implementation will take into account the following key factors: (i) a
large number of smallholders are the predominant producers of tea and rubber;
(ii) the private sector is keen to enhance tea and rubber production in order to
meet the growing market demand for these commodities, as well as to promote
sustainable and responsible farming; (iii) the formal banking sector is unable to
effectively provide the needed lending products due to their loan processing
procedures and risk aversion to rural lending; (iv) there is a need to strengthen the
capacity of government extension staff; there is also a need to put in place an
implementation strategy that is sustainable and does not lead to friction with
existing line agency staff; and (v) the cadre of village-level government staff can be
effectively employed for project implementation.

B. Organizational framework
12. The lead agency for the project will be the Ministry of Plantation Industries (MPI).

MPI will (i) appoint a senior staff member to supervise the overall implementation
of the project; (ii) set up a national steering committee to guide and steer project
implementation; and (iii) establish a project management unit (PMU) responsible
for daily project operations. The PMU will be headed by a project manager. District
level implementation will be the responsibility of the Tea Small Holdings
Development Authority (TSHDA) and the Rubber Development Department (RDD),
two of MPI's main constituent institutions. The district office of TSHDA, headed by
the TSHDA regional manager, and that of RDD headed by the RDD deputy director,
will act as the district project management cell (DPMC).

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

13. Planning. The project logframe will be the basis for preparing the annual work plan
and budget (AWP/B). The logframe will be refined periodically to reflect any
changes and adjustments that may be necessary during the life of the project. The
overall responsibility for AWP/B preparation will rest with the project manager, with
support from the TSHDA regional manager for tea and the RDD deputy director for
rubber at the district level. The district project AWP/Bs will be prepared by the
TSHDA regional manager or the RDD deputy director. The project manager will be
responsible for consolidating the district AWP/Bs into the overall project AWP/B, for
approval by the national steering committee and then no-objection by IFAD.

14. Monitoring and evaluation (M&E). The project will establish an effective and
efficient M&E system to provide comprehensive, frequent and reliable data and
information for sound result-based management and decision-making. The overall
responsibility for the project M&E activities will lie with the PMU, specifically its M&E
coordinator, who will be responsible for ensuring the consistency, accuracy and
timeliness of all project reporting. All M&E activities will be based on the IFAD
guidelines for project M&E and the Results and Impact Management System (RIMS)
first- and second-level indicators handbook. All indicators will be disaggregated by



EB 2015/116/R.20/Rev.1

4

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

gender and socio-economic status to allow for a proper assessment of poverty and
gender targeting.

15. Learning and knowledge management will be a key underlying theme. The
project is expected to offer valuable opportunities for learning at the policy,
operational and technical levels because it has certain novel features that can make
the existing government scheme for tea replanting and rubber expansion more
effective. In addition, the project can contribute to restructuring the manner in
which the group rubber processing centres are financed and operated as business
enterprises; demonstrating the use of eco-restoration to enhance tea yields;
promoting partnership with the private sector for better market linkages; and
enhancing the access to existing bank lending products for tea and rubber
production and other income-generating activities.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
16. Financial management. MPI as the lead project agency will be responsible for

overall financial management. The financial management arrangements will, to the
extent feasible, be mainstreamed into government systems. Operational day-to-day
fiduciary functions will be the responsibility of the PMU embedded within MPI, in
liaison with the DPMCs attached to district-level TSHDA and RDD offices. The PMU’s
financial management role will include consolidating AWP/Bs, managing the flow of
funds, maintaining project bank accounts, processing disbursement requests,
consolidating interim financial reports, and preparing annual financial statements
for audit. The PMU will put in place an imprest mechanism for the release of
adequate funds to DPMCs. It will also be responsible for ensuring that district-level
finance staff are provided with appropriate training and guidance with regard to
reporting expenditure and procurement. The financial management risk for the
project is rated medium. Measures to be put in place to mitigate this risk include
qualified and experienced financial staff, a detailed financial and accounting
manual, automated accounting processes (accounting software), quarterly financial
reporting, and internal and external audit.

17. Flow of funds. MPI will be responsible for managing the flow of funds from the
IFAD loan proceeds and the government counterpart funds, opening and
maintaining the designated account in United States dollars at the Central Bank of
Sri Lanka to receive initial deposit and replenishments, obtaining the agreed
counterpart funds from the General Treasury, forwarding imprest applications
prepared by the PMU to obtain advances from the designated account to meet
project requirements, and scrutinizing and forwarding withdrawal applications to
IFAD. MPI will make adequate annual budgetary provisions for both IFAD and
counterpart funds in the national budget, based on the project AWP/B.

18. Audit. The Auditor General, who is constitutionally mandated to audit all
government accounts and reports to Parliament annually, will perform the external
audit of the project. The Auditor General will submit audited financial statements
and a detailed audit report along with a management letter no later than six
months after the end of the financial year.

19. Procurement. Procurement of goods, works and services financed by the project
will be carried out in accordance with the national procurement guidelines to the
extent that they are consistent with IFAD's project procurement guidelines. The
procurement methods to be applied in each case will depend on the expenditure
and the estimated value of the contract. The thresholds for the different
procurement methods will be detailed in the letter to the borrower.

20. Governance. In line with its anti-corruption policy, IFAD will apply zero tolerance in
respect of fraudulent, corrupt, collusive and coercive action.



EB 2015/116/R.20/Rev.1

5

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

E. Supervision
21. The project will be directly supervised by IFAD which, with government

collaboration, will conduct annual supervision missions, regular implementation
support missions, a midterm review and a completion review.

IV. Project costs, financing, and benefits
A. Project costs
22. The total project cost is estimated at US$65.4 million including contingencies

(US$3.8 million) over a period of six years. Project costs are organized into: (i) tea
smallholders development (69 per cent of total base costs); (ii) rubber smallholders
development (22 per cent of total baseline costs); (iii) inclusive rural financing
(6 per cent of the base cost); and (iv) project management (4 per cent of total
baseline costs).
Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan
Other

cofinanciers Beneficiaries
Borrower/

counterpart Total

Component Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Tea smallholder
development 16 380 36.9 - - 1 955 4.4 26 107 58.7 44 442 68.0

2. Rubber smallholder
development 7 635 51.6 15 0.1 1 654 11.2 5 480 37.1 14 783 22.6

3. Inclusive rural financing 50 1.4 3 251 92.8 - - 201 5.7 3 502 5.4

4. Project management 1 699 63.6 - - - - 974 36.4 2 674 4.1

Total 25 764 39.4 3 266 5 3 610 5.5 32 762 50.1 65 401

B. Project financing
23. IFAD will provide a loan equivalent to US$25.764 million on blend terms; the

Government will provide counterpart funds equivalent to US$32.76 million; the two
participating banks will provide an amount equivalent to US$3.25 million as a line
of credit from their own funds; and the beneficiaries’ contribution is estimated at
US$3.61 million.
Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD loan
Other

cofinanciers Beneficiaries Borrower/Counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Civil works 4 491 60.5 - - 1 772 23.9 1 162 15.6 7 425
2. Vehicles 686 41.0 - - - - 987 59.0 1 674
3. Equipment and materials 3 985 72.0 - - 1 332 24.1 219 4.0 5 536
4. Consultancies 587 89.5 - - - - 69 10.5 656
5. Credit - - 3 000 100 - - - - 3 000
6. Goods, services and

inputs 2 028 75.1 - - 505 18.7 169 6.2 2 702
7. Capital grants and

government subsidy 9 624 27.0 - - - - 26 000 73.0 35 624
8. Training 1 294 67.3 251 13 - - 364 18.9 1 923
9. Salaries and allowances 1 645 41.0 - - - - 2 369 59 4 014
10. Operating costs 1 424 50.0 - - - - 1 424 50 2 847
Total 25 764 39.4 3 251 5 3 610 5.5 32 762 50.1 62 504

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
24. The project is expected to benefit a total of about 32,000 households and 144,000

people. Women-headed and poor households will be targeted in particular. The
project's support for tea replanting and intercropping will lead to increased yields



EB 2015/116/R.20/Rev.1

6

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

from tea as well as from appropriate inter-crops such as pepper. On average, a
household’s production benefits will increase from 3,000 kg/ha to over 14,000
kg/ha of fresh tea leaves in a year over a 20-year period, at a minimum.
Smallholders planting rubber will be able to benefit from a steady income from
latex, the average production of which is expected to be 2,160 kg per year for the
next 30 years. The project will contribute to institutional sustainability at the village
level by strengthening tea and rubber societies and linking them with private-sector
partners. The project's economic internal rate of return is estimated at 26 per cent.

D. Sustainability
25. There are strong elements in the project design that will enhance the sustainability

of benefits for smallholders. The most significant investment will be in the
replanting of tea and planting of rubber trees on new lands. The tea plantations are
expected to provide yields for another 20 to 25 years while the planting of rubber
trees is expected to provide benefits for 30 to 35 years. The quality of produce will
be ensured through the provision of high quality plants from nurseries certified by
the Tea Research Institute and the Rubber Research Institute. The marketing of tea
and rubber is not an issue in the country as there is high demand for both. Due to
the acute shortage of rubber, any additional rubber product can easily be
marketed. The ability of smallholders to convert latex into ribbed sheets will
enhance shelf life, and this in turn will make marketing easier. The increased
capacity of the smallholders to undertake intercropping and other small enterprises
through project support will enhance the sustainability of their livelihoods.
Smallholders' livelihoods will be further enhanced by increased incomes generated
from linkages with the private sector and implementation of the business models.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
26. The first risk is smallholder's lack of capital to invest in the replanting of old tea

crops and new rubber lands and also in processing equipment. This will be
addressed by providing capital support upfront to supplement government
financing. The second risk is the unavailability of plant materials, which can be
addressed by supporting private nurseries for tea and the large RDD nursery in the
Ampara district for rubber to provide the required plant materials. The third risk is
related to the timely regularization of land for the new rubber plantations. This is
currently being proactively addressed by MPI in collaboration with the Forest
Department and the Mahaweli Development Authority, both of which have agreed
to make the lands available immediately upon project start-up. The fourth risk is
farmer groups' low management and negotiating capacity, poor access to roads,
lack of transport and market information. These will be addressed through capacity-
building for tea and rubber societies and by supporting farm roads for enhanced
accessibility. Finally, the risk of climatic factors such as drought leading to lower
yields will be mitigated through the adoption of good agricultural practices,
including soil renovation and soil moisture management.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
27. The project is in line with IFAD policies, specifically: (i) the project target group has

been clearly defined and the selection of the project area is in keeping with IFAD's
targeting policy; (ii) in compliance with IFAD's gender policy, the project will make
special provision for the targeting of women, and gender disaggregated indicators
will be used to monitor women's participation; (iii) in line with IFAD's private sector
strategy, the project will place a strong emphasis on further developing and
strengthening the smallholders' linkages with licensed tea and rubber collectors and
processors; (iv) in keeping with the IFAD rural finance policy, the project will
facilitate access of smallholders to available financing for production, harvesting
and marketing of green tea leaves and rubber products; and (v) the design has
capitalized on the IFAD strategies and guidance tools for natural resource



EB 2015/116/R.20/Rev.1

7

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

management, climate change and environment, and has structured the project
activities in a way that will bring positive environmental impact and socio-economic
benefits to the communities.

B. Alignment and harmonization
28. The project is aligned with the Government’s development priorities for the tea and

rubber subsectors, and supports the implementation of the newly developed
National Rubber Master Plan. It will complement the ongoing government
programmes for smallholder tea replanting and rubber production. The project will
explore and support diverse types of partnerships between the project beneficiaries
and the private sector for enhanced access to market and financial services.

C. Innovations and scaling up
29. The project will vertically scale up to new geographic areas the successful

interventions in support of smallholder tea and rubber production initiated through
the IFAD-financed Smallholder Entrepreneurship Development Programme. It will
provide funding support for business models that link smallholders with the private
sector to ensure effective market access. The project will also partner with two
state banks to enhance smallholders' access to existing financial products specific
to tea and rubber.

D. Policy engagement
30. The project will facilitate the conduct of studies to assess the role and contribution

of the up-front capital grant in encouraging tea smallholders' participation in the tea
replanting scheme. The results of such studies will be used to initiate policy
dialogue with the Government on reviewing and possibly revising its subsidy
scheme to make it more effective for smallholders.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
31. A project financing agreement between the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka and IFAD will constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed
financing to the borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached
as appendix I.

32. The Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka is empowered under its laws to
receive financing from IFAD.

33. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
34. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on blend terms to the
Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka in an amount equivalent to
eighteen million four hundred and fifty thousand special drawing rights
(SDR 18,450,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President

















































President’s report

Proposed loan to the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam for the Commercial Smallholder
Support Project in Bắc Kan and Cao Bằng


Socialist Republic of Viet Nam

Commercial Smallholder Support Project in Bắc Kạn and
Cao Bằng

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Government of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam

Executing agencies: Provincial People’s Committees

Total project cost: US$74.3 million

Amount of IFAD loan: US$42.5 million

Terms of IFAD loan: Blend: maturity period of 25 years, including a graceperiod of 5 years, with interest at a fixed rate of 1.25 per
cent plus a service charge of 0.75 per cent per annum.

Amount of IFAD grant: US$0.5 million

Contribution of borrower: US$20.6 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$10.7 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD


Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam for the Commercial Smallholder
Support Project in Bắc Kạn and Cao Bằng, as contained in paragraph 39.

Proposed loan to the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam for
the Commercial Smallholder Support Project in Bắc Kạn
and Cao Bằng

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Since the introduction of comprehensive economic reforms known as Đổi Mới

(renovation) in 1986, Viet Nam’s economy has sustained strong economic growth.
Gross domestic product grew at an average of 7.2 per cent per annum over the
past 20 years, reducing poverty rapidly and lifting almost 30 million people out of
poverty since the 1990s. Viet Nam was classified as a lower-middle-income country
in 2009 and achieved five out of the eight Millennium Development Goals by 2010.
Under the higher poverty threshold issued by the Government’s Statistical Office in
2014, 17.2 per cent of the population are now considered to be living below the
poverty line. These achievements have been accompanied by structural shifts in
the economy. Between 1990 and 2012, the contribution of agriculture to GDP
decreased by more than 20 per cent, to 18 per cent in 2013. The proportion of the
labour force engaged in agriculture also decreased from more than 80 per cent in
the 1990s to an estimated 46.3 per cent in 2014.

2. Notwithstanding the economic transition under way towards industrialization,
agriculture continues to play an important role in maintaining Viet Nam’s economic
stability. The agricultural and rural sectors of the economy have, in recent years,
demonstrated solid annual growth of approximately 4.5 per cent due to
liberalization and private sector engagement. The development of the rural
economy, however, is still comparatively slow and not sustainable in many areas
due to inadequate linkages to markets, limited access to rural finance and
technology, and the impacts of climate change.

3. In rural areas, poverty remains a chronic problem, disproportionately affecting
ethnic-minority communities. It is concentrated in the upland areas of the
north-east and north-west, the central coastal region and parts of the central
highlands. While economic development has improved living standards in rural
areas, it has also contributed to income inequity and environmental degradation.
Despite the gains in per capita income in rural areas, tackling residual poverty is a
persistent challenge owing to limited assets, low levels of education and poor
health, particularly among ethnic minorities, who are disproportionately
over-represented among the rural poor.

4. Rural areas have less than half the average per capita income of urban areas but
almost thrice the poverty rate. Many rural households are not considered poor but
maintain an income level just above the poverty line. With little or no savings or
Government support and an almost-total dependence on natural resource
gathering and subsistence farming, they are vulnerable to unexpected life events,
climate shocks and the degradation of land and water resources. Approximately
90 per cent of each rural person’s total spending is to meet basic living costs. The
majority of their income is derived from agriculture, forestry or aquaculture
production and wages from mostly unskilled manual labour. The provinces of


Bắc Kạn and Cao Bằng are among the poorest in Viet Nam, with 14.2 per cent of
households classified as poor and 9.4 per cent as near poor in Bắc Kạn, and
21.4 per cent classified as poor and 10 per cent as near poor in Cao Bằng.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

5. The Commercial Smallholder Support Project in Bắc Kạn and Cao Bằng (CSSP) was
outlined during the development of the Viet Nam country strategic opportunities
programme (COSOP) 2012-2017 and included in the pipeline of projects that
received government approval. CSSP financing includes a loan of US$42.5 million
and a grant of US$0.5 million to scale up IFAD-supported approaches at the
national level through the National Target Programme for New Rural Development
(NTP-NRD) implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development. A
rigorous process of consultation, analysis and participatory design involving
provincial authorities was undertaken from late 2014 to 2016 to identify change
issues and areas of intervention.

6. The CSSP is fully aligned with the Government’s Socio-economic Development
Strategy 2016-20 (SEDS), the NTP-NRD, National Target Project on Sustainable
Poverty Reduction and National Target Project to Respond to Climate Change. The
CSSP is designed in accordance with the strategic objectives of the current COSOP,
seeking to: (i) enable poor rural provinces to carry out market-led pro-poor rural
development; (ii) improve access among the rural poor, particularly women, to
commodity and labour markets; and (iii) enhance the capacity of poor rural
households to adapt to climate change. Agriculture accounts for more than
70 per cent of employment in the project provinces. Significant market demand
and opportunities for improved productivity and value addition exist in the forestry,
non-timber forest products, livestock, ginger, canna, fruit, cassava and peanut
subsectors in the two provinces. Opportunities also exist in ecotourism
development.

7. The CSSP builds on two IFAD-financed initiatives: Developing Business with the
Rural Poor Programme and the Pro-poor Partnership for Agroforestry Development
Project, which ended in 2013 and 2015, respectively. Both were rated “successful”
in the light of sharp reductions in household poverty levels, the adoption of
broad-based strategies to improve productivity, the mainstreaming of a
comprehensive decentralization and community-empowerment strategy
(Cao Bằng), infrastructure development supporting enhanced agricultural
production and market access, and strengthened agricultural value chains
(Bắc Kạn).

8. Based on this progress, the Provincial People’s Committees (PPCs) in the two
provinces identified further areas for poverty reduction efforts, including:
promoting market-oriented production focusing on high-value crops and animal
production; providing sustainable non-State rural financial services, especially for
women; strengthening linkages between enterprises and farmers through
agribusiness-promotion funds; and developing upland production systems with due
attention to natural resource management and climate change adaptation.

9. Bắc Kạn and Cao Bằng still face many development constraints, including
inadequate capacity for market-oriented development and investment planning,
poor agribusiness and risk-management skills, lack of access to finance, and
inadequate rural infrastructure, in particular for upland economic activities. These
constraints are exacerbated by the effects of intense rainfall, producing floods and
soil erosion, and unseasonable drought, resulting in crop and livestock losses.

10. CSSP will scale up innovations developed by other IFAD-financed projects in
Viet Nam, with an emphasis on: (i) the expansion of private sector investment in
production and value addition in profitable commodity chains; (ii) the institutional



strengthening, training and capacity-building of existing agencies and local
authorities; (iii) the integration of participatory bottom-up planning, budgeting and
implementation; and (iv) broad-based reform as part of private
sector-development policy to ensure increased competitiveness and the expansion
of rural household incomes and asset-generating opportunities, particularly for poor
people. The Government through NTP-NRD is providing significant cofinancing for
CSSP, indicating a strong sense of commitment and ownership. The US$100 million
Asian Development Bank Basic Infrastructure for Inclusive Growth in North-eastern
Provinces Project, due to commence in 2017, is expected to complement CSSP
investments.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
11. Project area. The project will be implemented in the north-eastern provinces of

Bắc Kạn and Cao Bằng in Viet Nam. Participatory process in both provinces
identified 70 communes based on poverty rates, vulnerability to natural disasters,
the commitment of local leadership and the potential to develop pro-poor value
chains.

12. Target population. The project target groups will comprise: (i) rural poor and
near-poor households with land and available labour, including household
enterprises; (ii) unskilled employed rural people; (iii) rural people who lack
productive land but have business acumen and desire; and (iv) farmers who have
the skills to promote commercial agricultural production. Women and
woman-headed and ethnic-minority households will be prioritized among this target
group.

B. Project development objective
13. The overall objective of the project is to contribute to sustainable poverty reduction

in Bắc Kạn and Cao Bằng. The development objective is to sustainably improve the
income and reduce the climate vulnerability of poor and near-poor farm
households.

C. Components/outcomes
14. The project comprises three main components and a project management

component:

 Component 1: Institutionalized provincial participatory planning. This
component aims to ensure that provincial socio-economic development
planning is legislated, holistic, participatory, climate-adapted and
market-oriented. It has three subcomponents that together underpin the
Market-Oriented Participatory Socio-economic Development Planning
(MOP-SEDP) process.

(i) Strategic investment plan. During the first year of the project, this
subcomponent will support provincial project coordination offices
(PPCOs), backed by international technical assistance, in conducting
financial and economic analysis of key commodity and associated value
chains in both provinces to be incorporated into provincial, district and
communal MOP-SEDPs.

(ii) Climate change-adaptation planning. This subcomponent,
spearheaded by the Provincial Ministries of Natural Resources,
Environment and Planning, will support: (a) the updating of provincial
climate change action plans; (b) awareness-raising of climate change
risks at the commune, district and provincial levels to improve
resilience; and (c) the building of capacities to integrate climate change
adaptation into the MOP-SEDP process.



(iii) Dissemination of climate-informed market-oriented
socio-economic development plans. This subcomponent will roll out
the climate-adapted MOP-SEDP through: (a) strengthened public sector
market economy skills; and (b) focused support to adapt the instrument
to scale. At the commune and district levels – initially in project target
districts and then throughout the two provinces – the project will
facilitate the integration of commodity-based value chain development
(subcomponent ) and climate change-adaptation plans
(subcomponent ii) through a participatory process. This process will
engage relevant entities at the village, commune and district levels and
include all public funding sources, including CSSP and NTP-NRD funds.
Women’s representation in MOP-SEDP planning will be prioritized.

 Component 2: A greener agricultural future. This component will support
the Government’s ambitious green growth agenda by promoting climate
change-adaption technologies that also provide mitigation benefits. It has two
subcomponents:

(i) Forest land and forest allocation. This subcomponent will support
the equitable ownership and efficient use of productive forest resources
in all Bắc Kạn target communes through certification, rehabilitation and
the issuing of forest land and use rights, directly contributing to carbon
sequestration. The project will facilitate the transfer of land and use
rights certificates for 17,000 hectares of forest land to poor households.
Certificates will be issued jointly to both wife and husband.

(ii) Common interest groups (CIGs) for climate adaptation. This
subcomponent will support the establishment or strengthening of
approximately 1,900 CIGs to implement profitable climate
change-adaptation technologies and practices within a value chain
framework, with co-benefits for climate change mitigation. In this
context, forage production will be integrated into farming systems, with
co-benefits for soil fertility and stability. A competitive grant programme
for CIGs whose membership comprises at least 40 per cent women will
support climate change-adaption technologies such as afforestation,
irrigation management, climate-resistant crop varieties,
system-of-rice-intensification rice, forage production, minimum tillage
and organic agriculture.

 Component 3: Profitable farms linked to finance and markets. This
third component aims to ensure increased public and private investment in
sustainable, profitable commodity production and value addition. It comprises
three subcomponents:

(i) Community infrastructure. Public infrastructure investment grants
will be available for investments by communes providing public benefits
essential to targeted commodity-chain development and/or climate
change or disaster preparedness. This activity will be integrated into the
NTP-NRD agriculture infrastructure investment process, which will be
funded by a government contribution. In this context, a vocational
training programme targeting young people will be supported with a
view to generating employment.

(ii) Rural financial services. Newly established Women’s Development
Funds (WDFs) in Bắc Kạn and Cao Bằng will be supported as an
effective means of improving financial inclusion in the rural communes
of the project area. This will include capacity-building for the WDFs, the
establishment of new women’s savings and credit groups, and seed
capital for lending operations. Support will also be provided to



transform WDFs into fully sustainable microfinance institutions (MFIs) at
project end in accordance with State Bank regulations.

(iii) Agribusiness Promotion Investment Fund (APIF). By establishing
such a fund, the project will provide cofinancing to catalyse
approximately 25 private sector agro-enterprise investments that
improve enterprise competitiveness and linkages to smallholder
farmers, thereby generating incremental markets for raw materials,
value addition and employment. Fund co-investments will be awarded
on a competitive basis, for equipment, transportation and marketing,
environmental management, staff training and technical advisory
services to farmers.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
15. The CSSP will be implemented over the six-year period from 2017 to 2023. The

project will adopt similar implementation arrangements to those used successfully
in other IFAD projects but with a greater role played by the responsible provincial
departments, supported by the PPCOs. In addition, great emphasis will placed on
the decentralization of resources to districts and communes and on private sector
involvement.

B. Organizational framework
16. CSSP will be implemented through the PPCs of Bắc Kạn and Cao Bằng, which will

establish PPCOs to coordinate project implementation in their respective provinces
and steering committees to assist the PPCs in guiding government agencies, major
nationwide organizations, the private sector and communities at all levels to
achieve the project objectives. Inter-provincial PPCO meetings will be held twice
per year to foster cooperation in such areas as climate change-adaptation policy,
the identification of shared technical assistance, inter-provincial value chain
planning, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), and learning and knowledge
management.

17. Planning, monitoring and evaluation. The M&E system will monitor
performance and assess the impact of activities. Monitoring will focus on
activities/inputs, outputs, outcomes, performance and risks, while evaluation will
assess the relevance, efficiency, effectiveness and impact on poverty reduction,
business growth, environment, empowerment, sustainability, lessons learned and
knowledge uptake. Both provinces have relevant M&E experience from previous
projects. The M&E system will cover the operational and financial aspects of the
project alike. The annual workplan and budget will be the key planning document
for the project and will be harmonized with the SEDP cycle.

18. Learning and knowledge management. This will comprise two approaches:
(i) knowledge management within the project will support learning among its
components; and (ii) support for a broader set of knowledge management
activities aimed at informing government decision-makers and influencing policy.
Regarding policy development, the experience of a single province, while
important, is unlikely to influence national policy relating to the MOP-SEDP or APIF.
However, the cumulative knowledge from relevant IFAD project experiences in
Viet Nam is substantial and will continue to grow. In this context, each PPCO will
produce an annual knowledge resource addressing the key areas of the IFAD
country programme – namely, private sector investment in upland areas, the
response of poor households to agricultural business opportunities, the
implementation of the MOP-SEDP process and the evolution of WDFs into MFIs – to
feed into national policy dialogue.



C. Financial management, procurement and governance
19. Financial management. The PPCOs will be responsible and accountable to the

Government of Viet Nam and IFAD for the proper use of funds, in line with the
respective legal agreements, subsidiary financing agreements for financial
institutions and contractual arrangements for service providers. The project
financial management arrangements will ensure that funds are used for the
intended purpose in an efficient and cost-effective manner through internal controls
and capacity-building at all levels. The existing computerized accounting system
will be used for bookkeeping and reporting. The accounting systems will provide
detailed financial statements of the operations, resources and expenditures related
to the project for each fiscal year, prepared in accordance with standards and
procedures acceptable to IFAD, and deliver such financial statements to IFAD in a
timely manner. The IFAD financial management assessment rated the fiduciary risk
as medium. However, both provinces have extensive experience in managing
externally financed projects, including IFAD-financed projects, with good outcomes
and accountability frameworks in general.

20. Flow of funds. IFAD will disburse funds in accordance with the terms and
conditions of the financing agreement. Project funds will flow from IFAD via three
designated accounts: two for loan funds and one for grant funds, the latter
operated by the Ministry of Finance in accordance with imprest fund arrangements.

21. Procurement. The procurement of goods, works and consulting services financed
by IFAD will be carried out in compliance with IFAD Project Procurement Guidelines.
National procurement procedures, processes and regulations will be applied to the
extent that they are consistent with the IFAD Guidelines.

22. Internal control and external audit. Internal control systems at the PPCO level
will be established. An external audit will be carried out, in compliance with the
International Standards on Auditing and the IFAD Guidelines on Project Audits, of
the consolidated financial statements of both provinces covering loan and grant
funds. Independent external auditors will be appointed in a timely way. The audited
financial statements and audit reports will be submitted to IFAD within the six
months following the close of each fiscal year.

23. Governance. All major cofinancing allocations will be endorsed by the project
steering committee, approved by the PPC and, above certain thresholds, subject to
no objection from IFAD. Cofinancing at the commune level will be the result of an
open and equitable SEDP-based decision-making process that includes a
dispute-resolution mechanism. The IFAD Country Office capacity in project financial
monitoring was strengthened by the recruitment of an additional staff member in
mid-2013, improving the capacity for periodic oversight and support for PPCOs,
including spot checks and strong supervision of audit processes.

D. Supervision
24. The project will be directly supervised by IFAD through the country office in

accordance with the existing arrangements in Viet Nam.

IV. Project costs, financing, and benefits
A. Project costs
25. The total project cost is estimated at US$74.3 million. Indicative component costs

are detailed in table 1. Indicative project costs by expenditure category and
financier are provided in table 2.


Table 1
Indicative project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component

IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries
Borrower/

counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Province-based participatory planning
institutionalized 2,193.8 27.2 - - 5857.7 72.8 8,051.5

1.1 Strategic investment plan 108.0 77.0 - - 32.2 23 140.2
1.2 Climate change adaptation plan 944.6 75.9 - - 299.9 24.0 1,244.5
1.3 Climate-informed, market-
oriented socio-economic plans 1,141.2 17.1 - - 5525.7 82.8 6,666.8

2. A greener agricultural future 8,654.7 62.7 - - 3,557.3 25.8 1,582.8 11.4 13,794.9
2.1 Forest land and forest allocation 1,626.2 63.8 - - 232.3 9.1 691.1 27.1 2,549.7
2.2 CIGs for climate adaptation 7,028.5 62.5 - - 3,325.0 29.6 891.7 7.9 11,245.1

3. Profitable farms linked to finance and
markets 29,933.3 70.0 - - 7,183.7 16.8 5,670.2 13.3 42,787.2

3.1 Community infrastructure 21,330.8 69.2 - - 3,984.1 12.1 5.513.5 17.9 30,828.4
3.2 Rural financial services 4,557.8 96.7 - - - 156.6 3.3 4,714.4
3.3 Agriculture promotion
investment fund 4044.7 55.8 - - 3,199.6 44.2 - - 7,244.3

4. Programme management 7,718.3 18.7 - - - - 7,486.5 81.3 9,204.8
5. NTP-NRD National Coordination
Office Grant - - 500.0 100.0 - - - - 500.0

Total 42,500.0 57.2 500.0 0.7 10,741.0 14.4 20,597.2 27.8 74,338.3

B. Project financing
26. The project will be financed by: (i) an IFAD loan of approximately US$42.5 million

(57.2 per cent of total project); (ii) an IFAD grant of approximately US$0.5 million
(0.7 per cent); (iii) a government contribution of approximately US$20.6 million
(27.8 per cent); and (iv) a beneficiary contribution of approximately
US$10.7 million (14.4 per cent). Reimbursement of eligible expenditures incurred
after approval but before entry into force will be permitted up to a limit of
US$300 000 for each province.

Table 2
Indicative project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure
category

IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries Borrower/ counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Civil works 14.5 90.0 - - - - 1.6 10.0 16.2

2. Equipment and
materials

1,227.0 90.0 - - - - 136.3 10.0 1,363.3

3. Vehicles 94.2 50.0 - - - - 94.2 50.0 188.3

4. Consultancies 2,675.9 33.3 500.0 6.2 - - 4.862.0 60.5 8,041.5

5. Training 1,765.1 46.7 - - - - 2,015.9 53.3 3,781.0

6. Grants 32,969.6 66.2 - - 10,741.0 21.6 6.096.2 12.2 49,906.9

7. Credit 3,750.0 100.0 - - - - - - 3,750.0

5. Salaries and
allowances

- - - - - - 3,806.8 100.0 3,806.8

6. Operating costs - - - - - - 3,584.2 100.0 3,584.2

Total 42,500.0 57.2 500.0 0.7 10,741.0 14.4 20,597.2. 27.8 74,338.3


C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
27. The economic analysis determined CSSP to be robust, with an economic internal

rate of return (EIRR) of 14.8 per cent and a net present value discounted at nine
per cent of approximately US$27.0 million. An increase in project costs by
10 per cent would reduce the EIRR to 13.2 per cent, while a decrease in overall
project benefits by 20 per cent would result in an EIRR of 11.3 per cent.
Considering the possibility of a combination of a 20 per cent reduction in
incremental benefits with a two-year delay in benefits, the EIRR would be reduced
to 8.0 per cent. The switching values indicate that the project would remain
economically viable if benefits decreased by 31 per cent or project costs increased
by 46 per cent.

28. The main benefits from CSSP are: (i) increased crop, forest and livestock
productivity and production that is more resilient to the impacts of climate change
as well as improved access to better and more affordable inputs and their
application; (ii) increased proportion of farm produce successfully marketed;
(iii) reduced losses during production and processing; (iv) enhanced value addition
along value chains and improved product quality; (v) enhanced access to
longer-term financial services and cofinancing for productive investments;
(vi) increased employment; and (vii) increased government tax revenues.

29. The project is expected to provide significant direct benefits to at least 135,000
people or 30,000 poor or near-poor households, each expected to grow its assets
by at least 20 per cent. This will be achieved through a combination of
capacity-building, technology transfer and access to finance, supported by
upgraded community infrastructure and cofinancing of innovative investments in
their farming value chain operations.

D. Sustainability
30. The project is focused on enhancing private sector activity and competitiveness in

the specific subsectors targeted for investment. The most important determinant of
the sustainability of such investments, and thereby of their expected benefits, is
their continued profitability. The approach adopted will provide strong grounds for
the expectation that a large majority of investments will endure. The main tools to
enhance prospects for private business sustainability include: (i) enhanced capacity
of government staff, farmers and private rural enterprise actors to analyse and
prioritize investment choices; (ii) rigorous scrutiny of business proposals and
collaborating financial institutions; (iii) the commitment of a substantial proportion
of investment from the client’s own financial resources; (iv) complementary public
investment in infrastructure to improve business conditions and reduce costs; and
(v) a focused investment approach within the communes provided by the
MOP-SEDP process.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
31. The main risk to the overall project objective relates to external macroeconomic

shocks. Such risks are ever present in a relatively open economy such as that of
Viet Nam, particularly when a high proportion of income is derived from export
revenue. At the national level, sound macroeconomic policies, including
market-determined exchange rates, are the main means to mitigate such risk. The
main mitigation measures at the project and enterprise levels are the emphasis on
sound project financial analysis, with emphasis on quality, high productivity and
low cost-per-unit output value. A major socio-economic risk relates to climatic
disaster. The project will advance the climate change-adaptation agenda and
ensure that all project-financed interventions are adapted to the changing climatic
conditions. The relatively weak private business environments in both provinces
pose a further significant risk. Both PPCs have agreed to work with CSSP to create
a more favourable business environment, including by benchmarking their
provincial performance against provinces with high competitiveness indices.


V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
32. The CSSP takes into account key IFAD policies and strategies relating to targeting,

gender, land, ethnic peoples and climate change contributing to the overall
objectives of the current Strategic Framework 2016-2025 and in particular to:
(i) a natural resource and economic asset base for poor rural women and men that
is more resilient to climate change, environmental degradation and market
transformation; and (ii) access for poor rural women and men to services to reduce
poverty, raise income and build resilience in a changing environment. Most
activities related to environmental impact fall under category B.

B. Alignment and harmonization
33. As noted above, the concept note for the CSSP was included in the COSOP project

pipeline and, as such, is aligned with the Government’s development priorities. The
programme underpins the NTP-NRD by supporting the development of market
options for the poor segments of the rural population, creating the necessary
change of mindset at the household level and building capacity to plan market
activities at the commune level.

C. Innovations and scaling up
34. The CSSP approach taken will consolidate and scale up the successes of past

interventions, within the strategic framework of the NTP-NRD, for which a
substantial increase in central government funding is anticipated. Innovations
related to climate-adapted and market-oriented participatory planning and poverty
reduction have been successfully piloted in various IFAD-supported projects in
Viet Nam, including in Bắc Kạn and Cao Bằng. While the commitment of project
provinces to these approaches is significant – particularly for the roll-out of a
provincial MOP-SEDP process – a more rigorous and better market-oriented
approach is required for the effective stimulation and sustainable financing of
private sector investment in agricultural production and value addition along
profitable value chains. IFAD is supporting the roll-out of WDFs in 11 provinces,
with support for these activities under CCSP a part of this scaling-up effort.

D. Policy engagement
35. Along with the World Bank, IFAD has been requested by the Ministry of Agriculture

and Rural Development to assist in an assessment of NTP-NRD phase one and
provide recommendations for phase two, for which the National Assembly has
allocated approximately US$3 billion. The final recommended framework was
submitted to the Government mid-2016. This initiative, along with the grant under
CSSP, provides ample opportunity to scale up IFAD’s collective experiences and
approaches to the national level.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
36. A project financing agreement between the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam and IFAD

will constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached.

37. The Socialist Republic of Viet Nam is empowered under its laws to receive financing
from IFAD.

38. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.



VII. Recommendation
39. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on blend terms to the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam in an amount equivalent to forty two million
five hundred thousand US dollars (US$ 42.5 million), and upon such terms
and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

FURTHER RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam in an amount equivalent to five hundred
thousand US dollars (US$0.5 million), and upon such terms and conditions as
shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President













































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the
Republic of Tunisia for the
Siliana Territorial Development
Value Chain Promotion Project

Republic of Tunisia

Siliana Territorial Development Value Chain Promotion
Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower/recipient: Republic of Tunisia

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture, Water Resources and Fisheries

Total project cost: US$34.2 million

Amount of IFAD loan
(under the performance-based
allocation system [PBAS] 2016-2018):

EUR 21.6 million (equivalent to approximately US$23.6
million)

Amount of IFAD grant
(under PBAS 2016-2018):

EUR 0.46 million (equivalent to approximately US$0.5
million)

Terms of IFAD loan: 18 years, including a grace period of five years and an
interest rate corresponding to the annual reference rate
set by IFAD semi-annually

Retroactive financing: For eligible expenses up to a maximum amount
equivalent to US$100,000 incurred after the date of
signing of the financing agreement up to the date of
effectiveness of the agreement

Contribution of borrower/recipient: US$7.6 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$2.5 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: IFAD



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing for the Republic of Tunisia for the Siliana Territorial Development Value
Chain Promotion Project, as contained in paragraph 42.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Tunisia for
the Siliana Territorial Development Value Chain
Promotion Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Economic and social context. Tunisia is a middle-income country in North Africa

covering an area of 164,000 km2, three quarters of which is characterized by an
aridity that is attenuated only in the northeast. The country occupies a
geo-strategic position in terms of trade outlets, particularly towards Europe and the
Mediterranean region. In 2014 the total population was 10,982,000, growing at
1.03 per cent yearly, of whom 50.2 per cent were women and 32 per cent lived in
rural areas, for an average density of 67 inhabitants per km2. However, distribution
of the population across the country is highly unequal, with 70 per cent living in the
urban and industrialized coastal area and the remaining 30 per cent in the rural and
agricultural interior.

2. Incidence of poverty. The poverty rate in Tunisia is an estimated 15.5 per cent,
meaning that some 1.6 million Tunisians live below the poverty line. The
predominantly rural regions of the centre-west and south-east are particularly
affected and increasingly lag behind the rest of the country. The Governorate of
Siliana, which is home to 223,100 people, more than half living in non-communal
environments, is among the most disadvantaged regions.

3. Agriculture and fishing. Beyond the key role it plays in the country’s food
security, this sector continues to occupy an important place in the Tunisian
economy, generating close to 10 per cent of GDP and contributing actively to job
creation – currently at 16 per cent of the national level – and to the balance of
payments through exports. Of a national total on the order of 162,000 km2, arable
land covers an estimated 10 million hectares, including 420,000 hectares under
irrigation and 75 per cent using water-saving equipment. There are currently
516,000 farms averaging 10.2 hectares. However, within this average there are
significant disparities: 53 per cent of farms are 5 hectares or less in size, while
3 per cent of farms have over 50 hectares and manage some 37 per cent of the
land. Livestock are raised by 71 per cent of farms.

4. Having benefited from a positive growth rate of 3 per cent per annum for many
years, the agriculture sector was hard hit by the crisis in global agricultural markets
that took place in 2007-2008. A recent analysis shows that the sector will need to
promote the evolution of agricultural policies and institutions, in addition to
overcoming a series of structural constraints accentuated by the effects of climate
change. A five-year plan for the sector covering the period 2016-2020 is under
preparation. Based on boosting competitiveness and the sector’s appeal for private
investors, the plan underscores promoting sustainable development of natural
resources, adaptation of production systems to climate change, value chain
development and competitiveness, modernizing farms, revising the framework of
incentives, and building the capacities of farmers’ organizations.



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

2

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

5. Strategic framework. In the absence of a consolidated strategic framework for
the sector, an effort has been made to seek the greatest possible alignment
between IFAD’s orientations and those of the Tunisian Government. A national
economic and social development plan is nearing completion and a national process
of dialogue should lead to preparation of a long-term vision for the agriculture
sector. Pending the finalization of this process, IFAD has prepared a country
strategy note to guide interventions during the period 2017-2018 until a country
strategic opportunities programme (COSOP) is prepared at the end of 2017.

6. Rationale. IFAD has intervened in the governorate by implementing two integrated
rural development projects that have laid the groundwork for ensuring the region’s
agricultural development. At the request of the Government of Tunisia, the Fund
proposes to finance a project that can build upon those gains, focusing on adding
value to the products of the region’s value chains offering the greatest potential, to
enable smallholder producers to capture any value added thus generated and to
create sustainable employment, either directly in connection with the value chains
selected or indirectly by developing related services. The choice of this type of
project is all the more justified by the fact that developing value chains and
improving their competitiveness is one of the priorities set by the five-year plan for
2016-2020.

7. The Siliana Territorial Development Value Chain Promotion Project (PROFITS) is
justified by the following: (i) the existence of significant agro-economic potential for
producing and adding value to the products of value chains, particularly those
involving tree growing, provided that smallholder operations are secured against
hazards and have their investment capacities supported at every level; (ii) the
weakness of governance and management on the part of actors upstream and
downstream of these value chains, as well as limited share of value added captured
and access to profitable markets; (iii) inadequate capacities to add value to these
products compared to current needs and potential, while investments in this area
would enable a larger share of value added to be captured locally; and (iv) the
existence of major discrepancies between producers in terms of technical and
economic skills as a result of ineffective public structures and approaches to
extension, justifying a technical and economic advisory assistance arrangement
combining the public and private spheres to benefit all value chain actors. Finally,
the approach selected is intended to generate more jobs, improve and diversify
income sources for vulnerable social groups and thus combat poverty with a view to
promoting an economy marked by social solidarity.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
8. Project area. The project will cover 35 sectors in five delegations in the southern

portion of the Governorate of Siliana,1 which is home to some of the country’s
poorest people. The project area comprises essentially mountain systems within the
geographical region of the Tunisian dorsal, located between 600 and 1,300 metres
above sea level and suitable for fruit tree growing and livestock breeding.

9. Target group. There are 114,122 people living in the project area. The direct
beneficiaries will be 14,000 of the most disadvantaged households
(54,500 individuals, or half the area’s inhabitants) who have knowhow and work in
the agricultural economy, small family farms with up to 2 hectares of irrigated land
or 20 hectares of rainfed land practising extensive settled and/or pastoral (in
forests) livestock breeding with herds of up to 30 head of sheep and goats,
households involved in processing and adding value to value chain products, and

1 Bargou, Makhtar, Kesra, Er-Rouhia and Siliana South.



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

3

young men and women seeking employment and economic opportunities. In
addition, the project will target primary students with nutritional education.

10. Targeting strategy. Pro-poor, inclusive value chain development will be based on:
(i) creating an enabling environment for the inclusion of the poorest people,
including women and youth, by promoting communication with target groups, then
awareness-raising and training for value chain actors; (ii) geographical targeting
using the criteria indicated previously, refined by differentiation based on the
agroecological area and the value addition approach; (iii) direct targeting using
criteria to classify beneficiaries for the various activities and services set up by the
project, as discussed and defined with communities; (iv) self-targeting to identify
services and products within value chains that are adapted to each category of
beneficiaries: smallholder farmers, young people promoting small enterprises,
women; (v) quotas associated with support measures to ensure 30 per cent
participation by women and 20 per cent by young people; and (vi) operational
measures with responsible targeting, gender equality and nutrition to ensure
implementation of the project targeting strategy.

B. Project development objective
11. The overall objective of the project is to improve living conditions for vulnerable

rural people living in the southern part of Siliana, particularly by creating new
sustainable employment opportunities with value chain development and value
addition. The specific objectives are to sustainably develop value chains by taking
advantage of the diversity of unique terroirs in the region, with profitable inclusion
of organized smallholder producers, young people and women, and strengthening
the ability of smallholders to make effective and rational use of socio-economic
potential within value chains.

C. Components/outcomes
12. The project will be structured in two main components: (i) value chain promotion

and value addition; and (ii) creation of enabling conditions for value chain
development and strengthening with management/coordination arrangements.

 Component 1: Value chain promotion and value addition. The main outcome of
this component will be to enable value chain actors to identify opportunities to
develop the value chains concerned and coordinate their actions accordingly.
There are three subcomponents: (i) organizing value chain actors in production
areas; (ii) developing economic activities between value chain actors and
building capacities to add value to value chain products; and (iii) building the
actors’ professional capacities.

Subcomponent 1.1 calls for setting up spaces for consultation and dialogue
among all value chain actors and operators, in the form of value chain platforms,
leading to the participatory development of frameworks for action and the
establishment of win-win partnerships between value chain actors.

Subcomponent 1.2 will consist of supporting value chain actors to prepare and
implement business plans with other private and public actors, to develop each
value chain as a whole and to improve the overall value added and distribute it
more equitably, benefiting smallholder farmers. These business plans may
encompass a whole range of activities and may receive project support in the
form of strengthening and economic assistance to bring them to fruition. Such
activities will involve, in particular, support for farms to convert to tree growing
and engage in livestock-related activities, as well as start-up microenterprises in
production and services. All activities will be piloted by agricultural development
groups (GDAs). The subcomponent also calls for making available to existing or
future mutual agricultural services societies (SMSA), based on value chain action
frameworks, value addition units to be built and equipped with project funding.



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

4

These value addition units will be managed by the SMSA, which will receive
specialized technical assistance from the project.

Subcomponent 1.3 will involve mainly capacity-building for value chain actors,
particularly GDA and SMSA.

 Component 2: Creating enabling conditions for value chain development in an
improved institutional environment, by setting up arrangements for private
technical and economic advisory assistance for producers organizations and
financing the repair or construction of infrastructure needed for value chain
development – irrigated perimeters, new tracks for market access, catchment
lakes and restructuring of rural landholdings. Within this component efforts will
also be made, through participatory policy dialogue among all actors within value
chain platforms, to support the identification by the latter of obstacles to value
chain development and propose improvements to the legal and procedural
framework to address them. There are three subcomponents: (i) setting up
sustainable arrangements for technical and economic advisory assistance and
service provision; (ii) building public infrastructure relating to the value chains;
and (iii) consultative dialogue on policy and on the legislative and regulatory
framework for value chains.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
13. PROFITS will operate under a value chain approach to promote win-win

partnerships between actors in the selected value chains and the creation of local
economic development hubs. Thus, the Government will intervene essentially in
support of organized smallholder producers by implementing two components:
(i) direct support to private value chain actors based on the implementation of their
business plans and their professionalization through capacity-building, and based
on setting up local value chain platforms as inter-professional spaces for exchange
and orientation (component 1); and (ii) indirect support to create enabling
conditions for value chain development, specifically by setting up support structures
– in particular, innovative technical and economic advisory assistance
arrangements, including management councils and physical infrastructure – and
promoting policy dialogue (component 2). Although this is not an environmental or
youth employment project per se, it will address these concerns – e.g. by
supporting the conversion of cereal growing areas to the selected value chains,
which are more labour-intensive and more environmentally friendly, with technical
advice oriented towards organic agriculture and a rational use of chemical inputs.
The value chain professionalization dynamic will open up prospects for both direct
employment for skilled labour and indirect employment in the provision of services
and advice.

B. Organizational framework
14. Project management will take place at three levels. The central coordination unit

(CCU), which already exists at the Investment Financing and Professional
Organizations Directorate (DGFIOP) of the Ministry of Agriculture, will provide
central project coordination. At the regional level, a rural development division
(RDD), or another structure responsible for project execution will be created within
the Regional Commission for Agricultural Development in Siliana (CRDA). The RDD
will be assisted locally by light project implementation coordination structures
based on territorial outreach units. Project management and socio-professional
organization capacities of these structures will be strengthened with external
technical assistance.

15. For steering and coordination, plans call for setting up three coordination
structures: (i) a national steering committee; (ii) a regional coordination and
steering committee; and (iii) a local coordination committee set up for each



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

5

delegation. In addition, a regional technical committee will be set up to coordinate
the steering of arrangements for technical and economic advisory assistance.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, learning and knowledge
management

16. Planning. Through the value chain platforms supported by the required technical
assistance and specialized expertise, plans call for developing an action framework
for each value chain, then business plans for farmers organizations or other
operators within the value chains outlining investments, implementation modalities
and physical and financial participation by the different actors. These planning
instruments will identify the investments with the best returns for the target
population, with business plans for different types of upstream and downstream
investment.

17. The annual workplan and budget (AWP/B) will be prepared by DPCDR jointly
with the CRDA technical services and project partners, based on the design report,
COSTAB projections adjusted to reflect actual figures, value chain action
frameworks, priority needs of beneficiaries formulated within the platforms,
implementation capacities, budget allocations and recommendations by supervision
missions.

18. The M&E system will be set up on the basis of the system implemented by DGFIOP
for the Natural Resource Management Project (PGRN 2) funded by the World Bank,
already installed for the IFAD-funded second phase of the Agropastoral
Development and Local Initiatives Promotion Programme for the South-East
(PRODESUD-II) and the Agropastoral Value Chains Project in the Governorate of
Médenine (PRODEFIL). This system will make it possible to define: (i) planning for
activities and budgets; (ii) monitoring of physical and financial gains and their
impact on project management and logical framework indicators; (iii) evaluation of
results effectiveness by analysing outcomes and achievement times, and efficiency
based on performance on the cost of achievements; (iv) evaluation of results
disaggregated by specific target group, e.g. women and young people; and
(v) monitoring of disbursements. The system will be adapted during year one of the
project to take account of these specificities and indicators of results and impact
from the logical framework and the Results and Impact Management System
(RIMS). Preparation of the baseline study and adaptation of the M&E system will be
undertaken using retroactive financing so that the baseline study is available prior
to actual project start-up.

19. Knowledge management. The project will disseminate innovations and lessons
learned at workshops, seminars and round tables and in radio and television
broadcasts, as well as opinion surveys of beneficiaries on the effects and impact of
project achievements, publication and dissemination of documents, brochures and
other media on the project and its results – which will serve as sources of
information and orientation for the preparation and planning of other development
projects in similar areas elsewhere in the country. A website will be created for this
project.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
20. Financial management. The flow of funds for the project will proceed as provided

for in the financing agreement through the designated account. The Siliana CRDA,
delegated by the Ministry of Investment and International Cooperation and the
Ministry of Agriculture, will issue disbursement and payment orders drawn on IFAD
accounts and designated accounts at the Central Bank of Tunisia. Two designated
accounts will be opened at the bank, one for the loan and one for the grant.

21. Based on the experience acquired by IFAD in the country, the Government’s
intention to combat corruption and the reforms under way on fiscal management,
risk evaluation in connection with financial management and governance indicators



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

6

shows that the overall fiduciary risk is considered moderate. This risk will be
mitigated with a series of measures set as disbursement conditions: (i) drafting of a
decree to set up the regional development planning and coordination unit within the
RDD or another structure responsible for project execution within the CRDA;
(ii) designation, in agreement with IFAD, of key project staff, namely the project
coordinator, value chain manager, five local coordinators, an M&E officer and
accountant; (iii) installation of integrated accounting management and M&E
software; and (iv) preparation of an operational and financial management manual
for the project.

22. Disbursements. The IFAD loan and grant proceeds will be disbursed over six
years, based on the disbursement categories and amounts specified in annex 2 of
the financing agreement. Withdrawals of funds from the loan and grant accounts
will take place on the basis of the corresponding contracts and invoices. Other
eligible expenses will be justified by certified expense statements, and supporting
documents will be kept for verification by the external auditor and supervision
missions.

23. Procurement. Project procurement will be done in accordance with the provisions
of the IFAD procurement guidelines approved by the Executive Board in September
2010. As part of the PRODEFIL design, approved in 2014, IFAD evaluated national
regulations on procurement to ensure their compatibility with IFAD guidelines.
Following the evaluation it was decided that the national regulations could be used.
Activities under direct management will not be financed under the project. The
borrower will submit a procurement plan to the Fund each year prior to the end of
October including proposed contracts, procurement methods and procedures for
prior review by IFAD as applicable.

24. Audit. The borrower will, in accordance with the procedures and criteria set forth in
the Fund’s project audit guidelines, have an audit of the accounts done each fiscal
year by the Comptroller General reporting to the Ministry of Finance and agreed by
the Fund, and will submit a certified copy of the audit report to the Fund within six
months following the end of the year under review. The report will also contain an
opinion on procurement modalities for contracts financed under the project. The
DPCDR will prepare semi-annual financial statements on the project activities, and
will ensure that the accounting books are kept in accordance with government
practices and procedures agreed by IFAD. In addition, internal control will be
provided by the relevant services of the Ministry of Agriculture, supported by the
Comptroller at the regional level. In view of the frequent delays in submission to
IFAD of the final audit report for projects under way, IFAD will undertake the
necessary monitoring and rigorous application of the relevant provisions.

25. Governance. The Tunisian procurement system is aligned with the fundamental
principles of procurement for IFAD-funded projects. These are as follows: open
competition, equity, impartiality, integrity, transparency, good governance and
anti-corruption measures. The general rule for awarding contracts is to use open
tender procedures, and direct contracting is both highly limited and strictly
regulated.

E. Supervision
26. The project will be supervised on an annual basis by IFAD, with support missions as

needed. Special attention will be paid to eligibility criteria for project activities in
terms of targeting poor people, particularly women and young people. The
composition of IFAD’s supervision and monitoring missions will also reflect the
status of progress made on the project components and activities, targeting and
gender equity considerations, as well as lacunae in terms of the project’s
organizational structures.



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

7

IV. Project costs, financing, benefits
A. Project cost
27. The total cost of the project, over a six-year duration and including physical and

financial contingencies, is estimated at US$34.245 million. Base costs are estimated
at US$30.806 million, or 89.9 per cent of total cost. Physical and financial
contingencies represent US$3.439 million, or 10 per cent of total cost and
11 per cent of base costs. Investment costs, in the amount of US$31.5 million,
represent 92 per cent of total cost. Operating costs are just US$2.772 million, or
8 per cent of total cost.
Table 1
Project cost by component and source of financing
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries
Borrower/
counterpart Total

Component Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Value chain promotion
and value addition 8 982 68.6 218 1.7 1 717 13.1 2 184 16.7 13 101 38.2
2. Creation of enabling
conditions for value chain
development 13 432 76.7 261 1.5 827 4.7 2 982 17.0 17 502 51.0
3. Coordination and
management 1 248 33.3 24 0.6 - - 2 467 66.9 3 687 10.8

Total 23 610 68.9 502 1.5 2 544 7.4 7 633 22.2 34 289 100.0

B. Project financing
28. The project will be financed as follows: an IFAD loan on ordinary terms in the

amount of US$23.6 million, or 68.9 per cent of total project cost; an IFAD grant for
US$0.5 million, or 1.5 per cent of total cost; a contribution by the Government in
the amount of US$7.6 million, or 22.2 per cent of total cost, and contribution by
beneficiaries in the amount of US$2.5 million, or 7.4 per cent of total project cost.

29. It was agreed that recruitment of technical assistance providers by the project may
take place upon signature of the financing agreement. Reimbursement for technical
assistance will be made once the agreement has entered into force and on the
condition that the expenditures incurred meet the criteria for admissibility under
section 4.08 of the General Conditions for Agricultural Financing.
Table 2
Project cost by category of expenditure and source of financing
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Category of expenditure
IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries

Borrower/
counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Consulting services 4 043 79.0 502 9.8 11 0.2 533 11.0 5 119 14.9
2. Training 1 022 89.0 - - - - 126 11.0 1 149 3.4
3. Equipment and
materials 6 761 63.3 - - 2 132 20 1 783 16.7 10 676 31.1
4. Vehicles 480 83.3 - - 96 16.7 576 1.7
5. Civil engineering works 11 305 82.4 - - 130 0.9 2 292 16.7 13 727 40.0
6. Operating fund - - - - 271 100 271 0.8
7. Salaries and benefits - - - - - - 594 100.0 594 1.7
8. Operating and
maintenance - - - - - - 2 177 100.0 2 177 6.3

Total 23 610 68.9 502 1.5 2 544 7.4 7 633 22.2 34 289 100.0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
30. The economic internal rate of return (EIRR) for the project is 17.1 per cent, which

is considered extremely satisfactory for a project that addresses the challenging



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

8

problems of natural resource management in the marginalized areas of Tunisia. All
project costs have been taken into consideration, including those of the
components for which not all benefits have been quantified, such as rural tracks,
groundwater protection and recharge, and piezometric monitoring of groundwater
aquifers.

D. Sustainability
31. The sustainability of the project achievements will be ensured by means of:

(i) capacity-building for the administration to internalize the value chain approach
and make value chains operate effectively; (ii) support and assistance to producers’
organizations to enable them to fully take on a leading role in the process of value
chain promotion and liaison between their members and value chain operators,
particularly commercial operators, and to sustainably manage the value addition
units made available to them; (iii) facilitating the development of sustainable
win-win partnerships among value chain actors and operators; (iv) supporting
promoters of small enterprises created and supported by the project to enable them
to manage them profitably and sustainably; (v) making the advisory assistance
arrangements set up by the project permanent by integrating them within the
structure of the administration in charge of agricultural extension; (vi) undertaking
policy dialogue on improving the value chain environment so that the private sector
can invest in the various value chain links, particularly downstream; and
(vii) capacity-building for GDA to properly manage and maintain the public
infrastructure financed by the project.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
32. The main risks identified and measures planned to mitigate them are as follows:

(i) inadequate human resources, in terms of number and skills, within CRDA and
the executing agencies, to be mitigated by making use of multi-disciplinary
technical assistance and strengthening the technical services of executing agencies;
(ii) uncertainty as to the decentralization process provided for in the constitution, to
be undertaken in the coming years, which could lead to a review of the powers and
remit of central and local structures. To address this risk, plans call for a midterm
review of the project’s organization chart based on the results of this process;
(iii) fragility of the socio-professional fabric and limited capacities of staff, to be
mitigated with capacity-building and support for these structures by specialized
assistance throughout project execution; (iv) ecological and environmental risks
relating to setting up new crushing units and upgrading abattoirs, which could be
mitigated by performing environmental impact assessments and adopting specific
treatment measures for the crushing units and abattoirs; and (v) risks relating to
the durability of the private advisory assistance arrangements, to be addressed
with a rigorous participatory selection of service providers, based on realistic
business plans and taking into account demand for advice, awareness-raising of
GDA and SMSA and informal groups on gradually taking over the costs of private
advice, support to GDA and SMSA for implementation of forms of remuneration for
private advice based on membership fees and charges added to the prices of
products delivered by their members.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
33. The project is aligned with IFAD’s Strategic Framework and will contribute to an

inclusive and sustainable rural transformation by: (i) building the productive
capacity of poor rural people within the selected value chains; (ii) raising the profits
of rural poor people through their market participation, support for business plan
development and relations with value chain actors, particularly market actors;
(iii) strengthening environmental sustainability and resilience of rural poor people
to climate change. The principles of the Fund’s policies on targeting, empowerment,



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

9

gender equality, innovation and knowledge transfer, scaling up and partnership are
equally upheld by this project.

B. Alignment and harmonization
34. Contribution by the project to country strategy objectives. The overall design

and intervention approach are fully aligned with the vision of implementing the
priority orientations of the Strategic Plan for National Development 2016-2020 now
nearing completion, in terms of poverty reduction, interregional balance and
improving youth employment. To this end, the development of agricultural value
chains involving the different actors and preserving the interests of vulnerable
groups is crucial to achieve those objectives, particularly in regions affected by
poverty, unemployment and degradation of natural resources.

35. Complementarity. The preparation of this project coincided with the formulation
of three new projects to operate mainly in Siliana but also in other locations, which
also call for supporting the development of agricultural and forest value chains.
They are as follows: (i) the Natural Resource Management Programme in
Vulnerable Rural Territories, piloted by the Agricultural Land Use and Protection
Directorate and supported by the French Development Agency (AFD) and the
French Global Environment Facility (FFEM); (ii) the Forest and Pastoral Value Chain
Development Project, coordinated by the Forestry Directorate and supported by the
World Bank; and (iii) the EPARD programme financed by the European Union. The
Governorate of Siliana is also involved in part through the Technical Assistance
Project for Sustainable Agricultural Development supported by the German Agency
for International Cooperation (GIZ). For these projects, value chain development is
an important lever for promoting both agricultural and non-agricultural activities
and strengthening the livelihoods and incomes of vulnerable people.

C. Innovation and scaling up
36. Innovations. The project as a whole is innovative in that it introduces a new

approach – the value chain approach – to territorial development. The main
innovations are as follows: (i) initiatives between value chain operators, such as
platforms bringing together value chain actors and operators leading to win-win
partnerships, with business plans materializing in the form of contracts between
operators at different links of the value chains; (ii) promotion of policy lobbying on
challenges facing value chains in connection with territorial development;
(iii) technical and economic advisory assistance arrangements for small-scale
operators to facilitate ownership of the value chain approach by producers and
improve their production standards and farm management; (iv) making available
pilot value addition units to groups of farmers (SMSA), to be managed by them;
and (v) use of specialized private technical assistance to implement the project.

37. The project will make the best use of these innovations through scaling up by
identifying interventions to be consolidated and expanded, scale of intervention,
evolution in the number of beneficiaries in the short, medium and long term;
drivers of expansion such as leaders and contextual incentives; secured resources
such as financing and natural, strategic, institutional, organizational and political
resources, partnerships and participatory knowledge management; and the
trajectories and pathways of such an approach.

D. Policy engagement
38. The value chain approach as a lever of sustainable territorial development is still

incipient, and the current vision is essentially centred around adding value to
certain strategic products. In terms of policy dialogue, actions to strengthen
farmers’ organizations and to promote and develop value chains will be analysed
and proposals formulated in order to contribute to: (i) initiatives and win-win
partnerships between value chain operators; (ii) synergies between territorial
development and value chains; (iii) adapted technical and economic advisory



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

10

assistance arrangements for family farms to promote ownership of the value chain
approach and improve farm management; (iv) management of value addition units
by groups of farmers (SMSA); and (v) setting up value chain platforms to put
forward reform proposals.

VI. Legal instruments and powers
39. A project financing agreement between the Republic of Tunisia and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as
appendix I.

40. The Republic of Tunisia is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

41. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Lending Policies and Criteria.

VII. Recommendation
42. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Republic of Tunisia in an amount equivalent to EUR twenty-one million six
hundred thousand (EUR 21,600,000), and upon such terms and conditions as
shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
Tunisia in an amount equivalent to EUR four hundred and sixty thousand
(EUR 460,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially
in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President




















































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of
Zambia for the Enhanced Smallholder
Agribusiness Promotion Programme

Republic of Zambia

Enhanced Smallholder Agribusiness Promotion
Programme

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of Zambia

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture

Total programme cost: US$29.672 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 15.5 million (equivalent to approximately
US$21.25 million)

Amount of IFAD grant: SDR 0.74 million (equivalent to approximately US$1.01
million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional: Maturity period of 40 years,
including a grace period of 10 years, with a service
charge of 0.75 per cent per annum

Cofinancier(s): Private sector, Indaba Agricultural Policy Research
Institute (IAPRI), Platform for Agricultural Risk
Management (PARM)

Amount of cofinancing: Private sector: US$3.46 million
IAPRI: US$0.51 million
PARM: US$0.20 million

Terms of cofinancing: Private sector: partners’ contribution
PARM: grant
IAPRI: In-kind technical assistance.

Contribution of borrower: US$2.01 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$1.23 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/119/R.22/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to Republic of Zambia for the Enhanced Smallholder Agribusiness
Promotion Programme, as contained in paragraph 55.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Zambia for
the Enhanced Smallholder Agribusiness Promotion
Programme

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Zambia is a landlocked country covering 752,618 km2 with a population of

16 million. Over 70 per cent are aged under 30 and the population grows at
3 per cent per year. While Zambia attained lower-middle-income country status in
2011, inequalities remain very high and poverty reduction has been slow.

2. During the 2010-2014 period, gross domestic product (GDP) grew at an average of
7 per cent. However, growth fell to 5 per cent in 2014 and 3 per cent in 2015,
largely due to lower copper prices and power outages. The Zambian kwacha (ZMW)
has undergone depreciation, from around ZMW 5.5/US$ in 2012 to ZMW 10/US$ in
2016.

3. Widespread and extreme rural poverty and high unemployment remain significant
challenges. Over 50 per cent of Zambians live below the poverty line and
41 per cent in extreme poverty. At 77 per cent, poverty in rural areas is three times
higher than in urban areas.

4. Agriculture and agroprocessing account for approximately 40 per cent of GDP and
12 per cent of exports, with agricultural production contributing approximately
21 per cent to GDP. Zambia has abundant arable land that is relatively fertile and
experiences good rainfall. The agriculture sector has a dual structure, comprising: a
small number (approximately 740 households) of large commercial farmers and
approximately 50,000 emerging commercial farming households; and
approximately 1.5 million smallholder farming households. There is a large
productivity gap between the commercial and smallholder subsectors. Bridging this
gap and linking farmers to expanding markets has major potential to drive rural
economic growth and poverty reduction.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

5. Connecting smallholder farmers to the flourishing agribusiness sector will allow
IFAD’s target group to share in the rising prosperity enjoyed in urban areas and the
rapidly growing demand for high quality food.

6. Zambia is plagued with a high level of child malnutrition, with stunting rates at
50 per cent and 46 per cent in rural and urban areas, respectively.1 Further
investment to support smallholder farmers is required to reduce poverty and
increase food and nutrition security. The Government favours the commercialization
of small-scale agriculture as a major driver of rural poverty reduction. Agribusiness
is encouraged to strengthen linkages between smallholder farmers and consumers
through increased private sector participation in service delivery, such as in input

1 Central Statistical Office – 2015 Living Conditions Monitoring Survey Key Findings.



EB 2016/119/R.22/Rev.1

2

supply, output marketing and agroprocessing. This calls for improved quality,
reliability and scale of production, especially from small and medium agricultural
enterprises. The policy framework promotes self-reliance among farming
households and encourages the development of partnerships among farmers,
government and the private sector.

7. The ongoing Smallholder Agribusiness Promotion Programme (SAPP) is making
significant progress towards smallholder commercialization and agribusiness
promotion. According to the SAPP 2015 midterm review (MTR), 26 per cent of
sampled households reported increased sales of agricultural commodities averaging
64 per cent per household. Approximately half of households reported increased
selling prices, while 98 per cent reported increased value of sales, and 69 per cent
increases due to value addition. Approximately a quarter of the sampled households
benefited from improved market linkages, while 69 per cent accessed extension
services in business-related issues. Household ownership of assets increased for
55 per cent of those sampled.

8. The SAPP MTR identified a number of lessons that would improve effectiveness and
inform the design of the proposed Enhanced Smallholder Agribusiness Promotion
Programme (E-SAPP):

(a) The need to forge commercial linkages between smallholders and emerging
commercial farmers and higher level value chain actors rather than rely on
the service provider model, which has proven costly and not very effective.

(b) The need to decentralize operations and rationalize institutional arrangements
within existing structures.

(c) The need to improve the skills of smallholder farmers and small and
medium-sized enterprises to identify business opportunities, develop business
plans and negotiate with private sector value chain actors.

(d) The potential of matching grant facilities (MGFs) to leverage significant
investments from the private sector when large enough to attract interest.

9. Under SAPP, the matching grant uptake was initially slow because: (a) the
development of grant guidelines was a protracted process; (b) the guidelines were
found to be too complex and some potential partners were deterred from
submitting applications; (c) the technical service provider used had no presence
close to the beneficiaries and had to rely on subcontracting; (d) a lack of
involvement of district staff meant there was limited knowledge about the grants at
district level; (e) when SAPP eventually involved district staff, they did not have the
capacity to advise communities in developing fundable proposals; (f) the
beneficiary cash contribution of 10 per cent deterred applications; and (g) potential
applicants for “large” grants found the size of these grants too small to attract their
interest.

10. E-SAPP will focus on building strong and sustainable partnerships aimed at
facilitating the transformation from subsistence farming to farming as a business.
The programme will build on SAPP’s achievements in developing sustainable and
profitable partnerships connecting farmers to commercial opportunities.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
11. E-SAPP has a multiple commodity focus and nationwide coverage. The selection of

the commodities will define the geographic focus of interventions. The programme
will focus on three commodity groups: (a) legumes (groundnuts, soybeans, beans
and cowpeas); (b) small livestock (poultry, goats, sheep and pigs); and (c) rice.
These were selected on the following basis: (a) over 70 per cent of smallholders
produce these commodities as both food and cash crops; (b) the commodities have



EB 2016/119/R.22/Rev.1

3

significant nutritional benefits; (c) they help fill the seasonal hunger period;
(d) they have high potential for commercialization through partnerships with the
private sector, efficiency gains and value addition; (e) there is a high level of
interest among market intermediaries; and (f) there is potential to deliver quick
results. However, the larger grants under the public-private-producer partnerships
(4Ps) facility will not be restricted to the above value chains or regions.

12. Target group: The Government classifies Zambia’s 1.5 million smallholder farming
households in three categories. Category A (subsistence farmers) will form the
majority of the target group. Category B (economically active) and C (commercially
oriented farmers) will also be targeted to help develop the programme’s
agribusiness linkages, considering that they are already producing a surplus for the
market. The programme will work with approximately 40,000 category A,
16,000 category B and 5,000 category C households.

B. Programme development objective
13. The programme development objective (PDO) of E-SAPP is to increase the volume

and value of agribusiness outputs sold by smallholder producers. The programme
goal is to increase the incomes and food and nutrition security of rural households
involved in market-oriented agriculture. This underlines the central importance of
food and nutrition in efforts to improve the lives of the rural population, but also
the ambition to reach beyond basic needs and increase incomes to enable
households to improve dwellings, send children to school and invest in agriculture.

C. Components/outcomes
14. The PDO will be achieved through three technical components.

15. Component 1: Enabling environment for agribusiness development will help to
establish an enabling policy and institutional environment for commercially oriented
agriculture and rural development. It will advance the capacity-building work
initiated by SAPP and help to address risk management issues. In addition,
subsector policies will be reoriented to integrate climate risk management.

16. Component 2: Sustainable agribusiness partnerships will build the capacity of
smallholders and their service providers to compete for, and implement, matching
grants. This is a key success factor to facilitate the integration of smallholder
farmers within value chains, promote their engagement in the MGF process and
improve their productivity, incomes and nutritional outcomes. This will be achieved
through nutritional education and training on farming as a business, as well as
extending and strengthening SAPP’s MGF experience within a 4P framework. There
will be three MGF windows: linkage of graduating subsistence farmers to markets;
enhancing micro, small and medium-sized agroenterprise (MSME) development;
and facilitating pro-smallholder agribusiness partnerships. They will support
interventions on the supply and demand sides alike to increase output, productivity,
quality and resilience.

17. Component 3: Programme implementation will be conducted through a
programme coordination office (PCO). E-SAPP will finance, in addition to the
planned activities, the PCO costs, office equipment, office consumables, and
vehicles and associated maintenance costs. It will provide PCO staff salaries,
training and technical assistance to address specific needs. The PCO will be
responsible for coordinating and monitoring programme activities, including:
financial management and reporting; procurement; the preparation of annual work
plans and budgets (AWPBs); and monitoring and evaluation (M&E)/knowledge
management. The PCO will conduct annual AWPB review meetings, annual outcome
surveys, biannual implementation reviews and annual knowledge-sharing
workshops. Results and learning-oriented reporting will be based on inputs from
beneficiaries and implementing partners.



EB 2016/119/R.22/Rev.1

4

III. Programme implementation
ApproachA.

18. Based on lessons learned from SAPP, the entry point for target clients will be the
market intermediaries. The focus will be on a “market pull” approach rather than
“supply push” approach. Market intermediaries include output off-takers, input
marketing, service provision and commodity associations. The 4P clients will be
larger agribusinesses, with the exclusion of commodities such as maize that are
heavily supported by the Government and other development partners. MSMEs will
also be targeted, especially in developing linkages with category B and C
households. The market intermediaries are the primary partners of E-SAPP, with
the smallholders as the beneficiaries. This approach offers opportunities for
sustainable scaling up and replication on the basis of commercial incentives.

19. E-SAPP will adopt a whole value chain approach to improve the economic surplus
by identifying areas where efficiency, productivity and quality can be improved. It
will use government institutions and private-sector partnerships as the entry point
through which to reach smallholder farmers and MSMEs. Implementation will span a
seven-year period, fully embedded in the Government’s decentralized system. The
programme will be harmonized with the IFAD country programme and initiatives of
the Government and other development partners. Potential collaboration is being
explored with the World Bank, the African Development Bank, the United States
Agency for International Development, the European Union, the United Kingdom’s
Department for International Development and the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations.

Operational frameworkB.
20. The Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) will be the executing agency and delivery systems

will be fully integrated into decentralized government structures. Implementation
arrangements will build on the mechanisms employed by SAPP, enabling a
seamless transition from SAPP to E-SAPP. The MoA Policy and Planning Department
will be responsible for administration and coordination, and supported by a
programme steering committee chaired by the Permanent Secretary of MoA or
his/her nominee.

Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning andC.
knowledge management

21. The logical framework will be used as a tool for planning and M&E, to ensure that
necessary information is available for management decision-making, and to
facilitate reporting to the Government, IFAD and stakeholders. Planning will be a
decentralized process, starting at the district level with the preparation of
commodity-specific plans, which will be aggregated into a programme-wide AWPB.
To ensure a truly aligned portfolio, AWPBs for all IFAD programmes will be
harmonized to capitalize on comparative advantages, minimize duplication,
encourage linkages between them and ensure the optimal use of resources.

22. The M&E system will build on the experience of SAPP and provide information that
informs management decision-making and reporting, including data for IFAD’s
Results and Impact Management System. Monitoring will focus on the activities
defined in the AWPB, and on creating a cumulative overview of results/outputs. The
M&E system will be decentralized under the oversight of a planning/M&E officer and
a knowledge management officer. Knowledge management will ensure a continuous
learning process in which data are compiled, analysed and disseminated as lessons
learned, along with thematic studies and stories from the field. Information-sharing
within the aligned portfolio will receive particular attention.



EB 2016/119/R.22/Rev.1

5

Financial management, procurement and governanceD.
23. Financial management. Transparency International’s Corruption Perceptions

Index rates inherent risk in Zambia as “medium”, characterized by improved
governance, increasing opportunities for the private sector, and some weaknesses
in public sector management. The fiduciary risk was assessed by IFAD as “high”
mainly due to persistent delays in justification from districts, with consequent
liquidity problems, accounting software not optimally functioning and internal audit
in need of strengthening; improved safeguard measures will therefore be put in
place to reduce risk to “medium”. E-SAPP will employ similar financial management
systems to those used under SAPP, including the accounting software. However,
E-SAPP procurement will be started in advance by another ongoing IFAD project.
Strong training and technical assistance will be provided from the outset. Coverage
of biannual internal programme audits will be included in the audit plan of the MoA
Internal Audit Unit, which will be included in E-SAPP start-up trainings. Internal
audit reports and action plans to implement audit recommendations will be shared
with IFAD as a reporting requirement. Financial reporting will be based on IPSAS2
standards.

24. A designated account denominated in United States dollars will be held at the Bank
of Zambia. Two operating accounts, one denominated in Zambian kwacha and the
other in United States dollars, will be held a commercial bank – the latter is
intended to mitigate foreign exchange risk and will be used for paying foreign
suppliers for contracts denominated in United States dollars and for foreign travel
costs.

25. To address the risk of delayed justification of expenditures by districts: transfers to
districts will be made on the basis of activity-tagged advances that must be retired
before subsequent releases; a system for monitoring advances to districts will be
included in the accounting software; and agents/assistants will be recruited at the
provincial level to follow up and facilitate the justification process and to ensure
expenditure reports and supporting documentation from the districts are collated
and submitted to the PCO on a timely basis.

26. The MGF will be managed by a service provider selected on the basis of relevant
experience, working under the supervision of the PCO. Community mobilization and
training will also be outsourced. The matching grants will be replenished upon each
disbursement to grantees, not once grantees have fully utilized the grants. A
performance-based payment schedule will be included in contracts, and grants will
be regularly monitored. Procedures will be included in the grant manual to
guarantee transparency and minimize the risk of malpractice. After allocation of the
grants under their respective windows, the borrower shall ensure that audits of the
grant allocation process, approval and use of grant funds are carried out by an
independent service provider acceptable to IFAD. Withdrawals from the grants
category may only be made on condition that IFAD has determined that such audits
are satisfactory.

27. Audit. The Office of the Auditor General of Zambia will conduct an external audit of
E-SAPP annually or will have the discretion to appoint an independent private audit
firm acceptable to IFAD. Internal control systems at the PCO level will be
established and MoA will maintain oversight through its Internal Audit Unit.
Supervision missions will review internal audit reports and assess management
responses to recommendations. Internal controls will also be verified during the
annual external audit by the Auditor General, and reported to IFAD in management
letters. The audit reports will be submitted to IFAD no later than six months after
the end of each fiscal year.

2 International Public Sector Accounting Standards – Cash Basis.



EB 2016/119/R.22/Rev.1

6

28. Procurement. National procurement procedures will be applied to the extent that
they are consistent with IFAD’s guidelines and provided they are assessed as
satisfactory or better. This applies to all procurement except international
competitive bidding for contracts above an agreed threshold. Procurement planning
will follow the templates in the IFAD Procurement Handbook as already adapted for
SAPP and the other IFAD-supported programmes in compliance with the Zambia
Public Procurement Authority (ZPPA). A procurement assessment of SAPP
operations resulted in a medium risk score, largely as a result of staffing challenges
facing the MAL’s Procurement and Supplies Unit (PSU), which tend to cause delays
in the procurement cycle, exacerbated by lengthy processes, including for the
approval of contracts by the Ministry of Justice. Measures to improve procurement
performance will include: the recruitment of a procurement specialist to support the
PSU; capacity-building for the PSU, ZPPA and the Ministry of Justice to address the
procurement delays; and the incorporation of procurement modules into the
financial management software.

SupervisionE.
29. IFAD and the Government will conduct supervision missions, normally every six

months, to assess achievements and lessons learned and reflect on ways to
improve performance. Implementation support will focus on planning, procurement,
financial management, M&E and the provision of technical assistance. The most
important skills to be provided include: value chain analysis; financial management
and procurement; M&E; poverty and gender analysis and targeting; and
programme management. Key issues likely to require the attention of the missions
will include: M&E, learning and knowledge management; implementation and
reporting delays; procurement; partnerships, beneficiaries and the private sector;
and capacity-building interventions.

IV. Programme costs, financing, and benefits
A. Programme costs
30. Total costs, including price contingencies, duties and taxes, are estimated at

equivalent to US$29.7 million, of which approximately US$1 million (3 per cent)
represents the foreign exchange content and US$1.2 million (4 per cent) duties and
taxes. Total base costs amount to approximately US$28.1 million, while price
contingencies account for an estimated US$1.5 million (5 per cent of base costs).
Investment costs account for 80 per cent of the base costs, and recurrent costs
20 per cent. Funds allocated to management and coordination amount to
approximately US$5.0 million (17 of total costs).



EB 2016/119/R.22/Rev.1

7

Table 1
Programme costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Borrower IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries Private sector Other financiers Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %
1. Enabling environment
for agribusiness
development growth
A. Agribusiness policy
development 99 4.4 1 251 56.0 65 2.9 - - 108 4.8 712.3 31.8 2 235 7.5
B. Institutional
strengthening for
agribusiness 277 17.1 1 119 69.0 227 14.0 - - - - - - 1 623 5.5

Subtotal 375 9.7 2 371 61.4 291 7.6 - - 108 2.8 712.3 18.5 3 858 13.0
2. Sustainable
agribusiness
partnerships
A. Strategic linkage of
graduating subsistence
farmers to markets 374 3.4 8 200 73.9 719 6.5 1 232 11.1 572 5.2 - - 11 098 37.4
B. Enhancing agro
MSME Development 369 5.7 4 255 65.3 - - - - 1,890 29.0 - - 6 515 22.0
C. Facilitating pro-
smallholder market pull
agribusiness
partnerships 150 5.1 1 895 64.6 - - - - 887 30.2 - - 2 932 9.9

Subtotal 894 4.4 14 350 69.9 719 3.5 1 232 6.0 3 349 16.3 - - 20 544 69.2
3. Programme
Implementation 737 14.0 4 533 86.0 - - - - - - - - 5 270 17.8

Total programme
costs 2 006 6.8 21 254 71.6 1 011 3.4 1 232 4.2 3 457 11.7 712.3 2.4 29 672 100.0

B. Programme financing
31. IFAD will fund the programme through a grant equivalent to approximately

US$1.01 million and a loan on highly concessionary terms in an amount equivalent
to approximately US$21.25 million. Grant-funded activities relate mostly to
capacity-building and facilitating the transition of households from category A to
category B, and eventually to category C. The Government will provide
US$ 2 million in cofinancing, in the form of taxes and duties, and beneficiaries
US$1.23 million, mainly in-kind. The private sector will contribute US$3.46 million
through share of the matching grants; the Indaba Agricultural Policy Research
Institute (IAPRI) approximately US$0.51 million through technical assistance for
policy development; and the Platform for Agricultural Risk Management (PARM)
US$0.2 million for agriculture risk management activities.



EB 2016/119/R.22/Rev.1

8

Table 2
Programme costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Borrower IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries Private sector IAPRI PARM Total
Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Investment Costs
A. Consultancies - - 1 587 68.9 585 25.4 132 5.7 - - - - - - 2 304 7.8
B. Equipment and
materials 21 16.0 108 84.0 - - - - - - - - - - 129 0.4
C. Works - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
D. Vehicles 355 41.3 505 58.7 - - - - - - - - - - 860 2.9
E. Workshops - - 335 47.1 104 14.6 103 14.4 108 15.2 62 8.7 - - 712 2.4
F. Training 749 20.7 1 120 31.0 321 8.9 283 7.8 1 145 31.6 - - - - 3 617 12.2
G. Goods, services
and inputs - - 3 252 100.0 - - - - - - - - - - 3 252 11.0
H. Grants and
subsidies - - 9 610 75.5 - - 715 5.6 2 204 17.3 - - 200 1.6 12 729 42.9
I. Unallocated - - 250 100.0 - - - - - - - - - - 250 0.8
Total investment costs 1 125 4.7 16 768 70.3 1 011 4.2 1 232 5.2 3 457 14.5 62 0.3 200 0.8 23 854 80.4
2. Recurrent costs
A. Operating costs 143 16.0 572 63.9 - - - - - - 180 20.1 - - 896 3.0
B. Salaries and
allowances 738 15.0 3 913 79.5 - - - - - - 270 5.5 - - 4 922 16.6
Total recurrent costs 882 15.2 4 485 77.1 - - - - - - 451 7.7 - - 5 817 19.6

Total
programme
costs

2 006 6.8 21 254 71.6 1 011 3.4 1 232 4.2 3 457 11.7 512 1.7 200 0.7 29 672 100.0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
32. The programme will promote the transformation of smallholder farmers from mainly

subsistence level to commercially oriented production by building sustainable and
profitable partnerships with agribusinesses. The economic rationale hinges on
improving smallholders’ integration within value chains through partnerships with
agribusinesses (the 4P approach) that provide improved access to technologies and
inputs, knowledge about improved technologies, better services and enhanced
marketing opportunities. The beneficiaries will be assisted in developing their
entrepreneurial and business capacity through access to technical support and
training.

33. The result will be: (a) increased productivity and product quality; (b) better and
more stable prices through participation in contract farming and/or outgrower
arrangements offering improved market access; (c) expanded farm size and wider
adoption of improved farming practices; (d) sustainable partnerships with the
private sector and enhanced access to services; and (e) added value through
aggregation, sorting, grading, drying and storage.

34. Direct programme beneficiaries. The primary beneficiaries will be approximately
61,000 smallholder households, in particular young people and households headed
by women. This includes 40,000 category A subsistence farmers; 16,000
economically active category B farmers; and 5,000 commercially oriented category
C farmers. Assuming an average household size of five, the total number of
beneficiaries will be approximately 305,000.

35. Indirect programme beneficiaries. A large number of smallholders will benefit
indirectly through the diffusion of knowledge about improved technologies, and
improved access to marketing services and business information. Consumers will
also benefit from more better quality products and better prices, with positive
effects on nutrition and food security. In addition, all those living in the areas where



EB 2016/119/R.22/Rev.1

9

E-SAPP is active will benefit from strengthened local economies, increased job
opportunities and the development of complementary economic activities
(e.g. input dealers).

D. Sustainability
36. Economic/income sustainability. The value chain/market-led approach will

foster entrepreneurship among smallholder farmers and their integration within
value chains. This will result in the orientation of smallholder groups and individuals
towards market opportunities and a lasting commitment among value chain
partners to enhance value creation. Linkages to markets will ensure that mainly
subsistence farmers have an outlet for their surplus production to assist them make
the transition to farming as a business. As long as the established linkages prove to
be profitable and mutually beneficial, the long-term outcomes will be sustainable.

37. Environmental sustainability will be enhanced through the application of
environmental standards by the MGF recipients, and the implementation of
environmental and social management plans as part of grant-funded activities. This
will be achieved through capacity-building in environmental and social procedures
and risk management. While beneficiaries will acquire tangible benefits from these
standards and plans, those results may not materialize in the short term. The
management team will oversee the Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF) to reinforce the benefits of integrating environmental
management practices and counteract trade-offs for short-term benefits that may
adversely affect the natural resource base. The ESMF will define the responsibilities
and benchmarks for monitoring environmental impacts and include feedback
mechanisms to incorporate any positive externalities.

38. Institutional sustainability. To ensure relevance, ownership and sustainability,
E-SAPP will mainstream planning, implementation and M&E into the Government’s
decentralized institutional frameworks and align them with national goals and
policies. Participating institutions will be supported and strengthened to build
institutional capacity (as per subcomponent 1.B) and sustainability. Communities
and grass-roots institutions will be mobilized and strengthened to build their
capacity for sustainability and to take ownership of programme interventions.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
39. The logical framework identifies the main risk areas, and risk monitoring forms part

of the M&E approach. The main risks and mitigation measures are detailed below.

40. There is a possibility that the pipeline of large-scale 4P grantees will not materialize
into grants uptake, due to lack of awareness or the existence of more attractive
grant facilities under other programmes. This risk will be mitigated through:
(a) promoting the existence and terms and conditions of the 4P grants;
(b) identifying potential grantees and inviting them to make applications; and
(c) collaborating with other development partners to ensure that the various
matching grant funds have harmonized terms and conditions. Discussions have
already been held with other development partners concerning this issue.

41. Extension teams at the district level and lower may not be adequately prepared to
identify and support potential MSME grant recipients. Among the lessons learned
from SAPP was that training on business and grant procedures focused on too
narrow a range of government staff. E-SAPP will ensure that marketing, general
and commodity specialist extension staff receive training in farming as a business,
engaging with the private sector and managing/overseeing the MSME grants.

42. The limited capacity of some institutions may delay implementation. To mitigate
this risk, the programme includes capacity-building for institutions facing identified
capacity challenges (subcomponent 1.B).



EB 2016/119/R.22/Rev.1

10

43. Private sector stakeholders may be reluctant to fully engage in the programme,
resulting in reliance by farmers on government institutions for services that could
be provided by the private sector. To mitigate this risk, the programme provides for
private sector representation on the programme steering committee. In addition,
the MGF service provider will play a catalytic role in private sector participation.

44. A delay in programme start-up would lead to the possibility of implementation
delays and a disbursement lag. To minimize this risk, IFAD and the Government are
taking steps to ensure a seamless transition between SAPP and E-SAPP.

45. A lack of good quality matching grant applications would result in the slow
disbursement of grant resources. The programme will provide training for
applicants, promote the MGF widely and identify potential grantees based on value
chain scoping studies.

46. Climate change and variability will potentially have a negative impact on
productivity, in particular of rainfed agriculture and where farmers have limited
resources to manage risks such as pests and diseases. Measures to reduce impacts
include capacity-building in climate risk management, and vulnerability analysis
that will inform the selection of value chains.

47. Fiduciary risk, as mitigated by the controls detailed in section III.D above, results in
medium assessment.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

48. E-SAPP will be implemented in compliance with IFAD’s Strategic Framework
2016-2025, as well as IFAD’s policies on natural resource management and climate
change. The programme recognizes the economic and social value of natural assets
through capacity-building for farmers in environmental management, and the
criteria used in the selection of MGF partners. It will support climate-smart
approaches and defines minimum standards for grantees in relation to climate
resilience and capacity-building on environmental, social and climate risk
management. It will also adhere to the principle of livelihood diversification to
reduce vulnerability and build resilience. E-SAPP is also compliant with IFAD’s
Targeting Policy (2006) and Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment Policy
(2012). Of the 10,000 market-ready poor households to be targeted, at least
30 per cent will be headed by women and 25 per cent by young people. Moreover,
the nutrition focus is aligned with IFAD’s commitment to nutrition-sensitive
interventions and mainstreaming nutrition.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
49. The programme supports the Government’s policy on reducing poverty through

smallholder commercialization in conjunction with private sector partners. Within
this framework, MoA is expected to focus on its core functions, which include policy
formulation, legislation and regulation. The programme has been developed in
consultation with partners engaged in improving agricultural productivity and
market linkages. Relevant partners will be invited to participate in the screening
and selection of commodities, the mapping of selected value chains, and the
development and implementation of intervention plans.

Innovations and scaling upC.
50. E-SAPP builds on IFAD experience as a 4P endeavour aiming to reduce rural

poverty by stimulating rural economic development through the transformation of
smallholder producers (including subsistence farmers) into profitable small-scale
commercial farmers. It seeks to improve the effectiveness of policies and practices
to accelerate the growth of farming as a business among Zambia’s 1.5 million
smallholder households. The programme will enhance the focus on women and



EB 2016/119/R.22/Rev.1

11

young people as priority target groups and support the mainstreaming of
nutrition-sensitive agriculture/agribusiness.

Policy engagementD.
51. Policy engagement is an integral part of the programme in recognition of the need

for a conducive and inclusive institutional framework for the agribusiness sector
that involves smallholders in policy from design to implementation. The programme
will support the Government in establishing an enabling policy and institutional
environment for commercially driven agriculture and rural development, and help
put structures in place to address agricultural risk management-related issues.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
52. A programme financing agreement between the Republic of Zambia and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as
appendix I.

53. Republic of Zambia is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

54. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
55. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Republic of Zambia in an amount equivalent to fifteen million five hundred
thousand special drawing rights (SDR 15,500,000), and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
Zambia in an amount equivalent to seven hundred and forty thousand special
drawing rights (SDR 740,000) and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President





















































President's report

Proposed loan and grant to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo for the North Kivu
Agriculture Sector Support Project (PASA-NK)


Democratic Republic of the Congo

North Kivu Agriculture Sector Support Project (PASA-NK)

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower/beneficiary: Ministry of Finance

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Livestock

Total project cost: US$52.974 million

Amount of IFAD loan under the 2013-
2015 performance-based allocation
system (PBAS) allocation:

SDR 12.10 million (equivalent to approximately
US$16.89 million)

Amount of IFAD grant under the 2013-
2015 PBAS allocation:

SDR 12.10 million (equivalent to approximately
US$16.89 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional: repayment term of 40 years,
including a grace period of 10 years, with a service
commission of 0.75 per cent per annum

Cofinancier: OPEC Fund for International Development (OFID)

Amount of cofinancing: OFID: US$9.718 million

Contribution of the borrower/
beneficiary: US$5.950 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$3.528 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/116/R.15/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Democratic Republic of the Congo for the North Kivu Agriculture
Sector Support Project (PASA-NK), as contained in paragraph 49.

Proposed loan and grant to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo for the North Kivu Agriculture Sector Support
Project (PASA-NK)

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country, rural development and poverty context
1. Following several decades of political instability, insecurity and economic

devastation, the Democratic Republic of the Congo is enjoying robust economic
growth and a stable macro-economic framework. Agricultural and mineral
resources are vast, among the largest in sub-Saharan Africa. The country has an
area of 2.34 million km² and a population of about 71 million, close to 70 per cent
of whom live in rural areas.

2. Growth in GDP, which has improved significantly since 2010, is greater than 7 per
cent. In addition to agriculture, which employs 64 per cent of the active population
and generates 33.4 per cent of GDP (Central Bank of the Congo, 2013), the most
important sectors are trade (22 per cent) and mining (12 per cent).

3. Economic growth, in tandem with public investment in the health and primary
education sectors, has enabled the Democratic Republic of the Congo to reduce the
incidence of poverty from 71.34 per cent in 2005 to 63.4 per cent in 2012. The
rural poverty rate remains high at 69 per cent in 2012. Food and nutritional
insecurity remain at alarmingly high levels: 54 per cent of rural households are
food-insecure, 43 per cent of children under five are chronically malnourished and
8 per cent suffer from acute malnutrition.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and the
RB-COSOP

4. The country strategic opportunities programme (COSOP) 2012-2016 set two
strategic objectives: (i) improve smallholder farmers' access to effective production
services, appropriate technologies and local markets; and (ii) professionalize
farmers' organizations so that they can become economic partners with private
enterprises in rural areas.

5. PASA-NK is aligned with both COSOP strategic objectives, and will strengthen
portfolio results in terms of sustainable access by smallholder farmers to inputs
and markets, remuneration of agricultural products at more advantageous prices
for farmers (the COSOP calls for a 30 per cent increase) and stability of apex
producer organizations (POs). PASA-NK will also balance the distribution of IFAD-
cofinanced operations in the country's western and eastern regions.

6. The Government intends to develop inclusive value chains, in addition to
investments now under way in agro-industrial complexes (Nsele agro-industrial
zone and Bukanga-Lonzo agro-industrial park). This intention is fully aligned with
the National Agricultural Investment Plan (PNIA) and the aims of promoting value
chains in agriculture and agro-industry. The Government's vision and the strategic
objectives of the programme cofinanced by IFAD in the Democratic Republic of the



EB 2015/116/R.15/Rev.1

2

the Congo converge in North Kivu to remove the financial, institutional and physical
constraints now faced by the people living in the province.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
7. As indicated by its name, PASA-NK will be implemented in the province of North

Kivu, and more specifically in the territories of Beni, Lubero, Rutshuru, Nyiragongo
and Masisi. Activities will involve one or two crops in each of the territories
targeted.

8. North Kivu province falls within the post-conflict territories located to the country's
east, and covers an area of close to 60,000 km². The population in 2014 was an
estimated 6.5 million people, 88 per cent of them living in rural areas where the
population density is more than 100 habitants par km². According to the Human
Development Index, the province is ranked 10th of 11 provinces. An estimated 70
per cent of poor people in the province live in rural areas.

9. PASA-NK covers production and commercialization of four crops: maize, rice,
potato and Arabica coffee. The crops were selected on the basis of the following
criteria: (i) number of producers involved; (ii) potential for growth in production
and productivity; (iii) existence of expanding markets accessible to smallholders:
local, national, subregional and international markets, including fair trade niche
markets; (iv) potential for improving incomes and value added; (v) potential for
integration of vulnerable groups such as women, unemployed rural young people
and landless poor people; and (vi) presence in the subsector of a public service,
NGO or lead apex PO to provide technical guidance and other economic services.

10. Based on the four selected value chains, five lead organizations have been selected
to play a leading role in project implementation: (i) the Central Cooperative of
North Kivu (COOCENKI) for maize, to implement project activities in Rutshuru
territory; (ii) the League of Women Farmers Organizations of the Congo
(LOFEPACO) for rice, in Beni territory; (iii) the Farmers Union (SYDIP) for potato, in
Lubero, Masisi and Nyiragongo territories; (iv) the Federation of Agricultural
Producers Organizations of the Congo (FOPAC), for PO capacity-building and
advocacy; and (v) the NGO VECO for the Arabica coffee value chain, given the
tangible results it has achieved, to develop economic services for gourmet coffee in
Beni and Rutshuru.

11. PASA-NK will target, first and foremost, poor and very poor households who will
benefit from financial support granted by the project to facilitate access to
improved seed and fertilizer and agricultural advisory assistance. Storage and
processing activities will benefit all households. Activities to develop coffee growing
will affect poor, less poor and wealthy households owning coffee plantations. Poor
households will be defined as follows: (i) cultivated area of less than 1 ha;
(ii) livestock (type and number) of less than 5 head; (iii) transportation by bicycle
or scooter; and (iv) widows heads of household. Lead POs have suggested that
additional criteria be added, such as: (i) farmers working an area of at least 0.25
ha in a single location; and (ii) victims of domestic or sexual violence. A total of
28,400 households will benefit directly from the project activities.

B. Project development objective
12. The main objective of PASA-NK is to sustainably improve food security and incomes

among participating households. The development objective is to improve
productivity and profitability for four crops produced by smallholders – maize, rice,
potato and Arabica coffee.

C. Components/outcomes
13. Component 1: Capacity-building for actors supporting agricultural value

chains. Component 1, representing 58.1 per cent of total project cost, is divided



EB 2015/116/R.15/Rev.1

3

into three subcomponents: (i) development of economic services provided by POs;
(ii) institutional strengthening for POs; and (iii) support for the public sector. The
outcomes of these three subcomponents will be: (i) economic services provided by
POs are viable and appreciated by farmers; and (ii) the performance of provincial
public services in support of producers has improved.

14. Component 2: Support for rural infrastructure. Component 2, representing
22.5 per cent of total project cost, is divided into two subcomponents:
(i) rehabilitation of agricultural access roads; and (ii) capacity-building for
provincial and territorial coordination by the Agricultural Access Roads Division
(DVDA). The expected outcome is a reduction in the cost and time taken to
transport goods.

III. Project execution
A. Approach
15. PASA-NK calls for professionalizing POs around economic services to improve

smallholder access to agricultural inputs and markets and, accordingly, boost
agricultural productivity and incomes. These economic services comprise: (i) for
maize, access to improved seed, provision of advisory assistance, and storage and
warehousing to facilitate deferred group sales synchronized with periods of higher
prices for maize; (ii) for rice, access to improved seed and fertilizer, provision of
advisory assistance, storage and warehousing, and support for the LOFEPACO rice
mill; (iii) for potato, production of improved variety mini-tubers, access to fertilizer,
provision of advisory assistance, collection and sales facilitation for wholesalers;
and (iv) for coffee, improved variety nurseries, provision of advisory assistance,
washed coffee processing, facilitation of organic and fair trade certification, and
facilitation of quality green coffee sales on niche markets.

16. Based on this vision, the project will be implemented in accordance with the
following underlying principles:

17. Business plans. All lead POs will organize their interventions at the value chain
level based on business plans demonstrating the profitability of economic services
offered to their members. The economic services will be organized around weak
links in the maize, rice, potato and coffee value chains.

18. Financial terms. The project will trigger and support a virtuous process of
development within which POs will be assisted in undertaking economically viable
activities. In order to be viable, such activities must be based on a sound
mechanism for access to production factors, processing and commercialization.

19. Contractualization. This will be one of the building blocks of business plan
implementation by POs. Contractualization will govern relations with other actors
within the targeted food value chains: processors, traders, input suppliers and
other service providers.

20. Gradualism and sequencing of interventions. The project will be implemented
in the post-conflict area, where people are readjusting to stability. As a result,
project interventions and support will be organized in a prudent, gradual and
sequenced manner to ensure that each stage is properly managed and brings the
desired results.

B. Organizational framework
21. PASA-NK will be under the oversight of the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and

Livestock. The provincial Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development of North
Kivu will become a member of the existing steering committee. The project will be
coordinated by a project coordination unit (PCU) with administrative and financial
management autonomy, based in Goma.



EB 2015/116/R.15/Rev.1

4

22. To facilitate project start-up, IFAD will provide the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries
and Livestock – as oversight agency – with a start-up advance of US$650,000 from
the grant proceeds, to: (i) recruit PCU staff and international technical assistants
who are to train the PCU to ensure ownership of the project objectives and
approach; (ii) put in place basic tools needed for first disbursement; and
(iii) undertake the baseline study to ensure that results are available as of year
one.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

23. Annual planning for the project will begin with an evaluation of business plan
execution by the economic services for the four value chains. This will establish
high-level direction to plan for the following year and update the business plans, as
part of the process of participatory self-evaluation and preparation of the annual
workplan and budget (AWP/B). The AWP/B for the following year will be based on
the updated business plans for each value chain, subsequent preparation of the PO
institutional strengthening plan, the scope of public services provided and
engagement with the private sector, based on the new business plan targets. The
planning of rehabilitation works on access roads will be aligned with opening up
access to areas targeted in the business plans.

24. The PCU will set up a simple, operational M&E system. The logical framework
provides minimum indicators to provide information on the effectiveness, efficiency
and impact of PASA-NK. In addition, the M&E system will provide information on
IFAD's Results and Impact Management System (RIMS) system, and will include a
geographical information system.

25. Knowledge management under PASA-NK will leverage existing initiatives. Thus,
FOPAC, which has a communication system in the form of its quarterly news
bulletin and rural radio network, will play a leading role provincially by
disseminating information on the project in the bulletin and studies on advocacy-
related issues, mapping land tenure conflicts and mapping value chains. At the
national level, the project will enter into an agreement with the ECO CONGO
network, a digital content platform to disseminate relevant information on
sustainable rural and agricultural development in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Both of the national confederations (COPACO and CONAPAC) publish a
periodical bulletin and PASA-NK could reserve space for an article twice a year. At
the regional and international level, it is proposed that the IFAD-cofinanced
Farmers Organizations Support Programme (PAOPA) be used for capitalization of
PASA-NK activities.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
26. The PCU will be responsible for financial management and procurement. However,

the rural engineering works will be the responsibility of a project manager with the
competencies and human resources needed for procurement. Contracts for civil
engineering works (building construction and rural road rehabilitation) are the most
difficult to organize and supervise for PCUs, as they have limited staff.

27. A strategy to mitigate fiduciary risks will be adopted, based on the following
measures:

• Monthly verification of the project accounting database, to be done jointly by
the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Agriculture and the IFAD country
office;

• Submission of a quarterly report using the template provided by IFAD
financial services. Reports are to be prepared by the PCU and sent to IFAD for
review;



EB 2015/116/R.15/Rev.1

5

• Recruitment of international technical assistance in financial management and
procurement, commencing at the outset of the project, to set up a more
effective organizational structure of fiduciary functions; and

• Semi-annual audit of project accounts and procurement by a qualified audit
firm. The PCU will be responsible for hiring the external auditors.

28. Flow of funds. Two mechanisms will be set up to finance project activities: (i) the
designated account and financing of project expenses with a justified and
reimbursable advance; and (ii) direct payments by implementing partners based on
the achievement of specific results.

29. Audit. The Government will, with the prior consent of IFAD, appoint external
auditors to perform two external audits of PASA-NK each fiscal year, in accordance
with international auditing standards and the procedures and criteria set out in
IFAD's guidelines on project audits (for use by borrowers/beneficiaries).

E. Supervision
30. IFAD will supervise the project directly in close collaboration with the Government.

IV. Project cost, financing, benefits
A. Project cost
31. The total cost of the project is estimated at US$52.974 million over a nine-year

period. The main sources of financing are: (i) IFAD with US$33.78 million, or 63.8
per cent of total project cost – the Democratic Republic of the Congo is classified as
"yellow" under the Debt Sustainability Framework, and is therefore eligible for 50
per cent grant and 50 per cent loan financing, i.e. a grant of US$16.89 million and
a loan of US$16.89 million; (ii) OFID with US$9.718 million, or 18.3 per cent of
total project cost; (iii) the Government with US$5.95 million in the form of
exemptions from taxes and tariffs on the goods and services to be purchased by
the project; and (iv) the beneficiaries with US$3.58 million, or 6.7 per cent of total
project cost.

Table 1
Project cost by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan OFID Government Beneficiaries Total

Component Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

A. Capacity-building for actors
supporting agricultural value chains
1. Development of PO economic
services 16 022 75.3 - - 1 730 8.1 3 528 16.6 21 279 40.2

2. Institutional strengthening for POs 2 448 93.7 - - 164 6.3 - - 2 613 4.9

3. Support to public sector 5 276 76.4 689 10.0 940 13.6 - - 6 905 13.0

Subtotal 23 747 77.1 689 2.2 2 834 9.2 3 528 11.5 30 797 58.1

B. Support for rural infrastructure

1. Rehabilitation of access roads - - 8 481 75.0 2 827 25.0 - - 11 308 21.3

2. Capacity-building for DVDA - - 548 86.8 83 13.2 - - 631 1.2

Subtotal - - 9 029 75.6 2 910 24.4 - - 11 939 22.5

C. Coordination and management 10 032 98.0 - - 206 2.0 - - 10 238 19.3

Total cost 33 778 63.8 9 718 18.3 5 950 11.2 3 528 6.7 52 974 100.0



EB 2015/116/R.15/Rev.1

6

B. Project financing
32. Table 2 below indicates how the funds provided by IFAD will be used, by category

of expenditure.
Table 2
Project cost by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD loan OFID Government Beneficiaries Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

I. Investment expenses

A. Studies 384 28.3 808 59.6 163 12.0 - - 1 355 2.6

B. Vehicles and equipment 2 418 65.3 146 4.0 1 137 30.7 - - 3 702 7.0

C. Training and workshops 8 164 93.4 188 2.1 -0 - 387 4.4 8 739 16.5

D. Civil and rural engineering 418 3.5 8 576 70.8 3 081 25.4 43 0.4 12 118 22.9

E. Support fund 9 279 67.1 - - 1 568 11.3 2 971 21.5 13 819 26.1

F. Technical assistance

National expertise 2 368 100.0 - - - - - - 2 368 4.5

International expertise 1 808 100.0 - - - - - - 1 808 3.4

Subtotal assistance technique 4 176 100.0 - - - - - - 4 176 7.9

Total investment cost 24 839 56.6 9 718 22.1 5 950 13.5 3 401 7.7 43 909 82.9

II. Operating expenses

A. Personnel 6 009 97.9 - - - - 126 2.1 6 135 11.6

B. Operating and maintenance 2 931 100.0 - - 0 - - - 2 931 5.5

Subtotal operating expenses 8 939 98.6 - - 0 - 126 1.4 9 065 17.1

Total project cost 33 778 63.8 9 718 18.3 5 950 11.2 3 528 6.7 52 974 100.0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
33. All crop models indicate that the situation of smallholder producers will improve

with the project. The cost-benefit ratio is quite significant: 1.6 for potato, 1.4 for
rice, 1.3 for coffee and 1.2 for maize. Net present value is between US$81 and
US$565/household/year, calculated at an opportunity cost of capital of 30 per cent
per annum.

34. The economic internal rate of return (EIRR) for the project is 18 per cent and the
NPV, at the opportunity cost of capital of 9.32 per cent, is US$16.5 million. A
sensitivity analysis shows that the results obtained are robust: it would take an
income reduction of 37 per cent or a cost increase of 59 per cent to bring down the
EIRR to the level of the opportunity cost of social capital.

D. Sustainability
35. The sustainability of project-supported activities has been considered from several

different perspectives.

36. Institutional sustainability. The project has opted to build implementation
partnerships with lead POs and NGOs with proven experience in the subject areas
targeted. This approach, by handing over direct responsibility to professional
agricultural actors, provides guarantees of continuity and sustainability. Moreover,
having technical services take part in, inter alia, project supervision, setting up
farmers field schools, providing agricultural advisory assistance and M&E, will
position these services better within the socio-economic development of the
province, which is an element of sustainability.

37. Financing arrangements. The approach adopted by the project calls for
providing a temporary subsidy for agricultural inputs – improved seed and fertilizer
– as a process trigger, together with a policy to mobilize savings and create a
credit culture among farming households, facilitating smallholder access to financial
services over the longer term.



EB 2015/116/R.15/Rev.1

7

38. Returns on economic services. More sustainable rice, maize, potato and Arabica
coffee production should enable beneficiary households to improve their savings
and investment capacity and encourage them to maintain the same levels of
fertilizer and improved seed use and value chain integration. Farmers should
therefore be in a position to pay for inputs at market prices by the time of project
completion.

39. Consolidation of associational and cooperative life. The project will contribute
to consolidating associational life by meeting the needs of beneficiary households
to enable them to participate in the activities of their POs, specifically by paying
dues and undertaking commercial transactions to purchase inputs and market
production. Commercial linkages between POs and market operators will enhance
the sustainability of the economic services.

40. Improving access and viable rural access roads. Improving access to
production areas and hubs and linking them to consumption centres are clearly
factors underpinning agricultural production. Rehabilitating access roads, supported
by a maintenance programme such as the one in effect in North Kivu, provides a
guarantee of sustainability in this regard.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
41. The four major risks and related mitigation strategies are outlined in the table

below:

Risks Mitigation measures
Deteriorating security situation
given electoral and economic
challenges in the Great Lakes
region

Losses of goods and
destruction of infrastructure
funded by the project

 The Congolese army and the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) conduct a search for
armed groups to disarm and neutralize them

 The European Parliament negotiates the text of legislation to dissuade European
companies from using blood minerals

 The United Nations system and MONUSCO monitor the security situation closely
 FAO and WFP collaborate closely on an analysis of the situation and the

complementarity of interventions (resilience, recovery, development)
 Trucks made available to lead POs ensure regular pickups and storage at well-

guarded central warehouses located in town
 Project activities are staggered

Land tenure issues: land
disputes and abusive breach of
land lease contracts

 The provincial decree of 2012 on customary land management stipulates
procedures for resolving land disputes

 FOPAC performs advocacy on land tenure issues to ensure secure access for
farmers

 Training of paralegals continues within the project framework
Delay in tax and quasi-tax
relief for agricultural production
and trade

 FOPAC organizes advocacy on this subject with supporting studies
 Synergies in action are sought with other organizations working on the same

subject, such as ELAN
 Updating of the national strategy is leveraged to revise the level and quality of

taxation applied to the subsector and, by extension, to others
Drop in prices, specifically for
Arabica coffee

 Coffee cooperatives are in command of processing and commercialization costs
 The gourmet coffee market, which offers prices that are 20 to 30 per cent higher

than the New York quoted price, is targeted
 Export prices and export procedures benefit from tax relief
 Revision of the national coffee strategy to commence in 2016 benefits from

support, focusing on competitiveness issues (taxation and legislation)

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
42. The project is fully aligned with the IFAD Strategic Framework 2011-2015 and

complies with IFAD's policies on targeting, gender equality, natural resource
management, climate change and access to land and land tenure security.



EB 2015/116/R.15/Rev.1

8

B. Alignment and harmonization
43. PASA-NK is consistent with national legislation defining a strategic framework for

the agricultural and rural sector, i.e.: the Agriculture and Rural Development
Sector Strategy adopted in 2010, the Law on Fundamental Principles for Agriculture
passed in June 2012, the National Agricultural Investment Plan 2013-2020 adopted
in 2013, the Coffee Subsector Reactivation Strategy 2011-2015, the Provincial
Stabilization Strategy and the priority action plan introduced in the provinces,
including North Kivu.

C. Innovation and scaling up
44. In the context of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the major innovation

under PASA-NK is creating linkages between POs and government services to
improve the economic services provided to farmers and explore opportunities for
commercialization. This approach could be scaled up under the programme
cofinanced by IFAD and, over the longer term, in areas where there is a relatively
well structured farmers movement and active trade in agriculture.

D. Policy engagement
45. PASA-NK contributes to implementation of the following policies: the provincial

decree on the management of customary lands, and the tax exemptions on trade
in agricultural products. The project will support FOPAC in carrying out advocacy
actions in these areas.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
46. A financing agreement between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and IFAD

will constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/beneficiary. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as
appendix I.

47. The Democratic Republic of the Congo is empowered under its laws to receive
financing from IFAD.

48. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Lending Policies and Criteria.

VII. Recommendation
49. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo in an amount equivalent to twelve
million one hundred thousand special drawing rights (SDR 12,100,000), and
upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with
the terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in an amount equivalent to twelve million one hundred
thousand special drawing rights (SDR 12,100,000), and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President
























































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of
Benin for the Market Gardening Development
Support Project

Republic of Benin

Market Gardening Development Support Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower/recipient: Republic of Benin

Executing agency: Ministry in charge of agriculture Ministére en charge de
l'agriculture

Total project cost: US$49.2 million

Amount of IFAD loan: 16.8 million SDR (equivalent to approximately
US$23.5 million)

Amount of IFAD grant:

Amount of Adaptation for Smallholder
Agriculture Programme (ASAP) grant:

0.35 million SDR (equivalent to
approximately US$0.5 million)

3.2 million SDR (equivalent to approximately
US$4.5 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional: Maturity period of 40 years,
including a grace period of 10 years, with a service
charge of 0.75 per cent per annum

Cofinancier(s): OPEC Fund for International Development (OFID)

Amount of cofinancing: US$12.0 million

Terms of cofinancing: Loan

Contribution of borrower/beneficiary: US$4.8 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$3.9 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015 116/R.14

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of Benin for the Market Gardening Development Support
Project, as contained in paragraph 53.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Benin for the
for the Market Gardening Development Support Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. The population of Benin is estimated to be approximately 10 million, with a growth

rate of 3.5 per cent per year; 56 per cent of the population is rural. Benin is one of
the poorest countries in the world. Benin’s 2014 Human Development Index of
0.476 ranked in 169th out of 187 countries.

2. Agriculture is central to Benin’s economy, accounting for approximately 70 per cent
of employment and 30 per cent of GDP. Benin has recorded strong economic
performance, with an average annual growth rate of 3.9 per cent from 2006 to
2012, 5.6 per cent in 2013 and 5.7 per cent in 2014. Despite these positive trends,
economic growth has had a limited impact in terms of poverty reduction due to
high population growth and the vulnerability of the Beninese economy to external
shocks and climate change, and its dependence on primarily rainfed agriculture.

3. Poverty is characterized by strong regional disparities. Households most vulnerable
in terms of food consumption and poverty are those dependent on rainfed
agriculture (cereals and tubers) as the sole or primary source of income.

4. Youth and young adults (aged 15-35 years) account for approximately 60 per cent
of the national population. Due to a chronic lack of jobs in rural areas, youth
migration from rural to urban areas is growing by the year.

5. Benin is experiencing a deficit in vegetable production despite the market
opportunities existing in the country and elsewhere in the subregion. Moreover, its
high added value means market gardening production is a major direct and indirect
source of jobs for young people and women in urban, peri-urban and rural areas.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and RB-
COSOP

6. The Strategic Plan for Agriculture Sector Recovery (PSRSA) aims to boost market
gardening production and productivity to meet domestic demand and strengthen
the contribution of Beninese producers to cross-border trade.

7. The Market Gardening Development Support Project (PADMAR) is fully aligned with
the 2011-2015 country strategic opportunities programme (COSOP). It is also in
keeping with the strategic direction of the PSRSA and perfectly aligned with axis 1
of the Growth Strategy for Poverty Reduction (CPRS), the National Agricultural
Investment Programme (NAIP), the Comprehensive Africa Agricultural
Development in Africa Programme (CAADP), the National Microfinance Strategy
(SNMF), the National Decentralization and Devolution Policy (PONADEC) and the
National Action Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC).



EB 2015 116/R.14

2

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
8. The project will be implemented in southern Benin, working in 27 of the country’s

44 municipalities, located in seven of the country’s 12 departments: Atlantic,
Couffo, Littoral, Mono, Ouémé, Plateau and Zou. The project area has more than
5.8 million inhabitants. The departments and municipalities were selected based on
the following four criteria: (i) the potential for or emergence of profitable small-
scale market gardening; ii) the existence of useful hydro-agricultural potential that
could be developed for use by smallholders at a reasonable cost; (iii) proximity to
major consumer centres, including the cities of Lagos, Ibadan, Lomé, Accra and
Cotonou; and (iv) high rates of poverty, food insecurity, malnutrition and youth
unemployment.

9. The target group comprises: (i) market garden producers cultivating small areas –
1/8 hectare; (ii) vulnerable farming households with low crop diversification that
are motivated and interested in market gardening; and (iii) other value chain
actors, both upstream and downstream of production, including related services
and occupations such as input distribution, marketing, processing and trades
related to the construction and maintenance of irrigation infrastructure and
equipment supply.

10. Moreover, every link in the market gardening value chain will target as a matter of
priority: (a) young women and men (aged 18-24 years) and young adult women
and men (aged 25-35 years) with economic initiative, motivated and engaged or
seeking to establish themselves in the market garden vale chain; and (b) women
working as producers, processors or traders. The goal is set as at least 40 per cent
women and 50 per cent youth and young adult men and women among the direct
beneficiaries.

B. Project development objective
11. Overall project objective. The overall project goal is to help sustainably improve

food and nutrition security and reduce rural poverty in the project area.

12. Development objective. The development objective is to sustainably boost the
income of market gardeners, while strengthening their resilience to the effects of
climate change.

13. The project aims to reach 20,000 direct beneficiaries (120,000 household
members), including 17,000 market garden producers, and create 3,000 jobs
upstream and downstream of production, primarily for young men and women. It
will have significant impact through the provision of economic and social training to
growers and of institutional strengthening to market gardening organizations and
public and private institutions involved in the market gardening value chain. It is
expected that production will increase by at least 50 per cent and climate resilience
will be strengthened for 10,000 households as a result of the support provided by
the Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme (ASAP).

C. Components/outcomes
14. The project consists of the following three components:

Component 1. Value addition and marketing
15. Subcomponent 1.1. Partnership development and stakeholder

professionalization. Market garden value chain actors are expected to forge
professional partnerships that will add value to their products on local and
subregional markets. Activities will include: (i) support for the establishment of a
stakeholders’ forum, the “Market Gardening Stakeholders’ Form” (TFM), to promote
better governance in the market gardening value chain; (ii) a programme to
strengthen the institutional capacities of professional organizations; (iii) support to
existing systems in terms of information on pricing and vegetable markets; and



EB 2015 116/R.14

3

(iv) support to the development of services and jobs upstream and downstream of
production, especially for young holders of initiatives in new businesses that will
accompany the modernization of the sector.

16. Subcomponent 1.2. Market infrastructure and improved accessibility. The
expected outcome is the establishment of resilient infrastructure to enhance value
addition and facilitates market access. Activities will include: (a) support for the
construction and restoration of infrastructure collection, packaging and temporary
storage of market gardening inputs and produce; and (b) the repair of 120 km of
rural roads and construction of crossings needed to improve access to market
gardening production areas and the maintenance system.

Component 2. Improving market gardening productivity and production
17. Subcomponent 2.1. Resilient market gardening facilities. The expected result

is guaranteed and sustainable access to water and land for market gardening
producers. In this regard, the project will support the following activities: (a) the
development of 2,100 hectares of resilient market gardening plots, including 100
hectares of plots for the demonstration of innovative, water-efficient and low-
carbon market garden irrigation; (b) land tenure security for market gardening
producers; (c) the establishment of a committee to monitor the work and maintain
the market gardening plots, and capacity-building of committees charged with the
maintenance and management of irrigation systems and facilities; and (d) the
construction of flood protection dikes in areas at high risk of flooding. Solar-
powered pump irrigation systems will be used wherever conditions allow.

18. Subcomponent 2.2. Access to improved technologies and techniques. The
expected outcome is increased productivity and production among market
gardening producers in the context of climate change. Activities will include:
(a) specialized local advisory support provided by Market Gardening Technical
Specialists (TSMs) and link-producers; (b) access to quality production inputs
through the provision of market gardening kits including water-efficient irrigation
facilities and quality inputs; (c) support for the provision of quality inputs and
demonstrations on market gardening irrigation innovations; and (d) nutrition
integration support, including the promotion of the cultivation of local vegetables.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
19. The project is part of the broader trend of market gardening intensification in the

coastal areas of West Africa but has the following specific features: (i) it targets
small-scale market gardening producers so as to maximize their contribution to job
creation and the reduction of rural poverty; (ii) it takes into account the value
chain dimension, which will be developed through TFMs, and will strengthen
professional organizations and occupations and services upstream and downstream
of production; (iii) it systematically promotes modern, water-efficient and,
wherever possible, solar technologies, with a view to strengthening the
competitiveness of small market gardening enterprises; (iv) it systematically
promote quality inputs; (v) it promotes local leafy vegetables popular among
consumers and rich in vitamins and minerals; and (vi) it systematically strengthens
climate change resilience.

20. The IFAD Framework Programme in Benin (ProCaR) will be responsible for project
coordination and management, while field activities will be implemented through:
(a) TSMs, who will act as a technical reference group for the project at the
commune level in collaboration with regional centres for rural development
(CARDER) and agricultural development centres at the commune level; (b) link-
producers: experienced producers, living on site and receiving regular training and
support from TSMs, who will ensure the inclusion of their peers in market
gardening activities, each supporting and training 24 producers in market
gardening good practices, and receiving regular capacity-building from TSMs; and



EB 2015 116/R.14

4

(c) facilitators, who will run the TFMs to ensure they are able, in the medium term,
to ensure governance of the market gardening value chain.

B. Organizational framework
21. The Ministry of Finance will be the borrower/recipient for this project. The Ministry

in charge of agriculture will provide technical supervision. The ProCaR National
Steering Committee (NSC) will be modified to include representatives of PADMAR
stakeholders, including the National Platform of Farmers’ Organizations and
Agricultural Producers of Benin (PNOPPA). The Minister for Economic Development,
Public Policy Evaluation and the Promotion of Good Governance, or his
representative thereof, will chair the NSC. The NSC secretariat will be hosted by
the MAEP Department of Programming and Forecasting, supported by ProCaR. The
NSC will be responsible for approving annual work plans and budgets (AWPBs) and
monitoring the project.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

22. The activities implemented under the project will be presented each year in an
AWPB prepared with the help of TSMs and facilitators, and developed in the form of
site investment plans consolidated at the regional level. These regional investment
plans – standalone investments and enabling investments – will be consolidated by
the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) in a national AWPB to be submitted for
comments to the Ministry in charge of agriculture, then approved by the NSC,
before submission to IFAD for approval. Each draft AWPB will include: a detailed
description of the activities of the coming year; a procurement plan during covering
18 months the first year and 12 months from the second year; a statement of the
origin of funds and expected results. From the second year, the AWPB will include a
summary of the results achieved and constraints encountered during the year
concerned.

23. The project will develop a results-based monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system
to measure progress in implementation, its effects and its impact on target groups.
M&E will inform a small number of relevant indicators relating to the Results and
Impact Management System (RIMS), relating to the impacts climate change.

24. M&E will have three levels of indicators and include: (i) internal monitoring of
planning by measuring progress in physical and financial implementation against
the AWPB; (ii) monitoring of the logical framework indicators to measure the
attainment of expected outputs and outcomes; and (iii) impact assessment. The
indicators will be disaggregated by gender and age.

25. The project will draw on the core nutrition and food security indicators generated
by the baseline survey of the Adapted Rural Financial Services Development Project
(PAPSFRA). An anthropometric and socioeconomic survey will be conducted at the
end of the project. The ProCaR online database will be updated to reflect the
specific project indicators.

26. The approach adopted will aim to establish a value chain between M&E, knowledge
and communication, to collect, process, document and broadly disseminate,
through various media, using new information and communication technologies.
Data on results and impact will be collected and compiled into an electronic library.
The data will be analysed and trends in key indicators will be presented in a
differentiated format according to user needs (graphics, maps). The ProCaR
website, social networks and sharing workshops will be used to share and
disseminate results.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
27. Project funds will be managed in accordance with the procedures in force in Benin

and with IFAD procedures for the financial management of projects. They will be
set out in detail in the letter to the borrower and in the ProCaR manual of



EB 2015 116/R.14

5

administrative, financial and accounting procedures, which will be updated to
incorporate PADMAR.

28. The ProCaR PCU, which was created by ministerial order and has autonomous
financial and administrative management, will be responsible for the financial
management of the project. It will prepare semi-annual financial reports for
submission to the Government and to IFAD, as well as project financial statements
for each fiscal year. At project launch, the PCU will prepare an 18-month
procurement plan to be submitted to IFAD for approval. The plan will indicate, for
each market, the procurement method, the proposed thresholds and the applicable
preferences. Goods, works and services will be procured in accordance with
national procedures for procurement, subject to their compatibility with relevant
IFAD guidelines.

E. Supervision
29. IFAD will directly supervise the project and administer the financing (loan and

grant). In this regard, the Fund will conduct two supervision missions per year,
with the participation of representatives of the Ministry in charge of agriculture, the
Ministry for Development and other interested ministries and partners. The first will
be primarily a support mission and will focus essentially on reviewing and
finalizing: (i) the initial AWPB; (ii) the manual of administrative, financial and
accounting procedures; and (iii) procurement documents.

IV. Project costs, financing and benefits
A. Project costs
30. The total projects costs amount to US$49.2 million over seven years, with a base

cost of US$47.8 million. Taxes account for 9.8 per cent of total costs, at US$4.8
million, including US$0.4 million and US$1.0 million respectively for physical and
financial contingencies (3 per cent of base cost). Investment costs amount to
US$46.8 million, or 95.1 per cent of the base cost. Operating expenses account for
US$2.4 million, or 4.9 per cent of the base cost.

Table 1
Project costs by component and source of financing
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component

Government IFAD loan IFAD grant OFID ASAP Beneficiaries Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Value addition and marketing

Partnership development and
stakeholder professionalization 277.1 11.3 1 943.9 79.5 - - 203.6 8.3 - - 19.9 0.8 2 444.6

Market infrastructure and improving
access 1 343.0 18.0 - - - - 6 083.3 81.7 - - 19.7 0.3 7 446.0

Subtotal 1 620.1 16.4 1 943.9 19.7 - - 6 286.9 63.6 - - 39.7 0.4 9 890.6

2. Improving market gardening
productivity and production

Resilient market gardening facilities 1 534.5 18.3 - - - - 5 713.1 68.2 865.2 10.3 270.2 3.2 8 383.0

Access to improved technology and
techniques 1 221.9 4.7 17 572.6 67.1 500.0 1.9 - - 3 336.4 12.7 3 543.3 13.5 26 174.1

Subtotal 2 756.4 8.0 17 572.6 50.9 500.0 1.4 5 713.1 16.5 4 201.6 12.2 3 813.4 11.0 34 557.1

3. Coordination, M&E and
knowledge management

Coordination and management 226.5 6.7 2 875.1 85.3 - - - - 268.0 8.0 - - 3 369.6

M&E and knowledge management 235.8 17.2 1 108.3 80.6 - - - - 30.4 2.2 - - 1 374.5

Subtotal 462.3 9.7 3 983.5 84.0 - - - - 298.3 6.3 - - 4 744.1

Total 4 838.8 9.8 23 500.0 47.8 500.0 1.0 12 000.0 24.4 4 500.0 9.1 3 853.1 7.8 49 191.9



EB 2015 116/R.14

6

B. Project financing
31. The project will be financed by an IFAD loan and grant, an ASAP grant, a loan from

the OPEC Fund for International Development (OFID), a contribution from the
beneficiaries and a contribution from the Government of Benin. IFAD will
participate in the project financing by providing a loan in the amount of US$23.5
million on highly concessional terms (equivalent to CFAF 13.7 billion or 47.8 per
cent of total project costs) and a grant in the amount of US$0.5 million (equivalent
to CFAF 0.3 billion). The IFAD loan will be used as follows: 73.9 per cent for
improving productivity and production (component 2); 9.2 per cent for value
addition and marketing (component 1); and 16.9 per cent for coordination, M&E
and knowledge management. The IFAD grant funds will be entirely allocated to the
“Access to improved technologies and techniques” subcomponent, implemented
under component 2, specifically to new irrigation technology demonstration
activities.

32. OFID will provide a loan of US$12 million (equivalent to CFAF 7 billion FCFA or 24.4
per cent of total project costs), to be used as follows: 47.6 per cent for the resilient
market gardening facilities subcomponent, implemented under component 2, and
52.4 per cent for component 1 activities.

33. ASAP will provide a grant of US$4.5 million (equivalent to CFAF 2.6 billion or 9.1
per cent of total project costs), to be used as follows: 93.4 per cent to finance the
activities of component 2 and 6.6 per cent for coordination, M&E and knowledge
management.

34. Beneficiaries will contribute in the amount of US$3.9 million (equivalent to CFAF
2.3 billion or 7.8 per cent of total project costs), corresponding to their
participation in meeting the costs of developing market gardening plots, access to
mark gardening technologies, and building market and crossing infrastructures.

35. The Government will contribute an estimated US$4.8 million (equivalent to CFAF
2.8 billion or 9.8 per cent of total costs) to the project financing, corresponding to
the total taxes and duties due on the goods and services procured by the project.

Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure
category

Government IFAD loan IFAD grant OFID ASAP Beneficiaries Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

I. Investment
costs

1. Rural/civil
works 2 503.8 18.0 100.7 0.7 325.7 2.3 10 168.6 73.1 521.2 3.7 289.9 2.1 13 909.9

2. Subsidies
and grants 0.0 - 11 819.9 66.2 - - 102.7 0.6 2 399.7 13.4 3 543.3 19.8 17 865.5

3. Vehicles 81.7 23.0 194.1 54.6 - - 53.0 14.9 26.5 7.5 - - 355.2

4. Equipment
and material 397.5 23.0 532.4 30.8 - - 382.4 22.1 396.0 22.9 19.9 1.2 1 728.1

5. Consultants 1 796.4 18.0 6 527.3 65.4 - - 1 192.4 11.9 464.1 4.7 - - 9 980.1

6. Training and
workshops 0.0 - 2 226.3 75.4 174.3 5.9 101.0 3.4 451.0 15.3 - - 2 952.6

Total investment
costs 4 779.4 10.2 21 400.6 45.7 500.0 1.1 12 000.0 25.6 4 258.5 9.1 3 853.1 8.2 46 791.5

II. Operating costs

A. Operating costs 59.5 18.0 270.8 82.0 - - - - - - - - 330.3

B. Staff costs 0.0 - 1 828.6 88.3 - - - - 241.5 11.7 - - 2 070.1

Total operating
costs 59.5 2.5 2 099.4 87.5 - - - - 241.5 10.1 - - 2 400.4

Total project
costs 4 838.8 9.8 23 500.0 47.8 500.0 1.0 12 000.0 24.4 4 500.0 9.1 3 853.1 7.8 49 191.9



EB 2015 116/R.14

7

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
36. The project will provide direct socioeconomic benefits to at least 20,000 market

gardening value chain actors (thereby reaching 120,000 individuals), including
approximately 17,000 market gardening households cultivating small plots of 1/8
hectare. It will create 3,000 new jobs, primarily for young people, upstream and
downstream of production, including in related services and occupations, such as
input distribution, marketing, processing and trades related to the construction and
maintenance of irrigation infrastructure and equipment supply. It will contribute to
the production of 68,000 tons of a range of vegetables per year by the sixth year
of implementation. The basic economic rate of return (ERR) of the project is 27.5
per cent. The net present value (NPV) is estimated at US$25.3 million.

37. The direct benefits expected are: (i) 1,100 ha of land converted and equipped with
irrigation system in areas of high water table;  60 ha converted and equipped in
areas where the water table is of moderate depth; 60 ha converted and equipped
in plateaus or low water table areas; 480 ha of lowlands converted; 300 ha
converted and equipped in areas with artesian water; (ii) 12,000 linear metres (ml)
of ASAP-funded flood-protection dykes for market gardening facilities; (iii) 120 km
of desert tracks repaired and 279 ml of crossings built for use in all seasons;
(iv) 150 business, upstream and downstream of market gardening production,
created or strengthened; and v) 27 communes equipped to maintain the repaired
tracks.

38. In terms of environmental benefits, the project will make it possible to avoid:
(i) approximately US$560,000 in fuel consumption per year; (ii) an estimated
1,423 t CO2 eq of greenhouse gas emissions per year, equivalent to approximately
US$12,800; and (iii) 25-50 per cent of market gardening produce lost to flooding,
drought or excessive heat over every two-year period, corresponding to 20,400
tons or US$6.1 million. The project will also reduce water consumption through the
use of water-efficient technologies.

D. Sustainability
39. Sustainability has been systematically built into project design. The inclusion of the

poorest people and the facilitation of their access to quality equipment and inputs
is intended to create, in the medium term, self-financing capacity or access among
farmers’ organizations (FOs) to funding from financial institutions for the use of
their members. For market gardening sites, demand-based project interventions
are the true gauge of sustainability; these include: land tenure protection, the
participation of market gardening producers and rural communities in investment,
the use of locally tested and relevant technologies, the building of their financial
management capacities so as to enable them to buy inputs and renew equipment,
as well as the participation of producers in maintenance.

40. There is a high likelihood that the project achievements will be sustainable. The
establishment and effective functioning of TFMs, financing for water-efficient
irrigation systems and the provision of high-quality inputs will give stakeholders
the means to increase their competitiveness and enhance their production quality.
The strategy of fully empowering FOs to provide affordable services to their
members is intended to ensure the sustainability of project gains. Finally, the
empowerment of TFMs will ultimately enable them to ensure market gardening
subsector governance.

41. Improving land tenure security among market gardening producers will promote
investment in and the sustainability of their modes of production and reduce
conflicts. The organizational and management capacities of relevant civic land
tenure structures will be strengthened. Moreover, mechanisms for managing and
maintaining market gardening plots and infrastructure will be established, and user
capacity strengthened. Year-round production and better understanding of and



EB 2015 116/R.14

8

access to national and subregional markets to sell produce at remunerative prices,
as well as a more integrated understanding of the seasonal nature of these
markets, will be major gains contributing to sustainability.

42. The project will invest in monitoring water resources and salinzation risk as key to
the economic and environmental sustainability of its activities.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
43. Following the adoption of mitigation measures, the project risk level is rated as

medium. It will nonetheless face systematic risks inherent to the market gardening
subsector and to the planned programme activities. These risks have been
identified and appropriate mitigation measures incorporated at the design level.
The support of ASAP will help further mitigate these risks.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
44. The project is fully aligned with IFAD strategy and policies, including the 2011-

2015 Strategic Framework, the climate change strategy, environmental and social
evaluation procedures, the targeting and gender strategy, supervision and
implementation support, and environment and natural resource management
policies. The project is also fully aligned with the objectives of ASAP.

B. Alignment and harmonization
45. The project is closely aligned with the strategic direction of the PSRSA and aligned

with axis 1 of the CPRS and with the NAIP, the CAADP, the SNMF, the PONADEC
and the NAPCC. It is in line with other projects and initiatives under way,
supported by IFAD and other donors, including the IFAD-supported PACER and
PAPSFRA projects, the Belgian Technical Cooperation-funded Market Gardening
Stakeholder Support Project, the United States Agency for International
Development -funded Growing Resources for Enhanced Agriculture Enterprises and
Nutrition project and the African Development Bank-financed Ouémé Valley
Agricultural Infrastructure Support Project. Regarding rural youth employment, the
project will create partnerships with the Multi-year Water and Sanitation Sector
Support Programme and the Special Programme for Youth in Agriculture in Benin
and the Songhai Centre.

C. Innovations and scaling up
46. In the context of action research, the project will demonstrate market gardening

sector innovations that have a direct impact on priority areas, such as:
(i) determining appropriate fertilizer dosage for various types of market gardening
produce; (ii) phytosanitary treatments and mechanical protection measures, in
particular integrated protection against biological pests; (iii) the use of pesticides
and fertilizers of biological origin; and (iv) evaluating the performance of local,
salt-tolerant market gardening crop varieties and short-cycle varieties in mitigating
climate risks, and organic material value addition (compost).

47. The project will also demonstrate innovations in irrigation, water-efficient systems
and solar-powered pumps, in partnership with FOs, the Directorate-General for
Rural Development and Equipment and the National Agricultural Research Institute
of Benin. These demonstrations will be developed with the assistance of specialized
institutes, and funded by the ASAP financing (innovative kits) and the IFAD grant
(draining and piping).

48. The project will invest in monitoring pesticide residues in groundwater and market
gardening produce as an innovative element in keeping with the sustainable
agricultural production focus of the project. The project will also assess the
salinization level of the soil. Innovations once tested and evaluated will be scaled
up.



EB 2015 116/R.14

9

D. Policy engagement
49. The project will contribute to the transformation of the market gardening subsector

through the professionalization of its stakeholders. It will conduct, through TFMs,
policy consultations on topics of relevance to value chain actors, such as:
(i) improving access to land rights among vulnerable groups (women and young
people); (ii) policy relating to imports and access to specific market gardening
fertilizers; (iii) sustainable access to financing for small market gardening
producers; (iv) setting quality standards for market gardening produce and inputs;
and v) and the taxation of imports and exports.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
50. A project financing agreement between the Republic of Benin and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as
appendix I.

51. The Republic of Benin is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

52. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
53. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Republic of Benin in an amount equivalent to sixteen million eight
hundred and fifty thousand special drawing rights (16,850,000 SDR) and
upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with
the terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
Benin in an amount equivalent to three hundred and fifty-five thousand
special drawing rights (355,000 SDR) and upon such terms and conditions as
shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide an ASAP grant to the
Republic of Benin in an amount equivalent to three million two and twenty
thousand special drawing rights (3,220,000 SDR) and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President















































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the
Republic of Malawi for the
Programme for Rural Irrigation Development

Republic of Malawi

Programme for Rural Irrigation Development

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Ministry of Finance, Economic Planning and
Development

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Water
Development

Total programme cost: US$83.95 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 19.30 million (equivalent to approximately
US$26.48 million)

Amount of IFAD
Debt Sustainability Framework grant:

SDR 19.35 million (equivalent to approximately
US$26.54 million)

Amount of IFAD Adaptation for
Smallholder Agriculture Programme
grant:

SDR 5.15 million (equivalent to approximately
US$7.06 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: 40 years, including a grace period of 10 years, with a
service charge of three fourths of one per cent (0.75 per
cent) per annum

Cofinancier(s): Department for International Development (DFID);
private sector

Amount of cofinancing: DFID: US$0.5 million
Private sector: US$3.0 million

Terms of cofinancing: Grant

Contribution of borrower: US$13.08 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$7.28 million (in kind)

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/116/R.16/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of Malawi for the Programme for Rural Irrigation
Development, as contained in paragraph 56.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Malawi for
the Programme for Rural Irrigation Development

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Malawi is a densely populated landlocked country of some 15 million people in an

area of 118,484 km2, of which 24,000 km2 is covered by freshwater lakes and
mangroves. Population growth is almost 3 per cent per annum and the country has
one of the lowest per capita GDPs in the world. With a Human Development Index
of 0.414, Malawi is ranked 174th out of 187 countries (2014), while for its gender
development index it ranked 116th out of 208 countries (2013). Education levels are
low. Chronic food insecurity and malnutrition, combined with HIV/AIDS prevalence
of 11.9 per cent, add to the challenge.

2. Poverty is mainly rural. Approximately 51 per cent of the Malawian population lives
below the poverty line of a dollar a day (Millennium Development Goals [MDGs]
Report 2013), while in rural areas over 85 per cent of the people are poor.1 Rural
areas also have a higher occurrence of both stunted and underweight children than
do urban areas. In 2005, the Government of Malawi set up the Fertilizer Input
Supply Scheme, which increased maize production and enabled the country to
become self-sufficient in years with normal weather conditions. However, Malawi’s
progress against the MDGs remains mixed. Hunger has decreased, but persists.
Targets for poverty reduction and primary education are deemed unlikely to be
achieved by 2015.

3. Women have remained disadvantaged in many aspects of life, despite their large
share in the food-production labour force. They have little control over produce,
and benefit less from the income earned. Young people also face considerable
challenges, mainly in terms of few employment opportunities outside agriculture in
rural areas and the ongoing fragmentation of landholdings. Farming, predominantly
rainfed, is associated with low cash-income generation, hard labour and low status.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

4. Most smallholder families in Malawi live at the subsistence level, with cash or food
insecurity for several months of the year. Adverse climate effects exacerbate the
already precarious situation of many smallholders. In 2015, for example, floods
destroyed a large part of the maize harvest in southern Malawi, while other areas
suffered under prolonged drought, with severe consequences for crop yields, food
security and nutrition.

5. Land productivity has been declining for decades, mainly due to existing
inappropriate land and water management practices that do not support sustainable
crop production and erosion control measures. Moreover, farmers do not possess
sufficient financing to purchase fertilizer to restore soil fertility. Irrigation is scarce
and this curbs agricultural production to only one harvest per year.

1 National Statistical Office of Malawi, Statistical Yearbook 2008.



EB 2015/116/R.16/Rev.1

2

6. Access to land under customary procedures is increasingly under threat due to the
high demand for arable land. Seasonal sublets of land have become frequent and
benefit those who can afford to pay, while the poor may lose their land.

7. Several government- and donor-funded programmes aim to reverse current trends
in the loss of soil fertility and declining yields. The Government invests in the
Fertilizer Input Supply Scheme to enhance soil fertility and increase yields of maize,
the main staple crop, and to boost national food security. Unfortunately, it faces
difficulties in sustaining the scheme due to its high costs.

8. The proposed Programme for Rural Irrigation Development (PRIDE) has been
designed to address the above issues through investments in irrigation and in
improved rainfed agriculture adapted to smallholders. It seeks to enable: higher
land and labour productivity; application of sustainable, climate-smart land and
water management practices; and a focus on agricultural markets to generate cash
income for smallholders.

9. The Government is committed to addressing rural poverty through agricultural
growth. The second Malawi Growth and Development Strategy (MGDS II) defines
water development as a key strategic area. In 2015, the Irrigation Master Plan and
Investment Framework (IMPIF) was formulated to expand access of smallholders to
irrigation in order to boost crop production and enhance resilience to adverse
climate events. The Government asked IFAD to invest in the IMPIF and in the
development of water management for smallholder agriculture.

10. PRIDE is fully compatible with IFAD’s country strategic opportunities programme
(COSOP) 2010-2015 and complements services provided by the existing IFAD
portfolio. Synergies will be developed with both the Rural Livelihoods and Economic
Enhancement Programme (RLEEP – value chain development) and the Sustainable
Agriculture Production Programme (SAPP – good agricultural practices in rainfed
systems).

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
11. The programme will be implemented over a seven-year period in two regional

clusters in the northern and southern regions of Malawi. The programme will target
poor smallholder farmers of the villages associated with each irrigation scheme. The
primary target group comprises food insecure households. Smallholder farmers will
be supported in: (i) being allocated secure land in the programme irrigation
schemes; (ii) joining water users’ associations (WUAs) and obtaining representation
on catchment management committees; and (iii) becoming business entities
(individually and as groups) to respond to market opportunities.

B. Programme development objective
12. The programme’s goal is to enhance the resilience of rural communities to food

insecurity, the effects of climate change and economic shocks. Its development
objective is that smallholder farmer households increase their income and nutrition
through sustainable agricultural production. The programme’s two major outcomes
are that smallholders: (i) operate climate-smart land and water management
systems; and (ii) adopt environmentally and economically sustainable agricultural
production systems on both rainfed and irrigated land.

C. Components/outcomes
13. Component 1: Irrigation development and catchment management. The

objective of this component is to develop climate-smart land and water
management systems for smallholder households on rainfed and irrigated land. The
objective will be achieved through preparation and management of about 15
irrigation schemes, together with establishment and strengthening of WUAs to
manage, operate and maintain irrigation schemes for appropriate land and water



EB 2015/116/R.16/Rev.1

3

governance. Agricultural productivity will be increased through irrigation, using
water storage for a second or third crop, while PRIDE will address environmental
degradation risks by investing in soil and water conservation measures. The latter
will be funded entirely by a grant from the IFAD Adaptation for Smallholder
Agriculture Programme (ASAP). The measures aim to restore soil cover on
vulnerable grounds, control erosion, and carry out reforestation of slopes and
protection of river buffer zones, as a contribution to national greenhouse gas
reduced-emission targets.

14. Component 2: Agriculture and market linkages. The objective of this
component is to promote adoption of environmentally and economically sustainable
agricultural production systems by smallholder households on both rainfed and
irrigated land. The programme will support efficient knowledge transfer to
smallholder farmers through trials and demonstrations, combined with better
information from the private sector on market potential and opportunities. The
component will promote climate-smart good agricultural practices (GAPs), including
the use of weather and climate information services, irrigation optimization,
application of integrated pest management and reduction of post-harvest losses.

15. Market linkages will be promoted through: value chain analyses to identify suitable
crops; training, mainly through farmer business schools; and commodity platforms
to bring together all actors in a value chain. A dedicated irrigation technology
window – under the Malawi Innovation Challenge Fund – will be piloted with the
private sector and cofunded by the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) and the United Kingdom’s Department for International Development
(DFID). The private sector will provide farmers with modern irrigation equipment
such as drip irrigation and will facilitate marketing of their produce.

16. PRIDE will mainstream nutrition in most of its activities, such as the choice of crops
or value chain commodities, and support this through the following measures:
(i) integrating a nutrition perspective in all GAPs promoted; (ii) promoting
diversified and improved nutritional production and consumption (integrated
homestead food production); and (iii) supporting the introduction of improved
cooking stoves, which reduce the need for fuelwood by as much as 60 per cent,
combined with nutrition education.

III. Programme implementation
ApproachA.

17. During the implementation phase, PRIDE will actively mobilize partners and
resources for communities in scheme cluster areas so that these communities can
sustainably harness natural resources for agriculture, build competence in
production, and profit from better market linkages. The implementation approach
comprises a phased development process: identification, preparation,
implementation and review. Programme management will be tasked with
monitoring and reporting regularly to safeguard positive environmental and social
outcomes. With an average design-to-commissioning time of three years, irrigation
investments will be phased in three lots, with one or two schemes per irrigation
service division in each lot. Progress and lessons learned in the first three years of
irrigation projects developed under the programme will be carefully documented
and will inform the schemes to be developed in the second phase.

18. PRIDE builds on lessons learned in various projects in Malawi, such as the World
Bank/IFAD-funded Irrigation, Rural Livelihoods and Agricultural Development
Project (IRLADP), and links with other projects in the water sector promoted by
various donor agencies.



EB 2015/116/R.16/Rev.1

4

B. Organizational framework
19. The lead programme agency will be the Department of Irrigation (DOI) within the

Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Water Development (MOAIWD). The DOI will
establish a dedicated programme coordination office (PCO) which will be staffed
with highly qualified personnel, either from the government's roster or from the
labour market. Separate facilitation offices staffed by one coordinator each will be
established in the northern and southern regions. A programme steering committee
(PSC) will provide strategic oversight and is composed of senior representatives of
the ministries concerned, chaired by the Ministry of Finance, Economic Planning and
Development (MOFEPD). The PCO will be assisted by a technical advisory team
representing the departments concerned with programme implementation: Land
Resources, Extension, Research (under MOAIWD), Land (under the Ministry of
Lands, Housing and Urban Development), Environmental Affairs (under the Ministry
of Natural Resources, Environment and Mining), Debt and Aid (under MOFEPD), and
others as needed. The programme will coordinate fully with the agriculture sector-
wide approach programme (ASWAp) to ensure full alignment with government
investments and policies.

20. In the village and scheme cluster areas, the programme will coordinate its entry
with the existing village-level leadership (traditional authorities) and structures,
organized in village development committees. These will convene a combined
village committee to provide oversight for programme and community activities.
Detailed preparations for land consolidation and irrigation scheme preparation will
be delegated to a WUA formation committee. Implementation of more
straightforward activities (soil and water conservation, GAPs and market linkages)
will be handed over to beneficiary groups and lead farmers.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

21. The programme’s approach to planning, monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and
knowledge management will be in line with the 2001 National Irrigation Policy and
Development Strategy, the MOAIWD M&E framework and IFAD requirements, based
on emerging best practices of the IRLADP and other IFAD-funded projects.

22. The main planning tools for PRIDE comprise the logical framework, overall
programme budget and annual workplan and budget (AWP/B). Every year, a
decentralized, inclusive and demand-driven planning process will be undertaken.
The consolidated AWP/B will be presented to the PSC for approval and to IFAD for
concurrence. Implementation of the AWP/B will be monitored through the
programme’s M&E system, which will produce semi-annual reports.

23. Programme M&E will be based on IFAD’s Results and Impact Management System
(RIMS). The programme will conduct baseline and follow-up surveys combining
collection of basic demographic and socio-economic data with application of a
multidimensional poverty assessment tool. The latter will assist in tracking changes
in resilience to climate change. The baseline and follow-up surveys will employ the
Women’s Empowerment in Agriculture Index, which measures changes in women’s
empowerment levels as a result of an intervention.

24. Learning and sharing of knowledge will be based on the programme’s M&E system,
and particularly on reviews and participatory assessments of lessons learned during
implementation. These will translate into factsheets that will contribute to the wider
policy debate in the smallholder agriculture sector. Dissemination will take place
through programme and MOAIWD websites, or relevant institutions such as
research agencies, and will be presented at national workshops on key programme
themes.



EB 2015/116/R.16/Rev.1

5

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
25. Financial management. A financial management assessment was carried out

during design and concluded that the proposed financial management
arrangements for PRIDE are at medium risk. Transparency International's Global
Corruption Perceptions Index scored Malawi at 34 per cent in 2014.2 IFAD’s Rural-
Sector Performance score regarding accountability and corruption in rural areas
scored Malawi at 3.75 in 2014, which translates into medium risk.

26. Mitigation measures aim to enhance the country’s financial management systems
through: use of computerized accounting software, specifically recruited
programme finance staff, accounting linked to M&E, and the use of dedicated bank
accounts. Processing of PRIDE’s day-to-day transactions will be handled outside the
government Integrated Financial Management System. However, the programme
will provide periodic returns to the Accountant General to enable the updating of
government accounts. Accounting will be linked to the M&E system, requiring that
the terms of reference of the financial management team and the M&E expert be
linked on these aspects. The proposed arrangement will be managed by the PCO
under the oversight and guidance of MOAIWD.

27. Flow of funds. IFAD and ASAP funds will flow into one designated account, from
which they pass to the programme operational accounts. The MOFEPD Treasury will
manage the designated account and the PCO the operational bank accounts. All
accounts will be opened at a commercial bank satisfactory to IFAD. Any
government agencies participating in PRIDE will be required to open a PRIDE-
specific bank account to receive activity-tagged cash advances against approved
AWP/Bs, to be retired before subsequent releases.

28. Procurement. All procurement funded under the programme will be carried out in
accordance with national procurement procedures to the extent they are consistent
with IFAD’s 2010 Project Procurement Guidelines. Malawi’s legal and institutional
framework for public procurements has been assessed as sufficiently robust.

29. A procurement assessment of IRLADP operations was undertaken as part of the
design of PRIDE and, as a result, a number of mitigation measures will be
incorporated concerning bid registers, contract administration, engagement of the
MOAIWD Internal Procurement Committee, and so forth. A procurement specialist
in the PCO will ensure compliance with IFAD requirements and that procurement
processes in practice are fully compliant with the legislative and regulatory
framework.

30. Governance. A governance and anti-corruption framework will be elaborated as
part of the programme implementation manual during the first year of
implementation. This will ensure transparency, accountability in the use of
resources, and participation, i.e. that people have a voice in decisions that may
affect them. Key features of the framework include: (i) inclusive targeting of
women and disadvantaged households; (ii) participation of community
representatives in local-level planning; (iii) community and participatory monitoring
of programme activities; (iv) both internal and external audit of programme
accounts and processes; (v) IFAD supervision and implementation support;
(vi) reporting of results to the PSC and IFAD, with key information published on a
programme website; and (vii) a grievance system.

E. Supervision
31. PRIDE will be directly supervised by IFAD jointly with the Government, with a focus

on: (i) fiduciary aspects; (ii) achievements and the quality of programme
implementation; and (iii) implementation support emphasizing environmental and
climate assessment procedures. Supervision missions will normally be carried out

2 Transparency International: 0 per cent means not corrupt and 100 per cent highly corrupt.



EB 2015/116/R.16/Rev.1

6

twice a year. Timing of the missions will be coordinated with production of the six-
monthly progress report, so that missions can gauge the situation at the same cut-
off dates and thus provide an additional perspective on progress at PSC meetings.
During the start-up phase, implementation support will be provided to assist in
setting up adequate systems and to enhance technical capacities. Supervision will
focus on the quality of institutional arrangements, including timely installation of a
high-quality M&E system and creation of baselines.

IV. Programme costs, financing, and benefits
A. Programme costs
32. Total programme costs are estimated at US$84 million, including price and physical

contingencies, duties and taxes. The parameters underpinning these costs are: (i) a
seven-year programme period, starting in 2016; (ii) price contingencies of 6 per
cent, and physical contingencies of 3 per cent; (iii) local inflation set at 10 per cent,
and foreign inflation set at 2 per cent; (iv) an exchange rate fixed at US$1 =
440 Malawi kwacha (MK); and (v) the Government will waive duties, excises and
taxes or will finance the cost of all taxes on goods procured under the programme.
Taxes and duties are estimated at US$13 million of total programme costs.
Component estimates are summarized in table 1.
Table 1
Programme costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD
loan IFAD grant ASAP DFID

Private
sector

Beneficiaries
(in kind) Government Total

Component Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount

I. Irrigation development and
catchment management 16 294 17 736 1 878 - - 7 283 10 527 53 718
II. Agriculture and market
linkages 2 979 7516 4 984 498 3 000 - 1 940 20 918
III. Programme management
and coordination 7210 1 288 201 - - - 616 9 314

Total 26 483 26 540 7 063 498 3 000 7 283 13 083 83 950

B. Programme financing
33. The programme will be financed by a total IFAD contribution equivalent to some

US$53 million in the form of 50 per cent loan and 50 per cent grant under the Debt
Sustainability Framework (DSF); ASAP grant financing in an amount equivalent to
about US$7.0 million; DFID financing of about US$0.5 million; private-sector
financing of about US$3.0 million; a Government contribution of about
US$13 million; and a contribution by beneficiaries of about US$7.3 million (in kind).
The IFAD loan will be provided on highly concessional terms, including a 40-year
maturity period, a 10-year grace period, and a 0.75 per cent annual service charge.

34. IFAD will provide start-up funds from loan and DSF proceeds in the amount of
US$560,000 to cover specified expenditures aimed at enhancing capacity for a
quick start-up.



EB 2015/116/R.16/Rev.1

7

Table 2
Programme costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant ASAP DFID Private sector

Beneficiaries
(in kind) Government Total

Expenditure category Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Works 13 906 31.1 13 906 31.1 1 034 2.3 - - - - 6 953 15.6 8 896 19.9 44 696
2. Vehicles 565 70.0 - - - - - - - - - - 242 30.0 808
3. Equipment and materials 195 8.5 91 4.0 1 397 61.2 - - - - 157 6.9 443 19.4 2 284
4. Studies and consultancies 1 613 18.4 3 338 38.1 2 302 26.3 - - - - - - 1 506 17.2 8 760
5. Training 1 031 10.6 5 685 58.4 1 405 14.4 - - - - 172 1.8 1 439 14.8 9 732
6. Cofinancing - - 2 502 41.7 - - 498 8.3 3 000 50.0 - - -0 - 6 000
7. Operations and
maintenance 1 084 87.1 - - - - - - - - - - 161 12.9 1 245
8. Salaries and allowances 8 087 77.6 1 017 9.8 925 8.9 - - - - - - 395 3.8 10 425

Total 26 483 31.5 26 540 31.6 7 063 8.4 498 0.6 3 000 3.6 7 283 8.7 13 083 15.6 83 950

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
35. The programme’s overall economic internal rate of return (EIRR) is estimated at

20 per cent (base case), which is above the opportunity cost of capital in Malawi,
estimated at 12 per cent.3 The EIRR is based on the assumption that 80 per cent of
targeted farmers will adopt the GAP technology packages promoted by the
programme and 90 per cent will be engaged in farming of irrigated land.

36. PRIDE will generate financial benefits in the form of increased financial returns (net
incomes) to about 17,500 smallholder households as direct beneficiaries of the
programme. Social benefits will include a reduction in poverty rates in the
programme area owing to expected increased financial returns (about 10-fold) from
irrigated and improved rainfed agriculture, post-harvest technologies and improved
employment opportunities.

37. Other social benefits include improved nutrition and increased food security through
diversification of crop production. PRIDE will strengthen the status of women
through their economic and social empowerment. The main approach includes
promotion of gender-balanced access to irrigated land, representation in WUAs and
other farmers’ institutions, access to GAPs and cash-crop value chains.

38. Better access to and use of weather information, irrigation and community-based
approaches are expected to lead to sustainable land and water management. In
conjunction with a higher degree of commercialization among farmers, PRIDE is
expected to render smallholder farming systems more resilient and better-adapted
to the effects of climate change.

D. Sustainability
39. Sustainability of the benefits generated and approaches will be ensured through a

number of mechanisms. PRIDE embraces a clear strategy for horizontal and vertical
scaling up, with identified pathways, key drivers and institutional space.

40. Knowledge management will be central to information-gathering and learning. Key
results and information will be communicated to the wider public for participation
and to the Government for action in policy development. The focus on linking
smallholders to market will be key, as irrigation investments will only remain
profitable if commercialization of smallholder farming takes place. Farmers will
manage the irrigation schemes through a proven institutional set-up involving
WUAs and consultative planning. These institutions are expected to remain and
become the main development engine, as is the commercialization approach. Land
consolidation will be practised using existing procedures and involving community

3 World Bank: Average deposit interest rate paid by commercial or similar banks in Malawi.



EB 2015/116/R.16/Rev.1

8

organizations and the Government. The dynamics will be analysed in annual
studies.

41. Environmental and social sustainability will be achieved through implementation of
specific environmental and social management plans and necessitates resettlement
plans based on the assessments and frameworks adopted by the Government.
These frameworks will ensure that potential environmental and social impacts or
required resettlement actions be identified and addressed accordingly, before the
related irrigation schemes are constructed.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
42. Risk management will include adoption of mitigation measures and their

monitoring. Delayed programme start-up has been a common feature in the past.
Preparation of the implementation manual and a start-up plan aim to counteract
potential delays. By programme start-up, the action plan will be agreed and
earmarked funding will enable staff training and the purchase of equipment.
Another key risk is slow registration of WUAs. The registration process has been
placed in the start-up phase to complete the process before construction begins.

43. PRIDE will recruit from both the public and private sector to avoid gaps in staffing
and to obtain the best skill levels. A critical risk involves follow-up on environmental
safeguards. In line with IFAD’s 2015 Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment
Procedures (SECAP), a full assessment was carried out during design, leading to the
Environmental and Social Management Framework and a Resettlement Action
Framework. These frameworks will guide the impact assessments, to be executed
during implementation, but prior to construction of the irrigation schemes. The PCO
will host an environmental coordinator to monitor needed actions in line with
Environment and Social Management Plans and Resettlement Action Plans.

44. The establishment of irrigated command areas will require a redistribution of land.
PRIDE will benefit from the processes and experience of IRLADP. At scheme
development, farmers will be provided equitable access to land. Any agreements
will be subject to free, prior and informed consent by the affected parties, and will
include compensation for any loss of land and assets due to irrigation development.
A grievance mechanism will ensure the possibility of recourse following decisions.

45. Risks related to financial management include: (i) flow of funds is delayed due to
poor management of the designated account located within the Reserve Bank of
Malawi; (ii) MOAIWD capacity for internal audit is limited; and (iii) submission of
audit reports is delayed. The following mitigation measures will be established:
(i) the designated account will be located at a commercial bank; (ii) internal audit
will be outsourced; and (iii) the Auditor General has agreed to ensure timely
submission of audit reports.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

46. Programme design is compliant with the main IFAD policies and strategies. SECAP
has classified PRIDE as category A. In line with SECAP, as mentioned above, an
Environmental and Social Management Framework and a Resettlement Action
Framework were developed during design and adopted by the Government. They
specify the next steps in terms of environmental and social impact assessments and
follow-up actions. PRIDE is compliant with IFAD’s Natural Resources Management
Policy and Climate Change Strategy. Climate-change adaptation measures are
integrated into programme activities to address climate risks and the potential
multiplication of effects, such as damage to landscapes and infrastructure.

47. Strategies for gender mainstreaming and targeting mechanisms have been
incorporated into programme design in accordance with the IFAD Policy on Gender
Equality and Women’s Empowerment and the IFAD Targeting Policy. PRIDE will be



EB 2015/116/R.16/Rev.1

9

implemented respecting IFAD’s Policy on Improving Access to Land and Tenure
Security, the Voluntary Guidelines on the Responsible Governance of Tenure of
Land, Fisheries and Forests and the Framework and Guidelines for Land Policy in
Africa. Before supporting any intervention that might affect land access and use
rights of communities, the programme will ensure that their free, prior and
informed consent has been solicited through inclusive consultations based on full
disclosure of the intent and scope of the activities planned and their implications.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
48. PRIDE is fully in harmony with MGDS II, which defines water development as a key

strategic area. Under this strategy, the IMPIF plans and coordinates interventions in
irrigation funded by IFAD and other donor agencies. PRIDE is also aligned with the
Government's Climate Change Investment Plan and will contribute to two
adaptation programmes: (i) strengthening catchment area and soil and water
conservation management; and (ii) improving community resilience through
agricultural production. PRIDE will coordinate fully with the ASWAp to ensure full
alignment with government investments and policies. The programme is fully
supported by the donor group on food agriculture and food security in Malawi.

Innovations and scaling upC.
49. PRIDE complements RLEEP and SAPP in the current IFAD country programme in

Malawi. It will build on and scale-up the successes of IRLADP and other irrigation
projects in terms of adopting innovative approaches that ensure full community
participation and promote equitable land access.

50. PRIDE, itself, aims to serve as a model to be scaled up in Malawi and elsewhere.
The potential for scaling up seems good, as pathways are in place – such as policy
engagement. For example, an integrated natural resources management policy
framework has been established, and the government policy on WUAs is conducive
to participatory planning. Key drivers for scaling up include financial and fiscal
space. The Government is committed to funding operations and maintenance for
larger rehabilitation works, and it will be the responsibility of WUAs to carry out
regular maintenance of the schemes. WUAs and other grass-roots organizations
represent the institutional space, an approach that has been successful in IRLADP.
PRIDE will be equipped with a strong M&E and knowledge management system to
deliver the information needed for successful scaling up of its approach and to
render it a sustainable investment.

51. In terms of innovation, PRIDE will support the newly established irrigation window
of the Malawi Innovation Challenge Fund, funded by DFID and UNDP. It is expected
that the private sector will form a consortium to provide modern irrigation
technologies and marketing channels to smallholder farmers.

Policy engagementD.
52. Policy engagement is expected for compliance with environmental and social

safeguards, impact assessments, land tenure and the building of climate resilience.
The registration and full recognition of WUAs as key institutions is critical to the
success of PRIDE. The same applies to policies regarding GAPs and extension. The
mainstreaming of improved nutrition has become a key issue for IFAD. Dialogue on
these topics will take place at all levels – from community to national – to review
compliance, gather lessons learned and refine existing regulations.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
53. A programme financing agreement between the Republic of Malawi and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is included in
appendix I.

54. The Republic of Malawi is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.



EB 2015/116/R.16/Rev.1

10

55. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
56. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Republic of Malawi in an amount equivalent to nineteen million three
hundred thousand special drawing rights (SDR 19,300,000) (approximately
US$26.48 million), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a DSF grant to the Republic
of Malawi in an amount equivalent to nineteen million three hundred and fifty
thousand special drawing rights (SDR 19,350,000) (approximately US$26.54
million), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially in
accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide an ASAP grant to the
Republic of Malawi in an amount equivalent to five million one hundred and
fifty thousand special drawing rights (SDR 5,150,000) (approximately
US$7.06 million), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President



























































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the
Republic of Tunisia for the
Siliana Territorial Development
Value Chain Promotion Project


Republic of Tunisia

Siliana Territorial Development Value Chain Promotion
Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower/recipient: Republic of Tunisia

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture, Water Resources and Fisheries

Total project cost: US$34.2 million

Amount of IFAD loan
(under the performance-based
allocation system [PBAS] 2016-2018):

EUR 21.6 million (equivalent to approximately US$23.6
million)

Amount of IFAD grant
(under PBAS 2016-2018):

EUR 0.46 million (equivalent to approximately US$0.5
million)

Terms of IFAD loan: 18 years, including a grace period of five years and an
interest rate corresponding to the annual reference rate
set by IFAD semi-annually

Retroactive financing: For eligible expenses up to a maximum amount
equivalent to US$100,000 incurred after the date of
signing of the financing agreement up to the date of
effectiveness of the agreement

Contribution of borrower/recipient: US$7.6 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$2.5 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: IFAD



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing for the Republic of Tunisia for the Siliana Territorial Development Value
Chain Promotion Project, as contained in paragraph 42.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Tunisia for
the Siliana Territorial Development Value Chain
Promotion Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Economic and social context. Tunisia is a middle-income country in North Africa

covering an area of 164,000 km2, three quarters of which is characterized by an
aridity that is attenuated only in the northeast. The country occupies a
geo-strategic position in terms of trade outlets, particularly towards Europe and the
Mediterranean region. In 2014 the total population was 10,982,000, growing at
1.03 per cent yearly, of whom 50.2 per cent were women and 32 per cent lived in
rural areas, for an average density of 67 inhabitants per km2. However, distribution
of the population across the country is highly unequal, with 70 per cent living in the
urban and industrialized coastal area and the remaining 30 per cent in the rural and
agricultural interior.

2. Incidence of poverty. The poverty rate in Tunisia is an estimated 15.5 per cent,
meaning that some 1.6 million Tunisians live below the poverty line. The
predominantly rural regions of the centre-west and south-east are particularly
affected and increasingly lag behind the rest of the country. The Governorate of
Siliana, which is home to 223,100 people, more than half living in non-communal
environments, is among the most disadvantaged regions.

3. Agriculture and fishing. Beyond the key role it plays in the country’s food
security, this sector continues to occupy an important place in the Tunisian
economy, generating close to 10 per cent of GDP and contributing actively to job
creation – currently at 16 per cent of the national level – and to the balance of
payments through exports. Of a national total on the order of 162,000 km2, arable
land covers an estimated 10 million hectares, including 420,000 hectares under
irrigation and 75 per cent using water-saving equipment. There are currently
516,000 farms averaging 10.2 hectares. However, within this average there are
significant disparities: 53 per cent of farms are 5 hectares or less in size, while
3 per cent of farms have over 50 hectares and manage some 37 per cent of the
land. Livestock are raised by 71 per cent of farms.

4. Having benefited from a positive growth rate of 3 per cent per annum for many
years, the agriculture sector was hard hit by the crisis in global agricultural markets
that took place in 2007-2008. A recent analysis shows that the sector will need to
promote the evolution of agricultural policies and institutions, in addition to
overcoming a series of structural constraints accentuated by the effects of climate
change. A five-year plan for the sector covering the period 2016-2020 is under
preparation. Based on boosting competitiveness and the sector’s appeal for private
investors, the plan underscores promoting sustainable development of natural
resources, adaptation of production systems to climate change, value chain
development and competitiveness, modernizing farms, revising the framework of
incentives, and building the capacities of farmers’ organizations.



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

2

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

5. Strategic framework. In the absence of a consolidated strategic framework for
the sector, an effort has been made to seek the greatest possible alignment
between IFAD’s orientations and those of the Tunisian Government. A national
economic and social development plan is nearing completion and a national process
of dialogue should lead to preparation of a long-term vision for the agriculture
sector. Pending the finalization of this process, IFAD has prepared a country
strategy note to guide interventions during the period 2017-2018 until a country
strategic opportunities programme (COSOP) is prepared at the end of 2017.

6. Rationale. IFAD has intervened in the governorate by implementing two integrated
rural development projects that have laid the groundwork for ensuring the region’s
agricultural development. At the request of the Government of Tunisia, the Fund
proposes to finance a project that can build upon those gains, focusing on adding
value to the products of the region’s value chains offering the greatest potential, to
enable smallholder producers to capture any value added thus generated and to
create sustainable employment, either directly in connection with the value chains
selected or indirectly by developing related services. The choice of this type of
project is all the more justified by the fact that developing value chains and
improving their competitiveness is one of the priorities set by the five-year plan for
2016-2020.

7. The Siliana Territorial Development Value Chain Promotion Project (PROFITS) is
justified by the following: (i) the existence of significant agro-economic potential for
producing and adding value to the products of value chains, particularly those
involving tree growing, provided that smallholder operations are secured against
hazards and have their investment capacities supported at every level; (ii) the
weakness of governance and management on the part of actors upstream and
downstream of these value chains, as well as limited share of value added captured
and access to profitable markets; (iii) inadequate capacities to add value to these
products compared to current needs and potential, while investments in this area
would enable a larger share of value added to be captured locally; and (iv) the
existence of major discrepancies between producers in terms of technical and
economic skills as a result of ineffective public structures and approaches to
extension, justifying a technical and economic advisory assistance arrangement
combining the public and private spheres to benefit all value chain actors. Finally,
the approach selected is intended to generate more jobs, improve and diversify
income sources for vulnerable social groups and thus combat poverty with a view to
promoting an economy marked by social solidarity.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
8. Project area. The project will cover 35 sectors in five delegations in the southern

portion of the Governorate of Siliana,1 which is home to some of the country’s
poorest people. The project area comprises essentially mountain systems within the
geographical region of the Tunisian dorsal, located between 600 and 1,300 metres
above sea level and suitable for fruit tree growing and livestock breeding.

9. Target group. There are 114,122 people living in the project area. The direct
beneficiaries will be 14,000 of the most disadvantaged households
(54,500 individuals, or half the area’s inhabitants) who have knowhow and work in
the agricultural economy, small family farms with up to 2 hectares of irrigated land
or 20 hectares of rainfed land practising extensive settled and/or pastoral (in
forests) livestock breeding with herds of up to 30 head of sheep and goats,
households involved in processing and adding value to value chain products, and

1 Bargou, Makhtar, Kesra, Er-Rouhia and Siliana South.



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

3

young men and women seeking employment and economic opportunities. In
addition, the project will target primary students with nutritional education.

10. Targeting strategy. Pro-poor, inclusive value chain development will be based on:
(i) creating an enabling environment for the inclusion of the poorest people,
including women and youth, by promoting communication with target groups, then
awareness-raising and training for value chain actors; (ii) geographical targeting
using the criteria indicated previously, refined by differentiation based on the
agroecological area and the value addition approach; (iii) direct targeting using
criteria to classify beneficiaries for the various activities and services set up by the
project, as discussed and defined with communities; (iv) self-targeting to identify
services and products within value chains that are adapted to each category of
beneficiaries: smallholder farmers, young people promoting small enterprises,
women; (v) quotas associated with support measures to ensure 30 per cent
participation by women and 20 per cent by young people; and (vi) operational
measures with responsible targeting, gender equality and nutrition to ensure
implementation of the project targeting strategy.

B. Project development objective
11. The overall objective of the project is to improve living conditions for vulnerable

rural people living in the southern part of Siliana, particularly by creating new
sustainable employment opportunities with value chain development and value
addition. The specific objectives are to sustainably develop value chains by taking
advantage of the diversity of unique terroirs in the region, with profitable inclusion
of organized smallholder producers, young people and women, and strengthening
the ability of smallholders to make effective and rational use of socio-economic
potential within value chains.

C. Components/outcomes
12. The project will be structured in two main components: (i) value chain promotion

and value addition; and (ii) creation of enabling conditions for value chain
development and strengthening with management/coordination arrangements.

 Component 1: Value chain promotion and value addition. The main outcome of
this component will be to enable value chain actors to identify opportunities to
develop the value chains concerned and coordinate their actions accordingly.
There are three subcomponents: (i) organizing value chain actors in production
areas; (ii) developing economic activities between value chain actors and
building capacities to add value to value chain products; and (iii) building the
actors’ professional capacities.

Subcomponent 1.1 calls for setting up spaces for consultation and dialogue
among all value chain actors and operators, in the form of value chain platforms,
leading to the participatory development of frameworks for action and the
establishment of win-win partnerships between value chain actors.

Subcomponent 1.2 will consist of supporting value chain actors to prepare and
implement business plans with other private and public actors, to develop each
value chain as a whole and to improve the overall value added and distribute it
more equitably, benefiting smallholder farmers. These business plans may
encompass a whole range of activities and may receive project support in the
form of strengthening and economic assistance to bring them to fruition. Such
activities will involve, in particular, support for farms to convert to tree growing
and engage in livestock-related activities, as well as start-up microenterprises in
production and services. All activities will be piloted by agricultural development
groups (GDAs). The subcomponent also calls for making available to existing or
future mutual agricultural services societies (SMSA), based on value chain action
frameworks, value addition units to be built and equipped with project funding.



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

4

These value addition units will be managed by the SMSA, which will receive
specialized technical assistance from the project.

Subcomponent 1.3 will involve mainly capacity-building for value chain actors,
particularly GDA and SMSA.

 Component 2: Creating enabling conditions for value chain development in an
improved institutional environment, by setting up arrangements for private
technical and economic advisory assistance for producers organizations and
financing the repair or construction of infrastructure needed for value chain
development – irrigated perimeters, new tracks for market access, catchment
lakes and restructuring of rural landholdings. Within this component efforts will
also be made, through participatory policy dialogue among all actors within value
chain platforms, to support the identification by the latter of obstacles to value
chain development and propose improvements to the legal and procedural
framework to address them. There are three subcomponents: (i) setting up
sustainable arrangements for technical and economic advisory assistance and
service provision; (ii) building public infrastructure relating to the value chains;
and (iii) consultative dialogue on policy and on the legislative and regulatory
framework for value chains.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
13. PROFITS will operate under a value chain approach to promote win-win

partnerships between actors in the selected value chains and the creation of local
economic development hubs. Thus, the Government will intervene essentially in
support of organized smallholder producers by implementing two components:
(i) direct support to private value chain actors based on the implementation of their
business plans and their professionalization through capacity-building, and based
on setting up local value chain platforms as inter-professional spaces for exchange
and orientation (component 1); and (ii) indirect support to create enabling
conditions for value chain development, specifically by setting up support structures
– in particular, innovative technical and economic advisory assistance
arrangements, including management councils and physical infrastructure – and
promoting policy dialogue (component 2). Although this is not an environmental or
youth employment project per se, it will address these concerns – e.g. by
supporting the conversion of cereal growing areas to the selected value chains,
which are more labour-intensive and more environmentally friendly, with technical
advice oriented towards organic agriculture and a rational use of chemical inputs.
The value chain professionalization dynamic will open up prospects for both direct
employment for skilled labour and indirect employment in the provision of services
and advice.

B. Organizational framework
14. Project management will take place at three levels. The central coordination unit

(CCU), which already exists at the Investment Financing and Professional
Organizations Directorate (DGFIOP) of the Ministry of Agriculture, will provide
central project coordination. At the regional level, a rural development division
(RDD), or another structure responsible for project execution will be created within
the Regional Commission for Agricultural Development in Siliana (CRDA). The RDD
will be assisted locally by light project implementation coordination structures
based on territorial outreach units. Project management and socio-professional
organization capacities of these structures will be strengthened with external
technical assistance.

15. For steering and coordination, plans call for setting up three coordination
structures: (i) a national steering committee; (ii) a regional coordination and
steering committee; and (iii) a local coordination committee set up for each



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

5

delegation. In addition, a regional technical committee will be set up to coordinate
the steering of arrangements for technical and economic advisory assistance.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, learning and knowledge
management

16. Planning. Through the value chain platforms supported by the required technical
assistance and specialized expertise, plans call for developing an action framework
for each value chain, then business plans for farmers organizations or other
operators within the value chains outlining investments, implementation modalities
and physical and financial participation by the different actors. These planning
instruments will identify the investments with the best returns for the target
population, with business plans for different types of upstream and downstream
investment.

17. The annual workplan and budget (AWP/B) will be prepared by DPCDR jointly
with the CRDA technical services and project partners, based on the design report,
COSTAB projections adjusted to reflect actual figures, value chain action
frameworks, priority needs of beneficiaries formulated within the platforms,
implementation capacities, budget allocations and recommendations by supervision
missions.

18. The M&E system will be set up on the basis of the system implemented by DGFIOP
for the Natural Resource Management Project (PGRN 2) funded by the World Bank,
already installed for the IFAD-funded second phase of the Agropastoral
Development and Local Initiatives Promotion Programme for the South-East
(PRODESUD-II) and the Agropastoral Value Chains Project in the Governorate of
Médenine (PRODEFIL). This system will make it possible to define: (i) planning for
activities and budgets; (ii) monitoring of physical and financial gains and their
impact on project management and logical framework indicators; (iii) evaluation of
results effectiveness by analysing outcomes and achievement times, and efficiency
based on performance on the cost of achievements; (iv) evaluation of results
disaggregated by specific target group, e.g. women and young people; and
(v) monitoring of disbursements. The system will be adapted during year one of the
project to take account of these specificities and indicators of results and impact
from the logical framework and the Results and Impact Management System
(RIMS). Preparation of the baseline study and adaptation of the M&E system will be
undertaken using retroactive financing so that the baseline study is available prior
to actual project start-up.

19. Knowledge management. The project will disseminate innovations and lessons
learned at workshops, seminars and round tables and in radio and television
broadcasts, as well as opinion surveys of beneficiaries on the effects and impact of
project achievements, publication and dissemination of documents, brochures and
other media on the project and its results – which will serve as sources of
information and orientation for the preparation and planning of other development
projects in similar areas elsewhere in the country. A website will be created for this
project.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
20. Financial management. The flow of funds for the project will proceed as provided

for in the financing agreement through the designated account. The Siliana CRDA,
delegated by the Ministry of Investment and International Cooperation and the
Ministry of Agriculture, will issue disbursement and payment orders drawn on IFAD
accounts and designated accounts at the Central Bank of Tunisia. Two designated
accounts will be opened at the bank, one for the loan and one for the grant.

21. Based on the experience acquired by IFAD in the country, the Government’s
intention to combat corruption and the reforms under way on fiscal management,
risk evaluation in connection with financial management and governance indicators



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

6

shows that the overall fiduciary risk is considered moderate. This risk will be
mitigated with a series of measures set as disbursement conditions: (i) drafting of a
decree to set up the regional development planning and coordination unit within the
RDD or another structure responsible for project execution within the CRDA;
(ii) designation, in agreement with IFAD, of key project staff, namely the project
coordinator, value chain manager, five local coordinators, an M&E officer and
accountant; (iii) installation of integrated accounting management and M&E
software; and (iv) preparation of an operational and financial management manual
for the project.

22. Disbursements. The IFAD loan and grant proceeds will be disbursed over six
years, based on the disbursement categories and amounts specified in annex 2 of
the financing agreement. Withdrawals of funds from the loan and grant accounts
will take place on the basis of the corresponding contracts and invoices. Other
eligible expenses will be justified by certified expense statements, and supporting
documents will be kept for verification by the external auditor and supervision
missions.

23. Procurement. Project procurement will be done in accordance with the provisions
of the IFAD procurement guidelines approved by the Executive Board in September
2010. As part of the PRODEFIL design, approved in 2014, IFAD evaluated national
regulations on procurement to ensure their compatibility with IFAD guidelines.
Following the evaluation it was decided that the national regulations could be used.
Activities under direct management will not be financed under the project. The
borrower will submit a procurement plan to the Fund each year prior to the end of
October including proposed contracts, procurement methods and procedures for
prior review by IFAD as applicable.

24. Audit. The borrower will, in accordance with the procedures and criteria set forth in
the Fund’s project audit guidelines, have an audit of the accounts done each fiscal
year by the Comptroller General reporting to the Ministry of Finance and agreed by
the Fund, and will submit a certified copy of the audit report to the Fund within six
months following the end of the year under review. The report will also contain an
opinion on procurement modalities for contracts financed under the project. The
DPCDR will prepare semi-annual financial statements on the project activities, and
will ensure that the accounting books are kept in accordance with government
practices and procedures agreed by IFAD. In addition, internal control will be
provided by the relevant services of the Ministry of Agriculture, supported by the
Comptroller at the regional level. In view of the frequent delays in submission to
IFAD of the final audit report for projects under way, IFAD will undertake the
necessary monitoring and rigorous application of the relevant provisions.

25. Governance. The Tunisian procurement system is aligned with the fundamental
principles of procurement for IFAD-funded projects. These are as follows: open
competition, equity, impartiality, integrity, transparency, good governance and
anti-corruption measures. The general rule for awarding contracts is to use open
tender procedures, and direct contracting is both highly limited and strictly
regulated.

E. Supervision
26. The project will be supervised on an annual basis by IFAD, with support missions as

needed. Special attention will be paid to eligibility criteria for project activities in
terms of targeting poor people, particularly women and young people. The
composition of IFAD’s supervision and monitoring missions will also reflect the
status of progress made on the project components and activities, targeting and
gender equity considerations, as well as lacunae in terms of the project’s
organizational structures.



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

7

IV. Project costs, financing, benefits
A. Project cost
27. The total cost of the project, over a six-year duration and including physical and

financial contingencies, is estimated at US$34.245 million. Base costs are estimated
at US$30.806 million, or 89.9 per cent of total cost. Physical and financial
contingencies represent US$3.439 million, or 10 per cent of total cost and
11 per cent of base costs. Investment costs, in the amount of US$31.5 million,
represent 92 per cent of total cost. Operating costs are just US$2.772 million, or
8 per cent of total cost.
Table 1
Project cost by component and source of financing
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries
Borrower/
counterpart Total

Component Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Value chain promotion
and value addition 8 982 68.6 218 1.7 1 717 13.1 2 184 16.7 13 101 38.2
2. Creation of enabling
conditions for value chain
development 13 432 76.7 261 1.5 827 4.7 2 982 17.0 17 502 51.0
3. Coordination and
management 1 248 33.3 24 0.6 - - 2 467 66.9 3 687 10.8

Total 23 610 68.9 502 1.5 2 544 7.4 7 633 22.2 34 289 100.0

B. Project financing
28. The project will be financed as follows: an IFAD loan on ordinary terms in the

amount of US$23.6 million, or 68.9 per cent of total project cost; an IFAD grant for
US$0.5 million, or 1.5 per cent of total cost; a contribution by the Government in
the amount of US$7.6 million, or 22.2 per cent of total cost, and contribution by
beneficiaries in the amount of US$2.5 million, or 7.4 per cent of total project cost.

29. It was agreed that recruitment of technical assistance providers by the project may
take place upon signature of the financing agreement. Reimbursement for technical
assistance will be made once the agreement has entered into force and on the
condition that the expenditures incurred meet the criteria for admissibility under
section 4.08 of the General Conditions for Agricultural Financing.
Table 2
Project cost by category of expenditure and source of financing
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Category of expenditure
IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries

Borrower/
counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Consulting services 4 043 79.0 502 9.8 11 0.2 533 11.0 5 119 14.9
2. Training 1 022 89.0 - - - - 126 11.0 1 149 3.4
3. Equipment and
materials 6 761 63.3 - - 2 132 20 1 783 16.7 10 676 31.1
4. Vehicles 480 83.3 - - 96 16.7 576 1.7
5. Civil engineering works 11 305 82.4 - - 130 0.9 2 292 16.7 13 727 40.0
6. Operating fund - - - - 271 100 271 0.8
7. Salaries and benefits - - - - - - 594 100.0 594 1.7
8. Operating and
maintenance - - - - - - 2 177 100.0 2 177 6.3

Total 23 610 68.9 502 1.5 2 544 7.4 7 633 22.2 34 289 100.0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
30. The economic internal rate of return (EIRR) for the project is 17.1 per cent, which

is considered extremely satisfactory for a project that addresses the challenging



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

8

problems of natural resource management in the marginalized areas of Tunisia. All
project costs have been taken into consideration, including those of the
components for which not all benefits have been quantified, such as rural tracks,
groundwater protection and recharge, and piezometric monitoring of groundwater
aquifers.

D. Sustainability
31. The sustainability of the project achievements will be ensured by means of:

(i) capacity-building for the administration to internalize the value chain approach
and make value chains operate effectively; (ii) support and assistance to producers’
organizations to enable them to fully take on a leading role in the process of value
chain promotion and liaison between their members and value chain operators,
particularly commercial operators, and to sustainably manage the value addition
units made available to them; (iii) facilitating the development of sustainable
win-win partnerships among value chain actors and operators; (iv) supporting
promoters of small enterprises created and supported by the project to enable them
to manage them profitably and sustainably; (v) making the advisory assistance
arrangements set up by the project permanent by integrating them within the
structure of the administration in charge of agricultural extension; (vi) undertaking
policy dialogue on improving the value chain environment so that the private sector
can invest in the various value chain links, particularly downstream; and
(vii) capacity-building for GDA to properly manage and maintain the public
infrastructure financed by the project.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
32. The main risks identified and measures planned to mitigate them are as follows:

(i) inadequate human resources, in terms of number and skills, within CRDA and
the executing agencies, to be mitigated by making use of multi-disciplinary
technical assistance and strengthening the technical services of executing agencies;
(ii) uncertainty as to the decentralization process provided for in the constitution, to
be undertaken in the coming years, which could lead to a review of the powers and
remit of central and local structures. To address this risk, plans call for a midterm
review of the project’s organization chart based on the results of this process;
(iii) fragility of the socio-professional fabric and limited capacities of staff, to be
mitigated with capacity-building and support for these structures by specialized
assistance throughout project execution; (iv) ecological and environmental risks
relating to setting up new crushing units and upgrading abattoirs, which could be
mitigated by performing environmental impact assessments and adopting specific
treatment measures for the crushing units and abattoirs; and (v) risks relating to
the durability of the private advisory assistance arrangements, to be addressed
with a rigorous participatory selection of service providers, based on realistic
business plans and taking into account demand for advice, awareness-raising of
GDA and SMSA and informal groups on gradually taking over the costs of private
advice, support to GDA and SMSA for implementation of forms of remuneration for
private advice based on membership fees and charges added to the prices of
products delivered by their members.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
33. The project is aligned with IFAD’s Strategic Framework and will contribute to an

inclusive and sustainable rural transformation by: (i) building the productive
capacity of poor rural people within the selected value chains; (ii) raising the profits
of rural poor people through their market participation, support for business plan
development and relations with value chain actors, particularly market actors;
(iii) strengthening environmental sustainability and resilience of rural poor people
to climate change. The principles of the Fund’s policies on targeting, empowerment,



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

9

gender equality, innovation and knowledge transfer, scaling up and partnership are
equally upheld by this project.

B. Alignment and harmonization
34. Contribution by the project to country strategy objectives. The overall design

and intervention approach are fully aligned with the vision of implementing the
priority orientations of the Strategic Plan for National Development 2016-2020 now
nearing completion, in terms of poverty reduction, interregional balance and
improving youth employment. To this end, the development of agricultural value
chains involving the different actors and preserving the interests of vulnerable
groups is crucial to achieve those objectives, particularly in regions affected by
poverty, unemployment and degradation of natural resources.

35. Complementarity. The preparation of this project coincided with the formulation
of three new projects to operate mainly in Siliana but also in other locations, which
also call for supporting the development of agricultural and forest value chains.
They are as follows: (i) the Natural Resource Management Programme in
Vulnerable Rural Territories, piloted by the Agricultural Land Use and Protection
Directorate and supported by the French Development Agency (AFD) and the
French Global Environment Facility (FFEM); (ii) the Forest and Pastoral Value Chain
Development Project, coordinated by the Forestry Directorate and supported by the
World Bank; and (iii) the EPARD programme financed by the European Union. The
Governorate of Siliana is also involved in part through the Technical Assistance
Project for Sustainable Agricultural Development supported by the German Agency
for International Cooperation (GIZ). For these projects, value chain development is
an important lever for promoting both agricultural and non-agricultural activities
and strengthening the livelihoods and incomes of vulnerable people.

C. Innovation and scaling up
36. Innovations. The project as a whole is innovative in that it introduces a new

approach – the value chain approach – to territorial development. The main
innovations are as follows: (i) initiatives between value chain operators, such as
platforms bringing together value chain actors and operators leading to win-win
partnerships, with business plans materializing in the form of contracts between
operators at different links of the value chains; (ii) promotion of policy lobbying on
challenges facing value chains in connection with territorial development;
(iii) technical and economic advisory assistance arrangements for small-scale
operators to facilitate ownership of the value chain approach by producers and
improve their production standards and farm management; (iv) making available
pilot value addition units to groups of farmers (SMSA), to be managed by them;
and (v) use of specialized private technical assistance to implement the project.

37. The project will make the best use of these innovations through scaling up by
identifying interventions to be consolidated and expanded, scale of intervention,
evolution in the number of beneficiaries in the short, medium and long term;
drivers of expansion such as leaders and contextual incentives; secured resources
such as financing and natural, strategic, institutional, organizational and political
resources, partnerships and participatory knowledge management; and the
trajectories and pathways of such an approach.

D. Policy engagement
38. The value chain approach as a lever of sustainable territorial development is still

incipient, and the current vision is essentially centred around adding value to
certain strategic products. In terms of policy dialogue, actions to strengthen
farmers’ organizations and to promote and develop value chains will be analysed
and proposals formulated in order to contribute to: (i) initiatives and win-win
partnerships between value chain operators; (ii) synergies between territorial
development and value chains; (iii) adapted technical and economic advisory



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

10

assistance arrangements for family farms to promote ownership of the value chain
approach and improve farm management; (iv) management of value addition units
by groups of farmers (SMSA); and (v) setting up value chain platforms to put
forward reform proposals.

VI. Legal instruments and powers
39. A project financing agreement between the Republic of Tunisia and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as
appendix I.

40. The Republic of Tunisia is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

41. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Lending Policies and Criteria.

VII. Recommendation
42. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Republic of Tunisia in an amount equivalent to EUR twenty-one million six
hundred thousand (EUR 21,600,000), and upon such terms and conditions as
shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
Tunisia in an amount equivalent to EUR four hundred and sixty thousand
(EUR 460,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially
in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President
















President’s report

Proposed grant to the Republic of Zimbabwe
for the Smallholder Irrigation Revitalization
Programme


Republic of Zimbabwe

Smallholder Irrigation Revitalization Programme

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Recipient: Republic of Zimbabwe

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture, Mechanisation and Irrigation
Development

Total programme cost: US$51.5 million

Amount of IFAD grant: SDR 18.3 million
(equivalent to approximately US$25.5 million)

Cofinancier(s): OPEC Fund for International Development

Amount of cofinancing: US$15.0 million

Terms of cofinancing: To be confirmed

Contribution of recipient: US$7.7 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$3.3 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/118/R.20/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
grant to the Republic of Zimbabwe for the Smallholder Irrigation Revitalization
Programme, as contained in paragraph 53.

Proposed grant to the Republic of Zimbabwe for the
Smallholder Irrigation Revitalization Programme

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Zimbabwe is a landlocked country with a total area of approximately

390,757 square kilometres. The country’s population is estimated at 14.6 million
people (2014) and projected to grow to 20.3 million people in 2020. With a Human
Development Index of 0.509, Zimbabwe ranks 155th of 188 countries. Life
expectancy stands at 57.8 years, and stunting prevalence in children is an
estimated 27.6 per cent (2014). While still among the highest globally, the
prevalence of HIV has declined from 25 per cent in 1997 to 15 per cent in 2014.

2. Economic growth slowed from 4.5 per cent in 2013 to an estimated 1 per cent in
2015 as a result of weak domestic demand, high public debt, tight liquidity
conditions, drought, poor infrastructure and institutional weaknesses. Agriculture
provides direct and indirect livelihoods for over 70 per cent of Zimbabwe’s
population and supports one third of the formal labour force. Agriculture generates
between 15 and 18 per cent of gross domestic product, and contributes over
40 per cent of national export earnings.

3. The proportion of the population living below the national poverty line is estimated
at 72 per cent (84 per cent in rural areas). Zimbabwe’s recurrent droughts and food
security issues have remained dire over the past decade, exposing millions of
people to food insecurity and poverty. An estimated 1.5 million people – 16 per
cent of the rural population – will be unable to meet their minimum food needs and
will require humanitarian assistance in 2015/16. This is a 164 per cent increase
over the 2013/14 season.

4. Zimbabwe’s relations with the international community have been difficult for
years, mainly due to land reforms and political conflicts. There are now positive
signs of the international community re-engaging with the Government of
Zimbabwe. The Government has made progress on negotiations with international
financial institutions, notably the International Monetary Fund and the African
Development Bank, to settle the country’s arrears. In December 2015, IFAD’s
Executive Board approved Zimbabwe’s debt rescheduling proposal in the amount of
US$23.1 million.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

5. Zimbabwe has one of the highest levels of water development for irrigation in the
region. Evidence suggests that households in smallholder irrigation schemes are
better off in terms of food production, income, nutrition and general well-being than
households relying on rainfed agriculture. In addition to achieving higher yields,
irrigators are able to increase crop production and incomes during the dry winter
season, when rainfed production is impossible.



EB 2016/118/R.20/Rev.1

2

6. More than 50 per cent of smallholder irrigation schemes in Zimbabwe are either not
functional or only partly functional. These schemes have been caught in a vicious
cycle of build/operate/rehabilitate, and are heavily dependent on government and
donor funding.

7. A common feature is that rehabilitation has primarily focused on infrastructure
development and repairs, often without the corresponding investments in farmers’
organization and empowerment, water management, agricultural production
activities and market linkages. Some schemes have been operating for many years,
even decades, many of them at sub-optimal levels. There is a general lack of
community ownership and participation in the management of irrigation assets.
While irrigation management committees (IMCs) exist in all schemes, and are seen
as a standard requirement, they do not have the formal status to enforce by-laws.

8. Decades of experience in irrigation development, both in Zimbabwe and elsewhere,
have evidenced the need for an integrated approach to ensure commercial and
environmental sustainability. This is the rationale behind the design of the
Smallholder Irrigation Revitalization Programme (SIRP). Without an increased
market orientation, improved access to inputs, and the adoption of good
agricultural practices to boost productivity, farmers cannot create the revenue
needed to increase their income and defray the operation and maintenance (O&M)
of irrigation schemes. Similarly, unless wider socioeconomic and biophysical
considerations are taken into account, equity issues will limit impact to a small
number of people, and environmental issues will undermine the overall success of
the programme.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
9. Programme area: SIRP will revitalize 6,100 hectares (ha) in about 152 existing

smallholder irrigation schemes, located mainly in communal and old resettlement
areas in the semi-arid sections of natural regions III, IV and V in the provinces of
Manicaland, Masvingo, Matabeleland South, and Midlands. The programme’s target
area contains about 47 per cent of the country’s estimated total irrigation-equipped
area of about 13,000 ha.

10. Target group: SIRP will target 29,750 smallholder poor rural households,
equivalent to about 148,750 people. Women (heads of household, wives and young
women) will account for at least 50 per cent of the target group, in line with their
participation in irrigated agriculture and off-farm activities. SIRP beneficiaries will
include: (i) 15,250 households (76,250 people) holding an average of 0.4 ha in
irrigation schemes; (ii) 12,500 households (62,500 people) with no access to
irrigation in the greater-scheme and subcatchment areas relying on rainfed
agriculture and livestock; (iii) 2,000 youth, who will be involved in production,
aggregation, marketing and service provision and will build small- and
medium-scale businesses along value chains; and (iv) 500 extension service
providers that will improve their capacity for more responsive and efficient service
delivery.

B. Programme development objective
11. The overall goal of SIRP is that rural households achieve food and nutrition security

and are resilient to climate change effects and economic shocks in the programme
districts. The programme development objective is that rural households
sustainably increase their income in schemes and adjacent rainfed areas supported
by the programme.

12. The programme goal will be achieved by revitalizing existing high potential
irrigation schemes and their adjacent rainfed areas (subcatchment areas), which
will result in: (i) an increase in production and productivity of selected



EB 2016/118/R.20/Rev.1

3

commodities; (ii) an increase in annual household incomes; (iii) increased market
integration; and (iv) a smallholder agricultural production system that is better
adapted to climate change.

C. Components/outcomes
13. SIRP’s structure is articulated around two complementary components, the first

focusing on sustainable development of smallholder irrigation, and the second on
climate-smart agriculture and market access.

14. Component 1: Sustainable smallholder irrigation development will focus on
revitalizing existing irrigation schemes and rendering them fully operational,
thereby contributing to improving the incomes of targeted households. This will be
achieved by rehabilitating 6,100 ha of existing irrigation schemes in the four target
provinces, while financing further scheme feasibility and design studies nationwide.
It will entail expanding the area of existing smallholder irrigation schemes under
effective O&M by irrigators and their water users organizations (WUOs), by
preparing and implementing revitalization plans at scheme level. This will be
complemented by capacity-building for government departments to provide quality
service to smallholder irrigators, and engaging in policy dialogue on issues affecting
small-scale irrigators.

15. Component 2: Climate-smart agriculture and market access aims to improve
productivity and sustainable crop production under both rainfed and irrigated
conditions, through improved cropping intensity on selected schemes and increased
adoption of improved varieties, fertilizers, good agricultural practices and
climate-smart agriculture practices and technologies. This component will seek to
improve village natural resources management planning, including soil and water
conservation in adjacent rainfed areas, by preparing and implementing greater
scheme agricultural plans. A natural resources management facility will be
established to provide matching grants to farmers in rainfed areas to undertake
income-generating projects that utilize natural resources in a sustainable manner
and complement soil and water conservation technologies. This component will
focus on improving farm profitability and household incomes by increasing market
access and linkages between the different value chain actors for both irrigation and
rainfed farmers. Moreover, this component will improve access to and use of
financial services through enhanced financial literacy of farmers and their
organizations and strengthening of community-based financial institutions. This
component will promote good nutritional practices and gender mainstreaming as
part of agricultural and market support. This will be complemented by
capacity-building for government departments to enable them to provide quality
services to smallholder farmers, and engage in policy dialogue on issues affecting
smallholder farmers.

III. Programme implementation
A. Approach
16. The proposed principles of engagement for programme design are as follows:

(a) In line with IFAD’s mandate, SIRP will target productive poor smallholders
who are currently engaging in irrigation as well as poor and vulnerable
smallholders engaged in rainfed farming in the adjacent rainfed areas;

(b) Without compromising on food security, the programme will support the move
towards smallholder irrigated farming as a business in order to enable
sufficient financial returns to targeted smallholders, long-term sustainability of
investment and replicability/scalability of the smallholder irrigation
development approach;

(c) SIRP will adopt a participatory approach. The programme will support farmers’
own development efforts, based on the preparation of a revitalization plan and



EB 2016/118/R.20/Rev.1

4

a greater scheme agricultural plan by farmers/irrigators through their
organizations;

(d) Investment will be made on a cost-sharing basis, with capital expenditure
financed mainly by the programme, and farmers fully covering the O&M of
their scheme, including the cost of water and depreciation of movable
equipment;

(e) The programme will prioritize the rehabilitation of existing schemes while
verifying adequate water availability at pre-feasibility stage, market proximity
to sell produce at competitive prices and interest on the part of the private
sector and financial institutions to work with the scheme or cluster, and
institutional arrangements;

(f) SIRP will engage with the private sector, such as off-takers, input suppliers
and financial institutions, early on in the process of prioritizing schemes to be
rehabilitated, in order to ensure viable linkages with input and output markets
and support services during implementation; and

(g) The Government’s capacity to provide services to smallholders will be
strengthened, while supporting the implementation of different business
models and business relations between farmers and the private sector.

B. Organizational framework
17. The lead implementing agency will be the Ministry of Agriculture, Mechanisation and

Irrigation Development (MAMID). The Ministry will execute the programme and
ensure that it is aligned with sector priorities and complements the
programmes/projects and initiatives of other development partners supporting the
sector. Implementation responsibilities rest with the Department of Irrigation (DoI)
for component 1, while the Department of Agriculture Technical and Extension
Services (AGRITEX) will lead component 2. At the provincial and district levels,
programme coordination will be provided by provincial and district agricultural
coordination committees, respectively.

18. A multi-sector stakeholder programme steering committee, chaired by the
Permanent Secretary of MAMID, will be established to provide overall programme
oversight, direction and advice. A dedicated and competitively recruited programme
coordination unit (PCU) will report to the Permanent Secretary, MAMID. The PCU
will be responsible for day-to-day management and ensure effective coordination of
DoI and AGRITEX activities under the programme. The PCU will be responsible for
consolidating annual workplans and budgets (AWP/Bs), procurement plans, and
progress and financial reports received from the districts and implementing entities,
and will coordinate the procurement of goods, works and services. The PCU will also
take charge of monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and provide support to
implementation and supervision missions. The PCU will serve as programme
steering committee secretariat.

19. A programme technical committee, comprising of staff drawn from government
technical departments, will provide technical support and advice to the PCU on
planning and progress issues.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

20. The main planning tools for SIRP will comprise the updated logical framework/M&E
framework, including indicators and targets, and the results-based AWP/B. The
logical framework provides indicators and targets for the programme as a whole,
whereas the RB-AWP/B will be used as the primary planning tool to set annual
targets and allocate financial resources. The financial and physical execution of the
RB-AWPB will be regularly monitored and reported on.

21. The M&E system will be the key source of comprehensive and reliable data to
inform improved planning and decision-making during implementation. It will be



EB 2016/118/R.20/Rev.1

5

relied upon to inform stakeholders on SIRP performance. Results generated by the
results and impact management system indicators will be reported back to IFAD on
an annual basis. The PCU will be responsible for ensuring a well-functioning M&E
system.

22. A baseline study will be designed and carried out at programme start-up in
pre-identified schemes. Baselines will be scheme specific as per outcome of the
selection process. The baseline studies will form the basis for assessing programme
effectiveness and results achievement. The household survey will be repeated at
mid-term and upon programme completion.

23. SIRP learning systems will involve monthly, quarterly, bi-annual and annual review
meetings/workshops, capturing information on progress, lessons and best practices
and finding solutions to implementation constraints at different levels. These review
platforms will serve as a learning event, as well as to monitor and influence the
process through which results are supposed to be achieved.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
24. Financial management. A financial management assessment carried out at

design assessed the overall fiduciary control risk as high. Consequently, the
proposed financial management arrangements for SIRP include appropriate risk
mitigation measures, inter alia: (i) competitive recruitment of a dedicated
programme accountant, and assignment of qualified accounting staff at the
provincial level; (ii) mobilization of additional technical assistance during start-up to
assist with the establishment of systems and financial procedures to be included in
the programme implementation manual; (iii) use of accounting software; and
(iv) the use of programme-specific designated accounts, to ensure that the residual
programme implementation rating will be medium risk.

25. MAMID’s Director of Finance and Administration will be responsible for ensuring
adequate financial management arrangements throughout SIRP implementation.
The operational day-to-day financial management functions, including budgeting,
accounting, funds flow management, internal control, financial reporting and
ensuring timely external audits, will be the responsibility of the PCU’s programme
accountant overseen by the Chief Accountant, DoI.

26. Programme audits. To provide assurances of strong internal controls, MAMID will
include regular internal auditing of the programme in its audit plans. During the
initial years an independent audit firm acceptable to the Fund will perform the
external audit, until such time as the Office of the Auditor General has been
appropriately assessed.

27. Funds flow and disbursement arrangements. Two separate designated
accounts operated and maintained by the Ministry of Finance and Economic
Development will be opened to receive programme funds from IFAD and the OPEC
Fund for International Development (OFID), respectively. Only one operational
account will be opened for settlements of advances to implementing agencies and
programme expenditures incurred. The PCU will manage and operate the
operational account.

28. Start-up costs. An advance may be requested to cover start-up costs for eligible
expenditure to be incurred between the date of entry into force of the financing
agreement and fulfilment of the conditions precedent to withdrawal.

29. Procurement. All procurement under SIRP will be carried out in accordance with
national procurement procedures, to the extent that they are consistent with IFAD’s
project procurement guidelines. A procurement assessment of MAMID undertaken
during SIRP design showed several inconsistencies between national and IFAD
regulations, concerning bid registers, bidding documents, contract administration,
procurement planning and selection of procurement methods. To address
procurement risks, a procurement specialist in the PCU will be responsible for



EB 2016/118/R.20/Rev.1

6

ensuring full compliance with IFAD requirements. The latter will be duly spelled out
in the financing agreement, letter to the recipient and programme implementation
manual.

E. Supervision
30. The SIRP will be directly supervised by IFAD. Direct supervision will encompass loan

and grant administration, procurement reviews, audit reviews, and supervision and
implementation support missions. Joint supervision missions with the Government
will be carried out bi-annually and will focus primarily on fiduciary aspects, physical
progress and the quality of programme implementation. In conjunction with
supervision, implementation support will be provided by IFAD to help ensure the
efficient achievement of programme objectives. Additional implementation support
and backstopping will be provided during the programme start-up phase to enhance
technical capacities, assist with the establishment of implementation arrangements
and assist in the setting up of required systems (e.g. M&E and financial
management). The proposed OFID cofinancing will be administered by IFAD.

IV. Programme costs, financing and benefits
A. Programme costs
31. Total programme costs to be incurred during the seven-year implementation

period, including price and physical contingencies, duties and taxes, are estimated
at US$51.5 million. This includes base costs amounting to US$47.6 million and
estimated physical and price contingencies in the amount of US$3.9 million
(8 per cent of the base costs). Estimated foreign exchange expenditure is about
US$15.2 million (30 per cent of total programme costs), whereas duties and taxes
amount to US$8.1 million (16 per cent). Investment costs represent 89 per cent of
the base costs, with recurrent costs accounting for the remaining 11 per cent.
Programme management costs are 4 per cent of total programme costs.

32. Local inflation rates were estimated at 1.3 per cent per annum in 2017 and
2 per cent per annum thereafter until 2023. Foreign inflation has been set at
2 per cent for seven years, based on the World Bank Manufactures Unit Value
Index. Taxes and duties were estimated using information provided by the
Zimbabwe Revenue Authority. The Government of Zimbabwe will either waive
duties, excises and taxes or directly finance their cost.
Table 1
Programme costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component

IFAD grant OFID Beneficiaries Government Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Sustainable smallholder irrigation
development 11 511 35 13 767 42 2 238 7 4 961 15 32 477

2. Climate-smart agriculture and
market access 12 253 73 1 233 7 1 045 6 2 333 14 16 864

3. Programme coordination 1 736 80 - - - - 441 20 2 176

Total 25 500 50 15 000 29 3 283 6 7 735 15 51 518

B. Programme financing
33. SIRP will be financed by the Government of Zimbabwe, programme beneficiaries,

IFAD and, pending official confirmation, OFID. IFAD will finance 50 per cent
(US$25.5 million) of overall programme costs on grant terms, under the Debt
Sustainability Framework. The Government will finance taxes and duties



EB 2016/118/R.20/Rev.1

7

(US$7.9 million), representing 15 per cent of total costs.1 Beneficiaries will
contribute 6 per cent of total programme costs, US$3.3 million, in the form of
financial contributions to O&M for rehabilitated infrastructure, cost sharing of
post-harvest technologies, and in-kind contribution to soil and water conservation
activities. It is anticipated that OFID will finance 29 per cent2 (US$15.0 million) of
programme costs, covering civil works related to irrigation rehabilitation and road
improvement.
Table 2
Programme costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD OFID Beneficiaries Government Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1.Consultancies 4 911 90 - - - - 546 10 5 457
2. Equipment and materials 2 475 98 - - - - 56 2 2 531
3. Goods, equipment and inputs 2 009 71 - - 697 25 108 4 2 814
4. Workshops 545 85 - - - - 96 15 641
5. Training 4 315 85 - - - - 762 15 5 077
6. Vehicles 1 091 45 - - - - 1 336 55 2 427
7. Works 7 621 28 15 000 56 348 1 3 931 15 26 899
8. Salaries and allowances 387 75 - - - - 129 25 515
9. Operating costs 2 145 42 - - 2 238 43 774 15 5 157

Total 25 500 50 15 000 29 3 283 6 7 735 15 51 518

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
34. SIRP will generate substantial economic and social benefits. The main quantifiable

benefit is the increase in production and productivity to be achieved with higher
yields following investments in the revitalization of irrigation schemes and in
farm-level training on both irrigated and rainfed plots. Cropping patterns on
irrigated plots will favour market-led production of higher value crops, leading to
increased farm incomes. The introduction of post-harvest technology and
infrastructure, as well as training in post-harvest handling, is expected to result in
reduced post-harvest losses. Investments in the rehabilitation of approximately
150 kilometres of access roads will reduce transport costs and enhance market
access for targeted smallholders.

35. Moreover, the programme is likely to generate a range of indirect benefits, such as
the creation of off-farm jobs in the service and marketing sectors, increased market
participation and food availability, institutional strengthening and policy changes.

36. The proposed investment shows robust financial results at both crop and farm level,
demonstrating clear incentives for farmers to participate and financial sustainability
for the irrigation scheme. The base case economic internal rate of return (EIRR) is
estimated at 25.9 per cent. The benefit/cost ratio is estimated at 2.29, and the
payback period at 7.3 years. The economic net present value is estimated at
US$41.7 million. The EIRR is robust to changes in the expected benefits or costs.
Switching values were calculated for incremental benefits and incremental costs.
Benefits would have to be reduced by 60 per cent or costs increased by
152 per cent for SIRP to become economically unviable. Such variations in costs
and benefits are unlikely to occur. Adoption rates ranging from 65 per cent to
85 per cent have been assumed in the cost benefit analysis.

1 The estimate of taxes and duties was based on the rates in effect at the time of the design. In conformity with the principle that
no taxes or duties would be financed out of the proceeds of the IFAD and OFID financing, any future changes in the rates and/or
structures of taxes and duties would apply to the programme.
2 If OFID funding does not materialize, alternative sources of funding will be sought by the Government of Zimbabwe.



EB 2016/118/R.20/Rev.1

8

D. Sustainability
37. The long-term sustainability of investments in irrigated infrastructure will be

ensured as follows: first, prior to investment a diagnostic study of the key issues
affecting scheme performance needs to be carried out with a high degree of
participation by the targeted farmers. This study will identify the root causes of
system failure and allow SIRP to adequately target investments. Second,
interventions will take into account larger natural resource management issues to
ensure environmental sustainability. By investing in community-based natural
resources management in adjacent rainfed areas and linking them with income
generating activities, SIRP proactively deals with potential environmental issues
whilst also ensuring a longer life time for the scheme itself. Third, the programme
will invest in building adequate capacity at all levels as required to sustainably
operate and maintain schemes, manage finances and effectively prevent or resolve
any social conflicts related to access to land or water.

38. Zimbabwe’s rural population is exposed to the effects of climate change, as the
recent drought showed. The proposed programme interventions are designed to
minimize those impacts. Revitalized irrigated agriculture becomes a key adaptation
pathway to respond to increasing intra-seasonal variability in the water supply.
Water-use efficiency will be improved by reducing conveyance losses and by
training farmers on irrigation water management. When designing extensions to
existing schemes, the increased crop water requirements due to increased
evapotranspiration will be assessed to determine potential irrigable area. The
selection of new schemes to be studied will be informed by the National Adaptation
Plan, currently under development, in order to select those areas most crucially
affected by climate change. Interventions in the adjacent rainfed lands aim to
restore the natural resource base and use it in a more sustainable way, thereby
increasing resilience to shocks. These interventions will help protect the irrigation
schemes from silting up and restore water bodies.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
39. The programme design prioritized risk identification and management to ensure a

successful re-engagement of IFAD in Zimbabwe and the sustainability of the
proposed interventions. The main approach has been simplified design and
implementation arrangements to limit the programme’s exposure. Measures in
financial management and procurement are proposed to manage remaining risks
deemed acceptable or inevitable.

40. Macro-economic and political instabilities, however, remain beyond programme
control. Other key risks to programme success have been identified as follows:
(i) non-fulfilment of IFAD arrears settlement; (ii) non-availability of cofinancing
from OFID; (iii) programme implementation delays; (iv) limited responsiveness of
service providers; (v) inability of farmers to contribute to initial commitment and
operational costs; (vi) effects of climate change; and (vii) market constraints.

41. The respective mitigation measures for the above risks include: (i) commitment by
the Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe and the Ministry of Finance and Economic
Development to ensure liquidity to settle arrears as they fall due; (ii) close
follow-up by the Government of Zimbabwe with OFID; (iii) engagement of technical
assistance during programme start-up to help set up financial management
systems and address pre-disbursement conditions; (iv) capacity-building for public
sector service providers, and engagement of private-sector service providers under
performance-based contracts; (v) targeting schemes where farmers have
demonstrated willingness and ability to commit to operational costs; (vi) integration
of climate change effects into the planning and design of irrigation investments;
and (vii) improving farmers’ access to information and promoting value addition at
scheme level while establishing linkages to markets.



EB 2016/118/R.20/Rev.1

9

42. Based on the 2015 Transparency International Global Corruption Perceptions Index
score of 21, the country has been rated as high risk. A 2015 follow-on World Bank
financial management assessment indicated that improvements have taken place in
recent years but recommended a number of reforms. As provided in paragraph
24 above, the programme’s design arrangements include key financial management
safeguards to be adopted during implementation.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
43. SIRP design is fully aligned with all IFAD strategic objectives set for the

2016-2025 period.3 Strategies for gender mainstreaming and targeting have been
incorporated in programme design in accordance with the IFAD Policy on Targeting
and the Policy on Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment. All activities under
SIRP will comply with the IFAD Policy on Improving Access to Land and Tenure
Security. Proposed activities in rural finance are consistent with IFAD’s Rural
Finance Policy.

44. For environmental and social purposes, SIRP is classified as a category B operation,
as the focus of the investment is primarily on rehabilitating existing irrigation
schemes. The programme is expected to have limited adverse social impacts on
human populations or environmentally significant areas. These risks will be
minimized through a solid scheme selection and design process complemented by
investments in the greater scheme area. In line with IFAD’s Social, Environmental
and Climate Assessment Procedures, residual risks will be identified in the
environmental and social impact assessment and managed via scheme-specific
mitigation measures agreed upon in the environmental and social management
plan to be prepared for each SIRP-supported scheme.

B. Alignment and harmonization
45. The smallholder irrigation subsector is identified among priority areas for

investment in all relevant country strategy and policy documents.4 The Zimbabwe
Agenda for Sustainable Socio-Economic Transformation, the country’s poverty
eradication strategy, targets a 50 per cent increase in the country’s area equipped
with irrigation by 2018. Both the Comprehensive Agricultural Policy Framework and
Zimbabwe Agriculture Investment Plan share SIRP’s value chain approach to
increasing farm productivity, improving extension services and promoting the
commercialization of smallholder agriculture. All relevant country strategies
emphasize the importance of building the resilience of communities to food and
nutrition insecurity and the effects of climate change.

46. Furthermore, SIRP implementation responsibilities will be largely mainstreamed
within the Government’s existing systems and decentralized structures. This will
facilitate the creation of synergies with other development partners and ensure
complementarities between SIRP and other interventions in the sector.

C. Innovations and scaling up
47. The programme will adopt a holistic approach to smallholder irrigation revitalization

in Zimbabwe that encompasses infrastructure development, farmers’ organization
capacity-building and empowerment, natural resource management, agricultural
production, market linkages and access to finance. This is an innovative approach,
as it constitutes a departure from the usual focus on “hardware” investments. The
selection of irrigation schemes for revitalization will occur during programme

3 IFAD Strategic Framework 2016-2025.
4 Government priorities for the development of the agricultural sector are outlined in the: (i) Zimbabwe Agenda for Sustainable
Socio-Economic Transformation 2013-2018; (iii) Zimbabwe Agriculture Investment Plan 2013-17; (iv) draft Comprehensive
Agricultural Policy Framework 2012-2032; and (v) Zimbabwe 10-Point Plan for Economic Growth.



EB 2016/118/R.20/Rev.1

10

implementation, and will be based on predefined criteria that prioritize areas that
optimize a combination of biophysical, socioeconomic and institutional aspects, in
order to achieve economies of scale and scope, and maximize efficiency,
effectiveness and large-scale impacts. The participatory planning approach and the
requirement of having farmers contribute to O&M costs are innovative features,
intended to promote sustainability.

48. The programme will pilot and promote low cost technologies for storage and
processing of perishable products at irrigation scheme level and cluster level.
Innovative approaches to include youth in programme activities call for providing
vocational training and starter kits to promote off-farm employment along the value
chain.

D. Policy engagement
49. The programme will enhance national capacity through evidence-based policy

dialogue among stakeholders such as the Government, farmer representations,
WUOs and the private sector to engage in policy dialogue on issues related to
smallholder irrigation, natural resources management and market access. Several
priority issues have been identified during programme design, including:
(i) formalization of the status of IMCs to become legally recognized WUOs with
certified rights to water and lands; (ii) revision of water pricing for smallholder
irrigation; (iii) effective and cost-efficient implementation of environmental and
social management plans; and (iv) incentives for private companies to engage with
smallholder farmers.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
50. A programme financing agreement between the Republic of Zimbabwe and IFAD

will constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as appendix I.

51. The Republic of Zimbabwe is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD.

52. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
53. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a Debt Sustainability Framework grant
to the Republic of Zimbabwe in an amount equivalent to eighteen million
three hundred thousand special drawing rights (SDR 18,300,000)
(approximately US$25.5 million) and upon such terms and conditions as shall
be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President































































President’s report

Proposed loan to the Republic of Angola
for the Artisanal Fisheries and Aquaculture
Project

Republic of Angola

Artisanal Fisheries and Aquaculture Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of Angola

Executing agency: Ministry of Fisheries

Total project cost: US$12.1 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 7.91 million (equivalent to approximately
US$11.1 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Blend terms, subject to interest at a fixed rate of
1.25 per cent in addition to a service charge of
0.75 per cent per annum on the principal amount
outstanding with a maturity period of 25 years, including
a grace period of 5 years, starting from the date of
approval by the Executive Board

Cofinancier(s): Although not included as part of this project proposal,
parallel grant financing is being finalized from the
European Community in the amount of
EUR 10.0 million.

Contribution of borrower: US$1.0 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD.





Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
loan to the Republic of Angola for the Artisanal Fisheries and Aquaculture Project,
as contained in paragraph 40.

Proposed loan to the Republic of Angola for the Artisanal
Fisheries and Aquaculture Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Angola is located in south-western Africa and is bordered by the Atlantic Ocean to

the west, Namibia to the south and the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Zambia to the north and east, respectively. It is the third-largest country in sub-
Saharan Africa, covering an area of about 1.2 million square kilometres. Because
no population census has been conducted since 1970, population estimates must be
relied on and currently range between 16 and 18 million people, of whom some
41 per cent live in rural areas. Angola is one of Africa’s most resource-rich
countries, representing sub-Saharan Africa’s second-largest oil producer, after
Nigeria, and the world’s fourth-largest producer (in value) of diamonds. The
country also possesses a wealth of other natural resources, including minerals,
water, agriculture, forestry and fisheries.

2. Angola became independent from Portugal in 1975 after 14 years of fighting, but
was then immediately engulfed in one of Africa’s most prolonged civil conflicts,
between the Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola (MPLA) and the
National Union for the Total Independence of Angola (UNITA). Peace seemed
imminent in 1992 when national elections were held, but fighting was renewed
when UNITA rejected the election results. A new peace agreement, the Lusaka
Protocol, was signed in 1994, but war resumed in 1998. In April 2002, a ceasefire
was called following the death of the UNITA leader, Jonas Savimbi; and on
21 November 2002, the Government and former rebels signed a peace agreement
that definitively ended the Angolan Civil War.

3. After almost four decades of war, much of the country’s economy had collapsed,
infrastructure was destroyed, institutions were weakened or no longer functioning,
the society was polarized, an estimated 4 million people were displaced, poverty
was rampant, and the newly created political process was fragile. Over the last 12
years since signing the peace accords, the Government, together with its national
and international partners, has developed and implemented programmes to restore
order and security, revitalize the economy, restore basic social services and
rehabilitate basic infrastructure. The political process appears to have stabilized,
and in the latest election (August 2012), the MPLA party of President Jose Eduardo
dos Santos won over 72 per cent of the vote.

4. Angola ranks 148th out of 186 countries on the Human Development Index (HDI)
(2012), an improvement when compared with its 2004 HDI ranking of 166th out of
the 177 countries. However, despite the progress made, poverty remains prevalent
throughout much of the country. An estimated 68 per cent of the population live
below the poverty line, and 15 per cent of households live in extreme poverty.
Poverty is more entrenched in rural areas where 94 per cent of households are
categorized as poor. Other indicators also point to the difficult conditions in the
country as a whole: (i) 38 per cent of the population lack access to safe water


sources; (ii) only 30 per cent of the population have access to government health
facilities; (iii) life expectancy at birth is estimated at 47 years (2010), among the
lowest in the world; (iv) despite major efforts at educational reform, about 75 per
cent of teachers have never received any relevant training; (v) only 54 per cent of
enrolled children complete the primary level; and (vi) Angola ranks 106th out of 134
countries in the gender gap index (2009).

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

5. The Government is fighting poverty on various fronts through (i) its 2005 Strategy
to Combat Poverty (ECP); (ii) its 2009 National Strategy for Food and Nutrition
Security (ENSAN); (iii) poverty alleviation activities including in its national annual
plans; and (iv) resources earmarked in each municipal budget for implementation
of annual local plans to combat poverty, including rural development. The
Government continues to allocate more than 30 per cent of its budget to improving
social conditions, a figure projected to increase over the next five years.

6. The ECP’s main goal is to halve the country’s poverty level by 2015 and to
consolidate peace and national unity through sustained improvement in the living
standards of all Angolans. The main priorities identified in the ECP are (i) the
reconstruction of infrastructure; (ii) increased access to education, health and other
basic services; and (iii) decentralization of governance structures. The ECP
highlights rural development, with a focus on improving food security and
revitalizing the rural economy. Key proposed actions are (i) strengthening the
production capacity of the traditional sector, particularly food crops and fisheries;
(ii) relaunching rural commerce; (iii) sustainably managing natural resources; and
(iv) reorganizing the legal framework and public institutions. Priority actions are to
be guided by the following basic principles: (i) a focus on smallholders; (ii) the
importance of community participation; (iii) the concentration of planning,
implementation and monitoring at the municipal level; (iv) complementary
activities with donors, the private sector and NGOs; (v) specific targeting of
women, including access to land; and (vi) HIV/AIDS treated as a cross-cutting
concern.

7. The goal set out in the ENSAN is to ensure that, at all times, all Angolans have
physical and economic access to adequate quantities of a variety of good-quality
food to enable them to contribute to the human, economic and social development
of the country. The main policy priorities are to: (i) increase and diversify
agriculture and sustainable fish production to improve the well-being of the
population; (ii) improve access to food; (iii) diminish levels of malnutrition; and
(iv) guarantee basic sanitation, and food and drinking water quality. Both the ECP
and the ENSAN are reflected in the Government's National Development Plan
(2013-2017).

8. Parallel to these efforts, the Government is also making considerable headway with
promoting decentralization through several complementary initiatives: (i) the
Integrated Municipal Programme for Rural Development and Poverty Alleviation;
(ii) the transfer of health services to the municipal level; and (iii) the creation of
consultation and social dialogue councils. In addition, the National Development
Plan includes measures that reinforce the integrated vision of development, as
evident in the newly launched Rural Villages Requalification Programme. The
multidimensional nature of poverty, recognized in the ECP and in Angola’s human
development indicators, suggests that livelihood and food security improvements
alone will not be enough to sustainably overcome poverty and maintain households
in rural areas. Opportunities for active citizenship, local participation in governance
processes and access to quality social services (health, education, water and
sanitation) are also needed and can help free up time for productive activities.


9. The proposed Artisanal Fisheries and Aquaculture Project (AFAP) will promote
community development planning that will (i) strengthen inclusive and participatory
processes; (ii) facilitate the involvement of communities in local-level decision-
making bodies; (iii) introduce a culture of saving and improved financial
management at the household and the micro, small and medium enterprise levels
through the promotion of savings groups; and (iv) strengthen local organizations
not only as delivery mechanisms for fishing assets and services but also as more
effective facilitators of a holistic development process within the fishing
communities.

10. The project will complement various ongoing interventions in the country,
particularly: (i) the World Bank-funded Market Oriented Smallholder Agriculture
Project in Malange Province; and (ii) the African Development Fund’s Fishery Sector
Support Project dealing with marine and coastal fisheries, which also could
potentially cofinance national inland fishery interventions. In addition, the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, which is currently involved in other
fisheries activities in Angola, will likely be a partner in AFAP implementation.

11. IFAD has worked in Angola, and specifically in the fisheries sector, since 1991 and
is therefore in a strong position to be an effective partner to Angola as it addresses
its rural development challenges. The Fund also has considerable experience in
economic and institutional development in rural areas. Through AFAP, IFAD will
promote bottom-up approaches for rural development, centred on the capacity-
building of grass-roots organizations. It will also contribute to strengthening central
and local institutions following a thorough needs assessment. In addition, to ensure
effective project implementation, IFAD will tap into its experience from other
projects in the region (e.g. the Pro-Poor Value Chain Development Project in the
Maputo and Limpopo Corridors (PROSUL) and the Artisanal Fisheries Promotion
Project (ProPESCA), both in Mozambique).

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
12. The project will be implemented in four provinces in Angola’s central-north region:

Bengo, Cuanza Norte, Luanda and Malange. Component 1 (inland artisanal fisheries
development) will cover two areas: communes north of the Cuanza River, between
Dondo (Cuanza Norte) and the mouth of the Cuanza River (Luanda); and
communes traversed by the Dande and Bengo Rivers, in Bengo and Luanda. Both
areas have a large number of lakes, some of which are seasonally or permanently
linked to those rivers. All fishing communities are located around the lakes and
along the rivers. The component will target an estimated 15,000 people, or about
10,000 fishers and 5,000 processors and small traders.

13. Component 2 (small-scale aquaculture development) will be implemented in the
provinces of Bengo, Cuanza Norte and Malange. It will initially focus on Malange
and later expand to suitable areas in the other two provinces. The component will
target about 800 families, or 724 families engaged in small-scale family fish
farming, 62 in aquaculture as emerging farmers, and 14 as semi-commercial fish
farmers. Geographically, some 678 will be from Malange, 79 from Cuanza Norte
and 43 from Bengo.

B. Project development objective
14. The project’s goal is to reduced poverty in artisanal inland fishing and small-scale

fish-farming households in target communities. Its development objective is
improved food security and nutrition among artisanal inland fishing and fish-
farming households. The project design has incorporated a number of activities that
address climate change issues as they affect fisheries and aquaculture, the project’s
two technical components.



EB 2015/LOT/P.2

4

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

C. Components/outcomes
15. The project comprises two technical components:

(a) Component 1: Inland artisanal fisheries development. The project will
promote inclusive and sustainable inland fisheries sector development and
management contributing to strengthened livelihood strategies at the
household level;

(b) Component 2: Small-scale aquaculture development. The project will
promote inclusive and sustainable small-scale aquaculture sector development
and management contributing to strengthened livelihood strategies at the
household level.

16. To achieve the outcomes of both components, the project will support activities that
(i) strengthen institutional capacity (national, provincial, local/extension services);
(ii) improve community participation in economic and wider local development
processes; (iii) increase the quantity and quality of fish produced and sold on a
sustainable basis; and (iv) improve market-related infrastructure.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
17. Target groups. The project will conduct a mapping study to determine areas

suitable for aquaculture development. A service provider, in cooperation with
extension workers, will then decide on the target group within each community,
which should include woman-headed households, young and old people, people
with illnesses, and other disadvantaged and vulnerable groups.

18. Aquaculture development strategy. The project will work with the target groups
to identify areas where there is potential for aquaculture development, and then
introduce small-scale aquaculture to improve rural communities’ nutritional status
and food security. As the project progresses, it will encourage family fish farmers to
increase their production (for example by applying better technology or by
enlarging their pond surface area) in order to have surplus produce to sell on the
market. It is expected that some farmers will invest profits from fish sales back into
their fish farm (e.g. in improved fish food or more ponds built by hired labour),
“naturally” growing their small subsistence activity into a more commercial
enterprise.

B. Organizational framework
19. The Ministry of Fisheries will be responsible for policy and legislative initiatives

relevant to the project, and will make institutional adjustments in sector
administration and provide broad project oversight. A national project oversight
committee will be established to guide project planning and implementation,
provide high-level advice, review and approve annual workplans and budgets,
review implementation progress and impact, and address key issues. Project
coordination and management will be delegated to the Institute for the
Development of Artisanal Fisheries and Aquaculture (IPA), which will establish a
project coordination unit (PCU) responsible for programming, budgeting, resource
allocation, and monitoring and evaluation. In addition, the Ministry of Fisheries will
coordinate with the provincial governments of the four participating provinces, with
other government bodies, and with NGOs, private firms and individuals
implementing non-core project activities. The Ministry of Finance will play an
important supporting role: it will be responsible for the financial supervision of the
project; coordinate with the local authorities, at provincial, municipal and
communal levels, to ensure that project objectives and outcomes are achieved; and
maintain a dialogue with IFAD, particularly on policy and legislative matters.


C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

20. All project activities will be carried out through the joint and coordinated efforts of
IPA project staff, community facilitators (from the service provider), functional
literacy trainers and other stakeholders at the community level. All activities will be
jointly planned and regularly monitored with communities against targets and
expected results.

21. The project’s monitoring and evaluation system will be its main management tool
for tracking implementation progress and results. It will generate quality data that
will enable IPA and the Ministry of Fisheries to monitor the project, and it will also
provide information on the development of inland fisheries and aquaculture in the
project area for use at higher government levels. The system will allow IPA to
participate more effectively and knowledgeably in national science councils, and in
national and international forums on rural livelihoods and rural development, food
security, nutrition and poverty reduction, contributing to the existing knowledge
base, planning and policy discussions. The AFAP experience will feed into wider
regional learning on community-driven development, particularly the development
of adequate rural microfinance systems.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
22. Financial management. The project’s financial management will be coordinated

by IPA through its Financial Management Directorate (DAF/IPA). The PCU will be
responsible for administrative management, finance and accounting, budget
planning and cash flow, procurement and payments from project accounts. As
appropriate, the Ministry of Fisheries/Office for Studies, Planning and Statistics
(GEPE), together with the Ministry of Finance, will provide budget estimates,
mobilize counterpart funds, supervise, make disbursements and provide other
support needed for DAF/IPA to conduct the project’s financial management. IPA
already has some experience of working with projects funded by development
partners since it is implementing the African Development Bank-financed Fisheries
Sector Support Project.

23. Procurement. The project will follow national procurement procedures to the
extent that these are consistent with IFAD's project procurement guidelines. In this
regard, the PCU will be aided by an experienced procurement specialist recruited
along with all other PCU staff. A financial procedures manual will (i) set out the
operational procedures for procurement, management of contracts and payment of
receipts; (ii) describe a contract monitoring system; and (iii) give guidelines for the
creation of a records management system and registry of procurement records.
IFAD will provide support in the project’s first year to avoid possible delays in
project implementation.

24. Internal and external audit. The PCU will contract an internal auditor to ensure
compliance with audit requirements. All accounts, including the designated account
and statements of expenditure for each fiscal year, will be audited by qualified and
experienced independent external auditors acceptable to IFAD. The consolidated
annual financial statements will be compiled by the PCU/IPA within three months
after the end of each fiscal year and the audited financial statements will be
submitted within six months as per the IFAD Guidelines on Project Audits.

25. Governance. Internal controls will be ensured through the establishment of
separate functions, reconciliation of accounts, supporting documentation
requirements and different approval levels depending on expense amounts. In an
effort to strengthen internal controls, the PCU will produce, and attach to the
project implementation manual as an annex, project financial management
procedures specifying detailed arrangements for the flow of funds, roles and
responsibilities, and procedures.



E. Supervision
26. IFAD will directly supervise all phases of the project jointly with the Government

and in-country partners.

IV. Project costs, financing, benefits
A. Project costs
27. Total project costs, including physical and price contingencies, are estimated at

US$12.1 million (see table 1). Physical and price contingencies make up 13 per
cent of the total project costs; the foreign exchange component is estimated at
US$0.8 million; and taxes are estimated at US$0.7 million.
Table 1
Project costs by component
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component IFAD loan Borrower/counterpart Total

1. Inland fisheries 5 208 89.3% 627 10.7% 5 835 48.1%
2. Aquaculture 2 335 89.3% 279 10.7% 2 614 21.5%
3. Project management 1 875 95.8% 83 4.2% 1 958 16.1%

Unallocated 1 732 100.0 1 732 14.3%

Total 11 149 91.9% 989 8.1% 12 138 100.0%

B. Project financing
28. The project will be financed by IFAD and the Government of Angola. The IFAD loan

amounts to US$11.1 million (92 per cent of total project costs). The Government’s
contribution is estimated at US$1.0 million (8 per cent of total project cost) and will
cover actual costs, taxes and duties. Parallel financing is expected from the
European Commission in the form of a EUR 10 million grant. Table 2 provides a
summary by category of the proposed financing plan; the table, for now, does not
reflect European Commission grant funding.
Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Government IFAD loan Total
Amount % Amount % Amount %

Investment costs
1. Works 52 3.5 1 429 96.5 1481 12.2
2. Equipment and materialsa 71 13.5 454 86.5 525 4.3
3. Trainingb 477 13.6 4 297 91.0 4774 39.3
4. Consultanciesc 80 10.4 692 89.6 772 6.4
5. Salaries and allowancesd 268 11.5 2 054 88.5 2322 19.1
6. Operating costs 41 7.7 491 92.3 532 4.4
7. Unallocated 0 0.0 1 732 100.0 0 14.3

Total 989 8.1 11 148 91.9 12 100 100.0
a Equipment and materials comprises vehicles, boats, motorcycles and equipment
b Training comprises training, studies, meetings and workshops.
c Consultancies comprises local and international technical assistance
d Salaries and allowances comprises project staff and IPA staff.

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
29. Financial and economic analyses were carried out to assess: (i) the financial

viability of the interventions at the beneficiary level; and (ii) the likelihood of
adopting the proposed project interventions. The financial models including family
fish farmer, emerging fish farmer, semi-commercial fish farmer, canoe fishing,
plank boat fishing and enterprise models (including traditional processing and fresh



fish trading) generally show positive financial returns for the proposed aquaculture
and fishery rural economic activities, with the financial internal rate of return
ranging from 34 to 237 per cent.

30. The economic analysis shows an economic internal rate of return (EIRR) of
12.3 per cent. A sensitivity analysis was undertaken to assess the impact on
economic returns against changes in output (fish price) and key input prices (ice
and feed prices). The analysis shows that the project’s main economic profitability
indicators are more sensitive to changes in the benefits than to changes in the
costs. The production models are more or less equally sensitive to a risk of 10 per
cent increase in production cost as to a 10 per cent benefit decrease, resulting in a
negative net present value (NPV). With a two-year delay, the EIRR is still positive
at 7.2 per cent, but the NPV slips into a substantial negative of 1,125.

D. Sustainability
31. Factors contributing to the long-term sustainability of project outcomes are the

following: (i) the Government’s long-term commitment to addressing rural
development, poverty alleviation and food and nutrition security, and recognition of
the importance and role that the inland fisheries and aquaculture subsectors play in
achieving the stated policy objectives and actions; (ii) adoption of a precautionary
approach to fisheries development capable of being replicated elsewhere in Angola;
(iii) empowerment of communities that will lead to their greater involvement in
local-level planning and management and decision-making processes; and
(iv) knowledge management activities providing the opportunity to generate and
disseminate project-related experiences and lessons learned to other institutions in
Angola and beyond.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
32. The major risks identified in the project are the following: (i) project-supported

activities may contribute to overexploitation of the resource in the absence of
baseline information, a monitoring programme and fishery management actions;
(ii) market demand may be insufficient to absorb the incremental fish production
derived from project interventions; (iii) the absence of climate-change data may
impede the assessment of impacts related to climate change; (iv) there may be
limited government institutional capacity in the sector; (v) service providers may
not be present in the project area; and (vi) fiduciary risks may exist. The
Transparency International score for Angola is 2.3 and IFAD’s Rural Sector
Performance Assessment E(ii) indicator for accountability, transparency and
corruption in rural areas is 2.75, both indicative of high risk. Use of the
Government’s Integrated Financial Management System has benefits in terms of
budgetary control but risks that funds may be slow to be released unless the coding
is accurate. The overall financial management risk at design has been assessed as
high largely because this is the first time IPA and IFAD are working together and
understanding will need to be built. Mitigation measures include: (i) adopting a
precautionary approach towards the expansion of fishing operations; (ii) ensuring
that institutional capacity is strengthened and that participation in local
development processes is improved; (iii) engaging the private sector to implement
some aspects of the project (e.g. hatcheries); (iv) maintaining continued policy
dialogue between government and IFAD; (v) using internationally accepted
standards for financial reporting, and for internal and external audits;
(vi) implementing off-the-shelf accounting software; (vii) preparing a project
implementation manual; (viii) seeking support from international technical
assistance; (ix) recruiting suitably skilled staff with IFAD’S prior no objection; and
(x) installing proper record-keeping and back-up processes.



V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
33. The proposed project is consistent with key IFAD policies and strategies, in

particular with its policies on targeting, rural finance, gender, and the environment,
and with its knowledge management and scaling-up strategy.

B. Alignment and harmonization
34. This project is fully aligned with government policies and priorities as outlined in the

ECP and ENSAN policy documents. Investments in fishery development will improve
participating households’ livelihoods and food security (addressing the three pillars
of food security – food availability food access and food use).

C. Innovations and scaling up
35. The project will introduce relevant innovations and capacity-building, and offer

products/services that meet the needs and use the capacities of the different social
groups, age groups, and men and women. Such an approach will allow beneficiaries
to participate according to their needs and capacities, and progress at their own
pace. In terms of scaling up, the project has significant potential for widening
coverage to a larger and more diversified programme; the African Development
Bank, the European Union and the World Bank have expressed interest in
developing a common approach and possibly cofinancing the promotion of the
fisheries and the wider agricultural and rural sectors.

D. Policy engagement
36. Support for a policy dialogue on fisheries and aquaculture development will be

central to this project. This will include support for policy dialogue between IFAD
and the Government through national and international technical assistance that
will address one or more of the following issues: (i) updating of the country’s
aquaculture development strategy, (ii) formulation of new aquaculture regulations
with special attention to the characterization and regulation of small-scale
aquaculture and the introduction of exotic fish species; (iii) development of
incentives for aquaculture; and (iv) policy compliance and law enforcement.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
37. A project financing agreement between the Republic of Angola and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as an annex.

38. The Republic of Angola is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

39. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
40. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on blend terms to the Republic
of Angola in an amount equivalent to seven million nine hundred and ten
thousand special drawing rights (SDR 7 910 000), and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President


































































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the Kingdom of
Swaziland for the Smallholder Market-led
Project

Kingdom of Swaziland

Smallholder Market-led Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower/recipient: Kingdom of Swaziland

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture

Total project cost: US$21.1 million

Amount of IFAD loan: EUR 8.55 million (equivalent to approximately
US$9.6 million)

Amount of IFAD grant: SDR 0.36 million (equivalent to approximately
US$0.5 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: 18 years, including a grace period of three years, with
an interest rate equivalent to one hundred per cent of
the variable interest rate, as determined annually by the
IFAD Executive Board

Cofinancier(s): To be identified

Amount of cofinancing: US$3.8 million

Terms of cofinancing: To be determined

Contribution of borrower/recipient: US$6.6 million

Contribution of private sector: US$0.6 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/LOT/P.9/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Kingdom of Swaziland for the Smallholder Market-led Project
(SMLP), as contained in paragraph 46.

Proposed loan and grant to the Kingdom of Swaziland for
the Smallholder Market-led Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Although Swaziland is classified as a middle-income country, with a relatively high

GDP of US$2,415 per capita, 63 per cent of the population live below the national
poverty line and an estimated one in four of the adult population is affected by
HIV/AIDS. The predicament of the most vulnerable worsened during the recent
fiscal crisis, which had an adverse impact on employment and key social
programmes, including basic health and educational programmes. Recent economic
growth, which owes much to higher Southern African Customs Union (SACU)
revenues over the past two years, has not been pro-poor and there are indications
that the terms currently enjoyed by Swaziland in SACU may soon become less
favourable.

2. Poverty in Swaziland is predominantly rural and varies among the country’s four
regions and between different ecological zones. Regionally, the prevalence of
poverty in 2010 was greatest in Lubombo region at 69 per cent, followed by
Shiselweni region at 68 per cent.

3. The main factors contributing to rural poverty are small landholdings and low land
productivity, compounded by frequent droughts that lead to crop failure and loss of
livestock. People are often isolated from markets and information sources and have
limited access to off-farm employment opportunities. All these factors are
aggravated by the very high prevalence of HIV/AIDS, trapping the poor in poverty
and militating against recovery. Frequent drought has been attributed to climate
change and has led to a decline in Swaziland‘s food production. About a quarter of
the Swazi population is food insecure and dependent on assistance, and a third of
children under five are stunted.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and RB-
COSOP

4. Poverty and food insecurity are still widespread in rural areas, in spite of the
country’s economic development. The high poverty rates suggest that past
government policies and programmes have not been able to adequately address the
needs of the poor rural population. Smallholder agriculture remains the backbone of
rural livelihoods, while it is often drought prone and characterized by low
productivity and isolation from markets. IFAD projects, namely the Lower Usuthu
Smallholder Irrigation Project (LUSIP), the Lower Usuthu Sustainable Land
Management Project (LUSLM) and the Rural Finance and Enterprise Development
Programme (RFEDP), demonstrate the potential for smallholder farming systems to
(a) cover basic food needs; and (b) enter into remunerative value chains, if the
right inputs, services and market linkages are provided together with a strict focus
on targeting the poor and disadvantaged.

5. The above projects demonstrated the relevance of access to irrigation water for
smallholder crops such as maize, but even more so for potential high-value crops



EB 2015/LOT/P.9/Rev.1

2

such as vegetables. The RFEDP developed a honey value chain, which was adopted
by wholesalers and has become very prominent among farmers with small
landholdings and few livestock. The experience shows that the productivity of staple
crops such as maize can be enhanced through access to irrigation, inputs and
better farming technology, leading to better nutrition and food security among food
deficient households. More advanced, economically active households have strong
potential for entering remunerative value chains with the surplus produce of high-
value crops such as vegetables, which they are able to produce with the support of
dedicated business development services and dedicated wholesalers.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
6. The project will be implemented over a six-year period in 25 chiefdoms in the

rainfed Middleveld and Lowveld areas of the Lubombo and Shiselweni regions. It
will target poor smallholder farmers that are (i) food-deficient and living at a
subsistence level; and (ii) economically active and able to sell surplus production.
The farmers will be assisted in increasing their farm productivity and production
through access to irrigation, inputs, training and access to services. Economically
active farmers will sell surplus production to wholesalers to increase income. Along
selected value chains, employment opportunities will be created for young people,
for example in managing collection and information centres. The activities are
tailored to the capacities of smallholders, including women and families affected by
HIV/AIDS.

B. Project development objective
7. The project’s goal is to contribute to national poverty reduction. The development

objective is to enhance food and nutrition security and incomes among smallholder
producer families through diversified agricultural production and market linkages.
By the end of the project, rural poverty should be reduced by 20 per cent in the
targeted chiefdoms and food insecurity reduced by 50 per cent in currently food
deficient households. The project’s three major outcomes are: (i) the project
chiefdoms engage in effective planning and decision-making; (ii) soil and water
resources are sustainably managed for market-led smallholder agriculture in the
project chiefdoms; and (iii) smallholder producers in the project chiefdoms supply
crop and livestock products to market partners, while subsistence farmers are
enabled to produce sufficient nutritious food for themselves.

C. Components/outcomes
8. The project will have three components:

9. Component 1: Chiefdom development planning. In each chiefdom, community-
based development planning will be the starting point to identify and direct
development activities to the targeted households. To this end, an institutional
framework supporting decision-making by the traditional leadership will (where
needed) be established and strengthened. Community development committees
(CDCs) will be assisted in processing information on the chiefdom’s resource base,
population, any bottlenecks and opportunities, and development options and
priorities for inclusion in a chiefdom development plan.

10. Component 2: Infrastructure for soil and water conservation. Investments in
soil and water conservation at sub-catchment and homestead levels will help
harness irrigation and drinking water resources for both enhanced subsistence and
market-led agricultural production. The infrastructure will be designed for erosion
control and water catchment to improve and safeguard productive land. The main
interventions will focus on preventing silting in water reservoirs and harnessing
run-off for agricultural production. This component will comprise erosion control,
the rehabilitation of approximately 18 existing and construction of approximately
two new small earth dams and the installation of rainwater-harvesting equipment.



EB 2015/LOT/P.9/Rev.1

3

11. The process of planning, design, construction and operation and maintenance of the
above infrastructure combines oversight by the CDC, active participation of the
producers benefiting from the infrastructure, and sound engineering services
through existing or hired specialized agencies. The new construction of dams
requires a rigorous planning process, with environmental impact assessments and
checks and balances on engineering and aftercare. Producers benefiting from this
infrastructure will form users’ groups to operate, maintain and guard the
infrastructure.

12. Component 3: Market-led smallholder agriculture. The project will support
smallholder farmers in enhancing their crop and livestock production through
improved access to efficient technical advice, agricultural technology including post-
harvest processing and storage, farm inputs and irrigation. In addition to achieving
higher productivity, especially in the case of food deficient farm households,
economically active households will be linked to markets, including small local
traders and larger wholesalers such as the National Agricultural Marketing Board
(NAMBoard) and Eswatini Kitchen, a private company.

13. The project will concentrate on commodities that respond to the food and income
requirements of farmers and the productive capacity of the project area.
Commodities identified thus far include beekeeping, legumes, vegetables, fruits,
indigenous chicken and goats. In addition, technical support will be provided for
major staple crops such as maize and sorghum to safeguard household food
security.

14. The main approach for developing value chains will involve setting up innovation
platforms, where representatives of wholesalers, buyers, extension services,
business development services, rural finance services and smallholder farmers will
identify together the required improvements and innovations. Measures include
providing market information, estimating market demand, sourcing from new
internal and external markets, business plan development, financial services,
backward and forward linkages between wholesalers/buyers and producers, and
extension services. These activities aim to establish pro-poor value chains by using
existing unmet market demand as the entry point for agricultural development, and
will help gear agricultural practices to the specifics – in terms of quantity, quality
and timeliness – of that market demand, and ultimately raise incomes and increase
food availability among poor rural households.

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

15. The Smallholder Market-led Project (SMLP) is a six-year project that uses the
availability of confirmed markets as a driver for promoting smallholder production
for household nutrition and sale of marketable surplus. Both intervention areas
follow a clear value chain development approach that includes all players from
production through to processing, services and marketing.

16. Chiefdom development planning (CDP) is the starting point to involve both food
deficient and economically active households. Investments in soil and water
conservation are the next step to increase productivity in smallholder farms and to
safeguard a sustainable natural resource basis for market-led production. The
involvement of wholesalers such as NAMBoard and Eswatini Kitchen will bring the
essential pull for the smallholders, while they also bring in the essential technical
services for improvements in agricultural production and marketing. Business
service providers, for instance TechnoServe, will bring in the required know-how for
both producers and wholesalers, in terms of technical and business-related aspects
such as business planning and access to finance. The project approach builds on
existing policies, approaches and market demands, and offers an opportunity to
apply them on a larger scale while maintaining a focus on poor rural areas.



EB 2015/LOT/P.9/Rev.1

4

17. The choice for market-led development builds on the success of earlier projects,
notably RFEDP, LUSIP and LUSLM, in promoting smallholder agricultural production.
Support in terms of agricultural extension for better crop and livestock husbandry
and better capture of soil moisture and rainwater resulted in larger volumes of
agricultural produce. The surplus produced was, however, absorbed locally, with
little or no produce reaching national markets or sold at national market prices.
Although smallholders clearly have productive potential, national wholesalers are
either unable to cover their markets or have resorted to sourcing their demand
from producers elsewhere. Current demand for agricultural products in Swaziland
has not been linked to the agricultural potential of smallholder producers.

Organizational frameworkB.
18. The Ministry of Agriculture will be the lead agency for SMLP and will delegate day-

to-day project implementation to the Swaziland Water and Agriculture Development
Enterprise (SWADE), a parastatal with proven experience in the management and
implementation of similar projects. At the outset – to ensure smooth project start-
up – SWADE will be supported and strengthened with short-term technical
assistance on financial management and monitoring. SWADE will establish a
dedicated project implementation unit (PIU), which will work under Ministry of
Agriculture oversight comprising a project steering committee (PSC) and two
technical committees. The PSC will provide strategic advice on project
implementation and review and approve the results-based annual workplan and
budget (AWP/B), procurement plan and financial and technical progress reports. It
will be chaired by the Principal Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture and
composed of high-level representatives of the Ministries of Natural Resources and
Energy, Economic Planning and Development and Finance. Other participants may
include NAMBoard, the Swaziland Environment Authority and other important
stakeholders.

19. The technical committees will guide the PIU with technical advice on CDP and
infrastructure, and on market-led infrastructure. Both committees will host the
relevant ministries, technical agencies and private sector. Project partners will be
engaged under service agreements. Wholesalers already identified include
NAMBOARD and Eswatini Kitchen.

Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning andC.
knowledge management

20. Planning. The main planning tools for SMLP comprise the logical framework, the
monitoring and evaluation (M&E) framework with its indicators and targets, and the
results-based AWP/B. The logframe provides the overall targets for project
implementation at the output, outcome, development objective and impact levels.
The results-based AWP/B breaks down these targets by year and assigns financial
resources by financier.

21. Every year, each project partner will prepare a results-based AWP/B, for
consolidation by the PIU. Guidelines and templates provided in the project
implementation manual will facilitate the planning and reporting process. The
AWP/Bs will be prepared under a participatory approach based on the chiefdom
development plans (see component 1). They will incorporate information from the
M&E systems of the PIU and project partners, and recommendations from IFAD
supervision and implementation support missions. The PSC will approve
consolidated draft AWP/Bs, which will then be submitted to the Government and
IFAD to seek their concurrence.

22. Monitoring and evaluation. The project will undertake regular monitoring of
activities, output and outcomes. Regular outcome surveys will provide information
on progress at the household level, and how project activities have led to change
and impact. Chiefdom socio-economic profiles will be used as a basis to monitor
and assess progress and targeting of development activities, as well as periodic



EB 2015/LOT/P.9/Rev.1

5

review of agreements reached between market partners in the innovation
platforms. Project M&E will be based on IFAD’s results and impact management
system (RIMS) and be complemented with indicators and surveys as required.

23. The project will conduct baseline studies using RIMS and multidimensional poverty
assessment tool methodologies. In addition to standard collection of gender and
age disaggregated data, the baseline and follow-up surveys will employ the women
empowerment in agriculture index, which measures women’s empowerment
relative to that of men at household level. SMLP has also been identified as a
potential candidate for the IFAD impact assessment studies.

24. Learning and knowledge management. Learning and sharing knowledge will be
firmly based on the project’s M&E system. The PIU will issue progress reports on a
quarterly basis to be reviewed by the PSC and technical committees. Besides
project reports, policy workshops and short publications will be prepared on key
lessons learned and disseminated to inform the public and trigger feedback at
national and regional levels.

Financial management, procurement and governanceD.
25. Financial management. The project’s financial management system will be in

compliance with Swaziland’s and IFAD’s financial regulations and procedures. Under
these procedures, the project will adopt an appropriate financial management
system that will include financial planning through AWP/Bs, financial accounting and
reporting, funds flow management, procurement and audit. The project will ensure
that adequate capacity in terms of human resources and equipment are in place.
The PIU financial management team will open and maintain appropriate accounting
records including books of account, asset and contract registers. The chart of
accounts will be based on government accounting codes to ensure full compliance
with the national system in addition to meeting IFAD requirements of cost analysis
by financier, expense category and component. Previous experience with exchange
visits of financial management staff between countries in the region was successful
in promoting the adaptation of financial management best practice. Financial
statements and reports will be prepared at the end of each quarter for oversight by
the project director. The reports will be consolidated and presented in semi-annual
physical and financial progress reports. SWADE uses the accrual-basis International
Financial Reporting Standards and audits are conducted in accordance with
International Standards on Auditing, the same standards as IFAD. Well-reputed
private-sector audit firms have in the past issued unqualified audit opinions on the
three areas required by IFAD: financial statements, withdrawal applications and the
designated account.

26. Flow of funds. IFAD and any cofinancing funds will be disbursed to the project
through the Ministry of Finance into designated accounts held at the Central Bank
of Swaziland. The accounts will be operated by the authorized representative(s) of
the Ministry of Finance. Separate operational accounts in local currency will be
opened by the project for each funding source, including Government counterpart
funds. Payments of cash expenses will be in line with the approved AWP/B.

27. Procurement. All project procurement of goods, works and services will be carried
out in line with the approved project procurement plan, in accordance with the
Public Procurement Act and Procurement Regulations to the extent consistent with
IFAD’s 2010 Procurement Guidelines. The Government procurement legal
framework accommodates provisions of IFAD guidelines where there is conflict.

28. Governance. An enhanced framework for good governance has been developed for
SMLP to ensure: (i) transparency; (ii) accountability in the use of resources; and
(iii) participation, with people having a voice in decisions that may affect them. Key
features of the framework include: (i) inclusive targeting of women and
disadvantaged households; (ii) participation of community representatives in local-
level planning; (iii) community and participatory monitoring of project activities,



EB 2015/LOT/P.9/Rev.1

6

including a complaints mechanism; (iv) internal and external audits of project
accounts; (v) IFAD supervision and support; (vi) regular outcome surveys to
provide information on the coverage and quality of project outputs; (vii) reporting
of results to the PSC, IFAD and national government institutions, with key
information published on a project website; and (viii) a complaints and remedies
mechanism. The framework will support the transparent use of funds and
constitutes a preventive measure against misuse of project funds.

SupervisionE.
29. The project will be directly supervised by IFAD, with a focus on: (i) fiduciary

aspects; (ii) achievements and quality of project implementation; and
(iii) implementation support. Direct supervision will be a continuous process
requiring sustained communication and engagement with the Government,
specifically the Ministry of Agriculture and the Ministry of Finance, the PIU, project
partners and the target group. Instruments for guiding and improving
implementation will include continuous policy dialogue with the Government,
adjusting AWP/Bs, revising implementation manuals, supervision and midterm
review missions, and amending legal agreements as appropriate.

30. During the start-up phase, supervision will focus on ensuring that the institutional
arrangements to support project implementation are in place. IFAD will support a
series of workshops and training sessions to sensitize all potential stakeholders,
service providers and beneficiaries to the project objectives and their own roles and
responsibilities. Targeted training during the start-up phase will aim to increase
technical capacities and ensure adequate implementation quality.

IV. Project costs, financing, benefits
A. Project costs
31. Total investment and recurrent costs, including contingencies, over the six-year

project life are estimated at US$21.1 million or 244.1 million Swazi emalangeni
(SZL). The parameters underpinning these costs are: (i) project duration of six
years; (ii) cost price inflation at 6 per cent for the project period and 3 per cent per
annum for six years for foreign inflation, in line with International Monetary Fund
estimates; (iii) an exchange rate calculated in constant purchasing power parity
from a base of SZL 10.6:US$1; (iv) government financing or waiver of all taxes on
goods, works and services procured under the project. Taxes have been estimated
using information from the Swaziland Revenue Authority that includes duties and
value added tax; (v) base costs are real costs at July 2014 prices; and (vi) physical
contingencies estimated at 5 per cent for the civil works. Price contingencies are
based on local and foreign inflation. The component estimates are summarized in
the following table:
Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component IFAD loan IFAD grant Private sector
Government
of Swaziland

Unidentified
financing Total

1. Chiefdom development
planning

700 200 - 600 800 2 300

2. Infrastructure for soil and
water conservation

2 200 - - 1 200 3 000 6 400

3. Market-led smallholder
agriculture

5 600 100 600 2 900 - 9 200

4. Project management 1 100 200 - 1 900 - 3 200

Total 9 600 500 600 6 600 3 800 21 100



EB 2015/LOT/P.9/Rev.1

7

B. Project financing
32. The loan will be provided on IFAD ordinary terms and conditions with a three-year

grace period and an 18-year maturity. IFAD will provide a grant equivalent to
US$500,000 to enhance the project’s start-up capacity, such as designing baseline
and impact studies and establishing the overall project M&E framework and
financial reporting system.

33. The project will be financed by IFAD, the private sector, the Government and
unidentified financiers. The IFAD financing will be in the form of a loan in an
amount equivalent to US$9.6 million and a grant in an amount equivalent to
US$0.5 million, for a total IFAD contribution of US$10.1 million. The Government
will contribute US$6.6 million and the private-sector contribution is estimated at
US$0.6 million. The financing gap of US$3.8 million is expected to be funded by the
Global Environment Facility (GEF) or another cofinancier to be identified.
Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure
category

IFAD loan IFAD grant Private sector Government
Unidentified
financing Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Consultanciesa 4 800 71.4 500 8.1 200 3.6 200 3.3 400 6.5 6 100 29.1
2. Equipment and

materials
1 200 65.5 - - - - 200 14.0 400 20.5 1 800 8.6

3. Goods, services
and inputsb

1 200 86.2 - - - - 200 14.3 - - 1 400 6.6

4. Works 1 300 26.2 - - - - 700 14.0 3 000 60.4 5 000 23.6
5. Operating costs 1 100 86.2 - - - - 200 13.8 - - 1 300 6.2
6. Salaries and

allowances
- - - - 400 6.3 5 100 93.7 - - 5 500 25.9

Total 9 600 45.6 500 2.4 600 2.7 6 600 31.5 3 800 17.8 21 100 100.0
a Includes studies, technical assistance and training.
b Includes vehicles.

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
34. The overall economic internal rate of return of the project is estimated at

23 per cent for the base case. The net present value of the net benefit stream,
discounted at 5 per cent based on the Central Bank of Swaziland benchmark
interest rate/discount rate, is SZL 259.9 million (US$24.8 million). The analysis
shows significant net incremental benefits for farmers and rural entrepreneurs in
the project area.

35. An estimated 55,250 households will benefit directly from the project, of which
about 70 per cent or 40,000 households are classified as poor. It is estimated that
30 per cent of the target group will fully take up the project interventions related to
value chain activities, which in turn will lead to substantial increases in incomes and
the availability of nutritious food.

36. Benefits will accrue from: (i) efficient planning and implementation of pro-poor
development activities at chiefdom level; (ii) increased and sustainable access to
water for irrigation and drinking; (iii) increased productivity in livestock, crop and
horticulture production; and (iv) sustainable access to markets, services
(extension, finance) and inputs.

D. Sustainability
37. Project sustainability will be supported by close alignment with the policy and

planning framework in Swaziland. The project will assist in addressing emerging
needs, e.g. by increasing agricultural productivity and supplying consumer markets
with national products. CDP is expected to become a simpler tool that is easy to



EB 2015/LOT/P.9/Rev.1

8

apply and fully meets people's needs. Moreover, it will foster transparency in
decision-making and funding for development activities at community levels. The
introduction of soil and water conservation will protect the key resources of
smallholder farmers from degradation and in turn enhance productivity. Efficient
knowledge management will be the key element to distil successful approaches and
disseminate them widely. The Ministry of Agriculture will ensure that extension
services are better equipped and regularly trained to serve the chiefdoms.
Wholesalers such as NAMBOARD are likely to continue investing in smallholder
farmers, provided that the project succeeds in setting up value chains. This will also
encourage other wholesalers to undertake similar arrangements to source
agricultural produce from smallholders. The focus on commodities, already being
produced by smallholders and of high nutritious value, will generate long-term
benefits for the health of rural people.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
38. The principal risk areas affecting project execution include:

(i) Slow start up due to limited institutional capacity may reduce the likelihood
of the project reaching its targets. This risk has been mitigated by the
preparation of a draft project implementation plan and a financial
management manual during project design. The Government will finalize the
project manuals before project start-up. IFAD will finance start-up costs up to
US$500,000 equivalent to enhance technical capacity in project management,
especially for baseline surveys, M&E and financial management.

(ii) Non-availability of project financing would lead to a reduction of the
project area from 25 to about 20 chiefdoms. IFAD and the Government are
exploring mobilizing additional funds through PBAS reallocation as well as
cofinancing from GEF under GEF-6. In the case of both financing opportunities
being realized, the GEF funds will be used to increase complementary
activities and/or scale up the geographic scope. The SMLP, with its focus on
sustainable land management and climate-sensitive design, would be an ideal
baseline project for a GEF-6 grant.

(iii) Fiduciary risks. The inherent fiduciary risk in Swaziland is medium, based on
Transparency International and Rural Sector Performance Assessment scores.
Tools for effective financial management are present in SWADE, with strong
capacities in many areas. The challenges encountered in the past pertain to
the application and implementation of the control framework: financial
reporting, budgeting, staffing, mingling of financier and government funds,
and internal audit reports not being acted upon. Close collaboration was
needed on the preceding IFAD-funded project to achieve acceptable financial
management results. Consequently SMLP’s initial fiduciary risk assessment at
design is high, but these risks will be mitigated with technical assistance and
the application of lessons learned, starting with the incorporation of internal
control mechanisms into the financing agreement. Consequently, fiduciary risk
rating is expected to drop to medium during the first year of implementation.
The Ministry of Finance has a strong oversight role in management of external
funds and participates in the PSC. During design, a financial management
manual was prepared to guide the PIU on appropriate management of the
fiduciary aspects of the project. IFAD will provide close oversight through its
supervision and implementation support.

(iv) Reliability of existing market demand has been extensively researched during
project design. The involvement of NAMBoard in a number of the market chains
with smallholders suggests a fair degree of stability. Similarly, Eswatini Kitchen is a
confirmed reliable partner. Existing market demand may also be affected by
production in South Africa and by changes in global demand. The development of a



EB 2015/LOT/P.9/Rev.1

9

market information system under the project will mitigate this risk by
communicating early, allowing for mitigation measures in case of falling demand.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

39. Project design is compliant with the applicable IFAD policies and strategies. Both a
strategy for gender mainstreaming and targeting mechanisms have been
incorporated in the project design in accordance with the IFAD Policy on Gender
Equality and Women’s Empowerment and the IFAD Targeting Policy. The IFAD
Policy on Improving Access to Land and Tenure Security has informed the project’s
approach to addressing issues of land tenure insecurity under traditional
authorities. Potential negative environmental impact has been analysed and
mitigation measures designed in line with IFAD’s Environment and Natural Resource
Management Policy.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
40. Aside from harmonization with the Government’s Poverty Reduction Strategy and

Action Plan and with the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development
Programme and United Nations Development Assistance Framework, the project
will complement, derive lessons from and sustain positive initiatives emerging from
the Swaziland Agricultural Development Programme cofinanced by the European
Union (EU) and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. The
project will create space for learning between similar projects, such as the recently
started High-Value Crop and Horticulture Project funded by EU and European
Development Fund.

Innovations and scaling upC.
41. SMLP is based on experiences and lessons learned from its precursors and aims to

replicate successful practices on the largest scale possible in terms of both direct
inclusion of poor rural households and policy influence. The project applies an in-
built learning loop, whereby interventions start off on a small scale, then are
assessed for effectiveness and subsequently fine-tuned for replication on a wider
scale. This applies especially to results and lessons learned on innovation in market
linkages through the innovation platforms established by NAMBoard, Business
Development Services and buyers such as Eswatini Kitchen. Once approaches have
been tested and fine-tuned, the project can help roll out the innovation to the
entire designated project area.

Policy engagementD.
42. The project will inform policymakers on three key policy aspects: (i) efficient local

planning processes for development with CDP simplification; (ii) management of
small-scale irrigation by end users; and (iii) implementation of the new land law.
The project is well positioned to engage with policymakers and other stakeholders
as it can report the needs of smallholders, bring in the farmers’ representatives and
private-sector views, and provide quantitative and qualitative assessments for
policy discussions.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
43. A financing agreement between the Kingdom of Swaziland and IFAD will constitute

the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower/recipient.
A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as an annex.

44. The Kingdom of Swaziland is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD.

45. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.



EB 2015/LOT/P.9/Rev.1

10

VII. Recommendation
46. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Kingdom of Swaziland in an amount of eight million five hundred fifty
thousand euros (EUR 8,550,000) and upon such terms and conditions as shall
be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Kingdom of
Swaziland in an amount of three hundred sixty thousand special drawing
rights (SDR 360,000) and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President





