
























































PUBLIC 
SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE 

DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK  
 

 

 

 

BRAZIL 

 

 

 

PROGRAM TO MODERNIZE AND STRENGTHEN AGRICULTURAL HEALTH AND 
FOOD SAFETY SERVICES (PRODEFESA) 

(BR-L1496) 

LOAN PROPOSAL 
 
 
 

PROJECT SUMMARY 

BRAZIL 
PROGRAM TO MODERNIZE AND STRENGTHEN  

AGRICULTURAL HEALTH AND FOOD SAFETY SERVICES (PRODEFESA) 
(BR-L1496) 

 

Financial Terms and Conditions 

Borrower: Federative Republic of Brazil 
Flexible Financing Facility(a) 

Amortization period: 25 years 

Executing agency: Federative Republic of Brazil, through the 
Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Supply (MAPA) 

Disbursement period: 5 years 

Grace period: 5.5 years(b) 

Interest rate: LIBOR-based 

Source Amount (US$) % Credit fee: (c) 

IDB (Ordinary Capital)(e) 195,000,000 97.5 Inspection and supervision fee: (c) 

Local 5,000,000 2.5 Weighted average life (WAL): 15.25 years(d) 

Total 200,000,000 100.0 Approval currency: United States Dollars 

Project at a Glance 

Project objectives/description: The overall objective of the operation is to help increase agricultural productivity and improve 
access to domestic and international markets by strengthening the country’s agricultural health services. 

Special contractual conditions precedent to the first disbursement of the loan based on results (Components 1 and 2): 
(i) approval and entry into force of the program Operating Regulations, under the terms agreed with the Bank (paragraph 3.9); 
(ii) creation of the program coordinating unit (PCU) and appointment of its members (paragraph 3.4); and (iii) contracting of the 
consulting services responsible for external results verification, in accordance with the terms of reference agreed beforehand with 
the Bank (paragraph 3.6). 

Special contractual conditions precedent to the first disbursement of the technical cooperation loan (Component 3): 
(i) approval and entry into force of the program Operating Regulations, under the terms agreed with the Bank (paragraph 3.9); and 
(ii) creation of the PCU and appointment of its members (paragraph 3.4). 

Special contractual condition for execution of the technical cooperation loan (Component 3): signing and entry into force of 
the technical cooperation agreement between the MAPA and the National Council for Scientific and Technological Development 
(CNPq) to conduct research activities and award postgraduate grants (paragraph 3.12).  

Exceptions to Bank policies: None 

Strategic Alignment 

Challenges:(f) SI 
 

PI 
 

EI 
 

Crosscutting themes:(g) GD 
 

CC 
 

IC 
 

 
(a) Under the terms of the Flexible Financing Facility (FN-655-1), the borrower has the option of requesting changes to the amortization schedule as well 

as currency and interest rate conversions. The Bank will take operational and risk management considerations into account when reviewing such 
requests. 

(b) Under the flexible repayment options of the Flexible Financing Facility, changes to the grace period are permitted provided that they do not entail any 
extension of the original weighted average life of the loan or the last payment date as documented in the loan contract. 

(c) The credit fee and inspection and supervision fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors as part of its review of the Bank’s 
lending charges, in accordance with applicable policies. 

(d) The original weighted average life may be shorter, depending on the signature date of the loan contract. 

(e) The total Bank loan proceeds will be used to finance program implementation through the two investment loan instruments, namely: (i) results based 
(Components 1 and 2); and (ii) technical cooperation loan (Component 3), in accordance with this document. Component 4 will be funded by the local 
counterpart. Funding will be formalized through a single loan contract to be entered into between the borrower and the IDB, in accordance with the 
financial terms and conditions and the special contractual conditions envisaged in the project summary. 

(f) SI (Social Inclusion and Equality); PI (Productivity and Innovation); and EI (Economic Integration). 
(g) GD (Gender Equality and Diversity); CC (Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability); and IC (Institutional Capacity and Rule of Law). 

 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1211145217-31
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1211145217-31


 
 

I. DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING 

A. Background, problems to be addressed, and rationale 

1.1 The Government of Brazil has asked for support to finance a program to strengthen 
the Agricultural Health Services of the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, and 
Supply (MAPA) combining a loan based on results (LBR) and a technical 
cooperation loan.  

1.2 Sector context. Brazil’s agricultural sector is extremely important to its economy, 
representing 22% of gross domestic product (Ribeiro et al., 2015),1 44% of exports, 
and 37% of employment. According to the 2006 Agricultural Census, agricultural 
activities take place on 5 million farms covering 850 million hectares. The sector has 
grown significantly in recent decades. From 1976 to 2011 the area under cultivation, 
output, and yield of cereals and oilseeds grew by 32%, 240%, and 257%, 
respectively (Pereira et al., 2012). Output also rose in the case of sugar (369%), 
chicken (from 1 million to 13 million tons), pork (from 1 million to 2.1 million tons), 
and beef (2.1 million to 9.1 million tons). This growth has continued in recent years, 
with an annual increase in value of output of 3.8% in 2001-2014 (USDA, 2018), and 
has been associated with significant improvements in productivity. Between 1986 
and 2016, the area devoted to cereal production shrank by 10%, while output rose 
by 95% (FAOStat, 2018). Beef farming productivity reached 49 kg per hectare, 
compared with 40 kg in Uruguay, 34 kg in Argentina, and 28 kg in Paraguay. The 
Brazilian agricultural sector’s total factor productivity growth is one of the highest in 
Latin America (Nin-Pratt, A. et al., 2015). 

1.3 Trade in agricultural products has benefited from the sector’s growth. Brazil went 
from importing 30% of food consumed in the 1960s to being the world’s third largest 
exporter of agricultural produce. It is the top producer of soy, coffee, sugar, orange 
juice, chicken, and ethanol, and the second largest producer of beef, maize, 
soybean oil and soybean flour, third largest producer of cotton, and fourth largest of 
pork. Agricultural exports in 2017 came to a value of US$96 billion. Meat exports 
between 2015 and 2017 were worth US$5.9 billion a year (Brazilian Association of 
Meat Exporters (ABIEC), 2018). 

1.4 Agricultural health. Protecting animal health is a public good and is one of the main 
functions of the public bodies concerned with agriculture (OVE, 2015). Their main 
functions are: epidemiological and plant health oversight; health barrier and 
quarantine controls; and control and eradication of diseases and pests. 

1.5 Empirical evidence shows that agricultural health has significant effects on 
agricultural productivity and market access, and in the case of zoonoses, can affect 
consumers’ health (IDB, 2016). Agricultural health system failures cause enormous 
economic losses through reduced productivity caused by pests and diseases, as 
well as restrictions on market access. For example, outbreaks of foot-and-mouth 
disease (FMD) in 2001 in the United Kingdom and Uruguay caused losses of over 
US$10 billion (Bates, 2016) and US$80 million (FAO, 2002), respectively; an 
outbreak of classical swine fever (CSF) in the Netherlands in 1997 caused losses of 
US$2.3 billion (Terpstra and de Smit, 2000); the epidemic of highly pathogenic avian 
influenza (HPAI) in the United States caused losses of US$500 million in 2013 

                                                
1  See Technical References. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1211145217-27


 - 2 - 
 
 

 
(USDA, 2016). The detection of the Mediterranean fruit fly in New Zealand led to a 
two-year stop on exports of kiwifruit to China (Kiwifruitvine, 2014). The United States 
has imposed restrictions on the import of agricultural produce from countries in which 
certain pests are present (such as a ban on citrus fruit and peppers from Guyana to 
avoid introducing the carambola fruit fly (Aphis 2015 and 2018)). 

1.6 Faced with these risks, there are two main reasons for investments in agricultural 
health services: (i) maintaining and raising productivity, respectively, by avoiding 
losses caused by new diseases and pests, and reducing the impact of existing ones; 
and (ii) facilitating foreign trade by complying with health and safety standards that 
enable access to external markets, which often offer higher prices than domestic 
markets.  

1.7 Although investments in agricultural health services do not entirely eliminate the risk 
of impacts on output from disease and pests, they are highly cost-effective. An 
evaluation by OVE (2015) of six agricultural health projects shows that disease 
control and eradication campaigns by agricultural health organizations were 
successful at reducing the impacts of disease and pests on output. Peru’s fruit-fly 
eradication program increased fruit production by 65% (Salazar et al., 2016). In 
1995, the USDA estimated the net benefit of controlling the carambola fruit fly in 
South America at US$800 million. 

1.8 International evidence also shows benefits for trade. In Uruguay, obtaining FMD-free 
status without vaccination in 1996 increased the value of meat exports to the 
United States by more than 50% and saved US$8 million a year in vaccines (Knight-
Jones and Rushton, 2013; Otte et al., 2004). On losing this status in 2001, exports 
fell by 40% from 2000 levels (Ilundain et al., 2004). The price of beef exports from 
FMD-free countries is 93% higher than those from countries affected by the disease 
(ICA and CID, 2008). 

1.9 Agricultural health in Brazil. The agricultural health situation in Brazil has made 
significant progress over the last decade, opening up access to new international 
markets, particularly for meat and fruit. For example, the World Organisation for 
Animal Health (OIE) declared Brazil FMD-free (with and without vaccination) in 
2018. However, the size of the country, its diversity of ecosystems, and the length 
of its land borders (17,000 kilometers) with ten countries, and the scale of its 
agricultural trade, result in major health risks and challenges. The emergence of 
outbreaks of diseases such as FMD or the spread of pests such as fruit flies to other 
regions could have immediate impacts on costs, exports, and jobs. For example, the 
appearance of FMD in the State of Mato Grosso do Sul in 2005 resulted in the death 
of 78,000 head of cattle, a 15% drop in meat prices, closure of access to markets in 
over 30 countries, and a 40% reduction in exports. Between 2012 and 2013 the 
appearance in Mato Grosso and Bahía of Helicoverpa armigera, a pest affecting 
cotton and soy, raised spending on pesticides by 10% and resulted in losses of 
US$800 million in 2013 alone (Pomari-Fernandes et al., 2015). 

1.10 Agricultural health services in Brazil. The country has a long history of agricultural 
health, with an old and fragmented legal framework, including 12 laws and over 
150 regulations. The decrees enacting the agricultural health services date back to 
1934. More recently, the Unified Agricultural Health System (SUASA) was created2 

                                                
2  Law 8,171 of 17 January 1991, regulated by Decree 5,741 of 30 March 2006. 



 - 3 - 
 
 

 
as a mechanism for involving the Federal government (MAPA), State governments 
(Agriculture Secretariats) and Municípios (Agriculture Secretariats). 

1.11 Within the MAPA, the Secretariat for Agricultural Protection (SDA) is responsible for 
agricultural health and food (and beverage) safety measures and for the quality of 
agricultural inputs. Its main responsibilities are: (i) agricultural oversight at airports 
and borders; (ii) issuing regulations on the control and eradication of pests and 
diseases; (iii) approval of diagnostic methods; (iv) drafting health regulations for the 
import and export of animals and plants, and their products and byproducts; 
(v) registration of plants and products; (vi) inspection of products of animal and plant 
origin and agricultural inputs; and (vii) auditing, supervision, evaluation, and 
coordination of state and municipio agricultural health activities. 

1.12 In 2016 the government drafted the Agricultural Protection Plan (PDA) (MAPA, 
2016) defining the priorities for agricultural health policies. It has a ten-year horizon 
and six strategic pillars: (i) modernization and cutting red-tape, (ii) regulatory 
framework; (iii) knowledge and strategic intelligence; (iv) technical programs and 
projects; (v) sustainability of agricultural protection; and (vi) monitoring and 
evaluation. This operation aims to support implementation of the PDA over the next 
five years, focusing on the challenges in five of the six strategic pillars. 

1.13 “Modernization and cutting red tape” and “strengthening and modernizing the 
regulatory framework” strategic pillars. Their objective is to turn the Secretariat 
for Agricultural Protection (SDA) into an effective, efficient results-oriented 
organization by strengthening its main services. The program will support the 
following services:  

a. National Agricultural Laboratories (LANAGRO). This comprises a network 
of six laboratories performing the diagnostic tests necessary to monitor 
compliance with health standards, verify product quality, and identify disease 
outbreaks. Assessments of the Lanagro show that they face various problems, 
operate in an uncoordinated way, lack standardization of processes and 
procedures for important tasks such as receiving samples or purchasing 
supplies, lack planning of demand for laboratory tests, and have little or no 
process automation. Thirty percent of diagnostic tests take longer than 
standard times and the sample rejection rate is high. For example, 17% of 
physical-chemical tests and products of animal origin and 11% of wastes and 
food contaminants are rejected (optional link 7).  

b. International health monitoring. The International Agricultural Monitoring 
System (Vigiagro) is responsible for controlling and monitoring imports, 
exports, and international transit of persons and goods through ports, airports, 
and border crossings. It is of strategic importance for the country: in 2017, 
1.5 million import and export cargo inspections were carried out. Inspections 
are characterized by a low level of computerization, automation, or process 
standardization, and the failure to apply risk analysis. This results in 
shortcomings in inspections (Furlan, 2013), and long wait times for cargo at 
ports and airports, generating costs for importers and exporters. Cargo release 
takes an average of 4.5 days, against a target of 3 days (European Union 
average) (optional link 8).  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=%09EZSHARE-1211145217-33
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=%09EZSHARE-1211145217-34


 - 4 - 
 
 

 
c. Inspection, registration, and authorization. Health inspection and the 

issuance of authorizations for the import of live animals and animal products, 
inspection and authorization of beverage exports, and the registration of 
products of animal origin, are all performed manually or in a semiautomated 
manner and in the presence of the interested parties. This results in processes 
that are slow and costly for the Agricultural Protection Secretariat (SDA) and 
for users. For example, registration of products of animal origin takes an 
average of 120 days, and inspection and authorization of beverage exports 
45 days (optional link 9). 

d. Regulatory good practices. The SDA is responsible for drafting and 
publishing regulatory acts concerning the management of agricultural health 
and the regulation of agricultural inputs and services, as well as products of 
animal and plant origin. Many of the regulations are out of date, do not conform 
to current technologies, and do not set clear limits of action and competencies 
(optional link 10). As a first step towards improving the management of 
standards, in 2015 the Manual of Regulatory Good Practices was approved, 
with a view to harmonizing regulatory activities. 

1.14 “Implementation and strengthening of priority technical programs and 
projects” strategic pillar. This includes 18 projects and programs, prioritizing six: 
(i) fruit fly control; (ii) border monitoring and protection; (iii) FMD eradication and 
prevention; (iv) eradication and control of brucellosis and tuberculosis; 
(v) eradication of classical swine fever (CSF); and (vi) modernization of laboratories. 
This operation will support three of these programs (FMD, CSF and carambola fruit 
fly) considering that: (i) FMD and CSF are the most critical livestock diseases for 
exports, as their mere presence prevents access to overseas markets, and their 
spread to other areas could have serious impacts on producers’ costs; (ii) there are 
synergies in the implementation of FMD and CSF control, as they are carried out by 
the same veterinary services; (iii) the carambola fruit fly may significantly reduce fruit 
exports if it spreads to fruit producing areas; and (iv) tuberculosis and brucellosis do 
not affect exports and are not considered endemic in Brazil, such that their 
eradication is not envisaged in the medium term. 

a. Foot-and-mouth disease (FMD). In May 2018, the OIE declared Brazil 
FMD-free with vaccination (the state of Santa Catarina is free without 
vaccination). Brazil currently has a Strategic Plan under the National FMD 
Eradication Program (PNEFA), covering the period 2017-2026, which 
envisages the entire country being free of the disease without vaccination as 
of 2023 (optional link 11). This change would allow the country to access new 
export markets and command better prices (Alves and Martins, 2014). Brazil 
has not had access to the highest paying meat markets for several decades 
(Japan, South Korea, Canada, and the United States) as they do not import 
from countries with FMD (Miranda, 2001). FMD is one of the most frequent 
causes of non-tariff barriers to exports of beef and pork (Junqueira et al., 2007). 
It has a direct negative impact on production and results in high control and 
eradication costs (US$220 million a year). Over the past ten years, FMD 
outbreaks caused losses of animals and falling prices (paragraph 1.9). 
Vaccination also results in lower productivity: 70% of livestock develops 
abscesses with an average of loss of 1.3 kg of meat in the affected area (Moura 
and Junqueira, 1999). 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=%09EZSHARE-1211145217-35
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=%09EZSHARE-1211145217-36
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=%09EZSHARE-1211145217-37


 - 5 - 
 
 

 
b. Classical swine fever (CSF). In 2016, the OIE declared approximately half of 

the country by area, 84% of livestock, and almost the entire industry to be free 
of CSF. The CSF program aims to obtain a declaration of CSF-free status for 
the entire country (optional link 11). The presence of the disease is limited to 
the states in the north and north-east regions, where output is low and 
subsistence-oriented. Nevertheless, it affects the reliability of disease-free 
areas, and consequently their market access, as well as representing a risk of 
spread to states from which it has been eradicated (Freitas et al., 2007). It also 
affects productivity through a reduction in the number of piglets born and higher 
mortality rates (Zuge, 2018; ADAPEC, 2018). During an outbreak in 
Rio Grande do Sul in 1987 a mortality rate of 20% of live births was recorded, 
and mortality was also higher at other stages of production (Barcellos, 1992). 

c. Carambola fruit fly. The Carambola fruit fly (Bactrocera carambolae) was 
reported in Suriname in 1975 (Sauers-Muller, 1991), subsequently spreading 
to Guyana, French Guiana, and Brazil. It is currently present in three states in 
the north of Brazil (Amapá, Roraima, and Pará). The Carambola fruit fly can 
attack 75 species of plant, including mango, avocado, papaya, citrus fruit, 
guava, and carambola (star fruit). In Brazil it has been detected in a smaller 
number of species (Lemos et al., 2014) and it is the only fruit fly not currently 
affecting export production zones. The risk of spread by movements of people 
and goods is high, with potential losses estimated at $150 million a year due 
to export restrictions on the affected areas (optional link 12). The country is 
implementing an oversight and control program, with 7,774 fruit fly detection 
traps across the country, concentrated in the three states affected (7,284). In 
recent years the fly capture index in these three states has been brought down 
from 0.18 in 2013 to 0.02 in 2017.3 

1.15 Knowledge strengthening and strategic support strategic pillar. The 
Agricultural Protection Plan (PDA) and MAPA studies (optional link 13) show that 
the effectiveness of agricultural health services is affected by shortcomings in 
employee competencies, lack of intelligence tools to support decision-making, and 
inadequate research and knowledge generation. The PDA therefore proposes: 
(i) skills development; (ii) application of strategic intelligence; (iii) support for 
research and development; (iv) building and strengthening of the network of partner 
entities; (v) implementing an international exchange program; (vi) building a 
technology park; and (vii) harmonization and standardization of how risk analysis is 
used. The program will support six (items (i) to (vi)) of these seven lines of action. 

1.16 Monitoring and evaluation strategic pillar. This addresses the lack of automation 
in the monitoring and evaluation of agricultural health services and managing for 
results. According to MAPA reports (optional link 14), the use of inappropriate tools 
and the failure to set targets undermines activities focused on results and processes 
that need improvement. 

1.17 Climate change. There is a link between climate change and agricultural health, 
and interventions in this area are an important adaptation (Forman et al., 2008) and 
mitigation strategy (Stoot et al., 2010). Increases in temperature and changes in 
relative humidity cause changes in habitat that influence the emergence and spread 

                                                
3  The flies per trap per day (FTD) index measures the density of captured flies and is revised twice monthly. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=%09EZSHARE-1211145217-37
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=%09EZSHARE-1211145217-38
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=%09EZSHARE-1211145217-40
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=%09EZSHARE-1211145217-41


 - 6 - 
 
 

 
of plant and animal pathogens, requiring control strategies under changing 
environmental conditions (INIA, 2018). The main concern is the spread of pests and 
diseases to new areas (Cifuentes and Meza, 2008), with possible effects on access 
to international markets and increased inspection and treatment costs. The 
greenhouse-gas (GHG) emissions reduction achievable through reduced and more 
efficient use of pesticides stands out, given that those used to tackle the carambola 
fruit fly are particularly carbon intensive (Lal, 2004). Moreover, evidence shows that 
improved animal health raises productivity and reduces livestock’s carbon footprint 
(Kenyon et al., 2013; Stott et al., 2010). The expansion of agricultural activities into 
forest areas has been the main source of GHG emissions in Brazil (FAO, 2016; 
Gouvello, 2010, Rivero et al., 2009). Increased productivity associated with lower 
rates of diseases such as FMD and CSF therefore helps reduce GHG emissions 
and ease the pressure on forest areas (MAPA, 2010; Embrapa, 2018, Arias et al., 
2017). 

1.18 In short, the operation is aligned with the MAPA’s strategic priorities, as formulated 
in its PDA. It will contribute via its five strategic pillars, which seek to modernize the 
SDA, cut red tape, strengthen the regulatory framework, generate knowledge and 
strategic intelligence, and implement priority technical projects, ensuring agricultural 
health services are sustainable by means of strong monitoring and evaluation 
systems. The aim of focusing on these priorities is to strengthen agricultural health 
to increase access to international markets and raise agricultural productivity 
(paragraph 1.12). 

1.19 Theory of change. The program’s theory of change is based on the same 
challenges identified by the MAPA, including restrictions on access to external 
markets and the potential loss of productivity caused by the existence of high 
economic impact diseases and pests (which also give rise to high control and 
eradication costs) and the low efficiency of the services monitoring and controlling 
the health of imports and exports. Institutional shortcomings in these services, such 
as low professional specialization and high turnover of technical staff, scant 
investment in research, and failure to use risk analysis in its operations, makes the 
MAPA unable to perform its agricultural health responsibilities effectively. 

1.20 Against this backdrop, Components 1 and 2 support the expansion of existing animal 
and plant health programs and initiatives to improve the efficiency of the main 
agricultural health services. For Component 1, the automation of agricultural health 
service processes (laboratories, Vigiagro, inspection, records and authorizations, 
good practices) will reduce processing times and increase service efficiency. For 
Component 2, priority disease and pest (carambola fruit fly, FMD, and CSF) control 
and eradication measures will enable current health status to be maintained and 
expanded. Component 3 will support institutional changes in the management of 
agricultural health, strengthening human resource capacities, and funding research 
into agricultural health. By means of studies and research, training in priority 
competencies, and studies to evaluate a technology park as a means of scientific 
integration between various institutions, it is anticipated that the availability and 
dissemination of relevant information and competencies for more efficient 
agricultural health services will be enhanced. Lastly, Component 4 supports the 
continuous monitoring of activities and managing for results. Over the long term, 
these improvements aim to raise the quality, reliability, and efficiency of international 
trade in Brazilian agricultural produce.  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1211145217-26


 - 7 - 
 
 

 
1.21 The Bank’s experience. Between 2002 and 2014 the IDB approved 17 investment 

loans to strengthen agricultural health and food safety systems in the region for 
US$359 million, approximately 10% of the total sector portfolio (OVE, 2015). 
Drawing on these operations, those recently approved (Peru 4457/OC-PE, Uruguay 
3800/OC-UR, Bolivia 3797/BL-BO, Guyana 3798/BL-GY, and Mexico 3864/OC-ME, 
totaling US$292 million), and the conclusions and recommendations of OVE (2015), 
the main lessons learned and how they have been incorporated into the design of 
the proposed operation are included in Table 1. 

 

Table 1. Incorporation of lessons learned 

Lesson learned Reflected in program design 

1. The decisions of the health services should be 
independent and based on purely scientific 
grounds, due to the nature of the threats they 
have to respond to and the need for credibility, 
locally and internationally. 

The program aims to enhance the scientific 
basis of the SDA to improve its management 

and decision-making capacity. 

2. Health control institutions require ongoing 
programs to update and train their officials. 

Measures are envisaged to improve the 
technical competencies of SDA staff. 

3. The private sector’s participation is essential to 
bolster the success of health programs. 

The private sector will be involved in the design 
of automation processes, disease control, and 
research and development. No private goods 
will be financed.  

4. Use of results indicators more readily 
attributable to projects.  

The results matrix incorporates this lesson, 
particularly for the indicators linked to 
disbursements. 

5. It is important to focus efforts to avoid diluting 
resources.  

The program: (i) focuses on results and 
(ii) supports specific activities within a broad 
government program (the PDA). 

 

1.22 Strategic alignment. The operation is consistent with the Update to the Institutional 
Strategy (UIS) 2010-2020 (document AB-3008) and will contribute to the Corporate 
Results Framework 2016-2019 (CRF) (document GN-2727-6) through the 
development challenges of: (i) productivity and innovation, contributing to the 
indicator of government agencies benefited by projects that strengthen technological 
and managerial tools to improve public service delivery; and (ii) economic 
integration, through the indicator of instruments contributing to regional and extra-
regional trade. It is also aligned with the following crosscutting themes: (i) climate 
change and environmental sustainability through the development, transfer, and 
adoption of innovative technologies and approaches to implement adaptation 
measures; and (ii) institutional capacity and the rule of law through the strengthening 
of public agricultural health services. Approximately 17.44% of the operation’s 
resources are invested in climate change adaptation activities, according to the 
multilateral development banks’ joint methodology for tracking climate finance. 
These resources contribute to the IDB Group’s target of increasing the financing of 
climate-change-related projects to 30% of all operational approvals by the end of 
2020. 

1.23 The operation is consistent with the IDB Country Strategy with Brazil (2016-2018) 
(document GN-2850), in the dialogue on policies and sustainable development of 

https://publications.iadb.org/handle/11319/8505


 - 8 - 
 
 

 
agriculture and contributes to the implementation approach to reducing regional 
socioeconomic inequalities, given that the poorest regions (Northeast and North) are 
those hardest hit by the diseases and pests this program will address. The operation 
is included in the Update of Annex III of the 2018 Operational Program Report for 
Brazil (document GN-2915-2). It is also consistent with: the Agriculture and Natural 
Resources Management Sector Framework Document (document GN-2709-5), 
which gives priority to increasing the region’s agricultural productivity and 
strengthening the provision of public goods; the Food Security Sector Framework 
Document (document GN-2825-8), which aims to promote food security by 
increasing production and productivity; the Integration and Trade Sector Framework 
Document (document GN-2715-6), which gives priority to integration and foreign 
trade through improvements to security and dispatch times, and reducing the cost 
of foreign trade; and with the Integrated Strategy for Climate Change Adaptation and 
Mitigation, and Sustainable and Renewable Energy (document GN-2609-1) and the 
Climate Change Sector Framework Document (document GN-2835-3) by promoting 
increased agricultural productivity by adopting climate change adaptation practices. 

B. Objectives, components, and cost 

1.24 The overall objective of the operation is to help increase agricultural productivity and 
improve access to domestic and international markets by strengthening the 
country’s agricultural health services. To this end the operation plans to contribute 
to the implementation of the Government of Brazil’s PDA through the components 
detailed below. The first and second of these components will be financed by the 
LBR, the third by the technical cooperation loan, and the fourth by the local 
counterpart. The main beneficiaries are the approximately 14 million agricultural 
producers and other participants in the production chains supported, together with 
the country’s 210 million consumers. 

1.25 Component 1. Improving the efficiency of agricultural health services 
(IDB: US$23 million). The outcome of this component will be improvements in the 
performance of the SDA’s services, as detailed in its subcomponents: 

a. National Agricultural Laboratories (LANAGRO). The outcome will be a 
reduction in: (i) laboratory test times; and (ii) rejection of samples on receipt at 
the LANAGRO laboratories. Automation of the following key processes will be 
financed: (i) receipt of samples, laboratory analyses, and delivery of results; 
(ii) procurement and contracts; (iii) laboratory accreditation; (iv) demand 
management; and (v) inventory control. The initial focus will be on processes 
relating to antiparasitic and salmonella tests. In addition, demand for laboratory 
tests will be organized and prioritized, and the technical/administrative 
management will be modernized using harmonized quality management 
systems. 

b. International Agricultural Oversight System (Vigiagro). The outcome will 
be to shorten average export and import cargo release times at ports. The 
implementation of a harmonized management system for the international 
transit of agricultural products (termed the “SIGVIG”) will be financed. In 
particular, work will focus on exports of soybeans and frozen and chilled meat, 
and imports of fruits (apples) and agricultural inputs (mineral fertilizer and 
pesticides). 



 - 9 - 
 
 

 
c. Improvements to inspection, registration, and authorization services. 

This will aim to reduce the average time taken by product inspection, 
registration, and authorization services by financing the design and automation 
of services that are currently performed manually or in a semiautomated 
manner in person. It includes systems for: (i) beverage exports; (ii) imports of 
animal genetic material and live animals; and (iii) registration of products of 
animal origin. 

d. Implementation of regulatory good practices. The outcome will be a 
reduction in the average time taken by the SDA to draft and publish regulations 
and ordinances. The cost of developing and implementing a system for the 
real-time monitoring of the entire process of drafting, analysis, publication, and 
implementation of regulatory instruments will be financed. 

1.26 Component 2. Control and eradication of pests and diseases (IDB: 
US$137 million). The objective is to improve the control of high economic impact 
diseases and pests subject to quarantine, focusing on controlling FMD, CSF, and 
the carambola fruit fly. A description of the subcomponents and their outcomes is 
provided below. 

a. Carambola fruit fly. The outcome will be to keep the 24 states in which this 
pest is not currently present free of the carambola fruit fly.4 It will finance the 
costs associated with continuing implementation of the SDA program to control 
and eradicate the carambola fruit fly and expanding it to strengthen control 
stations on the border and inside the state of Amapá (the state most affected 
by the fly). It includes monitoring of traps throughout the country and measures 
to control and eradicate the fly in areas where it is detected. This 
subcomponent also includes training technical staff of the institutions involved, 
and health education campaigns for producers. 

b. Foot-and-mouth disease (FMD). The outcome will be to maintain the 
27 states of the country free of FMD, with or without vaccination, funding the 
implementation of the PNEFA, which has a scaled strategy, dividing the 
country into five groups of states in which achieving FMD-free status without 
vaccination will be pursued by group. The PNEFA includes: regulation, 
capacity building at federal and state levels, audits of state veterinary services, 
and development of action plans for states. These actions are defined by an 
Action Plan, which is monitored semiannually by the MAPA. 

c. Classical swine fever (CSF). The outcome will be an increase in the number 
of states recognized by the MAPA as CSF-free from 16 at present to 23 in 
2023. State-level actions will be financed (incorporated in the action plans 
indicated in the preceding paragraph), including: (i) activities reports on the 
state action plans; (ii) approved Quali-SV audit reports on state veterinary 
services in areas that are both CSF-free and not CSF-free; (iii) approved 
epidemiological study proposal; (iv) reports on epidemiological studies 
conducted in states with areas that are not CSF-free; (v) declaration of new 

                                                
4   Eradication in the states of Amapá, Roraima, and Pará is not feasible within the program execution period, 

particularly as it would require actions in neighboring countries (Guyana and Suriname). 



 - 10 - 
 
 

 
CSF-free areas; (vi) stepping up controls on pig movements; (vii) training of 
official state veterinary services; and (viii) health education for rural producers. 

1.27 Component 3. Knowledge and innovation for the agricultural health of the 
future (IDB: US$35 million). The objective of this component is to support the 
implementation of the PDA’s Knowledge and Intelligence pillar (paragraph 1.15). 
The component’s strategic and innovation actions will support and complement the 
activities of Components 1 and 2, including development of technical assistance, 
capabilities, knowledge and innovation in the agricultural health system, and 
definition of strategies for agricultural health services to address the future 
challenges, including the impacts of climate change. Accordingly, the component 
includes the following subcomponents: 

a. Modernization of federal agricultural protection. This will support the 
process of modernizing the SDA by financing studies to support the following 
strategic actions: (i) implement a new model of institutional management, with 
a redefinition of procedure manuals, adjustment or redesign of computerized 
systems, and training and consulting; (ii) strengthen coordinated joint action by 
federal, state, and municipal agencies and between these agencies and the 
sector; and (iii) update and adapt legal and regulatory instruments, matching 
procedures and teams. 

b. Competency building. This will finance: (i) short courses developed with 
Brazilian and foreign universities; (ii) the “Excellentia” program, with grants for 
practitioners to undertake specific work at universities, research centers or 
agricultural heath institutions in Brazil or abroad; and (iii) a strictly postgraduate 
grant program for studies on critical issues for agricultural heath. 

c. Knowledge and intelligence. This has the aim of aggregating information and 
knowledge on an ongoing basis by financing the implementation of an 
integrated plant-health monitoring and information system (Strategic 
Agricultural Defense Intelligence System (IEDA)) that will manage strategic 
information to support decision-making, centralizing all the data existing in 
other automated systems. 

d. Agricultural health research. The objective of this subcomponent is to close 
research gaps related to agricultural health, supporting the development of at 
least 10 research projects selected on a competitive basis in line with the 
thematic priorities defined by the SDA. It also includes the financing of grants 
for strategic agricultural health projects.  

e. Technology park. As part of its modernization strategy, the SDA is seeking to 
promote a model of technology research and development that facilitates an 
exchange of experience between different sectors (public, private, and 
academic) and scientific integration to promote innovation in agricultural 
health. This subcomponent will finance studies to evaluate the viability of 
promoting the creation of a technology park on the Lanagro campus in Minas 
Gerais. 

1.28 Component 4. Monitoring, evaluation, and learning (Local: US$5 million). This 
component will generate a monitoring and evaluation system for the program and 
will build the MAPA’s capacity to monitor and evaluate its agricultural health 
services, contributing to managing for results. 



 - 11 - 
 
 

 
C. Key results indicators 

1.29 The program’s impact will be measured using the following indicators: (i) increase in 
the number of health agreements with importer countries; and (ii) increased value of 
meat at the farm. 

1.30 The outcome indicators to be used for disbursements are: Component 1: 
(i) processing speed of Lanagro laboratories (in days); (ii) decrease in average 
import and export cargo release times in ports (in days); (iii) promptness of 
inspection, registration, and authorization services, which will include: average 
processing time for beverage exports (in days); and (iv) average time to draft and 
publish regulatory instructions and ordinances (in days). Component 2: (i) number 
of states kept without occurrence of Carambola fruit fly; (ii) number of states 
recognized as being FMD-free with or without vaccination; and (iii) number of states 
recognized as being CSF-free. The indicators and amounts associated with each 
are specified in the disbursement matrix (optional link 5). Additional indicators not 
associated with disbursements in the Results Matrix (see Annex II) are: (i) average 
sample rejection by Lanagro; (ii) recognition of states as FMD-free without 
vaccination; (iii) average processing time for imports of animal genetic material and 
live animals (in days); (iv) average time to register products of animal origin (in days); 
(v) improved agricultural protection competencies (level of training in priority 
competencies), (vi) legal establishment of a Technology Park; (vii) the number of 
accesses to the intelligence system; and (viii) number of technical studies with 
results of research projects published or available online.  

1.31 Economic analysis. An ex ante economic analysis was performed to evaluate the 
economic viability of the program. The benefits stem from more efficient agricultural 
health service processes and pest and disease control and are estimated to be: 
(i) avoided losses in exports of beef and pork products by preserving the country’s 
status as free of high impact diseases such as FMD and CSF; (ii) avoided losses in 
fruit exports by preventing the expansion of the Carambola fruit fly; and (iii) more 
efficient agricultural health services. The analysis considered a horizon of 20 years 
and a discount rate of 12%. The program is considered economically viable with an 
economic internal rate of return (EIRR) of 32.37% and net present value of 
US$223 million. Based on the worst-case scenarios for the subcomponents 
analyzed, the sensitivity analysis yielded an EIRR of 21%. 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS 

A. Financing instruments 

2.1 Rationale for the use of the financing instruments. This operation will be 
financed by two investment loan instruments: an LBR and reimbursable technical 
cooperation funding. The operation meets the requirements for an LBR 
(document GN-2869-1) as Components 1 and 2: (i) support state programs 
delivering results through the financing of their expenditure framework (paragraph 
1.26); (ii) support changes to government practices incorporating good practices 
(paragraph 1.25); (iii) promote improved performance of existing government 
programs by emphasizing their achievement of results (paragraph 1.25); and 
(iv) promote the use of the executing agency’s fiduciary systems (paragraphs 2.7 
and 3.10). Moreover, the institutional capacity assessment showed that the MAPA 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=%09EZSHARE-1211145217-30
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1211145217-28


 - 12 - 
 
 

 
has appropriate legal powers, governance, and institutional environment, and the 
necessary institutional, management, technical, and fiduciary (procurement and 
financial) capacity to ensure the delivery of the results and execute and monitor an 
LBR (see Annex III). Integrity risk is medium/low, and program actions reduce it by 
adopting transparent procedures and automating health permit issuance and other 
agricultural health services. 

2.2 Component 3 fulfills the requirements for the use of the reimbursable technical 
cooperation instrument (document GN-2470-2), as it will be focused on supporting 
institutional changes in the management of agricultural health in Brazil, building the 
MAPA’s institutional capacities and financing research studies into agricultural 
health. These technical assistance activities are essential to achieving the 
envisaged outcomes of the LBR in the framework of Components 1 and 2. The LBR 
instrument is not suited to these investments as they are not related to the 
simultaneous completion of an outcome but require a substantial flow of finance from 
the early stages of execution. The proposed financing structure enables the 
comprehensive financing of the interventions, permitting the achievement of the 
program objectives. 

2.3 Cost. The total cost of the operation is US$200 million, of which $195 million will be 
financed from the Bank’s Ordinary Capital and US$5 million by the local counterpart. 
The planned disbursement period is five years. Table 2 itemizes the cost per 
component. 

 

Table 2. Program costs and financing (US$ million) 

Investment component IDB Local Total % 

C1. Improving the efficiency of agricultural health 
services 

23.00 0.00 23.00 11.50 

C2. Control and eradication of pests and diseases 137.00 0.00 137.00 68.50 

C3. Knowledge and innovation for the agricultural 
health of the future 

35.00 0.00 35.00 17.50 

C4. Monitoring, evaluation, and learning 0.00 5.00 5.00 2.50 

Total 195.00 5.00 200.00 100.00 

 

2.4 Table 3 presents the disbursement schedule for the Bank financing. 

 
Table 3. Disbursement schedule (as %) 

Component Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Total 

C1. Improving the efficiency of 
agricultural health services 3.0 2.8 2.1 2.0 1.9 11.8 

C2. Control and eradication of 
pests and diseases 13.5 14.1 14.2 14.2 14.2 70.3 

C3. Knowledge and innovation for 
the agricultural health of the future 1.2 4.6 4.9 4.0 3.3 17.9 

Total 17.7 21.5 21.2 20.2 19.4 100.0 

 

B. Environmental and social risks 

2.5 Pursuant to Directive B.13 of the Environment and Safeguards Compliance Policy 
(Operational Policy OP-703) this operation does not require classification, as it is 



 - 13 - 
 
 

 
a loan based on results and its impacts cannot be subject to “ex ante” evaluation. 
However, no negative environmental or social impacts are envisaged from the 
implementation of Components 1 and 2, or Component 3, and no physical 
infrastructure or physical changes to the environment are involved. Lanagro 
laboratories have an environmental and social management system based on best 
practices and standards, accredited under ISO standard 17025, which establishes 
guidelines for documented operating procedures (SOPs) for the management of 
laboratory and environmental waste. Moreover, depending on its level of 
biosecurity (BSL3AG), each laboratory has more specific manuals, covering the 
management of materials, wastes, and rules for hygiene, safety, and employees’ 
working conditions. The pest and disease eradication and control programs will 
apply internationally recognized good practices, including the use of integrated 
control techniques. 

2.6 In addition, the independent consulting services contracted to verify the results will 
review the ISO-17025 accreditation, make visits to laboratories to verify that the 
biosecurity manuals are being applied, and that good practices are being followed 
in the disease and pest control programs. 

C. Fiduciary risks 

2.7 The results of the ICAP and Program Risk Management (PRM) analysis 
demonstrated that the executing agency has a low level of fiduciary risk for the 
execution of the results-driven components (Annex III). The evaluations indicate 
that the MAPA’s fiduciary systems are backed by a legal framework providing the 
foundations for sound management of administrative, financial, control, and 
procurement procedures, in accordance with the principles of transparency, 
economy, and efficiency.  

2.8 The medium-level risks identified are: (i) limited experience of the executing 
agency with IDB policies; and (ii) possible delay in purchase of the software 
needed for activities in Components 1 and 3. To mitigate the first of these risks, 
the Inter-American Institute for Cooperation on Agriculture (IICA) will be contracted 
directly as a specialized executing agency to manage part of the consulting 
services under Component 3. The IICA offers technical advantages on account of 
its experience and effective capacity to select and hire consultants familiar with 
Bank policies and with topics linked to the agrifood sector. This has been 
demonstrated in the execution of a number of MAPA initiatives and in loans with 
external resources, including those of the IDB (paragraph 3.11). To mitigate the 
second risk, the results-based disbursement mechanism will create an incentive 
to speed up processes, and the IDB will support preparation of the terms of 
reference.  



 - 14 - 
 
 

 
D. Other project risks and key issues 

Table 4. Other identified risks 

Taxonomy Risk Level Mitigation 

1.  Public 
management and 
governance 

Changes in authorities 
and technical areas in the 
MAPA and changes in 
staff could result in delays 
in execution of actions, 
outcomes, and 
disbursements.  

Medium 
High 

Inclusion in the loan contract 
of the condition precedent to 
the first disbursement 
(creation of the program 
coordinating unit (PCU) and 
appointment of its 
members). 

Dialogue with authorities on 
key aspects of the program. 

Training of new authorities 
and technical staff. 

2. Macroeconomic 
and fiscal 
sustainability 

Continuity of the fiscal 
situation of the Federal 
Government and the 
states, and limitations on 
the use of the allocated 
budget may reduce the 
resources available for 
agricultural health 
services, delay execution, 
achievement of outcomes, 
and disbursements.  

Medium 
High 

Audit of expenses linked to 
outcomes and return of 
amounts not applied to 
outcomes constitute an 
incentive to avoid budgetary 
limitations.  

Dialogue with authorities on 
key aspects of the program 
and functioning of the LBR. 

3. Macroeconomic 
and fiscal 
sustainability 

The Brazilian economy is 
recovering slowly and 
strong growth is not 
expected. A drop in 
economic activity would 
reduce tax revenues and 
the budget allocated to 
agricultural health 
services.  

Medium 
Low 

Audit of expenses linked to 
outcomes and return of 
amounts not applied to 
outcomes constitute an 
incentive to avoid budgetary 
limitations.  

Dialogue with authorities on 
key aspects of the program 
and functioning of the LBR. 

4. Development Failures in border checks 
or an increase in the 
epidemiological risk from 
neighboring countries 
could result in the 
reintroduction of FMD, 
delaying achievement of 
the outcomes.  

Medium 
Low 

Component 1 includes 
measures to strengthen 
health checks at the 
borders. 

Subcomponent 2.2 includes 
measures to strengthen 
controls and barriers.  

5. Reputation, 
monitoring, and 
accountability 

Private sector pressures 
may affect health 
monitoring and the 
credibility of health 
services and the program, 
resulting in temporary 
closure of export markets, 
and delays in achieving 
outcomes, and in 
disbursements. 

Medium 
Low 

The program includes 
measures to automate and 
standardize processes and 
move formalities online, 
reducing face-to-face 
interactions and the scope 
for discretionary decisions. 
Studies will support 
institutional changes in 
agricultural health services 
to reduce these problems. 

 



 - 15 - 
 
 

 
2.9 Sustainability. The Government of Brazil has been financing its pest and disease 

control programs for many years. Even in times of deep recession and public 
spending constraints, these programs have not been affected. Moreover, one of 
the aims of the institutional reforms being undertaken by the MAPA and of various 
program activities is to increase efficiency and reduce costs. In addition, the salary 
costs of technical staff, who are important for the sustainability of all the 
components, given that they are knowledge intensive, are fixed costs that cannot 
be subject to budget cuts.  

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN 

A. Summary of implementation arrangements 

3.1 The borrower for the operation will be the Federative Republic of Brazil. The 
program executing agency will be the MAPA through its Agricultural Protection 
Secretariat (SDA). A PCU will be created within the SDA’s structure, which will be 
the MAPA’s point of contact for the IDB. It will also be responsible for coordinating 
with all the MAPA areas executing program activities, giving them guidance on the 
program’s operational, administrative, and financial standards and procedures, 
preparing the reports envisaged under the contract, and proposing measures for 
improving execution and achievement of the outcomes, etc. The actions in 
Components 1 and 2 will be the responsibility of six SDA divisions or general 
coordination units, while the CGOP will be responsible for Components 3 and 4. 
The program Operating Regulations set out the details of the roles of the PCU and 
the various SDA areas. 

3.2 For execution of Component 3, the PCU will be supported by the services of the 
IICA, as a specialized agency, for the contracting of consulting services, and it will 
have the technical cooperation of the CNPq for the funding of strategic research 
projects and postgraduate grants (paragraph 3.12). The eligibility criteria for the 
research projects and grants will be set out in the program’s Operating Regulations. 
The remainder of the component, which includes improving the SDA’s information 
systems, will be executed directly by the MAPA. 

3.3 The SDA’s Executive Management Committee, comprising its departmental heads, 
will act as the program’s Steering Committee, providing strategic guidance, 
facilitating coordination between the PCU and the various MAPA units, approving 
the annual work plan (AWP), monitoring progress of execution and achievement of 
program targets, and proposing measures to streamline execution. 

3.4 The PCU will have a core team comprising a coordinator and an executive manager, 
together with the technical and administrative staff necessary for execution 
coordination tasks. It will be supported by other MAPA units on administrative, 
financial, accounting, procurement, and auditing matters. Setting up the PCU and 
appointing its members will be a special contractual condition precedent to 
the first disbursement of the proceeds of the loan based on results 
(Components 1 and 2) and to the first disbursement of the technical 
cooperation loan (Component 3). This condition is considered essential for 
guaranteeing to the Bank that the executing agency will be ready with an appropriate 
team to start execution. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1211145217-31


 - 16 - 
 
 

 
3.5 External results verification. The loan based on results envisages verification 

independent of the IDB and the MAPA/SDA to evaluate fulfillment of the outcomes 
as a requirement for processing disbursements. 

3.6 The MAPA will contract individual consulting services for this purpose. Optional 
link 5 presents the protocol for verification of each disbursement indicator. The 
consultant’s report should: (i) provide an opinion on the accuracy, reliability, validity, 
and consistency of the information on the outcomes; (ii) determine the value of the 
outcome indicators; (iii) make recommendations to enhance program execution and 
address deviations from achievement of results in advance. Under the terms of 
reference agreed in advance with the Bank, the contracting of consulting 
services for external results verification will be a special condition precedent 
to the first disbursement of loan proceeds for Components 1 and 2, as is 
envisaged in the policy on loans based on results (document GN-2869-1). 

3.7 Disbursement mechanism. For Components 1 and 2, the MAPA will prepare a 
progress report on program execution and achievement of the results indicators 
used for annual disbursements (paragraph 1.30), and this report will be sent for 
external results verification. The independent external evaluator will verify that the 
results have been achieved in accordance with the objectives mentioned 
(paragraph 3.6) and by the deadlines set in the terms of reference. Once 
achievement of the disbursement results has been verified, the MAPA will send the 
disbursement request to the IDB, which will make the corresponding disbursement 
when the results of the external verification show that the value of the indicator in 
question is equal to or greater than the established target. If below the target, the 
disbursement will be proportional to the extent to which the target has been met. 
Unused balances may be rescheduled for subsequent disbursements. 

3.8 For Component 3, disbursements will take the form of advances of funds based on 
semiannual financing plans. For the disbursement of advances subsequent to the 
first, the IDB will require justification of at least 80% of the cumulative balance 
pending justification. 

3.9 Program Operating Regulations. The program Operating Regulations will 
describe the execution arrangements for the operation, including: (i) the program’s 
organizational structure; (ii) technical and operational arrangements for program 
execution; (iii) arrangements for scheduling, monitoring, and evaluation of results; 
(iv) operating procedures; and (v) a detailed description of the results indicators, 
particularly those relating to disbursements and verification protocols. The 
approval and entry into force of the program Operating Regulations, under 
the terms agreed with the Bank, will be a special contractual condition 
precedent to the first disbursement of the loan based on results 
(Components 1 and 2) and the first disbursement of the technical 
cooperation loan (Component 3). The Bank’s experience in the region has 
shown that approval of the program Operating Regulations before the first 
disbursement contributes to the internal organization of the executing agency for 
program execution. 

3.10 Procurement of works, goods and nonconsulting services, and consulting 
services. The execution of Components 1 and 2 envisages the use of executing 
agency systems for procurement, in accordance with requirements for loans based 
on results (document GN-2869-1). For Component 3, procurement financed with 


 
IDB funds will comply with the “Policies for the Procurement of Works and Goods 
Financed by the IDB” (document GN-2349-9) and “Policies for the Selection and 
Contracting of Consultants Financed by the IDB” (document GN-2350-9). The 
Procurement Plan contains details of procurement during program execution in 
relation to Component 3 and the procedures applied by the IDB for its review. The 
independent verification entity will be selected in accordance with the Policies for the 
Selection and Contracting of Consultants Financed by the IDB (document 
GN-2350-9). 

3.11 Direct contracting. The IICA will be contracted directly as a specialized agency 
to manage procurement and contracting of approximately US$20 million under 
Component 3. The main functions of the IICA will be: (i) supporting consultant 
selection; and (ii) contract management. This contracting is justified under 
paragraph 3.10(d) of the Policies for the Selection and Contracting of Consultants 
(document GN-2350-9), which provides for direct contracting “when only one firm 
is qualified or has experience of exceptional worth for the assignment” (see 
Annex III, paragraph 5.4). 

3.12 Funding of grants and research projects. Component 3 envisages the funding of 
strategic research projects and postgraduate grants (US$6 million). These activities 
will be carried out through the CNPq, an agency with its own legal status that is 
linked to the Ministry of Science, Technology, Innovation, and Communication 
(MCTIC). The CNPq’s main duties are to promote scientific and technology research 
and promote the training of Brazilian researchers (see Annex III). The MAPA and 
the CNPq will sign a cooperation agreement to establish the institutions’ roles and 
responsibilities. The eligibility and selection criteria for research projects and grants 
will be set out in the program’s Operating Regulations. To formalize the roles of both 
parties and minimize risks in financial and technical management, the signing and 
entry into force of the technical cooperation agreement between the MAPA and the 
CNPq for the execution of research activities and the award of postgraduate grants 
will be a special contractual condition for execution of the financing under 
Component 3. 

3.13 Retroactive financing and recognition of expenditures. The Bank may 
retroactively finance, as a charge against the loan proceeds, eligible expenses 
incurred by the borrower prior to the loan approval date, for the procurement of 
consulting services and studies directly related to Component 3 up to the amount of 
US$7 million (20%), provided that requirements substantially analogous to those set 
forth in the loan contract have been fulfilled. Similarly, under Component 4, the Bank 
may recognize expenses against the local contribution up to US$500,000 (10%) for 
consultants and the purchase of software. These expenses must have been incurred 
no earlier than 6 June 2018 (project profile approval date), and under no 
circumstances may expenses incurred more than 18 months before the date of loan 
approval by the Bank’s Board of Executive Directors be included. 

3.14 Audited financial statements (AFSs). During program execution, AFSs will be 
submitted annually no later than 120 days after the end of each fiscal period, or the 
date of the last disbursement in the case of final AFSs. The program’s external audit 
will be carried out by the Office of the Comptroller General (CGU), as the body 
responsible for the external oversight of federal government projects executed with 



 - 18 - 
 
 

 
external financing. For Components 1 and 2, the final AFSs will include an analysis 
of possible differences between the actual program costs and the sums disbursed. 

B. Summary of arrangements for monitoring results 

3.15 Monitoring and Evaluation Plan. The Results Matrix indicators will be used for 
monitoring, with the following instruments: AWP, multiyear execution plan, 
procurement plan, semiannual progress reports, and supervision visits. The MAPA 
will prepare and send monitoring reports to the Bank no later than 60 days after 
the end of each six-month period. These reports will focus on the fulfillment of 
results and output indicators, identify issues encountered, and describe corrective 
measures adopted. Additionally, for Component 3 the MAPA will submit, to the 
Bank’s satisfaction, the AWP for the following year, no later than the fourth quarter 
of each year. 

3.16 The executing agency will submit the following evaluations to the Bank, in 
accordance with the scope agreed with the Bank: (i) midterm evaluation, once 50% 
of the loan proceeds are disbursed and justified or after 30 months of execution, 
whichever occurs first; and (ii) final evaluation, no later than 90 days after the date 
of the last disbursement. 

3.17 The Monitoring and Evaluation Plan includes the description of the impact evaluation 
methodology, together with the indicators to be evaluated, the parties responsible 
for gathering the information, the schedule, and budget. The plan proposes a 
quasiexperimental evaluation utilizing the gradual expansion of PNEFA activities 
funded by the program, in order to measure increases in the value of annual 
agricultural output at farm level. The methodology that will be used for this purpose 
is a combination of statistical pairing and differences in differences. 




























































PUBLIC 
SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE 

DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK  
 

 

 

 

PARAGUAY 

 

 

 

PROJECT TO IMPLEMENT THE  
CENSUS AND AGRICULTURAL SURVEYS SYSTEM 

(PR-L1147) 

LOAN PROPOSAL 
 
 
 

This document was prepared by the project team consisting of: Gonzalo Muñoz (CSD/RND), 
Project Team Leader; Alvaro García Negro (RND/CPR), Project Team Co-leader; Héctor 
Valdés Conroy (CSD/RND); Fernando Glasman (VPC/FMP); Jorge Luis González 
(VPC/FMP); Jose Antonio Mejía Guerra (IFD/ICS); Alejandro Quijada (CSC/CPR); Rodolfo 
Tello (VPS/ESG); Rodolfo Graham (LEG/SGO); Jennifer Doherty (CSD/CCS); Carolina Vera 
(CSC/CPR); and Elizabeth Chávez (CSD/RND). 

 

This document is being released to the public and distributed to the Bank’s Board of Executive Directors 
simultaneously. This document has not been approved by the Board. Should the Board approve the 
document with amendments, a revised version will be made available to the public, thus superseding 
and replacing the original version. 

 



 

 
PROJECT SUMMARY 

PARAGUAY 
PROJECT TO IMPLEMENT THE  

CENSUS AND AGRICULTURAL SURVEYS SYSTEM 
(PR-L1147) 

 

Financial Terms and Conditions 

Borrower: Republic of Paraguay 
Flexible Financing Facility(a) 

Amortization period: 24 years 

Executing agency: Republic of Paraguay, acting through the  
Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock (MAG) 

Disbursement period: 5 years 

Source Amount (US$) % Grace period: 6 years(b) 

IDB Ordinary Capital (OC): 15 million 100% 

Interest rate: LIBOR-based 

Credit fee: (c) 

Inspection and supervision fee: (c) 

Total: 15 million 100% 

Weighted average life (WAL) 15.25 years(d) 

Currency of approval: 
U.S. dollars from the 
Ordinary Capital  

Project at a Glance 

Project objective/description:  

To contribute to improving the availability and quality of agricultural information in the country, to support decision-making by public and 
private stakeholders. 

Special contractual conditions precedent to the first disbursement of the loan proceeds:  

(i) The program execution unit has been established on the terms agreed upon with the Bank; and (ii) the borrower has provided evidence, 
to the Bank’s satisfaction, that the program Operating Regulations have entered into force (see paragraph 3.4). 

Special contractual execution conditions: 

The project will be executed in accordance with the contractual provisions on environmental, social, health, and safety matters identified 
in the legal requirements section of the environmental and social management report (ESMR), including Annex B. 

Exceptions to Bank policies: None. 

Strategic Alignment 

Challenges:(e) SI 
 

PI 
 

EI 
 

Crosscutting themes:(f) GD 
 

CC 
 

IC 
 

 
(a) Under the terms of the Flexible Financing Facility (document FN-655-1), the borrower has the option of requesting changes to the amortization schedule, 

as well as currency and interest rate conversions. The Bank will take operational and risk management considerations into account when reviewing such 
requests. 

(b) Under the flexible repayment options of the Flexible Financing Facility, changes to the grace period are permitted provided that they do not entail any 
extension of the original WAL of the loan or the last payment date as documented in the loan contract. 

(c) The credit fee and inspection and supervision fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors as part of its review of the Bank’s 
lending charges, in accordance with applicable policies. 

(d) The original WAL may be shorter, depending on the signature date of the loan contract. 
(e) SI (Social Inclusion and Equality); PI (Productivity and Innovation); and EI (Economic Integration). 
(f) GD (Gender Equality and Diversity); CC (Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability); and IC (Institutional Capacity and Rule of Law). 

 
 

 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-42
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-29


 
 

I. PROJECT DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING 

A. Background, problem addressed, and rationale 

1.1 Agriculture is a key sector of the Paraguayan economy. In the period 2004-2016, it 
generated an annual average of 25% of GDP, and 30% of jobs. The sector has also 
grown at an average annual rate of 5.7% over that same period. Alongside this 
growth, agricultural exports have risen significantly over the last decade, 
representing 60% of the total value of exports in 2016.1  

1.2 This solid sector performance has occurred in the context of a dual productive 
structure. On the one hand, rapid growth can be observed in some areas, especially 

soybeans, which contributed 57% of agricultural GDP growth between 2004 and 
2016. Based on Paraguay’s last National Agricultural Census in 2008 (CAN 2008), 
the production of soybeans and livestock is concentrated on lands larger than 500 
hectares. By contrast, survey data show that the average annual farm income of 
family farms (under 50 hectares, accounting for 96% of at farms, according to 
CAN 2008) devoted to sesame, cassava, sugarcane, corn, and other crops, fell from 
US$3,121 in 1991 to just US$981 in 2013. (Willi, P., 1991; A-Fines and GIZ, 2014).2 
Recent studies indicate that, to maintain this solid aggregate sector performance 
and improve farming income for rural families living Paraguay, productivity needs to 
improve through actions to promote the use of better technologies among small-
scale farmers, greater diversification of production, and the introduction of 
production systems that help to better manage climate and other risks (Nin-Pratt, A. 
et al., 2016). 

1.3 These recommendations are the result of an analysis of existing official statistics. 
However, decision-makers need robust, up-to-date information that allows them to 
work more precisely when designing and/or implementing instruments for public 
policy and/or private investment. Furthermore, the impact of different interventions 
can only be measured and assessed effectively if appropriate statistics are available. 
For that reason, statistics are needed on land use, agricultural production factors, 
the predominant economic and social conditions faced by farmers, and other areas. 
Additionally, much of the income inequality seen in Latin America and the Caribbean 
can be attributed to factors such as race, place of birth, education level of parents, 
gender, and sexual orientation. Some case studies suggest that the benefits of 
having information are much greater than the costs of generating it. For example, 
Bruce Gardner reviewed the literature that quantifies the value of information on the 
agricultural market for private decision-makers, as well as for decision-makers in the 
public sector working on policy reforms relating to trade and investment in research 
and development in the U.S. (Gardner, 2004). The study confirms that the availability 
of this information has net benefits for decision-makers. 

1.4 Data requirements for the agricultural sector are extensive and include information 
on the structure and management of agricultural holdings, agricultural production 
and inputs, food consumption, household income and expenditure, gender equality, 
the work force, and agricultural prices. There is also a growing demand for basic 
agroenvironmental data on greenhouse gas and ammonia emissions, to improve 
national greenhouse gas inventories. All these data could come from agricultural 

                                                
1  Source: Central Bank of Paraguay. 
2  See optional electronic link 7 for a full bibliography. 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-36
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-2
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-2
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-36
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-36


 - 2 - 
 
 

 
censuses and sample surveys, population censuses and surveys, administrative 
records, and other sources.  

1.5 An agricultural census is a statistical operation focused on collecting, processing, 
and disseminating data on the structure of the agricultural sector of an entire country, 
or a significant part of one. The basic objectives of agricultural censuses according 
to the World Programme for the Census of Agriculture (WCA 2020) (FAO 2015) are: 
(i) to provide data on the structure of agriculture, especially for small administrative 
units, and to enable detailed cross-tabulations; (ii) to provide data to use as 
benchmarks for, and reconciliation of, current agricultural statistics; and (iii) to 
provide frames for agricultural sample surveys. 

1.6 In an integrated agricultural statistics system, an agricultural census provides: (i) an 
integrated set of data on food and agriculture, necessary for decision-making related 
to food, agriculture, and rural development; and (ii) sampling frames for the surveys, 
which are conducted more frequently to collect more detailed and timely data. It 
should also be based on the necessary quality standards and include the 
dissemination of the information, so as to meet the information demand of the public 
and private sectors. 

1.7 The “Global Strategy to Improve Agricultural and Rural Statistics” (World Bank, 
UNSD, FAO 2010) published after a consultation process that included national 
statistical institutes, agriculture ministries, recommendations from the United 
Nations Security Council, experts and academics, and online forums. In its 
recommendations, the strategy identifies and highlights limitations in the production 
of statistical data for the agricultural sector and suggests that the conceptual 
framework for agricultural and rural statistics needs be expanded, and that the scope 
and coverage of such statistics should be broadened to include, for example, 
aspects of rural populations and households, fisheries, forestry, and other 
dimensions. 

1.8 Some countries of the region, including Paraguay, therefore implemented technical 
cooperation operation ATN/OC-14750-RG, to develop a consensus-based shared 
conceptual and methodological framework for the IDB’s Regional Public Goods 
Initiative based on technical and practical criteria, to promote the production of 
agricultural and rural statistics sustainably over time. This regional public good, 
named “Development of Methodology for the Implementation of Agricultural 
Statistics Systems in Latin America and the Caribbean,” began with a diagnostic 
assessment3 of the capacity to produce and disseminate agricultural and rural 
statistics, looking at the legal framework, coordination within the national statistical 
system, financial and human resources, available infrastructure and equipment, and 
the type and quality of data. It also identified national needs, along with procedures 
for generating and/or compiling data and dissemination methods.  

                                                
3  This assessment was based on responses to a self-administered standard questionnaire sent to the 

countries. The questionnaire had 233 items grouped into 23 categories under four dimensions, which 
were used to prepare a baseline country profile. 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-36
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-36
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-36


 - 3 - 
 
 

 
1.9 The findings of the regional public good assessment put Paraguay4 in Group 2 out 

of four groups, with Group 1 being the “weakest countries,” and Group 4 being the 
“strongest countries.” Group 2, “intermediate to weak countries,” also includes 
El Salvador, Belize, the Dominican Republic, and St. Lucia. According to this 
diagnostic assessment, the main limiting factors for agricultural statistics in 
Paraguay are institutional weakness due to a scarcity of resources, both human 
(core training) and material (physical infrastructure), and weak methods and 
practices. Added to these are poor coordination within the national statistical system 
and unawareness of data quality5 (see details in Table 1). 

 
Table 1. Limiting Factors for Agricultural Statistics in Paraguay 

Dominant 
limitations 

• Transportation equipment for field activities 

• Sound methodology implemented for agricultural surveys 

• Development and updating of sampling frames 

Significant 
limitations 

• Number of professional staff for statistical activities in the main offices 

• Number of professional staff for statistical activities in the field 

• Technical skills of available statistical personnel 

• Up-to-date information technology hardware 

• Up-to-date information technology software 

• Lack of available funds for planned statistical field activities 

• Interagency coordination 

Relevant 
limitations 

• Number of support staff in the field for statistical activities 

• Office equipment (phone, Internet, office furniture) 

• Turnover of professional staff 

• Information sources exhausted 

 

1.10 Paraguay’s current regulatory framework puts responsibility for producing 
agricultural statistics on the Ministry of Agriculture,6 as is the case in other countries 
inside and outside the region such as France, Uruguay, India, and the U.S. The legal 
foundation for statistical activities is based on two main laws: Executive Order 11126 
of 1942, which reorganizes the Bureau of Statistics, Surveys, and Censuses 
(DGEEC) and gives it the authority for “technical direction of all statistical work;” and 
Law 81 of 1992, which designates the Office of Agricultural Censuses and Statistics 
(DCEA) as the executing agency responsible for preparing agricultural statistics and 
keeping them up to date by regularly conducting the CAN. Paraguay has also 
developed the National Strategy for Statistical Development, based on the principles 

                                                
4  On a scale of 0 to 100, Paraguay received 28 points, ahead of only Argentina (21) and Venezuela (14) in 

a group of 13 Latin American and Caribbean countries that averaged 45. The best score was obtained 
by Mexico (82), followed by Brazil (71). Among the items with the lowest score were: (i) coordination 
within the statistical system, strategic vision and planning, and trained human resources, with a score of 
0; (ii) data collection technologies, with 9; and (iii) awareness of quality, with 23. 

5  “Diagnóstico sobre las capacidades instaladas en los países de ALC para la producción y difusión de 
estadísticas agropecuarias rurales” [Diagnostic assessment of installed capacities in the LAC countries 
for the production and dissemination of rural agricultural statistics], Miguel Galmés, technical cooperation 
operation ATN/OC-14750-RG IDB. 

6  Law 81/92 of 22 December 1992 establishing the organizational and functional structure of the Ministry 
of Agricultural and Livestock (MAG). 



 - 4 - 
 
 

 
of the PARIS 21 initiative.7 Nevertheless, the statistical sector is not coordinated as 
a whole, nor is there one institution with the legal mandate to lead and coordinate 
the process of preparing statistics across sectors and institutions. 

1.11 Paraguay’s most recent agricultural census was performed in 2008 and was the fifth 
in the country’s history since 1944. A decade has passed since that census 
(CAN 2008), and the information from it no longer reflects the current conditions in 
the country. It lacks the data to assess quality (omission and nonresponse rates), 
nor is there data on information requests classified by type of user or how that 
information is used. Some users have questioned the reliability of the data, because 
of the way the field work was done, and the data processed. The data are also not 
broken down by thematic area: gender and indigenous peoples. Paraguay does not 
have a system of regular, reliable surveys to monitor and follow up on trends 
occurring after the previous intercensal period (1981-2008). Data need to be 
quantified on the expansion of the land area devoted to annual crops, deforestation, 
new operators and the development of technology-based business production 
models, news ways of organizing production, and other developments. 

1.12 The Office of Agricultural Censuses and Statistics (DCEA) is the unit of the Ministry 
of Agriculture and Livestock (MAG) responsible for “preparing and updating 
agricultural statistics, for which it regularly conducts the National Agricultural 
Census.”8 A preliminary assessment of the current organizational and financial 
structure of the DCEA reveals weaknesses in: (i) technical human resources, in 
terms of both number and knowledge that is sufficiently up to date to work using 
advanced technologies and statistical methods (out of 39 DCEA employees, only 
15 have university degrees, and 50% of those have low levels of training or outdated 
knowledge of census procedures); (ii) equipment and materials (100% of computer 
hardware is obsolete, and the vehicle fleet has been reduced by 80% over the last 
five years); and (iii) strategic planning for data collection based on statistical 
methods. Annual DCEA estimates of agricultural output are derived from data 
provided by authorized data reporters, which is an imprecise and unreliable type of 
information. Consequently, strengthening the DCEA both technically and 
administratively would benefit the decision-making and policy formulation process of 
the MAG, and particularly its Bureau of Planning (DGP)9 responsible for planning, 
monitoring, coordination, and assessment, as well as other public and private 
entities.  

1.13 The assessments mentioned above clearly underscore the need to strengthen 
country systems for agricultural statistics. This means not only having more 
information available, but improving the timeliness and quality of that information in 
a cost-effective manner. Adopting modern information technologies is a key factor 
in meeting these objectives, as their benefits in quality and economic efficiency have 
been proven in other countries. An example is the use of personal digital assistants 
(PDAs) to conduct surveys and censuses, known as computer-assisted personal 
interviewing (CAPI), instead of pen-and-paper interviewing (PAPI). Reliability, 
accuracy, timeliness, accessibility, and consistency are all quality indicators for 

                                                
7  The Partnership in Statistics for Development in the Twenty-first Century (PARIS 21), established in 1999, 

promotes the better use and production of statistics throughout the developing world. 
8  Law 81/92, Article 8. 
9  A MAG unit: http://www.mag.gov.py/index.php/institucion/dependencias. 

http://www.mag.gov.py/index.php/institucion/dependencias.


 - 5 - 
 
 

 
censuses that show improvements with the use of these new technologies (Baker 
et al, 1995; Caeyers et al., 2011; Seligson and Moreno Morales, 2015; Benstead et 
al., 2017). 

1.14 The Bank’s experience. Since 2007, the Bank has approved a series of investment 
loans to help support censuses and strengthen statistical systems. These include: 
the Program to Support the Economic Census (loan 1918/BL-PR); Program to 
Develop the National Statistical System through the 2012 Population and Housing 
Census (loan 2542/BL-PR); Project to Improve the Agricultural Statistical 
Information System and the Agricultural Information Service for Rural Development 
in Peru (loan 3272/OC-PE); and the Sustainable Agricultural Development Program 
(loan 3798/BL-GY). Public good ATN/OC-14750-RG, Development of a 
Methodology for the Implementation of Agricultural Statistics Systems in Latin 
America and the Caribbean, is also now in execution.  

1.15 Based on these operations, as well as the recommendations of the FAO’s World 
Programme for the Census of Agriculture (WCA 2020) and IDB technical note 
“Experiencias en el diseño estadístico y realización de censos nacionales del sector 
agropecuario y rural” [Experiences in the statistical design and implementation of 
national censuses of the agricultural and rural sector] (document IDB-TN-366), 
Table 2 presents the main lessons learned and the how these have been 
incorporated into the design of the proposed operation. 

 
Table 2. Lesson Learned 

Recommendations Incorporation into program design 

1. The National Agricultural Census (CAN) 
must be considered part of an integrated 

national statistical system. 

The program includes the generation of integrated 
information (census and surveys) of the national 
agricultural statistics system, as input for the 
national statistical system. 

2. Pilot testing is necessary to prepare a 
high quality census questionnaire. 

The program calls for a pilot to review and adjust 
critical parameters, such as the duration of surveys 
and the data collection and analysis method. 

3. As a project activity, it is important to 
make respondents, producers, and users 
aware of the value of accurate statistical 
information and utilizing that information to 
improve the quality of public policy and 
decision-making. 

The program will finance a communication and 
dissemination plan to raise awareness in the target 
population prior to collecting information, along with 
widespread dissemination of findings through 

various sources. 

4. The extensive involvement of public 
and private sector users in designing the 
census questionnaire ensures that useful 

information is collected. 

To design the census questionnaire, the program 
calls for workshops with the participation of public 
and private sector users. 

5. Political commitment to the census at 
the highest level is important. 

The program includes joint activities with 
Agricultural Advisory Council (CAA) to ensure that 
it is a political priority. 

6. Include the gender perspective in the 
design of the questionnaires. 

The program supports the incorporation of 
questions that will generate information on gender 
and diversity in census and survey forms, following 
the guidelines of the FAO’s WCA 2020.  

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-36
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-36
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-36


 - 6 - 
 
 

 
Recommendations Incorporation into program design 

7. Work with advanced technologies for 
data collection. 

The program incorporates the use of PDAs for 
personal interviews and a Web-based data 
transmission system to enhance data quality and 
reduce the time required for collection and 
analysis. It also includes the use of satellite 
imagery to make land-use and production 
estimates. The use of PDAs will also facilitate the 
implementation and quality control of the census. 

8. Institution-strengthening must be 
prioritized to ensure census continuity and 
the ongoing quality and dissemination of 
statistical information. 

The program includes investments to help 
strengthen the DCEA, so that data collection, 
analysis, and dissemination actions are 
sustainable. A cooperation agreement with the 
DGEEC is also planned. 

9. Synchronized administrative 
management is necessary when 
executing a mass data collection 
operation. 

The program calls for a company or international 
agency with experience in human resource 
management to be engaged for the selection and 
hiring of census takers. 

 

1.16 The country’s sector strategy. The project is linked primarily to the principal points 
and objectives of the National Development Plan 2030, as well as the MAG’s 
Agricultural Strategic Framework 2014-2018 and Institutional Strategic Plan 
2014-2018. In terms of the National Development Plan 2030 and its major areas of 
strategic focus—poverty reduction and social development, inclusive economic 
growth, and positioning Paraguay as a global player—the project will provide 
essential input to identify evidence-based actions to support farming families and 
rural populations. The program will also contribute to the MAG’s Agricultural 
Strategic Framework 2014-2018 by supporting public policy design and the adoption 
of sector development measures, as one of the objectives is to make information 
available for such purposes. The program also fits into the MAG’s Institutional 
Strategic Plan 2014-2018 by supporting the establishment of an agricultural 
information system that integrates information on climate, economics, and 
technology, as well as statistical synthesis and studies of current economic 
conditions and sector performance, to provide the different users with data for 
decision-making. 

1.17 The Bank’s country strategy. This operation is aligned with the Bank’s country 
strategy with Paraguay 2014-2018 (document GN-2769), since it contributes to the 
strategic objective to “Increase the supply of agricultural public goods and services.” 

1.18 Strategic alignment. The program is consistent with the Update to the Institutional 
Strategy 2010-2020 (document AB-3008), specifically the crosscutting themes of: 
(i) institutional capacity and rule of law, as it seeks to strengthening the institutions 
that generate agricultural statistics; (ii) gender equality and diversity, as it generates 
differentiated information by thematic area: gender and indigenous peoples; and 
(iii) climate change and environmental sustainability, as it provides reliable 
information for building a national emissions inventory. The program is also aligned 
the Corporate Results Framework 2016-2019 (document GN-2727-6) under the 
indicator, “Government agencies benefited by projects that strengthen technological 
and managerial tools to improve public service delivery,” through the outcome 
indicator “Improvement in institutional capacity to collect and process agricultural 
statistics” in the program’s Results Matrix. It is consistent with the Dimension of 



 - 7 - 
 
 

 
Success 1 of the Agriculture and Natural Resources Management Sector 
Framework Document (document GN-2709-5), which advocates that agriculture in 
the region achieve high levels of productivity and proposes the modernization of 
statistics systems as an activity under its second line of action. Lastly, it is consistent 
with the Sector Strategy on Institutions for Growth and Social Welfare (document 
GN-2587-2) through support for public sector management through integrated 
information systems. 

1.19 Approximately 6% of the resources of this operation will be invested in climate 
change adaptation activities, based on the joint methodology of the multilateral 
development banks for estimating climate finance. These resources contribute to 
the IDB Group’s goal to increase the financing of climate change-related projects to 
30% of total approvals by the end of 2020. 

B. Objectives, components, and cost 

1.20 The general objective of this project is to contribute to improving the availability and 
quality of agricultural information in the country, to support decision-making by public 
and private stakeholders. The program has the following components: 

1.21 Component 1: Design and implementation of the agricultural census 
(US$10.32 million). This component will finance the implementation of the 
agricultural census with emphasis on guaranteeing quality, proper thematic 
coverage, and the timely and wide dissemination of the information generated. As 
an innovation, this census will adopt the use of an electronic questionnaire and data 
capture using mobile devices in the field. The census will have a crosscutting gender 
approach, to get women more involved and increase their visibility in their role as 
both producers and workers. All relevant information will also be disaggregated by 
indigenous community and will address issues of environmental conservation. The 
agricultural census process to be financed will have the following stages: 
(i) pre-census: cartographic updates and georeferencing of farms, pre-census 
survey, and development of the data capture system; (ii) census: data collection pilot 
test and field operation; and (iii) post-census: data quality analysis, post-census 
survey, and dissemination of results. To promote the quality of data collection, this 
component also envisages: (i) validations and controls in the electronic form that 
assist census takers in their work; (ii) a pilot test in the field to validate the electronic 
forms; and (iii) dissemination actions to inform and motivate the respondent 
population. An information processing and analysis system will be developed that 
encompasses everything from database consolidation and quality control to the 
generation of the primary tabulations and making the information (including 
microdata) available to users online, in as much detail as permitted by laws and 
regulations on the confidentiality of the information. As an additional layer of quality 
control for the information generated, a post-census survey is planned to validate 
the accuracy of the census itself.  

1.22 Component 2: Institutional strengthening of the entities in the agricultural 
statistics system (US$3.67 million). This component will strengthen the capacity 
of the Office of Agricultural Censuses and Statistics (DCEA) to generate reliable and 
up-to-date agricultural statistics. The strengthening process includes: (i) developing 
IT tools to support the adoption of best practices for agricultural censuses; 
(ii) updating knowledge of census processes in the region by sending DCEA 
technical staff abroad and hiring experts to bring DCEA technical staff up to date on 

https://publications.iadb.org/handle/11319/7807
https://publications.iadb.org/handle/11319/7807


 - 8 - 
 
 

 
practices used; (iii) renovating buildings; (iv) purchasing computer hardware; 
(v) purchasing vehicles to ensure that the DCEA can operate throughout rural areas; 
(vi) developing a model for the use of satellite imagery to produce agricultural 
statistics that can be validated with census information; (vii) conducting thematic 
studies with the census information; and (viii) conducting two surveys built on the 
census sampling frame to update relevant information on the sector. The topics of 
these surveys will depend on the studies and policy priorities, but may include 
agriculture, livestock, production costs, and family farming. Agricultural statistics are 
also expected to be incorporated into the national statistical system under an 
agreement with the DGEEC. 

C. Key results indicators 

1.23 The program Results Matrix has been agreed upon with the borrower (Annex II) and 
contains impact, outcome, and output indicators for the program, as well as its 
baselines and targets. In keeping with the program objective, the impact indicators 
also seek to capture the two dimensions of availability and quality of agricultural 
information. As a substitute for availability, the number of census information 
requests is used as an indicator. The indicator to evaluate the expected changes in 
the quality of information will be user ratings. At the outcome level, indicators are 
included for three different dimensions: (i) the quality of the census will be assessed 
by comparing the census results to the results of the post-census survey, omission 
rate, and nonresponse rate; (ii) the improvement in the timeliness and availability of 
agricultural information will be verified through a shorter time lag between the 
conclusion of field work and publication of the final results, as well as through a 
shorter time devoted to data collection in the field; and (iii) the improvement in 
agricultural statistical capacity will be assessed through the rating of installed 
capacities for the production and dissemination of agricultural and rural statistics.  

1.24 As an added benefit, strengthening the agricultural census makes the source of 
information used to build Paraguay’s national emissions inventory more reliable, 
enabling Paraguay to comply with current requirements under the United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and transparency guidelines 
under the Paris Agreement.10 It also generates information on land use (pastures, 
forests, crops), livestock, etc., that can be used to assess resilience, design public 
policies on adaptation, and makes it possible to pose specific questions on mitigation 
and/or adaptation. The program will also benefit Paraguayan farmers and ranchers 
(currently estimated at 300,000), public and private institutions, and other links in the 
agrifood chain. 

1.25 The use of mobile devices for data capture and satellite imagery are technological 
innovations that will benefit the country’s statistical capacity in the context of the 
agreement signed with the DGEEC. The program will also receive advisory support 
from the National Secretariat for Information and Communication Technologies 
(SENATICs) on the technical specifications of computer hardware and connectivity. 
These interagency agreements, along with efforts to strengthen the MAG/DCEA, 
aim to make the generation of agricultural statistics sustainable. 

                                                
10  The Paris Agreement (2015) is part of the UNFCCC, which establishes measures to reduce greenhouse 

gas emissions through mitigation, adaptation, and resilience of ecosystems to the effects of global 
warming. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40491683
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Treaty
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Climate_change_mitigation
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Climate_change_adaptation
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ecological_resilience


 - 9 - 
 
 

 
1.26 Economic viability. The economic analysis of the program was based on the 

economic viability of the 2018 National Agricultural Census (CAN 2018), the costs 
of which represent nearly 80% of total program resources. The analysis of the 
economic viability of the census employed the least-cost methodology (a specific 
instance of cost-effectiveness analysis). This methodology is commonly used in 
interventions of this nature, when it is recognized that the benefits (statistical 
information, in this case) have a very high value, but one that is difficult to quantify. 

1.27 The anticipated costs of the agricultural census indicate that it will be cost-effective 
(See optional electronic link 1). The estimated total cost of CAN 2018 is 
US$11,627,262,11 including all aspects of the preparation, survey, processing, and 
dissemination phases. The estimated number of productive units to be enumerated 
will be around 300,000, yielding a cost per productive unit of US$39.12 This figure is 
higher than was budgeted for the agricultural censuses in Nicaragua (2011, US$23) 
and Honduras (2008, US$27), but lower than was budgeted in Brazil (2018, US$47) 
or the actual figure in Uruguay (2011, US$73). Factoring in the land area (which 
affects the cost of field work), the cost per square kilometer of CAN 2018 in 
Paraguay will be US$29, which is higher than in Uruguay (2011, US$18.5) and 
similar to Brazil (2018, US$29), but lower than in Nicaragua (2011, US$49) and 
Honduras (2008, US$71). The cost of the agricultural census will therefore be within 
the range of costs of other recent agricultural censuses performed in countries of the 
region. 

1.28 Another relevant comparison is the costs budgeted for the census using 
computer-assisted personal interviewing (CAPI) (US$11,627,262) versus the costs 
that would be expected using pen-and-paper interviewing (PAPI) (US$12,330,855). 
The use of PDAs instead of paper questionnaires will save approximately 
US$700,000. This figure does not reflect the fact that CAPI offers better quality 
control than PAPI, so the financial gains of adopting CAPI are even greater. 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS 

A. Financing instruments 

2.1 This project is designed as a specific investment loan under the Flexible Financing 
Facility (document FN-655-1) and the specific investment modality. Its total cost is 
US$15 million, to be financed totally by the Bank from the Ordinary Capital 
resources. 

                                                
11  This figure includes the amount of Component 1, plus an amount corresponding to equipment and 

management and evaluation costs for the project. 
12  All figures presented in the economic viability analysis are expressed in 2016 U.S. dollars. The sources 

of this data are the FAO, Uruguay’s Office of Agricultural Statistics (DIEA), and the DCEA (Paraguay). 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-30


 - 10 - 
 
 

 
Table 3. Program Cost and Financing (in US$000) 

WBS Components IDB % 

1 Component 1: Design and implementation of the 
agricultural census 

10,320 69% 

2 Component 2: Institutional strengthening of the entities 
in the agricultural statistics system 

3,670 24% 

3 Administration, audit, and evaluation 710 5% 

4 Contingencies 300 2% 

 Total: 15,000 100% 

 * These amounts include local taxes. 

2.2 The program disbursement period will be five years, running from the effective date 
of the loan contract. Disbursements will be made in the form of advances of funds 
(see paragraph 3.7). 

 
Table 4. Disbursement Schedule (in US$) 

 Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Total 

Total 1,559,201 11,117,339 895,705 803,553 624,202 15,000,000 

% 10% 74% 6% 6% 4% 100% 

 

B. Environmental and social safeguard risks 

2.3 In accordance with the Environment and Safeguards Compliance Policy 
(Operational Policy OP-703), the Bank has analyzed the potential environmental and 
social risks of this operation and classified it as category “B,” with a moderate level 
of risk. No significant environmental or social risks have been identified in the 
sociocultural analysis prepared for this project. The identified environmental and 
social risks relate primarily to interactions between census takers and the indigenous 
population, risks faced by census takers when travelling to socially complex areas, 
and the risk that the census questionnaire may not be sensitive enough to the 
sociocultural complexity of indigenous peoples and gender issues in agriculture. The 
sociocultural analysis includes recommendations on these issues to promote the 
inclusion of vulnerable population groups like indigenous peoples and small family 
farmers, with a gender approach. 

2.4 In accordance with Operational Policy OP-703, Directive B.6, this project requires at 
least one public consultation. This requirement was met with two consultations 
conducted with key stakeholders: (i) one with public and private sector data users, 
and (ii) another with the National Organization of Indigenous Peoples (ONPI). 
Additional consultations with other social actors are also planned as part of the 
census preparation process, especially, once a draft census form is ready. More 
information on this matter is included in the annex, Environmental and social 
management report (ESMR). 

C. Fiduciary risks 

2.5 The fiduciary risk is low, so no special mitigation actions are planned. 

D. Other project risks 

2.6 The following was identified as high risk: a government changeover would affect 
priority or execution time. The planned mitigation measure is to rely on political 
consensus and the sectoral private sector, as well as the mandate contained in 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1261750315-13
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-32
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-31
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-29


 - 11 - 
 
 

 
Article 8 of Law 81 of 1992, and international commitments (the 2030 Agenda for 
Sustainable Development). The following were identified as medium risks: (i) public 
administration fails to keep pace with census operation needs; (ii) no decree issued 
to conduct the census; (iii) refusal to provide information to census takers; 
(iv) political decisions not to disseminate census results; and (v) loan contract fails 
to enter into effect in 2018. The following mitigation activities were identified and 
agreed upon, supported particularly by the Agricultural Advisory Council (CAA) for 
the census, made up of prominent individuals from the public and private sector, to 
back up policy-level actions at the key entities identified: (i) the CAA will take steps 
to comply with administrative time frames; (ii) work will be done directly with the 
Office of the President; (iii) an efficient communication campaign will be launched 
(local authorities and civil society); (iv) the CAA will take steps to raise awareness 
among public sector stakeholders, with IDB support; and (v) the MAG, CAA, and 
project team will work with Congress for it to take up this law for consideration. 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN 

A. Summary of implementation arrangements 

3.1 The borrower will be the Republic of Paraguay, and the executing agency will be the 
borrower, acting through the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock (MAG), which will 
be fully responsible for administration and supervision of the program. 

3.2 The program will be implemented under the direct supervision of the MAG, acting 
through the Office of Agricultural Censuses and Statistics (DCEA) and the National 
Office of Project Coordination and Administration (DINCAP). The DCEA, supported 
by a program execution unit (PEU) reporting directly to the DCEA director, will 
provide general coordination of program execution, programming, and monitoring, 
ensuring that the conditions and targets set in the loan contract are met, and serving 
as principal liaison between the IDB and the borrower during execution. DINCAP will 
perform administration and finance activities, as well as procurement and 
contracting, in coordination with the PEU. 

3.3 The key positions identified for the PEU for program execution are: (i) general 
coordinator; (ii) Component 1 coordinator; (iii) Component 2 coordinator; 
(iv) financial and administrative specialist; (v) procurement specialist; and 
(vi) planning and monitoring specialist. 

3.4 Special contractual conditions precedent to the first disbursement of the loan 
proceeds: (i) the program execution unit has been established on the terms 
agreed upon with the Bank; and (ii) the borrower has provided evidence, to 
the Bank’s satisfaction, that the program Operating Regulations have entered 
into force. These conditions must be satisfied for implementation to begin. The 
program Operating Regulations establish the basic rules for the execution of the loan 
(e.g., field work, supervision, and regional coordination, information processing and 
analysis, and fiduciary considerations), as well as the responsibilities of PEU 
members.  

3.5 Procurement of works, goods, and nonconsulting services. Procurements 
financed in whole or part with IDB funds will be conducted pursuant to the Policies 
for the Procurement of Works and Goods Financed by the Inter-American 
Development Bank (document GN-2349-9) and the Policies for the Selection and 



 - 12 - 
 
 

 
Contracting of Consultants Financed by the Inter-American Development Bank 
(document GN-2350-9). The procurement plan contains detailed information on the 
procurements to be implemented during execution, as well as the procedures 
followed by the Bank for their review. Numerous low- and medium-skilled operational 
staff will be hired (approximately 5,300 people) to collect CAN information in the 
field. To do so, an international competitive bidding process will be held to engage 
a firm with experience in human resources management, or an international agency 
with such experience will be contracted. No selection processes involving single-
source selection are planned, with the exception of fuel purchases, since this product 
can be obtained from only one source13 under the fuel provision agreement between 
Petróleos Paraguayos (PETROPAR) and the executing agency,14 and other cases 
where it is justified under policy documents GN-2349-9 and GN-2350-9. 

3.6 The Fiduciary Agreements and Requirements (Annex III) establish the framework 
applicable to program execution for financial management and planning, as well as 
procurement supervision and execution. An intervention of this nature entails 
significant travel expenditures and an additional time commitment from employees 
of the MAG or other government agencies called upon to prepare and implement of 
the census, as well as process and disseminate the information generated. The 
estimated expenditure for these tasks is approximately US$1.3 million, broken down 
as follows: per diems (per MAG regulations) (33%), gas (21%), and additional 
compensation (45%). This last item must be justified by the Budget Act and in line 
with expense items 123, 125, and 137, depending on the different cases of 
employees that take on additional work.15 

3.7 Disbursements. The disbursement modality will be as established in the Financial 
Management Guidelines for IDB-financed Projects (document OP-273-6). 
Advances will be made preferably on a six-monthly basis, once justification has been 
provided for at least 80% of the advanced amount. Accountability forms and the 
financial planning spreadsheet must be submitted as documentation.  

3.8 Audits. The PEU will deliver the audited financial statements for the program on an 
annual basis during execution on the terms required by the Bank. The project will 
require the selection of a Plus-level independent auditing firm. The audited financial 
statements will be delivered within 120 days after the close of each fiscal year, and 
the closing final statement will be delivered within 120 days following the scheduled 
date for the last disbursement. 

B. Summary of arrangements for monitoring results 

3.9 The project has a detailed monitoring and evaluation plan agreed upon with the 
MAG. The DCEA, acting through the PEU, will be responsible for generating and 
sharing the necessary information with the Bank to track the Results Matrix 
indicators. 

3.10 Monitoring. Throughout project execution, the PEU will prepare and deliver status 
reports to the Bank within 60 days after the end of each six-month period. These 

                                                
13  Document GN-2349-9, paragraph 3.6(c). 

14  Based on Article 316 of Decree 176 implementing Articles 128 and 129 of Law 5554/2016. 

15  The program does not call for counterpart support to be factored into the calculation. 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-43
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40468605
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-34


 - 13 - 
 
 

 
reports will provide a detailed account of physical and financial execution of the 
project, as well as progress on all Results Matrix indicators. The reports will also 
provide a detailed account of issues encountered during project execution, and 
corrective measures taken, as well as explain any deviation from the project 
management instruments (multiyear execution plan, annual work plan (AWP), and 
procurement plan). No later than the last quarter of each year of project execution, 
the PEU will deliver the AWP for the following year, to the Bank’s satisfaction, as 
well as the maintenance plan for equipment purchased with the loan proceeds and 
the plan for meeting the environmental and social requirements established in the 
environmental and social management plan (ESMP). Bank staff will conduct regular 
inspection missions and meet with PEU personnel to discuss the progress of 
activities identified in the AWP, compliance with the Results Matrix indicators, the 
AWP for the following year, and the procurement plan for the next 12 months. 

3.11 In addition to overall monitoring of execution, the project will incorporate several 
different measures to oversee data gathering and ensure the quality of information 
in CAN 2018 and the agricultural surveys in the two subsequent years. Firstly, a 
cartographic update will be done, to minimize the likelihood of omissions or 
duplications during data collection. Secondly, the PDAs used to collect information 
will have a built-in, automatic verification program. This way, any inconsistency in 
responses, whether contradictions or mistakes on the part of the respondent or 
errors on the part of the census taker when entering the information into the PDA, 
will be detected and corrected immediately. Thirdly, CAN 2018 will have a Web-
based data transmission system for the immediate and simultaneous application of 
controls on progress and coverage in the field, and the data registered by census 
takers. 

3.12 As established in the monitoring and evaluation plan, the project will have a midterm 
and a final evaluation. The midterm evaluation will be conducted 90 days after the 
date on which 50% of the loan proceeds have been committed, or 50% of the 
execution period has elapsed, whichever occurs first. The objective of the midterm 
evaluation will be to review the progress of all activities, examine the causes of any 
potential deviation from the planned progress, and propose corrective measures. 
The final evaluation will be conducted 90 days after the date on which 95% of the 
loan proceeds have been disbursed. These reports will include: (i) financial 
execution by subcomponent and the source of financing; (ii) progress on outputs, 
outcomes, and impacts included in the Results Matrix; (iii) compliance with the 
ESMP; (iv) summary of financial statements, procurements, disbursements, and 
internal control; (v) review of implementation; and (vi) lessons learned. Both the 
midterm and final evaluation will be conducted by external consultants independent 
of the PEU. 

3.13 Impact assessment. The project will have a “before and after” evaluation of the 
impact indicators included in the Results Matrix, conducted as part of the final 
evaluation described above and the project completion report (PCR). 

3.14 Additionally, CAN 2018 will include a post-census survey to measure omission and 
nonresponse rates, as well as the accuracy of certain key variables included in the 
census. This will make it possible to get an exact final value for the outcome 
indicators included in the Results Matrix. Significantly, there is no known experience 
with post-census surveys in the case of agricultural censuses, so this will be the only 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-34


 - 14 - 
 
 



























































PUBLIC  

SIMULTANEOUS  DISCLOSURE 

 

 

DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

HAITI 

 

 

ARTISANAL FISHERIES DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM 

 

 

(HA-L1096) 
 

 

 

 

 

 

GRANT PROPOSAL 
 

 

 

 

 


PROJECT SUMMARY 

HAITI 

ARTISANAL FISHERIES DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM 

(HA-L1096) 

Financial Terms and Conditions 

Beneficiary: Republic of Haiti 

Executing Agency: Ministry of Agriculture, Natural 

Resources and Rural Development (MARNDR) 

Amortization period: N/A 

Original WAL: N/A 

Disbursement period: 60 months 

Grace period: N/A 

Source Amount (US$) 

Supervision and 

inspection fee: N/A 

IDB (Grant Facility) 15,000,000 Interest rate N/A 

Local 1,500,000 Credit fee: N/A 

Total 16,500,000 

Currency: US Dollars Parallel Financing 

(AECID)         2,700,000* 

Project at a Glance 

Project Objective: The general objective of the project is to improve the income of small fishers in 

three southern regions of Haiti (South, South-East and Grande Anse), through the sustainable 

development of artisanal fisheries. The specific objectives are to: (i) strengthen the institutional 

management of the fisheries sector for resource sustainability, and improved sanitary and food safety 

conditions for marketing of seafood products; (ii) improve the quality of fish at landing sites, through 

improved public infrastructure; and (iii) increase artisanal fisheries productivity and reduce economic 

losses through the establishment of a rights-based fishery management scheme. In order to achieve 

these objectives, and consistent with the identified challenges, the project will finance three 

components: (i) institutional strengthening and information system; (ii) public infrastructure; and   

(iii) stakeholders’ capacity building.  

Special contractual conditions prior to first disbursement: (i) the hiring or assignation of a 

planning, monitoring and evaluation specialist within the Fishery Directorate; of an administrator, an 

accountant and an administrative assistant within the MARNDR’s BCP-ProGEBA unit; and of a 

procurement specialist to support the Procurement Unit of the MARNDR (¶3.2); (ii) the creation of 

the Program Steering Committee (¶3.4); and (iii) the approval of the Operation Manual by the 

Steering Committee (¶3.7).   

Special contractual condition prior to the use of resources for execution: the recruitment of 

approximately 26 people by the MARNDR Fishing Directorate to provide basic fishery services in the 

field for the regions of intervention will be a condition prior to execution of Component 3 (¶3.3).  

Special disbursement: To enable the Executing Agency to fulfill all the conditions prior to first 

disbursement, an initial disbursement for up to US$125,000 will be made to the extent the Beneficiary 

fulfills to the Bank’s satisfaction all the standard general conditions prior to disbursement set forth in 

grant agreements, except for: (i) the submission of the initial execution report; and  (ii) evidence of 

reliable financial information systems and internal control mechanisms (¶3.8 and ¶5.6 of Annex III). 

Exceptions to Bank policies: None 

Project 

qualifies for: 

SEQ [ X ] PTI [ X ] Sector [ X ] Geographic  Headcount  

  * The program is also supported by approximately US$2.7 million (€2.5million) in parallel financing from 
AECID (Spanish Agency for International Cooperation for Development) which is not included as part of 

the program’s budget total and  is subject to AECID’s annual budget approval for 2016-2020.  



- 2 - 

 

I. PROGRAM DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING 

A. Background, Problem Addressed and Justification 

1.1 Agriculture including farming activity, livestock, fisheries and forestry, plays a 
dominant role in the Haitian economy, contributing 22.5% of Gross Domestic 

Product (GDP) (Fiscal Year [FY] 2012-13). The economy’s recovery since the 

2010 earthquake has been mainly attributed to accelerated output growth in the 

agricultural sector. This has translated into GDP growth of 4.3% in FY 2013, up 

from the 2.8% observed in 2012. While agriculture represents the principal form 

of livelihood for over one million families, contributing to about 50% of the total 

households’ income,
1
 rural poverty headcount remains the highest in the country 

with 75.2% (58.7% national level).
2
  

1.2 The Fisheries Act of 1978
3
 established the Fishery Directorate (FD) under the 

Ministry of Agriculture Natural Resources and Rural Development (MARNDR) 

as the responsible institution for the administration and enforcement of the 

sector’s legal and regulatory framework, including surveillance and monitoring of 

authorized fishing gear and compliance with fishing seasons for certain species.
4
  

1.3 Occurring along many parts of the country’s approximately 1,700 km coastline,
5
 

the fishery sector in Haiti is of high socio-economic relevance as it generates 

around 77,000 full-time jobs (52,000 direct jobs, and 25,000 indirect jobs),
6
 and 

2.5% of the GDP
7
 (FY 2010-11). Artisanal fishing remains the main type of 

marine fishery in Haiti. It is carried out in a total of 420 locations in 9 out of 10 

departments of the country. Fishing is a diversified and largely unrestricted 

artisanal activity, with the relative importance of main fishing practices varying 

considerably among localities.
8
 Practices can nonetheless be grouped into two 

different types: (i) collection of intertidal species such as shellfish, crabs, clams, 

oysters, mussels; including the use of fish traps; and (ii) coastal fishing performed 

using boats
9
 and fishing gear to catch demersal and pelagic fish. Fishers target a 

wide range of resources that are found mainly on the continental shelf (conch, 

lobster, reef and demersal fishes and small coastal pelagics).
10

  

                                                 
1
  General Agricultural Census 2008-2009 (www.agriculture.gouv.ht); www.brh.net; www.mefhaiti.gouv.ht. 

2
   World Bank (WB). 2014. Poverty and Inclusion in Haiti: Social Gains at a Timid Pace. Washington DC: 

The WB. Retrieved from: http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2014/01/19871408/poverty-

inclusion-haiti-social-gains-timid-pace  
3 
 The Fisheries Act of 1978 was approved byPresidential decree.

 

4
  e.g. lobster 

5
  Second longest in the Caribbean region countries, after Cuba (Fishery Country Profile, FAO, 2005). 

6
  Ministère de l’Agriculture, des Ressources Naturelles et du Développement Rural (MARNDR), Etude de 

la filière pêche en Haïti et propositions de stratégie d’appui au secteur, IRAM-INESA, 2007. 
7
  FAO statistics and data management, http://faostat.fao.org, 2010. 

8
  Célestin 2004, Damais et al. 2007, Favrelière 2008. 

9
  The estimated fleet is 26,000 units of pirogues, canoes, sailing boats, and/or wooden motorboats. 

10
  Célestin 2004, Damais et al. 2007, Favrelière 2008. 

http://www.agriculture.gouv.ht/
http://www.brh.net/
http://www.mefhaiti.gouv.ht/
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2014/01/19871408/poverty-inclusion-haiti-social-gains-timid-pace
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2014/01/19871408/poverty-inclusion-haiti-social-gains-timid-pace
http://faostat.fao.org/


- 3 - 

 

1.4 Marketing of seafood is conducted by a network of intermediaries that ensure the 
supply of fresh products for local consumption and export. The stakeholders who 

market fish products include “merchants,” “merchants-saras” and agencies. The 

marketing process of fishery products is dominated by women.
11

 They sell 69% of 

the fish production fresh and 31% salted or dried. The latter is of lower value than 

the fresh fish and is the result of a lack of accessibility to refrigeration and ice. 

The merchants, who are often the spouses of the fishers buy and then sell 

lowvalue fish to the merchant-saras in local markets or to agencies. Merchants 

saras, estimated at approximately 7,000, come from the urban centers to coastal 

areas to buy (dried or fresh) and return to sell the production back in the cities. 

Finally, an estimated 1,000 agencies are located in the communes in coastal areas 

and exhibit the greatest purchasing and refrigeration capacity. This allows them to 

purchase the highest-valued products (conch, lobster) to resell to wholesalers, 

supermarkets and restaurants in the urban centers.
12

  

1.5 Despite the prevalence of fisheries, Haiti is a net importer of seafood products.
13

 

National production supplies only around 30% of total consumption. In 2011 the 

sector’s annual production in terms of landing equivalent was estimated at 17,000 

MT of fish, 600 MT of lobster, 200 MT of conch meat and 50 MT of shrimp.
14

 

Artisanal fisheries and trade are estimated to generate an annual sales figure 

higher than 240 million gourdes (US$6.3 million). In 2003, total value of export 

amounted to 349 MT (US$4.2 million),
15

 but had dropped significantly by 2011 to 

less than 50 MT and limited to informal and occasional exchanges mainly with 

the Dominican Republic.
16 

This drop in exports was mainly due to the suspension 

of exports to Europe. 

1.6 Sector challenges. Despite the critical importance of fishing as an economic 
activity for coastal communities, several challenges prevent the development and 

sustainability of the sector. The following challenges have been prioritized and 

selected based on prior experience in the sector and Government of Haiti (GoH) 

Marine Fisheries Development Program (PDPM) priorities.
17

 

1.7 Resource sustainability. Artisanal fishery’s contribution to socio-economic 
development depends in large part on the sustainability of the fishery resources, 

which represents the main challenge for the sector. As such, fisheries can be 

distinguished from other agricultural activities by the challenges posed by 

resource management. These include: (i) the diversity of the resource and means 

of production, particularly in the case of artisanal fisheries; (ii) the mobility of the 

                                                 
11

  Gachot, 2015. 100% of merchants and merchants-saras are women. 
12

  Célestin 2004, Damais et al. 2007, Favrelière 2008. 
13

  In 2010, Haiti imported more than US$ 20 million (34 MT) of seafood products and registered close to 

US$6 million of exports (Sources FaoStat, 2012). 
14

  FAOStat, 2012. 
15

  ftp://ftp.fao.org/FI/DOCUMENT/fcp/fr/FI_CP_HT.pdf  
16

  Report on « préparation d’un programme d’investissement public en faveur du secteur de la pêche » (2011) 
17

  Ministère de l’Agriculture, des Ressources Naturelles et du Développement Rural (MARNDR), Etude de 

la filière pêche en Haïti et propositions de stratégie d’appui au secteur, IRAM-INESA, 2007. 

ftp://ftp.fao.org/FI/DOCUMENT/fcp/fr/FI_CP_HT.pdf


- 4 - 

 

resource not confined within set boundaries; (iii) the difficulties of assessing the 

status of stocks and determining sustainable yields; and (iv) the absence of 

property rights. Although reliable fisheries statistics do not exist for Haiti, 

available evidence shows a catch reduction per fishing trip in coastal waters,
18

 

indicating that inshore stocks are either fully exploited or depleted, therefore 

threatening the sustainability of the sector. Ensuring the resource’s sustainability 

requires a strong government commitment to implement sustainable fishery 

management systems.
19

 However, the existing Haitian governance structure has 

not proven conducive to a sustainable exploitation of fisheries, as evidenced 

particularly by a lack of implementation of monitoring, control measures and 

regulations. This has led to unrestricted ‘open access to fishing grounds,’ and 

deterioration of critical breeding and nursery habitat for fish and shellfish.  

1.8 Sector governance. The existing fisheries regulations date from several decades 
and are significantly outdated in several aspects, including the sustainability and 

management of the natural resource. The FD is currently understaffed, comprised 

of only six civils servants. Moreover, the decentralization of the FD services at 

local levels remains weak with only eight agents (most of them supported by 

projects) in Departmental Directorates for Agriculture (DDA) (one agent per 

6,500 fishers). This prevents the provision of public services at local level such as 

extension services for the introduction of new sustainable techniques, and on-site 

data collection and implementation of a catch monitoring system. The FD’s 

technical capacities for applied research, sanitary control and resource 

management, need to be revamped to implement a more science-based approach 

to the sector’s management. In this context, the FD is in a weak position to 

exercise its leadership and coordination role (¶1.2). 

1.9 Availability of information for decision-making. The FD does not collect 
fisheries data nor does it compile fisheries statistics except for imports and 

exports. Basic information especially related to socio economic aspects, catches 

and marketing is essential for the adoption of improved policies for fisheries 

management. Previous efforts to implement a data collection system have not 

proven to be sustainable due to methodological and financial constraints to 

maintain a long term data collection system.
20

 

1.10 Lack of public infrastructure and services for artisanal fisheries, results in 
poor product quality, important post-harvest losses amounting to around 40%

21
 

(US$2.8 million), loss of market opportunities in urban centers and suspension of 

exports of seafood products to Europe. Harvesting, processing and marketing 

occur in marginal highly degraded areas that lack the basic infrastructure to ensure 

basic sanitary conditions and product quality. Out of the 18 communes (¶1.14) 

targeted by the program, only two have regular access to water and electricity, less 

than 10% have adequate landing sites for artisanal fishing boats and the majority 

                                                 
18

  IRAM, 2007. 
19

  Christy, 1997. 
20

  “Fisheries Investment Plan,” financed with the technical cooperation ATN/II-11593-HA. 
21

  Macias, 2014. 



- 5 - 

 

(80%) have public markets in poor conditions without running water or facilities for 

ice production or storage. Finally, 16% do not have public markets.  

1.11 Associations’ capacities. In 2002, the GoH sought to revitalize the fishery sector 
through the National Fishers’ Association. A large number of fishers’ professional 

associations were developed since then with more than 80 associations registered. 

These associations have weak organizational structures and, as a consequence, 

limited capacity to manage productive infrastructure and provide services and 

equipment in a financially sustainable manner. The social context further inhibits 

the development of the sector. Specifically Haitian fishing communities are 

characterized by a relatively young population; high rate of illiteracy.  

1.12 Access to basic technologies and equipment. The development of the fishery 
sector in Haiti requires improvements in post-harvest handling of the product 

through refrigeration and the adoption of technical innovations, some of which 

have an important cost in terms of investment. This combined with the presence 

of financial constraints prevents stakeholders to invest in the sector.
22

  

1.13 Areas of intervention. The program will target the three most productive 
departments (South East; South; and Grande Anse),

23
 that have been prioritized 

by the GoH and which together support a majority of the country’s fisheries 

localities along approximately 540 km of coastline. However, the institutional 

component of the program will benefit all the fishing communes in the country. 

As the South Department is also the intervention area of the tourism project 

financed by the IDB (3383/GR-HA), a fishing program in this department will 

develop the complementarity of the two operations in a context of sustainable 

development of coastal areas through improvement in the fishery/tourism value 

chain. In the South East Department the program will complement the Spanish 

Agency of International Cooperation for Development’s (AECID) funding with 

public infrastructure and thus consolidate this department as a model and catalyst 

for artisanal fisheries development in Haiti contributing to the dissemination of 

their experience in other regions of the south. 

1.14 The area of intervention was further refined based on the following criteria:  (i) at 
least one fishing association; (ii) fishery as a relevant socio-economic activity and 

potential for further increase in productivity; and (iii) the possibility of               

re-enforcing existing interventions financed by the AECID. Within the 

intervention area a total of 55 fisher's associations have been identified, with an 

estimate of 20,800 fishers.
24

 On average, fishing communities comprise 80 

members of which 63% are fishers, and 35% are merchants. These fishing 

communities are widely scattered, small and isolated with little access to basic 

services such as water, sanitation and electricity. In addition, in the area of 

                                                 
22

  IRAM, 2007 and Macias, 2014. 
23

  Supply chain analysis for fresh seafood in Haiti, Felix, 2012. 
24

  Macias, 2014. 

javascript:fOpenWindow('http://edwbip.iadb.org:80/cognos8/cgi-bin/cognos.cgi?b_action=cognosViewer&ui.action=run&ui.object=XSSSTART*2fcontent*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27BI*20Reports*27*5d*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27OPS*27*5d*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27LMS*20REPORTS*27*5d*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27LMS1*20-*20Versiones*27*5d*2freport*5b*40name*3d*27LMS1*27*5dXSSEND&ui.name=LMS1&run.outputFormat=&run.prompt=false&p_Active=1&p_UDR=UDR&p_OpNumber=3383/GR-HA&p_Date=2015-04-06',%20'_OPSDetail');


- 6 - 

 

intervention the number of fishing vessels is estimated at approximately 10,700.
25

 

The small boat size (under 20 feet long) and lack of engines make offshore deep 

water fishing difficult and so most fishing effort concentrates on shelf resources.  

1.15 Lessons learned. This program takes into account important lessons learned from 
the Bank and other donor-financed operations in Haiti (UE, UNEP, AECID), as 

well as empirical evidence from research undertaken in Haiti and abroad (Belize, 

Ecuador, Chile, Panama, Guadeloupe). Since 2007, the MARNDR is 

implementing, with the technical and financial support from AECID, a project 

focused on strengthening the capacity of fishery institutions and fishers 

organizations to provide adequate services to their members. The total AECID 

funding to present amounts to €3.5million. A recent external evaluation of the 

intervention has indicated positive results, especially with respect to the 

organizational capacity of fishing associations including financial sustainability, 

and provisions of services including maintenance of collective infrastructure.
26

 

Therefore the proposed program aims to follow a similar approach. Moreover, the 

design benefited from the close participation of national and international experts 

involved in AECID-MARNDR’s project. Main lessons are primarily drawn from 

Christy, F. T., 1997 The Development and Management of Marine Fisheries in 

Latin America and the Caribbean, Seijo J.C., FAO, 2011, Coastal fisheries of 

Latin America and the Caribbean and the Sector Framework Document on 

Agriculture and Natural Resources Management (SFD) are included in Table 1. 

1.16 Conception of the intervention. Based on the sector diagnostic, the challenges 
identified and the lessons learned, interventions have been identified to improve 

the sustainability of the resources by simultaneously increasing fishers’ 

productivity and income through the provision of improved public services in the 

sector. The literature
27

 suggests specific reasons that justify the public provision 

of fishery services from a market failure perspective: (i) coordination failures 

might foster depletion of resources reducing economic gains in the long run;     

(ii) liquidity constraints limit the availability of financial resources for fishers to 

access productive capital and adopt sustainable technologies; and (iii) risk 

aversion and information asymmetries limit adoption of more productive and 

sustainable technologies by fishers. To avoid overexploitation of the marine 

resources, the implementation of a long term sustainable fishery management 

system is required as a pilot in the southern regions. The effectiveness of the 

system will be evaluated by an impact evaluation (¶3.12). 

1.17 Regarding productivity and income generation, the program will address market 
failures as follows: (i)  accelerating the decentralization and sustainability of 

fishery services in close proximity to fishers, through the GoH’s commitment to 

improve the staffing in the field; (ii) improving fishers’ access to pelagic stocks 

using technological improvements while simultaneously piloting a rights-based 

                                                 
25

  Dugout woods, flat-bottomed boats, and wooden sailboats. Less than 5% of total fishing vessels is made up 

of fiberglass boats equipped with engines donated by non-governmental organizations and aid agencies. 
26

  Marine Fishery Strengthening Program in the Southeast department, mid-term review, Canaest, 2014. 
27

  Seijo J.C., FAO, 2011. Coastal fisheries of Latin America and the Caribbean. 



- 7 - 

 

fishery scheme; (iii)  promoting enhanced product quality through improved  

post-harvest handling facilities to be co-managed with strengthened fishers’ 

associations; and (iv)  strengthening the fisheries value chain through enhanced 

collaboration between FD and other initiatives of the Bank for private sector. 

Table 1. Lessons Learned 

Lessons learned
28

 Reflected in the program design 

Improved operational legal framework is 

needed for marine fisheries with clear 

competency to regulate and implement 

corrective measures harmonized with 

international standards, framework legislation 

and regulations. 

The modernization of the legal framework will be 

supported through short term technical assistance. 

(Component 1). 

Basic socio-economic information is required 

for the adoption of improved policies for 

fisheries management. 

The program includes the design and implementation of 

marine information system including a national fishers’ 

census, registries and sustainable data collection through 

the associations, including socio economic aspects 

(Component 1). 

Fostering public infrastructure of fish product 

processing and the cold chain will improve the 

quality of the product opening new local and 

international markets. 

The program supports the development of public 

infrastructure to improve fish product post-harvest quality 

and sanitary conditions (Component 2). 

Promotion of collective action schemes among 

fishers is key to their participation, and 

prevents individual actions that might threaten 

the sustainability of the fishing resource. 

The program includes activities aimed at strengthening 

the capacity of fishers associations to promote collective 

actions that ensure sustainability. This includes training 

in sustainable fishing activities as well as maintenance of 

public infrastructure (Component 2). 

Shift attitudes from development to sustainable 

fisheries management: The major opportunities 

of the future lie in improved fisheries 

management. 

The program supports the establishment of fisheries 

management regimes through: rights-based fishery 

management pilot. (Component 3); and implementation 

of the national marine information system and the 

development of a research program (Component 1). 

Given the importance of women contribution in 

the fishery sector, the undertaken activities 

must also be targeted to strengthen their 

participation and empowerment. 

The program includes improvement of public 

infrastructure with the primary goal to increase the value 

of fish sales per merchant (women). Also, part of the 

training and matching grants benefit female merchants 

(Component 3). 

1.18 Regarding resource sustainability, the program will address market failures by 
strengthening fisheries governance and management implementing an integrated 

information system and establishing a strong scientific-based approach. In the 

case of fisheries, empirical evidence shows that integrated fisheries management
29

 

not only contributes to resource sustainability by reducing pressure on stocks but 

also generates increased income, especially with the transition towards a      

rights- based fishery management (Belize,
30

 Ecuador, Chile
31

). The program will 

ensure the implementation of a pilot on sustainable fishery management system to 

avoid overexploitation of the marine resources based on successful interventions 

                                                 
28

  Sector Framework Document on Agriculture and Natural Resources (GN-2709) 
29

  combining research, monitoring and measures to manage the activity 
30

  http://www.tidebelize.org/ 
31

  Seijo J.C., FAO, 2011, Coastal fisheries of Latin America and the Caribbean 



- 8 - 

 

in similar circumstances in Belize and Panama.
32

 This pilot will include:                 

(i) definition of extraction rates compatible with stock replenishment rates; (ii) the 

implementation of a fishery information system including a national fishers’ 

census, as well as a strong monitoring and evaluation system; (iii) the 

implementation of a rights-based fishery management scheme for both offshore 

and coastal waters, combining managed access, quotas and no-take zones; and 

(iv) the promotion of more sustainable alternative fisheries techniques. The 

fisheries management measures will strengthen the benefits for stock recovery of 

the already created marine protected areas in the intervention zone through close 

collaboration with Ministry of Environment (MDE) and UNEP in the 

implementation of fisheries habitat conservation regulations with the cooperation 

of the fishers’ associations. 

1.19 Gender approach. The proposed operation will include a gender approach that 
promotes women’s participation and empowerment. Specifically, the program 

will finance public infrastructure, training
33

 and matching grants
34

 targeted 

towards female merchants. These activities aim to increase women’s income by 

increasing value of sales and reducing economic losses.  

1.20 Consistency with national priorities and donor coordination. The program 
will finance activities included in the National Fisheries Development Program 

(NFDP) and the Fisheries Investment Plan financed with the technical cooperation 

ATN/II-11593-HA, particularly: (i) strengthening the institutional and legal 

framework, through the establishment of a monitoring and control system, a data 

collection and analysis service including a national census of fishers and a fishers 

and vessels registry; (ii) socio-economic development of artisanal fishery through 

institutional and organizational strengthening of fishers associations, and 

introduction of improved fishing techniques and equipment; (iii) improving 

seafood marketing through development of basic public infrastructure destined to 

improve the processing of fish products and access to cold chain; and                 

(iv) increasing effectiveness of fisheries management through introduction of 

awareness campaigns introducing sustainable fisheries management practices. 

Program activities will be closely coordinated with AECID. 

1.21 Consistency with the Country Strategy, Sector Strategy and GCI-9. The 
program is aligned with the Bank’s Country Strategy with Haiti for 2011-2015 

(GN-2646), which sets agriculture (including fisheries) as a priority sector of 

intervention and with its private sector development pillar. The program is also 

included in the 2015 Operational Program Report (GN-2805). It contributes to 

three of the lending program priority targets outlined in the Report on the Ninth 

General Increase in Resources of the IDB (AB-2764) (GCI-9) and its Results 

Framework: (i) support to small and vulnerable countries; (ii) poverty reduction 

and equity enhancement, as beneficiaries will be low income fishers; and 

                                                 
32

  Seijo J.C., FAO, 2011, Coastal fisheries of Latin America and the Caribbean 
33

  Training on the following themes will directly target female merchants: hygiene and sanitary conditions, 

conservation techniques, infrastructure management  
34

  Specific equipment such as coolers and dryers have already been identified 



- 9 - 

 

(iii) support regional cooperation and integration, as the operation is consistent 

with both, the cross-country focus and national subsidiarity criteria.
35

 It will also 

contribute to the regional development goals of “trade openness,” as well as to the 

Bank´s outputs, “regional and subregional integration agreements and cooperation 

initiative supported” as defined in the Results Framework. The operation is 

consistent with the strategic priority to “Protect the environment, respond to 

climate change and enhance food security,” and will contribute to its Regional 

Development Goal “Annual growth rate of agricultural GDP.” The operation is 

consistent with the “Agriculture and Natural Resources Management Sector 

Framework Document” (GN-2709-1), as it will foster fisheries management 

regimes adapted to local conditions. Also, it is consistent with the Sector Strategy 

“Sustainable Infrastructure for Competitiveness and Inclusive Growth”          

(GN-2710-5), as the Program seeks to ensure financial sustainability of the 

investments by developing maintenance plans for each infrastructure to be built. 

The linkages with other projects from an economic perspective will be developed 

during program implementation in particular with 3383/GR-HA, Sustainable 

Coastal Tourism Program, with respect to improving food products for the 

tourism value chain and 3260/GR-HA, Modernization of Agricultural Health 

Public Services, regarding sanitary protection activities. Linkages with other Bank 

initiatives through the FD will be developed to enhance private investments. In 

particular it will support the participation of fishers’ associations in the Program 

to Support Productive Investment (2827/GR-HA). 

B. Objective, Components and Cost 

1.22 The objective of the program is to improve the income of fishers in three southern 
regions of Haiti (South, South-East and Grande Anse), through the sustainable 

development of artisanal fisheries. The specific objectives are to: (i) strengthen 

the institutional management of the fisheries sector for resource sustainability, 

and improved sanitary and food safety conditions for marketing of seafood 

products; (ii) improve the quality of fish at landing sites, through improved public 

infrastructure; and (iii) increase artisanal fisheries productivity and reduce 

economic losses through the establishment of a rights-based fishery management 

scheme. To achieve this, the program will support a set of investments and actions 

organized in three components. The direct beneficiaries of the program are the 

20,800 fishers located in the intervention area. An additional 31,200 fishers 

located elsewhere in the country will benefit from institutional strengthening. 

                                                 
35

  According to the guidelines for GCI-9 regional cooperation and integration lending priority                   

(GN-2733/ GN-2650), this operation is consistent with the cross-country focus criteria, as this national 

program will support the institutional strengthening and infrastructure investments to promote 

internationalization of the artisanal fishery industry, as presented in the result matrix by the indicator; 33% 

increase in the number of annual health certificates for exports (OIE). The operation meets the national 

subsidiarity criteria as it will support unilaterally policy reforms that are related to a supra-national plan. 

Particularly, as stated in the result matrix, at least three international conventions on sustainable fishing 

will be adopted. Haiti´s Pelagic fisheries as tuna, are shared among countries in the Caribbean, therefore 

the sustainability improvements will have a positive impact at a regional level.  

javascript:fOpenWindow('http://edwbip.iadb.org:80/cognos8/cgi-bin/cognos.cgi?b_action=cognosViewer&ui.action=run&ui.object=XSSSTART*2fcontent*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27BI*20Reports*27*5d*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27OPS*27*5d*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27LMS*20REPORTS*27*5d*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27LMS1*20-*20Versiones*27*5d*2freport*5b*40name*3d*27LMS1*27*5dXSSEND&ui.name=LMS1&run.outputFormat=&run.prompt=false&p_Active=1&p_UDR=UDR&p_OpNumber=3383/GR-HA&p_Date=2015-04-07',%20'_OPSDetail');
javascript:fOpenWindow('http://edwbip.iadb.org:80/cognos8/cgi-bin/cognos.cgi?b_action=cognosViewer&ui.action=run&ui.object=XSSSTART*2fcontent*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27BI*20Reports*27*5d*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27OPS*27*5d*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27LMS*20REPORTS*27*5d*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27LMS1*20-*20Versiones*27*5d*2freport*5b*40name*3d*27LMS1*27*5dXSSEND&ui.name=LMS1&run.outputFormat=&run.prompt=false&p_Active=1&p_UDR=UDR&p_OpNumber=3260/GR-HA&p_Date=2015-04-07',%20'_OPSDetail');


- 10 - 

 

1.23 Component 1. Institutional strengthening and information system        
(US$7.7million). This component will benefit all fishing communes in the 

country (¶1.13). To accomplish these goals, the program will finance: (i) technical 

assistance to conduct a detailed organizational and institutional analysis of the 

FD, revise and formulate the legal framework of the sector, and formalize the 

status of artisanal fishers;
36

 (ii) development and implementation of a national 

integrated fishery information system including: design of the system, software 

development, a national fishery census, and a registry of fishers, boats, sellers and 

associations; (iii) strengthening of FD’s human resources capacities at 

decentralized levels; (iv) technical training of managers, technicians and FD staff; 

(v) study for seafood products new potential markets; (vi) national sensitization 

campaigns on the use of ice, food safety, consumption of seafood products, and 

information on endangered species; (vii) design and construction of FD office in 

Damien and decentralized buildings;
37

 (viii) design and preliminary 

implementation of a plan for control and surveillance of seafood pathologies as 

well as a plan for sanitary control of seafood products; (ix) study on operational 

fishery control system that supports the transition towards rights–based fishery 

management for both offshore and coastal fisheries through a combination of 

managed access, quotas, no-take zones and similar measures; and (x) stock 

evaluation of under exploited resources via experimental fisheries campaigns and 

implementation of a research program on new fishery techniques.
38

 

1.24 Component 2. Public infrastructure (US$2.6million). This component will 
finance the design, supervision and maintenance plan (¶3.6) of the following 

infrastructure: (i) basic fishery infrastructure (landing, cleaning sites and public 

markets including solid waste management, manual system of seawater pumping 

filtration, ice container); and (ii) other landing facilities to protect fishing vessels 

during storms and hurricanes. To ensure sustainability, the design of investments 

will take into account the vulnerability to natural disasters, climate change 

mitigation and adaptation measures.  

1.25 Component 3. Stakeholders’ capacity building (US$3.5million). This 
component comprises the delivery of technical assistance and productive 

technologies through the provision of matching grants. To strengthen the     

fishers’ and merchants’ associations, the program will finance: (i) training to 

fishers and merchants in organizational administration, infrastructure management 

to ensure their sustainability and skills development for new fishing techniques;
39

 

(ii) provision of improved productive equipment
40

 to fishers’ and             

                                                 
36

  Administrative recognition of what is a fisher, defining fishers’ eligibility to public support. 
37

    The size of the FD offices in Damien cannot host all FD staff. As no other space within the MARNDR is 

available the program proposes to either build or rehabilitate one on the campus.  
38

  As no stock assessment has ever been done in Haiti, a preliminary work was conducted during program 

preparation (Optional Link #6)  
39

  AECID project will directly carry out strengthening capacities of the associations in the South East region 

under the AECID parallel funding, as well as training of project staff in other Departments through 

technical assistance. 
40

  The research program will define new fishing techniques to be promoted by the project to the associations. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39540185


- 11 - 

 

merchants’ associations through matching grants; and (iii) implementation of a 

pilot on new fishing techniques and rights-based fishery management. 

Approximately 2,829 fishers and 1,661 merchants will benefit from the pilot. 

C. Key Results Indicators 

1.26 The program is expected to improve artisanal fishers’ income through the 
development of sustainable artisanal fisheries in Haiti. Table 2 summarizes the 

program’s key indicators, measurement periods and selection rationale. 

Table 2. Key indicators, measurement periods and selection rationale 

Key Indicators Period Selection rationale  

Impact Indicators 

Increase average total net revenues from fishing and 

fishing-related activities by household 
Y5 

Measures the impact on productivity and 

income of artisanal fishers 

% of fishers fishing exclusively on the shore  
Y5 

 

Measure the improvement on the 

environmental sustainability of artisanal fishing 
Establishment of at least one no-take zone in the 

coastal area associated with the scope of the project 

Selected Outcomes’ Indicators 

Component 1: Membership to international 

conventions on sustainable fishing 
Y5 

Measures the improvement on the management 

of the resource at the institutional level. 

Component 2: Value of weekly sales of fish per 

woman merchant 
Y5 

Measures the improvement on sanitary 

conditions and quality of the products sold. 

Component 3: Fishing basins with rights based 

fishery management  established 
Y5 

Measures the improvement on the management 

of the resource at the local level. 

Core Sector Indicator (CSI): Number of 

beneficiaries of improved management and 

sustainable use of natural and cultural capital 

Y5 
Measures the number of total beneficiairies in 

the associations. 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS 

A. Financing Instruments 

2.1 The total program amount is US$16,500,000; financed by the IDB Grant Facility 
up to the amount of US$15,000,000 and by the national counterpart up to the 

amount of US$1,500,000. The program is also supported by approximately 

US$2.7million (€2.5million)
41

 in parallel financing from AECID. A memorandum 

of understanding is expected to be negotiated between MARNDR, AECID and 

IDB to ensure further collaboration and complementarity of both interventions. 

The disbursement period will be 60 months. Table 3 provides the cost summary 

by investment categories and components (detailed budget). The budget includes 

all costs associated with risks mitigation measures mentioned in ¶2.5. 

B. Economic Analysis 

2.2 A cost-benefit analysis was conducted to assess the economic viability of the 
program. The main economic benefits that were quantified in the cost-benefit 

analysis were: (i) the increase in gross operating margins of fishers; (ii) the 

increase in the value added generated by the merchants; and (iii) the benefits 

obtained from the restoration and sustainability of the stock fisheries. The annual 

                                                 
41

  Subject to AECID’s annual budget approval in Euros for 2016-2020. 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/38107888/R


- 12 - 

 

overall costs of the program considered in the analysis include both investment 

costs and recurrent costs. The analysis envisions a program horizon of 15 years 

and a 12% discount rate. Goods and services considered in the analysis are 

evaluated using their economic prices. The program is considered economically 

viable as its estimated internal rate of return is 14.5%. The positive net present 

value associated with the program amounts to US$1.6 million. Although the 

economic analysis of the program is based on reasonably conservative 

assumptions, a broad sensitivity analysis confirmed the reliability of the results. 

Table 3. Estimated cost by component in US$ million 

Investment categories IDB Local Total AECID 

I. Components 

1. Institutional capacity strengthening 6.3 1.4 7.7 1.08 

2. Public Infrastructure 2.6 0.0 2.6 0.54 

3. Stakeholders’ capacity building 3.5 0.0 3.5 1.08 

II. Monitoring-Evaluation, Audit, Administration, Contingencies 

Monitoring, Evaluation, Audits 0.8 0.0 0.8 - 

Administration 1.4 0.1 1.5 - 

Contingencies 0.4 0.0 0.4 - 

Total 15.0 1.5 16.5 2.7 

C. Environmental and Social Safeguard Risks  

2.3 Following the guidelines in the Bank’s Environment and Safeguards Compliance 
Policy (OP-703 and OP-765), this operation has been classified in Category “B.” 

A positive social impact is expected from increasing fishers income level’s (as a 

result of the program’s activities) and providing suitable fish processing facilities 

(Component 2), which will contribute to improve social conditions and decrease 

public health risks from poorly handled products. In terms of environmental 

impact, the expected strengthening and monitoring of the sector, including the 

fishers census and assessment of fishery resources (Component 1), will build a 

strong foundation to implement a state fishery control system. No resettlement 

and no adverse impacts on critical habitats are foreseen. Direct impacts will be 

related to the construction of infrastructure, for which associated mitigation 

measures will be incorporated in the bidding documents for the works. Potential 

indirect negative impact as overfishing or endangered species fishing will be 

mitigated by both the GoH increased capacity measures and fishers’ awareness 

measures, whose costs have been incorporated into the operation’s budget. An 

environmental and social analysis was conducted and the associated 

Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) will be included in the 

Operation Manual (OM). This information is incorporated in the ESMR. 

D. Fiduciary Risk  

2.4 The financial risk of the proposed program is evaluated as being medium due to 
the increase in volume and complexity of new projects being assigned to the 

fiduciary team of BCP-ProGEBA (HA-L1087, HA-L1050 and HA-L1096). To 

mitigate this risk, the Bank recommends the strengthening of BCP-ProGEBA’s 

accounting team with the hiring of an administrator, an accountant and an 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/39542894/R


- 13 - 

 

administrative assistant dedicated to the implementation of this program. In 

addition the OM of the program will include among other sections: (i) procedures 

for the approval and disbursement of funds; (ii) chart of accounts; and (iii) policy 

and procedures for the administration of inventory. The hiring of a support team 

agreed upon with the Bank and the approval of the program’s OM will be 

condition prior to first disbursement. In addition, during the first year of the 

program, Bank’s Fiduciary staff will conduct inspection visits on a semi-annual 

basis to review the execution of the financial plan, the preparation of financial 

reports and the review of program expenses and documentation. All costs 

associated with mitigation measures are included in the operation budget. 

2.5 The procurement risk is evaluated as medium. The MARNDR’s Procurement 
Unit (UPMP) is operational since early 2014 and has proved to possess a strong 

technical capacity in procurement and a reliable structure. However, the increased 

number of projects that are being handled by this unit may have an impact on the 

timing of procurement activities. As a mitigation measure, an additional 

procurement specialist will be hired to support the UPMP. During the program’s 

life, the Bank will conduct at least one procurement inspection visit per year. All 

associated costs are included in the operation budget. The ex-ante review method 

will apply to major procurement activities. Ex post review will be conducted over 

specific low risk activities as detailed under Annex III. 

E. Other Key Issues and Risks 

2.6 The main risk identified during a workshop conducted with the GoH is the 
increase of the fishing effort and infrastructure sustainability. Mitigation measures 

include among others: implementation of a pilot rights based fishery management 

system, development of a fishery control system, technical assistance and training 

of FD technical staff, creation of a Steering Committee (SC) and implementation 

of infrastructure maintenance plans (¶3.6). The general risk qualification of the 

program is medium. 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN  

A. Summary Implementation Arrangements 

3.1 The beneficiary of the program will be the Republic of Haiti and the Executing 
Agency (EA) will be the MARNDR. The EA will be responsible for the overall 

administration of the program, including: planning and reporting for technical and 

fiduciary aspects; execution of procurement activities; the supervision of technical 

assistance firms; financial and accounting management, including the submission 

of disbursement requests; risks management; monitoring and evaluation; and 

complying with contractual conditions of grant agreement. 

3.2 The MARNDR will execute the aforementioned tasks through its FD. The 
program will be headed by a Coordinator of the program. Financial management 

aspects will be handled through the fiduciary team of the MARNDR’s            



- 14 - 

 

BCP-ProGEBA unit while the UPMP will execute all procurement activities. To 

support the Project Coordinator in its tasks, the hiring or assignation of a 

planning, monitoring and evaluation specialist within the FD; of an 

administrator, an accountant and an administrative assistant within the 

MARNDR’s BCP-ProGEBA unit; and of a procurement specialist to support 

the Procurement Unit of the MARNDR will be a special contractual 

condition prior to first disbursement. 

3.3 To date, the MARNDR decentralized human resources in the intervention regions 
are limited (two agents in the South-East, two in the South financed by AECID 

and UNEP) or none (Grande Anse). The program will support the MARNDR-FD 

in strengthening its capacity to provide decentralized services within the 

DDA/BAC by recruiting/absorbing
42

 a total of 26 people (eight managers and 18 

technicians) whose salary will be supported by Public Treasury through 

counterpart funds. Recruitment of these managers and technicians is required to 

provide basic fishery services in the field for the respective regions will be a 

special contractual condition prior to the use of resources for the execution of 

Component 3. These MARNDR’s fishery employees located in the DDA or BAC 

will directly work and collaborate with the fishers associations in strengthening 

their capacity implementing the AECID model with the technical assistance of                

AECID-MARNDR’s project staff. 

3.4 A Steering Committee (SC) will be created
43

 to ensure strategic general guidance 

as well as the approval of the OM, initial Multi-Year Execution Plan, Annual 

Operation Plans and semiannual Progress Reports. This committee will be led by 

the Minister of the MARNDR, or his representative, and composed of: (i) the 

MARNDR’s General Director; (ii) a representative of the National Agency for 

Protected Areas from the Ministry of Environment; (iii) one representative of 

national fishers’ federation,
44

 representing the three implementation departments 

of the country; and (iv) one representative of the fishery and aquaculture 

consultation group
45

 which includes the private sector. Representatives of the 

Bank and other Donors, including AECID and UNEP, will be invited as 

observers. The SC will meet at least two times per year. The creation of the SC 

will be a special contractual condition prior to first disbursement. 

3.5 Procurement activities will be conducted as detailed in Annex III. The 
MARNDR’s UPMP will manage all procurement processes for goods and 

services. Specific contractual mechanisms will be identified to purchase 

equipment through matching grants, as foreseen under Component 3. All 

procurement activities will be performed in accordance with Bank rules and 

procedures, with no exceptions to the application of the Policies for the 

                                                 
42

  Including 10 staff already supported by the AECID financing. 
43

  By Ministerial Circular. 
44

  IDBDOCS-#39592336. 
45  The objective of the group for the sector is among other to Ensure effective participation of civil society 

sector strategic orientation; coordinate the mobilization and use of resources (human, material and 

financial); and ensure communication. Membership is open to any stakeholder in the sector. 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/39592336/R


- 15 - 

 

Procurement of Goods and Works (GN-2349-9) and Policies for the Selection and 

Recruitment of Consulting Services (GN-2350-9). The program will also be 

subject to the special provisions for procurement activities in Haiti (GN-2654). 

3.6 Project financial management will be conducted as detailed in Annex III. 
Advance of funds methodology will be used for the disbursement of program 

funds and for an amount equivalent to three-month funding needs. No financial 

resources of the program will be transferred to participating associations and 

stakeholders, with the exception of a limited budget during the first four years of 

the program for the strengthening of the capacity of local actors including fishers 

and sellers through their association. It will be implemented by DDA via a 

technical assistance to be provided by an experienced operator to be financed 

under Component 3. National counterpart will be used to finance operational costs 

including the strengthening of the FD human resources personnel at decentralized 

levels and which will be processed through the MARNDR single treasury 

account. The program will subsidize the purchase of equipment through matching 

grants to associations based on eligible criteria defined in the OM including: (i) a 

functioning registered association with all fishers and merchants members 

registered; (ii) a business plan; (iii) commitment through an agreement to comply 

with a rights based fishery management plan (¶7.3 of Annex III). The program’s 

grant contribution will be a maximum of US$30,000 per association, and the 

matching amount per association will be a minimum of ten percent of the grant. 

The OM specifies the amounts to be granted to each association per type of 

investment, based on a technical and economic analysis for each investment. 

3.7 Operation Manual (OM). The OM will set out the procedures to be followed by 
the EA with regard to implementation, planning and reporting of activities, 

financial management, audits, procurement and contracting, risks management, 

and monitoring and evaluation. The OM will include: (i) financial and accounting 

procedures; (ii) chart of accounts; (iii) procurement procedures; (iv) matching 

grant eligibility criteria and procedures; (v) environmental and social management 

plan and procedures; and (vi) monitoring and evaluation plan. The SC’s approval 

of the OM will be a special contractual condition prior to first disbursement. 

3.8 Special disbursement. To enable the EA to fulfill all the conditions prior to first 
disbursement an initial disbursement of up to US$125,000 will be made to the 

extent the Beneficiary fulfills, to the Bank’s satisfaction, all the standard general 

conditions prior to disbursement set forth in the grant agreement, except for: 

(i) the submission of the initial execution report; and (ii) evidence of reliable 

financial information systems and internal control mechanisms. 

3.9 Special audit and financial reporting requirements: (i) audit of program: external 
auditors eligible to the Bank will be hired by the FD to perform the audit of the 

program as follows: one annual financial audit of the program including the audit 

of internal control processes and the review of procurement processes to be 

submitted within 120 days following the end of each fiscal year and a final 

financial audit of the program to be submitted within 120 days after the date of 



- 16 - 

 

the last disbursement. For accounting and audit purposes, the Haitian fiscal year 

will be respected; and (ii) during the first year of execution, the program will also 

submit quarterly unaudited financial reports 45 days after the end of each quarter. 

For the following years, the frequency for the submission of unaudited reports 

will be based on risk evaluation updates determined during supervision missions. 

B. Summary of Arrangements for Monitoring Results  

3.10 Planning and monitoring. During the grant disbursement period, the EA will 
submit annual operation plans

46
 (AOP) no later than 30 days before the end of the 

preceding calendar year; and semiannual progress reports (PR) no later than 30 

days after the end of the calendar semester. AOPs and PRs will be prepared 

following a template consistent with the Bank’s “Project Monitoring Report”. The 

AOPs will include targets indicators, a work plan for the calendar year, updated 

procurement and risk mitigation plans, a disbursement forecast, and a 

maintenance plan for infrastructures and equipment. The PRs will indicate the 

level of fulfillment of the output and outcome indicators planned in the AOPs; 

detail the execution of procurement, risk mitigation and maintenance activities; 

analyze problems encountered; and propose corrective measures. Within 60 days 

after the last disbursement date, the EA will prepare a final report, summarizing 

all the PRs prepared during the program life and will organize a closing workshop 

to present and discuss the Project Completion Report prepared by the Bank. 

3.11 Evaluation. The EA will submit to the Bank: (i) a midterm independent 
evaluation report no later than 36 months after the date of entry into force of the 

grant agreement or when 50% of the grants proceeds have been disbursed, 

whichever occurs first; and (ii) a final independent evaluation report, within 90 

days after the date on which 90% of the grant proceeds have been disbursed or 

after the Bank’s official request. The final evaluation report will mandatorily 

include the results of the program’s impact evaluation (see below). 

3.12 Impact evaluation. An impact evaluation plan was agreed upon with the GoH. 
The impact evaluation and monitoring plan presents the methodology, data 

collection plan, indicators to be measured, sample design and budget allocated to 

each activity. For Components 2 and 3, the evaluation methodology to be applied 

is a quasi-experimental approach of Double Difference combined with a 

Propensity Score Matching. To accomplish this, a data collection strategy will be 

implemented to administer two rounds of surveys to fishers and merchants in 

treatment and control groups. This analysis will allow us to measure the impact 

heterogeneity of the program with an emphasis on beneficiary women 

(merchants). The total number of surveys for both rounds is 3,230. For 

Component 1, a reflexive method will be used to compare indicators before and 

after the intervention. The total cost of the impact evaluation amounts to 

US$450,000. 

                                                 
46

  Sections of the AOPs related to Component 2 and 3 for the SE department will be prepared in coordination 

with AECID. 






























































PUBLIC 
SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE 

DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK  
 

 

 

 

BOLIVIA 

 

 

 

AGRICULTURAL HEALTH AND FOOD SAFETY PROGRAM II 

(BO-L1179) 

LOAN PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
 
PROJECT SUMMARY 

BOLIVIA 

AGRICULTURAL HEALTH AND FOOD SAFETY PROGRAM II 
(BO-L1179) 

Financial Terms and Conditions 

Borrower: Plurinational State of Bolivia 
 OC FSO 

Amortization period: 30 years 40 years 

Executing agency: Servicio Nacional de Sanidad 

Agropecuaria e Inocuidad Alimentaria [National Service 
for Agricultural Health and Food Safety] (SENASAG) 

Disbursement period: 5 years 5 years 

Source Amount (US$) % Grace period: 6 years 40 years 

IDB (OC): 21,250,000 85 
Inspection and 
supervision fee: 

(a) N/A 

IDB (FSO): 3,750,000 15 
Interest rate: SCF – fixed(b) 0.25% 

Credit fee: (a) N/A 

Total: 25,000,000 100 
Currency of approval: US$ US$ 

Project at a Glance 

Project objective/description: The general objective of the program is to help increase productivity in the agriculture 

sector. The specific objectives are: (i) to reduce production losses from pests and diseases; (ii) to facilitate access to 
international markets; and (iii) to enhance service to users. 

Special contractual conditions precedent to the first disbursement of the loan: (i) the borrower will sign a subsidiary 

agreement with the executing agency establishing the following and other elements: (a) the mechanism for transferring the 
loan proceeds; and (b) the commitment of the executing agency to conduct program activities in accordance with the terms 
of the loan contract (paragraph 3.2); (ii) the executing agency: (a) will create the program execution unit in accordance with 
terms and conditions previously agreed upon with the Bank; and (b) will contract specialists, through a competitive process, 
in at least the following areas: general coordination, planning, financial management, procurement, and environmental and 
social management (paragraph 3.2); (iii) the program technical board will be created and its members appointed 
(paragraph 3.2); and (iv) the program Operating Regulations will be approved by the executing agency and will be in force, 
under terms previously agreed upon with the Bank (paragraph 3.4). 

Special contractual conditions of execution: Prior to startup of the activities for the fruit fly control program in 

Component 3, agreements will be signed between SENASAG, the Municipio of El Torno, the Municipio of Luribay, and 
local producers’ associations (paragraph 3.3). 

Exceptions to Bank policies: None. 

Strategic Alignment 

Challenges:(c) SI 
 

PI 
 

EI 
 

Crosscutting topics:(d) GD 
 

CC 
 

IC 
 

(a) The credit fee and inspection and supervision fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors as part of its 
review of the Bank’s lending charges, in accordance with applicable policies. 

(b)  The borrower will pay interest on outstanding balances on this portion of the Ordinary Capital loan at a LIBOR-based rate. The rate on 
the outstanding balance will be set whenever such balance reaches 25% of the approved net amount or US$3 million, whichever is 
greater. 

(c) SI (Social Inclusion and Equality); PI (Productivity and Innovation); and EI (Economic Integration). 
(d) GD (Gender Equality and Diversity); CC (Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability); and IC (Institutional Capacity and Rule 

of Law). 

 



 
 

I. DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING 

A. Background, problem addressed, and rationale 

1.1 Overview of the agriculture sector. The agriculture sector is of crucial 
importance to the Bolivian economy. It accounts for more than 13% of the country’s 
GDP, contributes more than US$1.3 billion in exports (18% of the total), and 
employs 35% of the economically active population (INE, 2015). The sector’s GDP 
has been growing at an average annual rate of 4.16% (2002-2014), and its 
composition has undergone no substantive change over the last decade. Crop 
products represent 70% of agricultural GDP, livestock products account for 21%, 
and forestry, hunting, and fisheries products make up the remaining 9% (UDAPE, 
2015). The sector is fairly diversified, with the largest areas under cultivation 
corresponding to industrial crops (45%)—soybeans, sunflowers, sugarcane, and 
sesame—followed by nonindustrial crops such as grains (30%), fruits and 
vegetables (8%), and tubers (7%). The livestock sector is dominated by beef and 
milk production and by poultry farming. Agricultural exports have grown at an 
average annual rate of 13% over the past decade, with soybeans, Brazil nuts, 
quinoa, beans, and fruits as the main agricultural exports. The main destination 
markets are Latin America (47%), Europe (30%), and the United States (23%). 

1.2 Despite the recent growth and relative importance of the agriculture sector, an 
in-depth examination reveals low levels of productivity. According to a recent 
study, total factor productivity in Bolivia’s agriculture sector showed an annual 
growth rate of 1.4% over the period 2000-2012, below the average for the region 
(1.7%) and far short of Brazil (3.0%), Peru (2.6%), Chile (2.3%), and Paraguay 
(3.2%) (Nin-Pratt et al., 2015). Among the factors contributing to the poor 
performance of productivity in the sector (which include lack of market information, 
inadequate infrastructure, scarce access to financing, and low levels of innovation 
and technology transfer1), losses due to pests and diseases are especially 
significant. Estimates suggest that fruit growers in Bolivia lose approximately 
US$113 million per year2 due to the impact of the fruit fly, and it is estimated that 
the beef sector would lose around US$57 million3 in the event of another outbreak 
of foot and mouth disease (FMD). These estimates reflect a situation in which the 
intensity of spending on agricultural health4 in Bolivia (6.7% in 2009) is much lower 
than in Brazil (26.1%), Uruguay (22.9%), Chile (19.8%), and Argentina (37%) 
(Agrimonitor, 2015). 

1.3 Recent empirical evidence shows that progress in controlling pests and diseases 
is key to improving the country’s productivity. In this respect, a comparative 
evaluation of six agricultural health and food safety projects conducted by the 
Office of Evaluation and Supervision (OVE, 2015) indicates that campaigns for 
controlling and eradicating pests and diseases carried out by agricultural health 
agencies have been effective in boosting productivity. Noteworthy here is the case 
of farmers participating in the fruit fly control program in Peru (loans 1025/OC-PE, 

                                                
1 Kay, C. (2011); and Hameleers, Antezana, and Paz (2011). 
2  SENASAG – TESA PROMOSCA (2013). 
3  Due to source control costs and the closing of export markets, Mascitelli (2016). 
4  In this case, the intensity of spending on agricultural health refers to the proportion of supports for general 

services (or sector public goods) that go to agricultural health services. 

http://agrimonitor.iadb.org/es
https://publications.iadb.org/bitstream/handle/11319/7146/Evaluacion_comparativa_de_proyectos_de_sanidad_agropecuaria_e_inocuidad_alimentaria_Anexo_3.pdf?sequence=7


 - 2 - 
 
 
 

1647/OC-PE, and 2015/OC-PE), which increased fruit yields by 65%, and 
enhanced the value of production by 15% (Salazar et al., 2016). At the same time, 
Peru’s exports of fruits and vegetables rose at an average annual rate of 22.5% 
(1998-2014), outpacing other exports in the sector, for which the annual growth 
rate was 7.4% (SUNAT, Peru). The case of Uruguay also demonstrates the 
international trade benefits of animal disease control. Specifically, once the country 
was declared FMD-free without vaccination in 1996, the value of beef exports rose 
by more than 50%, generating additional annual earnings on the order of 
US$110 million from exports to the United States, while trade with Pacific Rim 
countries increased, and savings in vaccination costs came to US$8 million per 
year (Knight-Jones and Rushton, 2013; Otte et al., 2004). An important point to 
consider in connection with the foregoing empirical evidence is that the impacts 
have been felt by small and medium-sized farmers. 

1.4 To address the country’s phyto-zoosanitary and food safety risks, the National 
Service for Agricultural Health and Food Safety (SENASAG) was created by 
Law 2061 in 2000, with the mandate to protect health and the safety of food.5 In 
2016, Law 830/2016 ratified SENASAG as the competent national authority in this 
area. For technical and operational purposes, SENASAG has organized its 
functions into two broad areas: (i) agricultural health; and (ii) food safety, the 
challenges of which are described below. 

1.5 Agricultural health. In Bolivia, the fruit fly is one of the most destructive 
agricultural pests, damaging more than 260 crops and causing losses in the range 
of 20% to 60% of yields (SENASAG, Fruit Fly Control Program 2012). The area 
under cultivation in fruits and vegetables in the country exceeds 250,000 hectares, 
with citrus accounting for the greatest portion of that area (INE-CAN, 2013). The 
fruit fly reduces product yield, quality, and value; it increases production costs; and 
it diminishes opportunities for market access in light of phytosanitary restrictions in 
importing countries. To manage this pest, which has the potential to spread far and 
wide, a coordinated public-private effort is needed in which SENASAG plays a key 
role, defining intervention and inspection protocols, among other activities (IICA, 
2009). In order for importing countries to accept Bolivian fruits, fruit-fly-free zones 
must be established and maintained.6 Experience with control in one area can 
contribute to the design of a strategy for eradicating the pest in other areas, or in 
the entire country. Another threat to fruit production, especially citrus fruit, is 
Huanglongbing disease, which can devastate citrus orchards.7 This disease has 
not yet been detected in Bolivia, but the vector insect is known to be present. The 

                                                
5  The responsibilities of SENASAG include: (i) preservation of the health of agricultural and forestry 

resources; (ii) product certification for domestic consumption, imports and exports; (iii) accreditation of 
individuals and companies as service providers; (iv) control, prevention, and eradication of pests and 
diseases in animals and plants; (v) control and guarantee of food safety in the production and processing 
chains; and (vi) control of inputs used for agricultural, agroindustrial, and forestry production. 

6  An area free from fruit fly is one in which the fruit fly is not present, as demonstrated by scientific evidence, 
and in which, as appropriate, that status is being officially maintained (CIPF-NIMF 26 and NIMF 5). 

7  Huanglongbing is a bacterial disease that affects all commercial citrus species, as well as others. It is 
currently considered the most devastating citrus disease worldwide, given the damage it causes, the 
difficulty of diagnosing it, and the speed at which it spreads (Food and Agriculture Organization). The 
arrival of Huanglongbing in Brazil is estimated to have caused annual losses of 6% in the area under 
cultivation, cost increases of 10% to 20%, and an annual exit of 18% of small producers (1-4 hectares, 
2015-2016) (IICA, 2015, Evaluation of the Potential Impact of Huanglongbing in Argentina). 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40691814
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40652374
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40652374


 - 3 - 
 
 
 

presence of the vector combined with reports of the disease in neighboring 
countries makes it all the more urgent to take steps for its prevention and control. 

1.6 In zoosanitary aspects, Bolivia has been officially recognized by the World 
Organisation for Animal Health (OIE) as an FMD-free country since 2014. This has 
been the first step in opening dialogue between the country and potential meat 
export markets. Since that declaration, several countries have shown interest in 
Bolivian beef. The next challenge in terms of gaining access to potential markets 
is to identify the risk of diseases of the nervous system, primarily bovine 
spongiform encephalopathy (BSE), for which Bolivia needs to run analyses that 
show a negligible risk of the disease in the country.8 Neighboring countries have 
already been recognized by the OIE as countries with a negligible BSE risk. Once 
these zoosanitary requirements have been met, potential buyers will give priority 
to those countries with the highest levels of food safety, particularly those with little 
or no presence of biological, physical, or chemical contaminants (including 
residues of pesticides and veterinary drugs) (Garzón, 2009). 

1.7 Another fast-growing sector that has been affected by health concerns is poultry 
farming, with production having increased over the last 10 years by 135% 
(www.udape.gob.bo). This sector is an important source of employment, 
generating some 60,000 direct jobs and 135,000 indirect jobs, owing primarily to 
its multiplier effect on the production of corn, sorghum, and soybeans. Among the 
diseases that cause losses in poultry production, the most important is Newcastle 
disease (the mortality rate from respiratory infections, of which this disease is a 
leading cause, is 9%). Declaring areas free from this disease would help open 
markets for poultry products.9 At this time, there is no evidence in Bolivia of avian 
flu, which could cause major losses in production and risks to human health (OIE, 
2007). Drawing on data from animal health services in 12 countries, Swayne 
(2011) found that the increase in the capacities of veterinary services, such as 
laboratory analysis, trained personnel, development of biological products, and the 
responsiveness of the surveillance system, are correlated with improvements in 
the control of avian flu. In this respect, Bolivia needs to conduct surveillance for 
the disease and demonstrate its absence with scientific evidence, so that it cannot 
be used as a sanitary barrier preventing access for the country’s poultry products 
to international markets. 

1.8 Food safety. The benefits of stronger and more effective food safety systems are 
increasingly important for meeting the growing demand for healthier, cleaner food. 
However, the country has little information on the level of contaminants in its food 
products. The government’s network of food safety laboratories—still without 
ISO 17025 accreditation—are limited in their diagnostic capacities to testing for 
biological contaminants (e.g. salmonella) and are unable to test for chemical 
contaminants (metals, pesticide residues, etc.). Data on the growth of pesticide 
imports, rejections of exports of agricultural products, and cases or outbreaks of 

                                                
8  BSE (known as mad cow disease) is a disease for which the OIE has established official recognition of the 

health status of countries and zones, based on a general risk analysis. The categories for BSE are: 
negligible risk, controlled risk, and undetermined risk. Bolivia is included in this last category.  

9  The Newcastle disease status of a country, zone or division can be determined on the basis of specific 
criteria established by the OIE. 

http://www.oie.int/en/animal-health-in-the-world/official-disease-status/fmd/list-of-fmd-free-members/
http://www.udape.gob.bo/
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40652369
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40652369


 - 4 - 
 
 
 

foodborne diseases10 highlight the problem. Between 2005 and 2013, pesticide 
imports grew 75% by volume (IBCE).11 With respect to the rejection of food 
products in foreign markets, the European market notified four rejections (RASFF, 
2016) during the period 2009-2013,12 while over that same period Peru reported 
no cases of rejection. The cases of foodborne disease recorded between 2010 
and 2015 totaled 35,850 (Ministry of Health of Bolivia, 2016). Meanwhile, the World 
Health Organization estimates a value of 315 disability-adjusted life years (DALY)13 
per 100,000 inhabitants caused by foodborne illnesses in Bolivia, higher than the 
estimate for most Latin American countries, which is 140 DALY, and for the United 
States and Canada, at 35 DALY. Thus, contaminant surveillance programs and 
awareness-raising for all links in the country’s supply chains are increasingly 
important for providing safer food to the Bolivian population and facilitating access 
to international markets. 

1.9 Beyond the technical and operational areas described above, SENASAG has a 
user services office covering all units. A survey conducted of users (producers, 
companies, exporters, and importers) of SENASAG services in 2016 revealed a 
satisfaction index of 6.13, measured on a scale of 0 to 10. The areas in which 
users reported dissatisfaction included transactions times, the number of 
requirements imposed, and the costs. In order to improve the delivery of services 
to users, SENASAG has embarked on a process to systematize its transactions, 
and at present four of the services in greatest demand can be done by users online. 
These efforts by SENASAG are part of a larger process to implement 
e-government that the country is pursuing in accordance with the General 
Telecommunications, Information Technologies, and Communications Act 
(164/2011). Meanwhile, indicators such as the United Nations e-Government 
Development Index (EGDI) show that the country has much room for improving 
the management of its public services. According to EGDI 2016, Bolivia ranks 
101st of 193 countries (behind most of the countries in the region), and the Doing 
Business report places it 137th of 198 countries worldwide, and 30th of 
32 countries in Latin America and the Caribbean (World Bank, 2015). 

1.10 For purposes of international comparison of agricultural health and food safety 
services, countries’ national services are subject to evaluations by the World 
Organisation for Animal Health (OIE) and the Inter-American Institute for 
Cooperation on Agriculture (IICA). In the case of Bolivia, those evaluations identified 
improvements in the delivery of services between 2008 and 2014 but recognized the 
need to strengthen them further. The evaluation of animal health and animal-source 

                                                
10  Date on foodborne diseases are merely indicative of the problem, as contamination may originate at 

different points in the chain, not only in production. These data represent a low estimate of the real situation 
in the country, as only about 10% of persons who suffer a bout of gastrointestinal illness will seek medical 
attention (Food and Agriculture Organization, 2002). 

11  The Action Network on Pesticides and their Alternatives in Latin America (www.RAP-AL.com) estimates 
annual use of agrochemicals in Bolivia at 9.03 kg per capita, higher than in Brazil (5.2 kg) and three times 
higher than in Costa Rica and Panama. 

12 Of total rejections in RASFF, 63% are due to the presence of aflatoxins in Brazil nuts, 21% to 
microbiological problems, and 16% to unsuitable organoleptic characteristics. The ratio of rejections per 
tons of exports for Bolivia is 1 rejection for every 4,907 tons, where for Peru the figure is 0 rejections for 
every 4,172 tons.  

13  A disability-adjusted life year (DALY) is equivalent to one year of healthy life lost. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40652366
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40652539
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40652539
http://www.rap-al.com/


 - 5 - 
 
 
 

food safety services by the OIE14 showed improvements in 22 of the 
39 competencies assessed (the others were unchanged). The average value of the 
competency performance indicators for SENASAG in 2014 was 62%, below the 
averages achieved by Chile (2010, 82%), Uruguay (2014, 83%), and Colombia 
(2015, 70%).15 The plant health services evaluation conducted by IICA in 2014, using 
a similar methodology, found performance levels averaging 47%16 in the various 
competencies and identified the need for improvement in all areas of plant health 
services. Both evaluations recommend, among other steps, improving: (i) the 
surveillance, inspection, and control system; (ii) the control of agricultural inputs and 
medications; (iii) the capacity and management of laboratories for diagnostics and 
analysis of residues, with proper biosafety conditions; and (iv) improvement in the 
services offered to users. 

1.11 Bank’s strategy in the agriculture sector of Bolivia. The Bolivian government, 
with Bank support, is implementing efforts to boost productivity. This year, it has 
approved: (i) the National Irrigation Program with a Watershed Approach III 
(3699/BL-BO) for US$158.4 million, which will help to increase or improve areas 
under irrigation and will benefit more than 20,000 farmers directly; (ii) Direct 
Supports for the Creation of Rural Agrifood Initiatives II (3536/BL-BO) for 
US$62 million, to help small-scale farmers adopt technologies that will boost 
agricultural yields, the value of output, and productive efficiency; and (iii) the Rural 
Land Regularization and Titling Program (3722/BL-BO) for US$60 million, which 
will support the regularization and titling of 24.5 million hectares and the 
registration of more than one million rural landholdings of small and medium-sized 
farmers. The proposed agricultural health and food safety program will supplement 
these operations with support targeted at general agricultural services designed to 
improve productivity levels in the sector. 

1.12 The proposed operation will help to consolidate Bank support in the area of health 
and safety, recognizing that SENASAG has been supported from its inception with 
funds from the Agricultural Services Program (1057/SF-BO), which called for 
investments to establish the institutional structure and set up the planning and 
administration systems, as well as services in the technical areas of food safety, 
animal health, and plant health. Achievements under that operation include: 
(i) central headquarters and nine district offices (one for each department) set up 
and open for service; (ii) coverage of 37% of the operating budget with own 
resources; (iii) Institutional Strategic Plan approved; (iv) website with information 
from the institution published; (v) national food safety unit created and providing 
services through a reliable management system (ISO-9000 certification); 
(vi) network of food safety laboratories established and running tests to identify 

                                                
14 The OIE Tool for the Evaluation of Performance of Veterinary Services (PVS) measures the effectiveness 

of veterinary services, identifies gaps and weaknesses, and provides recommendations for 
40 competencies in four groups: (i) human, technical, and financial resources; (ii) technical authority and 
capability; (iii) interaction with stakeholders; and (iv) access to markets. Each competency is rated on a 
scale from 1 to 5, with 5 being the highest score. The resulting values can be expressed as percentages. 
The tool used by IICA to evaluate plant health services, known as “Performance, Vision and Strategy,” is 
similar to the PVS tool developed by the OIE.  

15  http://www.oie.int/support-to-oie-members/pvs-evaluations/. 
16  This is lower than some other countries of the region, which have values above 50%, and far short of the 

ideal 100%. PVS country results are not publicly available. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40652545
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40652552
http://www.oie.int/support-to-oie-members/pvs-evaluations/


 - 6 - 
 
 
 

biological contaminants in foods; and (vii) two areas of the country (Chiquitanía in 
the department of Santa Cruz and the entire department of Oruro) have been 
declared FMD-free by the OIE. 

1.13 As well, in 2008 the Bank approved the Agricultural Health and Food Safety 
Program (2061/BL-BO) designed to strengthen systems for: (i) the administration 
of human, physical, and financial resources; (ii) cost recovery; (iii) integrated 
management of planning and monitoring; and (iv) information and management of 
services provided to users. In technical areas, the most pressing consideration 
was identified as the need to eradicate foot and mouth disease so the country 
could be declared FMD-free by the OIE. 

1.14 At the close of the operation, in 2014, SENASAG had achieved the following: (i) the 
system for the administration of human, physical, and financial resources had been 
implemented; (ii) own revenue from fees for services covered 90% of the total 
budget; (iii) the planning and monitoring system (Planea), part of the Institutional 
Strategic Plan, had been installed in the central and district offices; (iv) a user 
services management information system (Gran Paitití)17 was in operation with 
78 services systematized and 4 services available online through the institutional 
portal; and (v) the central office and district offices had been refurbished and 
improved. Lastly, the operation helped the country obtain an “FMD-free with 
vaccination” declaration by the OIE in 2014. 

1.15 Lessons learned. Between 2002 and 2014, the Bank approved 17 investment 
loans to strengthen agricultural health and food safety systems in the region, for a 
total amount of US$359 million, or approximately 10% of the total sector portfolio 
(OVE, 2015). As noted earlier, SENASAG has been supported since its creation, 
first with funds from the Agricultural Services Program (1057/SF-BO) and 
subsequently, in 2008, through the Agricultural Health and Food Safety Program 
(2061/BL-BO). The latter operation was selected as part of a sample of six projects 
(Argentina (1950/OC-AR, 2008-2015); Nicaragua (1500/SF-NI, 2003-2011); 
Peru (1647/OC-PE, 2005-2009, and 2045/OC-PE, 2008-2014); and Uruguay 
(2182/OC-UR)) that were analyzed by OVE for purposes of evaluating the 
interventions and identifying recommendations for the design of new operations. 
On the basis of the previous operations, as well as the conclusions and 
recommendations from the Comparative Project Evaluation of Agriculture Health 
and Food Safety, 2002-2014 (OVE), Table 1 below describes the main lessons 
learned and how these have been incorporated into the design of the proposed 
operation. 

 

                                                
17  Gran Paitití is an information technology system developed to manage each of the services that SENASAG 

provides nationwide. It administers information on animal health, plant health, food safety, as well as 
information from the administrative, planning and legal areas. The system is of national scope and is used 
in the departmental, local and frontier offices of SENASAG. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40652556


 - 7 - 
 
 
 

Table 1. Recommendations incorporated into program design 

Recommendations Incorporation into program design 

Involve the private sector 
through joint work and the 
incorporation of new 
information and 
communication technologies. 

The program gives priority to incorporating a greater number of 
online services for users, in order to make their delivery more 
prompt and efficient.18 The phytosanitary and zoosanitary 
programs will be implemented in coordination with farmers. 

Make the laboratories 
sustainable. 

The laboratories operated by SENASAG are self-funded but do 
not have the necessary capacity to run public programs for pest 
and disease control. The program will provide financing to 
enhance the capacity of the laboratories, which will remain 
self-funded. 

Strengthen the food safety 
area. 

The program will strengthen the capacity of the laboratories for 
analyzing contaminants, surveillance plans, and training for 
farmers in good agricultural practices, thereby helping to 
improve food safety levels in Bolivia 

Evaluation and results in 
relation to direct beneficiaries 

The program includes a monitoring and evaluation component 
and an impact evaluation plan that will analyze the impacts of 
program activities on the direct beneficiaries. 

 

1.16 Program design. The design of the program addresses the need to protect Bolivia’s 
agricultural resources from health risks and provide the safety assurances sought 
by domestic consumers and foreign markets, especially high-value markets, as part 
of the government’s bid to position Bolivia as a reliable and safe supplier of quality 
food products. To this end, the program will continue the work of strengthening the 
country’s health services, which the Bank has supported (loans 1057/SF-BO and 
2061/BL-BO) since the creation of SENASAG. The design of the operation takes 
into account achievements to date, lessons learned, and the results of evaluations 
by the Bank and leading international agencies working in this area. Thus, the 
operation focuses on: (i) strengthening the technical capacity of SENASAG to act 
independently and objectively, basing its decisions on scientific principles; 
(ii) enhancing the analytical capacity in fully equipped, internationally accredited 
laboratories for the diagnosis of diseases and pests, control of agricultural inputs, 
and detection of contaminants in agricultural and food products; (iii) implementing 
disease and pest prevention and control programs that will help lay the groundwork 
for expanding those programs to other regions or for implementing innovative work 
solutions (coordination mechanisms with the private sector, accreditation of 
professionals, etc.) that will facilitate surveillance and control of other health 
threats; and (iv) improving the management and increasing the efficiency of 
service delivery to users throughout the country. 

1.17 Country strategy for the sector. The program is part of the Patriotic Agenda 2025 
and the Productive Economic Development Plan 2016-2020. The program will 
contribute primarily to Pillar 6, Productive Sovereignty with Diversification, which 
sets the objective for the agriculture sector of boosting productivity and enhancing 
market access for Bolivian products. The program will also contribute to Pillar 8, 
Food Sovereignty, with respect to the promotion of good agricultural practices and 

                                                
18  The program is helping to enforce the supreme decree on e-government in Bolivia (Supreme Decree 1874 

of 23 January 2014), as well as the 2016-2020 e-Government Plan. 



 - 8 - 
 
 
 

ecologically sound production. Lastly, the program is aligned with the Institutional 
Strategic Plan of SENASAG 2014-2018. 

1.18 Bank’s country strategy with Bolivia. The operation is consistent with the Bank’s 
country strategy with Bolivia 2016-2020 (document GN-2843), inasmuch as it will 
contribute to the objective of increasing productivity in the economy through the 
delivery of quality public goods and services. 

1.19 Strategic alignment with the Update to the Institutional Strategy 2010-2020 
and the Corporate Results Framework 2016-2019. The program is consistent 
with the Update to the Institutional Strategy 2010-2020 (document AB-3008) and 
is aligned with the development challenges of productivity and innovation 
inasmuch as it will increase the agricultural productivity of small farmers and 
thereby contribute to the indicators in the Corporate Results Framework 
corresponding to the number of beneficiaries of improved management and 
sustainable use of natural capital and to the number of government agencies 
benefitted to improve public service delivery. The program is also aligned with the 
challenge of economic integration, inasmuch as it will support food safety 
mechanisms facilitating the participation of Bolivian producers in value chains 
integrated into international trade and will promote the alignment of trade 
integration instruments (Integration Annex). The program is aligned, as well, with 
the crosscutting area of institutional capacity, as it will strengthen the technological 
and management instruments for improving the delivery of SENASAG services, as 
reflected in the results indicators mentioned above. 

1.20 In addition, with respect to the Corporate Results Framework 2016-2019 (document 
GN-2727-6), the program is aligned with the regional context indicators of 
(7) intraregional trade in goods and (12) government effectiveness, as reflected in 
the program impact indicator in the results matrix (i) increased exports of agricultural 
products and the program outcome indicators (i) fewer sanitary barriers that restrict 
access to export markets for agricultural and agrifood products and (ii) improved 
service to users with incorporation of the virtual office and electronic signature. The 
program will further contribute to the Corporate Results Framework by aligning itself 
with the country development results indicator (5) corresponding to public agencies’ 
processing times of international trade of goods and services, as reflected in the 
outcome indicators mentioned above. 

1.21 The program is also consistent with the Agriculture and Natural Resources 
Management Sector Framework Document (document GN-2709-5), which 
emphasizes the need to strengthen the provision of agricultural public goods, as well 
as with the Food Security Sector Framework Document (document GN-2825-3) in 
the dimension of access to safe and nutritious food, and also with the Integration 
and Trade Sector Framework Document (document GN-2715-6), which addresses 
the problem of logistics costs and the facilitation of international trade. 

B. Objectives, components and cost 

1.22 Objective. The general objective of the program is to help increase productivity in 
the agriculture sector. The specific objectives are: (i) to reduce production losses 
from pests and diseases; (ii) to facilitate access to international markets; and (iii) to 
enhance service to users. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40691878


 - 9 - 
 
 
 

1.23 Components and cost. To achieve the program’s objective, investments will be 
made in four components, as described below. The total cost of the program will 
be US$25 million. 

1.24 Component 1. User services system (US$2.70 million). This component will 
improve the delivery of agricultural health and food safety services to users. To 
this end, it will provide financing for: (i) computer equipment and the development 
of applications to expand the capacity of the Gran Paitití information technology 
system, incorporating a greater number of online services and enabling digital 
signature; (ii) renovation of the building housing the Santa Cruz district 
headquarters19 (which serves roughly 50% of the country’s users), in order to 
incorporate new offices and refurbish public reception areas; and (iii) training for 
staff of SENASAG in public management and customer service. 

1.25 Component 2. Animal health system (US$7.80 million). This component will 
improve the zoosanitary status of the country by implementing national programs 
for disease prevention and control and strengthening laboratory capacity for the 
diagnosis of diseases and the control of veterinary inputs. It will provide financing 
for: (i) the program to maintain the country’s FMD-free status; (ii) the BSE 
prevention program; (iii) the program to control Newcastle disease in poultry, with 
a view to declaring two zones free of the disease, in the department of 
Cochabamba and the department of Santa Cruz, the country’s main poultry 
production areas; (iv) the national avian flu prevention program; and (v) the 
construction and equipping of a national laboratory for animal health diagnostics 
and control of veterinary inputs in the department of Santa Cruz.20 For the four 
zoosanitary programs, the component will finance epidemiological surveillance, 
emergency simulations, and training for technical staff.  

1.26 Component 3. Plant health system (US$8.10 million). This component will 
improve the country’s phytosanitary status through pest control programs and the 
creation of capacity for diagnosing agricultural diseases and pests and controlling 
agricultural inputs. It will provide financing for: (i) the pilot program for fruit fly 
control, so as to have two areas declared “low prevalence” zones, the municipio of 
El Torno (department of Santa Cruz) and the municipio of Luribay (department of 
La Paz). These two municipios have a total land area of 9,000 hectares, with 
2,500 farmers producing a large share of the country’s fruit supply; (ii) the 
prevention and control program for Huanglongbing disease that affects citrus 
crops; and (iii) construction and equipping of the national laboratory for diagnostics 
and control of agricultural inputs in the department of Santa Cruz. 

1.27 Component 4. Food safety system (US$5 million). This component will focus 
on training and awareness-raising for farmers and the general public with respect 
to greater food safety, and it will also determine the baselines for the presence of 
contaminants, as a way of facilitating surveillance decisions in line with scientific 
criteria. It will provide financing for: (i) training and certification in good agricultural 

                                                
19  The department of Santa Cruz accounts for the largest share (29%) of national GDP (INE, 2006) and 

produces 70% of the country’s food (CAO, 2014). SENASAG district headquarters in Santa Cruz serves 
approximately 50% of the country’s users. 

20  Before awarding contracts for the works in question, the executing agency will present to the Bank 
evidence that it has legal possession of the properties. This is a required condition for all works contracts, 
such as those mentioned in the following paragraphs. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40691924


 - 10 - 
 
 
 

practices and ecological production for producers of priority farm products for local 
and export markets;21 (ii) renovation and equipping of the Cochabamba laboratory 
and construction and equipping of the main national laboratory, in the department 
of Santa Cruz, to expand its analytical capacity for identifying residues in 
agricultural and food products; and (iii) installation and operation of the 
surveillance system for chemical residues and contaminants in food, in accordance 
with Codex standards. 

C. Key results indicators 

1.28 The program has a results matrix (Annex II) agreed upon with SENASAG that 
presents impact, outcome, and output indicators with their respective baselines, 
targets and means of verification. The main expected outcomes are: (i) reduced 
losses in agricultural production caused by pests and diseases; (ii) fewer sanitary 
barriers that restrict access to export markets; (iii) improved zoosanitary and 
phytosanitary conditions in the country; and (iv) shorter processing times. The 
operation will generally benefit rural producers in the country (880,000 farms), the 
members of the main agrifood chains, and consumers of food products in the country 
(11.4 million) by lowering transaction costs and helping to preserve health and safety 
conditions while facilitating access to markets. The fruit fly pilot program is expected 
to benefit 2,300 producers, and 2,500 producers will receive training in best 
agricultural practices. 

1.29 Economic evaluation. The cost-benefit methodology was used to estimate the 
economic benefits to be generated among the target population of beneficiaries 
(see link). These benefits will be seen in the reduction of production losses caused 
by pests and diseases, better access to external markets (due to improved sanitary 
conditions), and improvements in terms of internal savings and time savings for 
users of services owing to modernization of the processing system (e.g. electronic 
signature).22 Based on the incremental economic effect and considering an impact 
horizon of 20 years, the planned investments yield a net present value (NPV) of 
US$21.1 million (at a discount rate of 12%) and an internal rate of return (IRR) of 
23.5%. Under these assumptions, the benefit/cost ratio is US$1.58 per unit 
invested. The indicators were subjected to a sensitivity analysis, which showed 
that even under pessimistic hypotheses concerning certain execution risks 
(a 20% increase in investment and recurrent costs combined with a 25% decrease 
in the rate of application of techniques, a 25% decrease in market access, and a 
25% decrease in users of the virtual office system), the program would still reach 
the breakeven point (NPV of 0 and IRR of 12%). 

                                                
21  This activity will provide training and certification for producers of priority products for the local and export 

markets, in accordance with the Economic and Social Development Plan 2016-2020. This includes the 
production of bananas, pineapples, quinoa, tomatoes, coffee, cocoa, chia, soybeans, sesame, wheat, 
potatoes, and corn. Beneficiary producers will be selected at random from each association. 

22  Benefits in the form of fewer export rejections and less foodborne disease in the population due to 
improvements in safety were also identified but were not included in the calculations because there was 
no attribution mechanism or precise baseline information available. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40691924
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670749


 - 11 - 
 
 
 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS 

A. Financing instruments 

2.1 The total cost of the program is estimated at US$25 million, which the Bank will 
finance with a blend of US$21.25 million from the Ordinary Capital (OC) and 
US$3.75 million from the Fund for Special Operations (FSO). The distribution by 
source of financing is shown in Table 2. 

 

Table 2. Program cost and financing (US$ millions) 

Investment category IDB Total % 

I. Direct costs 23.60 23.60 94.4 

Component 1. User services system  2.70 2.70 10.8 

Component 2. Animal health system 7.80 7.80 31.2 

Component 3. Plant health system 8.10 8.10 32.4 

Component 4. Food safety system 5.00 5.00 20.0 

II.  Administration 0.80 0.80 3.20 

III.  Monitoring and evaluation 0.30 0.30 1.20 

IV.  External audits 0.30 0.30 1.20 

Total 25.00 25.00 100.00 

 

2.2 The program is structured as a specific investment operation, to be executed over 
five years, with the following disbursement schedule, in accordance with 
preliminary financial plan: 

 
Table 3. Program costs and financing (US$ millions) 

Source Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Total 

Total IDB 1.46 8.94 6.03 6.24 2.33 25.00 

% 5.9% 35.8% 24.1% 24.9% 9.3% 100% 

 

B. Environmental and social risks 

2.3 In accordance with the Environment and Safeguards Compliance Policy (OP-703), 
the program has been classified as a category “B” operation. During program 
preparation, an Environmental and Social Analysis found that the program will 
primarily have positive social and environmental impacts. The program will 
contribute to the following and other positive impacts: (i) more rational use of 
pesticides through implementation of integrated pest management and plant 
protection activities and training in good agricultural practices and ecological 
production; (ii) control of animal diseases that can affect human health; and (iii) a 
safer food supply. Potential adverse environmental impacts will be isolated and of 
limited scope. They will be linked to the construction and remodeling of 
infrastructure (4,000 square meters of new construction and refurbished space at 
two locations), the operation of laboratories (with a marginal increase in the use of 
toxic and biological substances as test reagents, samples of pesticides and 
veterinary products, and biological samples), and pest and disease control 
activities. To mitigate these adverse risks and impacts, an Environmental and 
Social Management Plan (ESMP) has been prepared that includes procedures for 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670747
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670747


 - 12 - 
 
 
 

handling toxic substances in the laboratories, steps for disposing of waste in 
accordance with national and international standards for the management, control, 
and disposal of biological and hazardous solid and liquid wastes, measures to 
ensure hygiene and safety in the workplace, and a monitoring plan that includes 
environmental indicators. The program also calls for activities to communicate with 
the general public and disclose information on the objectives and scope of the 
investments, through the publication and dissemination of information. The ESMP 
has been incorporated into the program Operating Regulations. 

C. Fiduciary risks 

2.4 Based on the results of the institutional assessment, SENASAG has the 
institutional capacity needed to properly carry out the responsibilities of the 
executing agency for the program. The results of the Institutional Capacity 
Assessment System (ICAS) exercise show strengths in organization, execution, 
and control capacities, and thus a weighted satisfactory development level and a 
low level of risk. Nevertheless, the risk analysis indicated the possibility of delays 
in procurement and contracting processes and hence the need to mitigate that risk 
by strengthening the institution’s team with fiduciary consultants in financial 
management and procurement, working exclusively on program implementation. 
This is due to the large number of financial and procurement transactions involved 
in the program, compared with the current levels of administrative and accounting 
activity at SENASAG. 

D. Other project risks 

2.5 The principal challenges facing SENASAG, as revealed by the risk analysis, lie in 
building and modernizing the laboratory infrastructure for animal health, plant 
health, and food safety, as well as in running and managing it. To mitigate those 
risks, the program includes specialized consulting assignments for infrastructure 
design, equipment and outfitting, and specialized technical training for laboratory 
personnel and for the technical areas responsible for running the laboratories. The 
investments financed by the program, both for infrastructure construction and for 
equipping SENASAG laboratories, entail a series of medium- and long-term 
institutional challenges involving the maintenance and sustainability of those 
assets. In this context, the project team analyzed a series of factors that will 
contribute directly to mitigating this risk. First, with enactment of the new 
Agricultural Health and Food Safety Act, there will be an estimated 22% annual 
increase in the current fee-based revenues of SENASAG, and this will contribute 
directly to the institution’s budgetary capacity, including the coverage of 
incremental operating costs associated with the operation and maintenance of 
those assets. Second, with respect to laboratory services, SENASAG will introduce 
fees directly associated with the costs of providing technical services, including the 
cost of maintenance and asset depreciation or replacement. Third, the program 
includes specific training activities for personnel, including aspects directly related 
to operation of the new infrastructure, equipment, and other assets. Lastly, 
SENASAG will be able to reinforce its human resources with respect to 
management of goods, services, and assets, thanks to the new legal and 
budgetary framework contained in the new law, as well as enhancing cost recovery 
management, among other aspects. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670745
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670745


 - 13 - 
 
 
 

2.6 Another risk is that SENASAG services will not meet the expectations generated 
by the program. To mitigate this risk, the program will implement a monitoring and 
evaluation plan covering the activities of the program execution unit as well as 
external evaluations, training, and instruction in institutional management by 
results. Risks have also been identified with respect to the contractual status of 
SENASAG staff, who now carry out their functions as temporary employees under 
short-term contracts. On this point, SENASAG has initiated a structural process 
with the Ministry of Rural Development and Lands and the Ministry of Economy 
and Public Finance for the gradual institutionalization of positions and their 
corresponding conversion to permanent positions financed from the General 
Treasury of the Nation. As well, with enactment of the new Agricultural Health and 
Food Safety Act and the anticipated growth in SENASAG’s own revenues, the 
institution will have greater financial capacity that will allow sound management of 
the conversion of staff contracts and thereby mitigate the risks associated with 
labor conditions. Lastly, risks have been identified in relation to the interest of 
potential beneficiaries and their participation in the program’s planned activities 
and services. To mitigate these risks, the program includes specific institutional 
strengthening measures designed to improve the quality of services provided by 
SENASAG and its capacity to respond to its clients, as well as training in good 
agricultural practices and other activities that will yield private benefits for 
producers. 

2.7 Finally, with respect to sustainability and scalability of the fruit fly project, this pilot 
project constitutes a learning phase in the framework of a national strategy for 
attacking the pest. Priority has been given to two zones (in the departments of 
Santa Cruz and La Paz), which have the largest concentration of farmers, a major 
share in the total production of the sector, the presence of producers’ organizations 
and associations, large markets in close proximity, and high incidences of the pest. 
The two zones together cover a total of 9,000 hectares (12% of the total area—
currently 75,000 hectares—planted in orchards that are susceptible to the fruit fly), 
and they have different geographic, ecological, and productive characteristics, 
which will provide detailed information, now lacking, in order to design a national 
program that will ultimately serve all areas of production in the country. 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN 

A. Summary of implementation arrangements 

3.1 The borrower will be the Plurinational State of Bolivia, and the executing agency 
will be the National Service for Agricultural Health and Food Safety (SENASAG). 
SENASAG was created by Law 2061 of 16 March 2000 as a deconcentrated 
agency of what is now the Ministry of Rural Development and Lands, with its own 
structure and legal, technical, and administrative capacity. It has nationwide 
responsibility for administering the agricultural health and food safety regime. It will 
handle coordination, planning and monitoring, technical and administrative 
management, procurements and contracting, and financial administration of the 
program. It will also implement the environmental and social safeguards for the 
program, contained in the ESMP. 

3.2 To implement the program, a program execution unit will be created; it will report 
directly to the national director of SENASAG, as the senior executive authority. 



 - 14 - 
 
 
 

Staffing of the program execution unit will consist of a general coordinator and 
personnel responsible for legal, planning, accounting and financial, procurement, 
and environmental matters. These personnel will work in direct coordination with 
the support and control areas of SENASAG with respect to fiduciary management 
and with the national head offices for plant health, animal health, and food safety, 
which will be responsible for technical management of activities in each of these 
areas. SENASAG will also establish a technical board for program coordination, 
comprising the national technical directors of SENASAG, and it will serve as a 
mechanism for ongoing monitoring and evaluation of program implementation. As 
special contractual conditions precedent to the first disbursement of the 
loan: (i) the borrower will sign a subsidiary agreement with the executing 
agency establishing the following and other elements: (a) the mechanism for 
transferring the loan proceeds; and (b) the commitment of the executing 
agency to conduct program activities in accordance with the terms of the 
loan contract; (ii) the executing agency: (a) will create the program execution 
unit in accordance with terms and conditions previously agreed upon with 
the Bank; and (b) will contract specialists, through a competitive process, in 
at least the following areas: general coordination, planning, financial 
management, procurement, and environmental and social management; and 
(iii) the program technical board will be created and its members appointed. 

3.3 During program preparation, plans were made for SENASAG to be able to sign 
agreements with autonomous territorial entities23 and producers’ associations. 
Those agreements will lay the basis for mutual cooperation among those involved 
and will spell out the activities covered by the agreements, the commitments of the 
parties, including mechanisms for cooperation between them, and other terms and 
conditions necessary for execution. Among other matters, the agreements will 
define: (i) the number of producers and land area to be covered or 
incorporated/used in the program technical activities; (ii) the times to be spent on 
specific areas and producers; (iii) the geographic location of farms and of 
agricultural activities; (iv) the inputs and the scope of technical assistance and 
training to be provided by the program; and (v) the dissemination of practices and 
results. As a special condition of execution, prior to startup of the activities for the 
fruit fly control program in Component 3, agreements will be signed between 
SENASAG, the Municipio of El Torno, the Municipio of Luribay, and local 
producers’ associations. 

3.4 Program Operating Regulations. Program execution will be governed by 
program Operating Regulations, which will establish guidelines and operating 
procedures relating to: (i) the execution structure of the program and the 
responsibilities of the program executing agency; (ii) the responsibilities of other 
entities involved in program implementation; (iii) the procedures for planning and 
programming the activities to be financed; (iv) the procedures and processes for 
technical management and financial and procurement administration; (v) the 
procedures for environmental and social management of the program; and 
(vi) operating instructions for monitoring and evaluation of the program’s impact. 
As a special contractual condition precedent to the first disbursement of the 
loan, the program Operating Regulations will be approved by the executing 

                                                
23  This encompasses departmental, municipal, regional, and rural indigenous autonomous governments. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670743


 - 15 - 
 
 
 

agency and will be in force, under terms previously agreed upon with the 
Bank.  

3.5 Procurement. Works, goods, and consulting services financed with program 
resources will be procured in accordance with the Bank policies established in 
documents GN-2349-9 and GN-2350-9 and with the provisions of the loan contract 
and the program’s fiduciary agreements and requirements (see Annex III), 
including the procurement plan for the first 18 months. The procurement plan 
includes the purchase of vehicles, operating and information processing 
equipment, furniture, individual consultants, consulting firms, and other items. It 
will be updated annually or when there are substantial changes, subject to the 
Bank’s approval. Procurement processes may be reviewed ex post, in accordance 
with the provisions of Annex III. 

3.6 Audits. During the loan disbursement period, within 120 days following the close 
of SENASAG’s fiscal year, audited annual financial statements for the program will 
be presented to the Bank. Audits will be conducted by a firm of independent 
auditors acceptable to the Bank. The scope and other aspects of the audit will be 
governed by the Financial Management Policy for IDB-financed Projects 
(document OP-273-6) and the Guide for the Preparation of Financial Statements 
and External Audits. 

B. Summary of arrangements for monitoring results 

3.7 Monitoring. The program has a monitoring and evaluation plan. SENASAG will 
prepare and send the following reports to the Bank on a regular basis: (i) no later 
than 60 days after the end of each six-month period during program execution, a 
monitoring report, focused on achievement of the output indicators and progress 
towards outcomes, identification of problems encountered, and the corrective 
measures taken; and (ii) no later than the last quarter of each year during program 
execution, the multiyear execution plan, the program risk matrix, and the annual 
work plan for the following year. In addition, SENASAG will conduct two 
independent evaluations financed from the loan: (i) the midterm evaluation will be 
presented to the Bank no later than 90 days after 50% of the loan has been 
disbursed (or at the end of the third year of execution, whichever occurs first); and 
(ii) the final evaluation, no later than 90 days after 90% of the program resources 
have been disbursed. These reports will include an evaluation of the quality of data 
from the monitoring system, the degree of achievement of the outputs, outcomes 
and impacts established in the results matrix, as well as the level of compliance 
with the ESMP. 

3.8 Evaluation. The impact evaluation is designed primarily to measure the effects of 
the pilot program for fruit fly control, given its potential expansion at the national 
level. The estimates will be based on the method of differences in a panel of 
producers encouraged to participate randomly in a treatment group and a control 
group. For this purpose, two surveys are planned: a baseline survey (in two 
phases) and a final evaluation. The proposed sample covers two municipios 
located in the department of Santa Cruz: El Torno, one of the pilot areas of the 
intervention, and La Guardia, serving as a counterfactual (control) benchmark 
within the same geographical zone, where the agroecological characteristics, 
productive orientation, degree of organization among producers, and prevalence 
of the pest are very similar (70% correlation). The sample for the baseline study 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670734


 - 16 - 
 
 
 

comprises 386 farmers (with 248 in the treatment group and 138 in the control 
group), and a similar sample will be used for the final evaluation. The budget for 
data collection has been included in the program. The operation provides an 
opportunity to generate empirical evidence on the impact of pest management and 
control efforts on production, productivity, and incomes for individual farms and for 
the total area, as well as changes in land use, application of insecticides and/or 
fertilizers, incorporation of new technologies, and/or reorientation of crops. 






























































PUBLIC 
SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE 

DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK  
 

 

 

 

BOLIVIA 

 

 

 

DIRECT SUPPORTS FOR THE CREATION OF  
RURAL AGRIFOOD INITIATIVES II 

(BO-L1096) 

LOAN PROPOSAL 

 
 

PROJECT SUMMARY 

BOLIVIA 
DIRECT SUPPORTS FOR THE CREATION OF  

RURAL AGRIFOOD INITIATIVES II 
(BO-L1096) 

 

Financial Terms and Conditions 

 Financing 
Ordinary Capital  

Fund for Special 
Operations  

Borrower: The Plurinational State of Bolivia Amortization period: 30 years 40 years 

Executing agency: Ministry of Rural and Land 
Development (MDRyT), through the Deconcentrated 
Public Institution for Food Sovereignty (IPD-SA) 

Disbursement period: 5 years 5 years 

Grace period: 6 years 40 years 

Source Amount % 
Interest rate: Single Currency Facility 

fixed* 
0.25% 

IDB (Ordinary Capital) US$49,600,000 80 Inspection and supervision fee: ** N/A 

IDB (Fund for Special 
Operations) 

US$12,400,000 20 Credit fee: ** N/A 

Total US$62,000,000 100 Currency: U.S. dollars from the 
Single Currency Facility 
of the Ordinary Capital 

U.S. dollars 

Project at a Glance 

Program objectives:  

The program’s general objective is to raise the income of Bolivia’s small-scale farmers by promoting productivity-enhancing 
technologies, thereby helping to reduce levels of vulnerability to food insecurity. Specifically, increased productivity will lessen 
vulnerability to food insecurity through increased output, which will result in higher income for participating producers through sales a nd 
in the form of food for their own consumption. The specific objective is to boost the adoption of technologies that increase agricultural 
yields, the value of production, and productive efficiency. 

Special contractual conditions precedent to the first disbursement: 

(i) evidence that a program coordination and execution unit with sufficient administrative, budgetary, procurement management, 
technical, operational, legal, and financial capacity has been set up under the IPD-SA, with staff assigned full-time to the program 
(paragraph 3.1); and (ii) entry into force of the program Operating Regulations, under the terms agreed upon in advance with the Bank 
(paragraph 3.2). 

Exceptions to Bank policies: None. 

Program qualifies as:  SV [X]       PE [X]       CC [X]                CI [  ]  

* The borrower will pay interest on the outstanding balance of the Ordinary Capital portion of the loan, at a LIBOR-based rate. Each 
time the outstanding balance reaches 25% of the net amount approved or US$3 million, whichever is higher, the base rate will be 
set on that balance. 

**  The credit fee and inspection and supervision fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors as part of its 
review of the Bank’s lending charges, in accordance with the relevant policies. 

*** SV (Small and Vulnerable Countries), PE (Poverty Reduction and Equity Enhancement), CC (Climate Change, Sustainable 
Energy, and Environmental Sustainability), CI (Regional Cooperation and Integration). 

 



 

 

I. BACKGROUND AND KEY ISSUES 

A. Background, problems to be addressed, and conceptual design 

1.1 General context. Agriculture is one of Bolivia’s most important economic 
activities, accounting for about 13% of gross domestic product and employing 
approximately 30% of the total workforce (62% in rural areas). Its main 
agricultural products include soybeans, sorghum, corn, wheat, sugarcane, 
quinoa, and potatoes. Sector exports represent 16% of the total value of exports. 
The most important agricultural export products are soybeans (30%), nuts (27%), 
quinoa (15%), beans (8%), fruit (5%), coffee (4%), and corn (3%).

1
 Bolivia has 

37 million hectares of agricultural land, of which approximately 3.5 million are 
arable, representing 4% of its total area. The area of cultivated land has been 
expanding significantly, growing by more than 20% since 2005.

2
  

1.2 Despite this expansion and the agricultural sector’s high potential, Bolivia is one 
of the countries with the lowest productivity in the region. According to the Food 
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), agricultural yields are 
approximately 43% of the South American average for the production of grains 
and tubers. Additionally, it was the only country in this region to experience 
negative growth in total productivity of the factors of production in the 2006-2011 
period (IFPRI, 2013).

3
 Low productivity weighs directly on the low income of the 

rural population and, consequently, on the country’s high levels of food 
insecurity. Bolivia is one of the region’s lowest-income countries, with 45% of its 
population under the poverty line—a number that swells to 61% in rural areas 
(INE, 2011). In terms of food security, Bolivia has the second-highest malnutrition 
rate in South America (21% of the population), and 89% of its municipios are 
categorized as having high or medium vulnerability to food insecurity.

4
 

1.3 Among the reasons for low sector productivity are a lack of market information, 
little investment in productive infrastructure, scant access to rural financing 
mechanisms, and insufficient levels of innovation and technology transfer.

5
 There 

is also a wide gap between the farming systems used in Bolivian agriculture. On 
the one hand are modern, commercial agriculture systems where production is 
typically intensive, mechanized, and export-oriented, with access to financing 
and cutting-edge technologies. These farms are located primarily in eastern 
Bolivia and produce mainly soybeans, rice, sugarcane, and beef. In subsistence 
agriculture, in contrast, small family farms are devoted mainly to producing food 
for their own consumption and have limited access to financing and productive 
technologies. These farms are found chiefly in the valleys and high plateau, and 

                                                 
1
  World Trade Organization (2013) and National Statistics Institute (INE, 2012). 

2
  World Bank and Ministry of Economy and Finance (2012). 

3
  International Food Policy Research Institute. Statistics Division of the FAO (2012): faostat.fao.org. 

4
  Food insecurity Vulnerability Analysis and Mapping (VAM) is a methodology developed by the United Nations 

World Food Programme to establish the degree of vulnerability of a given population and/or geographical 
area to food insecurity. It places municipios into three food security categories: (VAM=1: low; VAM=2: 
medium; VAM=3: high). 

5
  Plan del Sector Desarrollo Agricultural (2014-2018); Kay, C. (2011); and Hameleers, Antezana and Paz 

(2011).  

http://faostat.fao.org/
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38752159
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38751946
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38752141
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38752141


 - 2 - 
 
 

 
mainly grow traditional crops such as potatoes, corn, and grains. An estimated 
83% of rural households engage in subsistence farming.

6
 

1.4 With the Bank’s support, Bolivia has made considerable efforts to boost sector 
competitiveness by providing more public goods. Since the year 2000, loan 
operations have been executed in the areas of innovation and agricultural health 
(loans 1057/SF-BO and 2061/BL-BO), land regularization and management (loan 
1512/SF-BO), and irrigation (loans 964/SF-BO, 2057/BL-BO, and 3060/BL-BO). 
The proposed program complements these interventions in that it channels 
government spending to direct supports to promote the adoption of technologies 
to boost small producers’ agricultural productivity.  

1.5 The proposed program is based on the operation financed with loan 
2223/BL-BO, which is in its final stage of implementation. It was approved in 
2009 for US$25 million, of which the Bank financed US$20 million and the 
remaining US$5 million was financed with local counterpart resources. The 
objective of that operation is to help raise the income of small-scale farmers 
through two components: (i) direct supports for the adoption of agrifood 
technologies; and (ii) support for agrifood enterprises. To date, the operation has 
distributed 20,269 nonreimbursable vouchers to an equal number of small 
producers, to finance six types of agricultural technologies,

7
 exceeding the target 

by 49%. Of the target of having 80 productive enterprises in operation, to date 
there are 36. This is due to the difficulty of forming associations that meet the 
project eligibility criteria, which included having at least 30 beneficiary producers 
and being legally formalized. Some of the resources under Component 2 were 
therefore reallocated to Component 1. The original closing date for the operation 
was 24 May 2015. However, an extension was granted for fulfillment of the 
execution commitments until 24 December 2015. The operation has disbursed 
99% of the financing. 

1.6 The midterm evaluation for loan 2223/BL-BO conducted in 2013 highlighted the 
following strengths: (i) the types of technologies, which are well-suited to the 
production conditions of the target population, in addition to being low-cost and 
user friendly; (ii) the training of local technicians to resolve issues relating to 
using the technologies; (iii) the socialization of environmental practices among 
producers; (iv) the monitoring system; and (v) the rural technology fairs, which 
serve to bring together the demand for technology among small producers and 
the supply from private vendors. Areas needing improvement were: (i) the lag 
between technology delivery and technical assistance; (ii) the beneficiary 
registration systems; and (iii) the communications and socialization strategy. The 
evaluation also noted the limited progress on implementation of Component 2, 
identifying as execution difficulties producers’ liquidity constraints for financing a 
productive enterprise, a lack of incentives to form associations, and lack of 
knowledge as to how to formalize an organization (see Midterm evaluation). 

                                                 
6
  http://bolivia.um.dk/es/danida-es/programas-sectoriales/agricultura/. 

7
  These technologies include packages for crops (modern irrigation, traditional irrigation, dehydrators, mills, 

pulpers, weeders, shellers, electric fencing, greenhouses) and for livestock (poultry and beekeeping 
technologies and electric fences) in four departments. Irrigation equipment accounted for 60% of demand.  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38703779
http://bolivia.um.dk/es/danida-es/programas-sectoriales/agricultura/


 - 3 - 
 
 

 
1.7 The evaluation to measure the impacts of loan 2223/BL-BO, based on a 

representative sample of 1,287 participating and control producers in five 
departments, showed the operation’s positive impacts. Utilizing a 
quasi-experimental instrumental variable methodology (see Impact evaluation),

8
 

the analysis showed that, in comparison to nonbeneficiaries, beneficiary 
producers saw increased in agricultural productivity (92%) and higher household 
income from agricultural activities (36%). The study also found evidence that the 
program reduced vulnerability to food insecurity (32%).  

B. Conceptual design 

1.8 The program’s intervention strategy centers on addressing the problems of low 
productivity and high vulnerability to food insecurity by targeting public agriculture 
expenditure to facilitating access to agricultural technologies and technical 
assistance. The literature on agricultural technology adoption suggests several 
reasons (market failures) to economically justify the public provision of 
technology transfer services. In the context of this operation, the following apply: 
(i) constraints on liquidity and access to credit; (ii) problems with information 
access and/or asymmetries; and (iii) aversion to risk. Liquidity constraints refer to 
credit market imperfections that limit the financial capacity of small producers to 
purchase and implement productivity-enhancing technologies.

9
 Lack of and/or 

asymmetrical information affects both producers and suppliers. Producers mainly 
lack knowledge as to the proper use of technologies and the existence of 
suppliers’ offerings. Suppliers lack knowledge about potential demand.

10
 These 

information asymmetries interact to preclude the existence of a marketplace. 
Lastly, risk aversion curbs technology adoption because of producers’ 
uncertainty regarding the returns associated with each technology.

11
 Amongst 

the program’s target population, only 7% of producers have access to credit and 
4% report having savings. In addition, 30% of producers mentioned problems 
with information on how to use technology and 13% gave lack of training as their 
main reasons for not doing so.

12
 

1.9 Empirical evidence shows that massive technology transfer interventions 
produce direct and indirect positive impacts. The direct impacts are those 
affecting beneficiaries who adopt technology, through improvements to 
productivity and income. The indirect impacts are those affecting nonparticipants: 
adoption by imitation, lower food prices, and/or job creation.

13
 Quasi-

experimental impact evaluations conducted by the Bank’s Office of Evaluation 
and Oversight for two technology adoption programs for small-scale farmers in 
the Dominican Republic (loan 1397/OC-DR) and Uruguay (loan 1299/OC-UR) 
yielded evidence of the positive impact of this type of intervention in the region. 

                                                 
8
  The impact evaluation was published as an IDB Working Paper for which there was a peer review process 

with external revisers. 
9
  Navajas and Tejerina (2007); Salazar and Winters (2012), and the CRIAR impact evaluation (2014).  

10
  Bentley, et al. (2011), Thiele and Barber (1998), and the CRIAR midterm evaluation (2013). 

11
  Feder et al. (1985), Abadí et al. (2005), and Monge, Hartwich and Halgin (2008).   

12
  CIES Internacional data (2014) for the impact evaluation of loan 2223/BL-BO (see Baseline study). 

13
  De Janvry, A. and E. Sadoulet (2002). 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38724883
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38725172
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38751714
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38751970
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38751892
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38724883
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38752082
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38751986
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38703779
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38752134
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38752122
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38751817
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38713551
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38751858


 - 4 - 
 
 

 
1.10 The proposed program incorporates the following recommendations from the 

midterm evaluation of loan 2223/BL-BO: (i) redefine the scope of supports to 
strengthen the delivery of technical assistance at the appropriate times and 
intervals; (ii) incorporate a gender approach with crosscutting actions to promote 
the participation of women; (iii) apply criteria of transparency and equal 
opportunity in the selection of beneficiaries; (iv) conduct a rigorous impact 
evaluation; (v) increase coverage; and (vi) concentrate supports under a single 
component for the distribution of vouchers to purchase technology. 

1.11 Lessons learned. The operation’s design incorporates lessons learned from 
loan 2223/BL-BO as well as from other Bank-financed operations involving 
supports for technology adoption (loans 2181/OC-ME, 2443/OC-DR, 2055/BL-NI, 
and 1299/OC-UR): (i) mechanisms should be incorporated to foster the 
development of a market of private technology suppliers; (ii) financial supports 
(vouchers) should be scaled to encourage the self-selection of small producers; 
(iii) since technical assistance plays a key role in technology adoption, these 
services should be offered at the right moment in the crop cycle, and at 
appropriate intervals; (iv) the technology menu selection criteria should be 
objective and based on technical, economic, social, and environmental 
principles; (v) the eligibility criteria for producers and the strategy for selecting 
them should foster transparency and equal opportunity; and (vi) program impacts 
should be measured using indicators that capture short-, medium-, and long-term 
impacts of the technology adoption process. 

1.12 Target population. As in loan 2223/BL-BO, the program beneficiaries are small 
producers from indigenous, native campesino communities whose income level 
is low primarily because of low agricultural productivity. The chief source of 
income for these producers is agriculture (67%).

14
 They work small plots of land, 

averaging two hectares, with more than 70% of the land devoted to the 
production of traditional crops with little commercial value.

15
 Of their total output, 

these producers consume 39% and sell 20%.
16

 Also, they are typically 
indigenous or native (71%), and have little formal schooling (four years on 
average) and limited access to credit or savings (7% report access to formal 
credit and 4% savings).

17
 

1.13 Gender approach. The proposed program includes a gender approach to 
promote the participation and empowerment of women through the following: 
(i) coordination of activities for obtaining an identity card; (ii) establishment of 
focal points for gender mainstreaming within institutions involved with the 
program; (iii) specific socialization activities to promote the linkage of 
associations for women producers; (iv) technical assistance that factors in the 

                                                 
14

  This percentage reflects food for the producers’ own consumption, which was valued at market prices to 
calculate the opportunity cost of selling.  

15
  In all, 44% have up to 1 hectare of cultivated land, 32% have 1 to 3 hectares, 13% have 3 to 5 hectares, and 

11% have 5 to 10 hectares. 
16

 The remainder goes to: 8% animal consumption, 5% seed, 2% processing, 16% gifts and bartering, and 10% 
losses. 

17
 Survey for the impact evaluation of loan 2223/BL-BO (see Baseline study). 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38713551


 - 5 - 
 
 

 
situation of participating women in the local context; and (v) collection and 
monitoring of sex-disaggregated data and output indicators.  

1.14 National Development Plan and the Agriculture Sector Development Plan. 
The operation is consistent with the National Development Plan and the 
Agriculture Sector Development Plan 2010-2015 insofar as it contributes to the 
proposed goals of: (i) progressing toward food security and sovereignty; and 
(ii) increasing the contribution of agricultural and forestry production to people’s 
livelihoods and the country’s development. The program also dovetails with the 
proposed National Development Plan 2015-2020.  

1.15 Consistency with the Ninth General Increase in the Resources of the Bank 
(GCI-9) and the IDB country strategy with Bolivia. The proposed program is 
consistent with the following lending program priorities of the GCI-9 (document 
AB-2764): (i) support for small and vulnerable countries; (ii) poverty reduction 
and equity enhancement, since this operation’s main objective is to raise the 
agricultural income of small rural producers; and (iii) climate change and 
environmental sustainability initiatives, by creating incentives to adopt agricultural 
technologies that contribute to climate change adaptation. The program will help 
meet the regional GCI-9 targets relating to annual growth rate of agricultural GDP 
and number of farmers given access to improved agricultural services and 
investments. The program is also aligned with the Bank’s country strategy with 
Bolivia (2011-2015) (document GN-2631-1), in that it will contribute to the 
crosscutting objectives of climate change adaptation, by promoting technologies 
that will enhance the adaptive capacity of small producers, and of interculturality 
and participation of indigenous people, by including interventions that improve 
their living conditions. The program is consistent with the Sector Framework 
Document on Agriculture and Natural Resources Management (document 
GN-2709-1). 

C. Objectives, components, and costs 

1.16 Objectives. The program’s general objective is to raise the income of Bolivia’s 
small-scale farmers by promoting productivity-enhancing technologies, thereby 
helping to reduce levels of vulnerability to food insecurity. Specifically, increased 
productivity will lessen vulnerability to food insecurity through increased output, 
which will result in higher income for participating producers through sales and in 
the form of food for their own consumption. The specific objective is to boost the 
adoption of technologies that increase agricultural yields, the value of production, 
and productive efficiency. 

1.17 To achieve the proposed objectives, the program has a single component, 
“Direct supports for the adoption of agricultural technologies,” which will 
finance nonreimbursable financial supports (vouchers) to partially cover the cost 
of adopting a technology.

18
 The number of producers expected to benefit from 

the program is 45,500.
19

 The component is divided into two subcomponents: 

                                                 
18

  Technology adoption is understood to mean the purchase of technological equipment and technical 
assistance. Technical assistance is understood to mean the transfer of information, technology, and advisory 
services with the aim of improving agricultural activities (Law 144, 2011). 

19
 Including projections from loan 2223/BL-BO, a total of 66,500 producers will benefit. 



 - 6 - 
 
 

 
(i) nonreimbursable financial supports for the purchase of agricultural 
technologies; and (ii) technical assistance for agricultural processes with a focus 
on gender and association management. 

1.18 The program will initially target a subgroup of 70 municipios from a list of 
190 eligible municipios based on the following criteria: (i) vulnerability to food 
insecurity (VAM=2 or 3); (ii) predominantly agricultural land use as defined by the 
current “Capacity for Greater Land-use” (CUMAT)

20
 classification methodology; 

(iii) no participation in loan 2223/BL-BO; and (iv) municipios not located in 
protected areas. In addition, the program will directly include two

21
 municipios 

that had been selected as beneficiaries under loan 2223/BL-BO, but that did not 
participate owing to a lack of resources at program’s end. The additional 
70 municipios will be selected as follows: (i) 33 municipios will be included 
directly that have been prioritized by the Government of Bolivia because they 
have high poverty rates and meet the eligibility requirements; and 
(ii) 37 municipios from the remaining list of eligible municipios will be selected at 
random (see zoning). After the target of benefiting the 72 municipios has been 
met, if there are resources available, a new group of municipios will be selected 
at random from the universe of remaining eligible municipios. 

1.19 Subcomponent 1. Nonreimbursable financial supports for the purchase of 
agricultural technologies (US$46.78 million). This subcomponent will finance 
the delivery of nonreimbursable financial supports to partially cover the cost of 
purchasing an agricultural technology selected by the producer from a menu of 
eligible options, along with training in its use and maintenance. Producers who 
meet the following criteria will be eligible to receive these supports: (i) are small 
producers who subsist primarily on farming and/or raising livestock;

22
 (ii) have a 

valid identity card and are 18 years or older; (iii) were not beneficiaries of loan 
2223/BL-BO; (iv) do not have household members who were beneficiaries of 
loan 2223/BL-BO; (v) belong to the selected municipios and communities; (vi) are 
in the registry of potential beneficiaries;

23
 and (vii) are legally entitled to hold/use 

the land (by legal deed and/or according to custom and tradition). 

1.20 The initial technology menu has been determined based on the following criteria: 
(i) returns, meaning financial viability via impacts on productivity and/or reduction 
in losses; (ii) environmental sustainability, meaning that environmental impacts 
will be positive or neutral; (iii) appropriability, referring to a technology’s 
compatibility with external (agroecological and climate) and internal (gender and 
cultural) circumstances; (iv) neutrality, referring to the technology’s flexibility to be 
applied to a wide range of crops or livestock products; (v) availability, referring to 
the presence of sufficient supply; (vi) adaptability, which entails building capacity 

                                                 
20

 Based on the “Capacity for Greater Land-use” (CUMAT) classification methodology, the project will include 
municipios whose land is used mainly for: (i) extensive annual crops, (ii) intensive annual crops; or 
(iii) extensive perennial crops or extensive-grazing livestock. 

21
  The two municipios are Padcaya and San Lorenzo, both located in Tarija. 

22
  Small producers are those with small holdings as defined in agrarian legislation (the Régimen Agricultural 

Unificado [Unified Agricultural System]). 
23

  The execution unit will develop the registry of potential beneficiaries in each of the eligible communities. 
Producers will have a period of time to register and prove that they meet the requirements for participation, 
including by giving a sworn statement.  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38789208
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38789115
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38725442


 - 7 - 
 
 

 
for climate change resilience; and (vii) verifiability, referring to the possibility of 
confirming in situ that the technology was adopted. The initial menu includes 
10 technologies grouped into three categories: agricultural production, 
post-harvest, and livestock production. This technology menu may be modified 
as mutually agreed with the Bank, in keeping with the selection criteria (see 
technology menu and Subcomponent 1). 

1.21 Subcomponent 2. Technical assistance for agricultural processes with a 
focus on gender and association management (US$10.85 million). This 
subcomponent will finance the delivery of nonreimbursable financial supports 
(vouchers) to partially cover the cost of technical assistance associated with the 
use of the technology purchased. The technical assistance will have two 
dimensions: (i) technical assistance to maximize productive potential, including 
crop diversification practices and use of inputs; and (ii) capacity-building to 
promote association management (see Subcomponent 2 study). It will also 
consider social and environmental sustainability and gender issues specific to the 
local context, including training exclusively for women, linking associations of 
women producers, and promoting women’s participation in the technical training 
teams. 

1.22 The technology supplier will provide training in use and maintenance at the time 
the technology is delivered to the field, as part of Subcomponent 1. Technical 
assistance with agricultural processes and association-related capacity-building 
will be outsourced to organizations or enterprises selected through a competitive 
process, with priority given to those on the list of technology clearinghouses 
certified by Bolivia’s National Institute for Agricultural and Forestry Innovation 
(INIAF). This mechanism will make it possible to build the capacity of local 
institutions and coordinate efforts with INIAF to create the institutional framework 
for an agricultural outreach system to ensure the operation’s sustainability.  

1.23 The financial support to be provided will consist of a fixed amount per producer of 
up to US$1,200 for technology adoption, including the purchase of equipment 
and technical assistance, with the beneficiary able to opt for a lesser amount, 
depending on the technology chosen. The US$1,200 figure includes financing for 
up to US$1,000 to procure technology and US$200 for technical assistance. Of 
the total voucher amount, 90% will be financed with program resources and 10% 
will be paid by the beneficiary. The voucher can be exchanged by the producer 
or any family member (first degree) listed in the registry of beneficiaries. Just one 
voucher will be given per family. The support amount may be revised as mutually 
agreed with the Bank (paragraph 2.5). The delivery and adequate use of 
technologies and the quality of the technical assistance will be supervised 
through a sample verification process done by an independent firm. 

D. Results Matrix and key indicators 

1.24 The program will use a Results Matrix (see Annex II) agreed upon with the 
Ministry of Rural and Land Development (MDRyT) showing the impact, outcome, 
and output indicators along with the respective baselines, targets, and means of 
verification. The program’s main outcomes will be a rise in agricultural 
productivity among small producers through increased technology adoption. In 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38718555
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38721944
pcdocs://IDBDOCS/38703731/R


 - 8 - 
 
 

 
the long term, the program’s impact will be reflected in higher agricultural income 
for small producers and improved food security.  

 
Table 1: Main results matrix indicators 

Impact and outcome 
indicators 

Time of 
measurement 

Rationale for selection 

Annual household agricultural 
income (US$) Years 1 and 5 

Measures impact on quality of life 
for producers through income 
increases 

Food security index (FAO) 
Years 1 and 5 

Measures impact on vulnerability 
to food insecurity 

Average gross production 
margin per hectare (US$/ha) Years 1 and 5 

Measures the change in 
agricultural productivity resulting 
from technology adoption 

Share of beneficiary producers 
who used the promoted 
technologies during the 
previous two agricultural cycles 
(%) 

Years 1 and 5 
Measures the adoption and 
implementation of technologies 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND RISKS 

A. Financing instrument 

2.1 The total program cost is US$62 million, which the Bank will finance through a 
blended loan broken down as follows: US$49.6 million from the Single Currency 
Facility of the Ordinary Capital and US$12.4 million from the Fund for Special 
Operations. Table 2 shows the cost breakdown and sources of financing (see 
program execution plan). 

Table 2. Program cost and financing (US$ millions) 

Investment category IDB Total 
Approx

. % 

I. Component: Direct supports for the adoption of 
agricultural technologies 

57.63 57.63 93 

Subcomponent 1: Nonreimbursable financial 

supports for the purchase of agricultural technologies 
46.78 46.78 75 

Subcomponent 2: Technical assistance for 

agricultural processes with a focus on gender and 
association management 

10.85 10.85 18 

II. Program administration (implementation, 

monitoring, evaluation, audits. Includes strengthening 
of the Management, Monitoring, and Evaluation 
System (SIGESEVA)) 

4.37 4.37 7 

Total 62.00 62.00 100 

 

2.2 The program is structured as a specific investment operation to be executed over 
five years, according to the following disbursement schedule and the preliminary 
financial plan: 

 
  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38725283


 - 9 - 
 
 

 
Table 3. Disbursement schedule (US$ millions) 

Source Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Total % 

Total 
IDB 

2.19 11.82 15.92 18.76 13.31 62.00 100 

% 4 19 25 30 23 100  

 

B. Economic viability 

2.3 The ex ante economic appraisal of the program utilized a cost-benefit analysis 
methodology that began by analyzing each of the most important technologies on 
the initial menu in terms of demand. The costs used included investment in 
(technology asset, technical assistance, and private investment by the 
beneficiary) and operation, maintenance, and replacement of the technologies, 
as well as the costs of additional production and opportunity costs. The benefits 
included higher yields, diversification toward higher-value-added crops, and 
lower production losses. These were used to calculate the economic benefit of 
the technologies, which translates into an increase in gross margins for farms 
and in household income levels. The net incremental benefits of technology 
adoption were estimated using labor and input technical coefficients obtained in 
the field, as well as from the impact evaluation for loan 2223/BL-BO. Using 
efficiency prices, a technology adoption rate of 75%, a 12-year time horizon,

24
 

and a 12% discount rate, the appraisal found the program to be cost-effective, 
with a net present value (NPV) of US$25.8  million, an internal rate of return 
(IRR) of 28.3%, and a benefit-cost ratio of 1.35. Table 4 provides information 
broken down by technology. 

 

Table 4. Initial menu of eligible technology options  

Technologies Direct impact IRR 

Modern irrigation  Increases in productivity and efficiency of water use  
38%-
46%

25
 

Greenhouse Increases in productivity and efficiency of seed use 57% 

Fruit dehydrator Improvements to food security and value added to output  43% 

Storage silo and 
multipurpose mill  

Improvements to food security and value added to output 15%-17% 

Poultry coops  Increases in productivity and reproductive efficiency  19% 

2.4 An analysis of sensitivity to variations in the actual extent to which technologies 
are adopted by beneficiaries showed the program to be cost-effective starting at 
the cutoff point of 48% effective adoption. 

 
  

                                                 
24

  This time frame is equivalent to two useful life cycles of the technologies plus a two-year learning period.  
25

  The IRR of 31% is for the specific scenario of crop intensification (without diversification), while the IRR of 
34% is for the crop diversification scenario. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38703784


 - 10 - 
 
 

 
Table 5. Analysis of sensitivity to variations in extent of adoption  

Adoption rate 
NPV (US$ 
millions) 

IRR 

48% 0 12% 

60% 11.6 19.5% 

75%* 25.8 28.3% 

90% 40.1 36.9% 

* The 75% rate of effective adoption by beneficiaries 
was used in the base scenario. 

 

2.5 The maximum voucher amount per producer will be US$1,200. To be able to 
exchange a voucher of this maximum amount, producers will have to pay 
US$120, which represents 10% of their annual agricultural income (US$1,090). 
This amount was adjusted by 20% with respect to the amount under loan 
2223/BL-BO, because: (i) new technologies with slightly higher prices were 
included with the expansion of the program’s coverage; and (ii) the cost of the 
more intensive technical assistance is inherently higher—estimated at US$200 
per beneficiary. The midterm and impact evaluations of loan 2223/BL-BO found 
the amount to be appropriate to the financial and productive capacity of the target 
population.  

C. Environmental and social risks 

2.6 In accordance with the Environment and Safeguards Compliance Policy (policy 
OP-703), this has been classified as a category “C” operation. The planned 
activities are not expected to adversely affect the environment or vulnerable 
communities. To the contrary, the program will boost the adoption of 
technologies with positive or neutral environmental impacts. What’s more, the 
anticipated social impacts are positive, as it gives priority to vulnerable 
communities and native cultures and will implement crosscutting activities to 
encourage the participation of women. This notwithstanding, an environmental 
and social management strategy was developed as part of the operation’s 
design, identifying steps to strengthen the  execution unit. 

D. Fiduciary risks 

2.7 The institutional capacity of the project coordinating unit (PCU) for loan 
2223/BL-BO was assessed during the design of the proposed operation using 
the Institutional Capacity Assessment System methodology in the following 
areas: (i) planning and organization, measuring the ability to carry out 
programming processes and to assign responsibilities for managing resources; 
(ii) execution, measuring the ability to achieve the programmed outcomes; and 
(iii) controls, measuring internal and external control capabilities. The 
assessment found the PCU’s institutional capacity development level to be 
“medium” for planning and organization, “satisfactory” for execution, and 
“medium” for controls. The assessment resulted in an overall score of 81%, 
equivalent to satisfactory development, with a low level of risk. The risk analysis, 
however, did identify the lack of clear definition of roles and responsibilities of the 
agencies involved in implementation as a risk.  

2.8 Based on these findings, an institution-strengthening plan was developed to 
ensure that the program coordination and execution unit (PCEU) for the 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38714002
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38714002


 - 11 - 
 
 

 
proposed operation will have the internal capabilities for effective execution. The 
principal actions include: (i) strengthening the SIGESEVA information system; 
(ii) preparing the annual work plan for the first year of execution, with physical 
and financial targets; (iii) preparing Operating Regulations that cover levels of 
authorization for different types of contracting and spell out the responsibilities of 
the various actors, avoiding duplication of efforts; (iv) designing an 
implementation mechanism that provides the PCEU with greater operational 
autonomy; and (v) bolstering staff knowledge of project management (Bank 
tools) in the PCEU and the MDRyT, as well as in the Internal Audit Unit. 

E. Other risks 

2.9 The program’s risks were identified during the design phase, along with the 
respective mitigation measures. The main risks are: (i) lack of identification of 
demand by technology suppliers; (ii) insufficient technical assistance, limiting the 
adoption of technologies; and (iii) program needs not met by SIGESEVA. The 
mitigation activities are: (i) implementation of a comprehensive communications 
and information plan to disseminate the program to all stakeholders; (ii) technical 
assistance strategy that provides training in the use of technology and support for 
agricultural processes and association management; and (iii) updating of 
SIGESEVA. All the activities have a budget line item. 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN 

A. Implementation and management  

3.1 The borrower will be the Plurinational State of Bolivia, and the executing agency 
will be the Ministry of Rural and Land Development (MDRyT), through the 
Deconcentrated Public Institution for Food Sovereignty (IPD-SA), which was 
legally established under the MDRyT via Supreme Decree 1858. The program 
coordination and execution unit (PCEU), which will run the program, will be 
attached to the IPD-SA. The PCEU will have Administrative Office status, 
assuming direct responsibility for implementation and devoting its time 
exclusively to program execution. The PCEU will carry out program planning, 
management, and monitoring, develop planning instruments, channel resources 
for execution, authorize and transfer voucher payments, and consolidate and 
submit to the Bank financial information and monitoring and evaluation reports, 
among other responsibilities set forth in the program Operating Regulations. So 
as not to slow the pace of execution, every effort will be made to keep on key 
personnel currently in the PCU

26
 for loan 2223/BO-BL for the PCEU. As a 

contractual condition precedent to the first disbursement, evidence must 
be furnished that a PCEU with sufficient administrative, budgetary, 
procurement management, technical, operational, legal, and financial 
capacity has been set up under the IPD-SA, with staff assigned full-time to 
the program. 

3.2 Operating Regulations. Program execution will be governed by the Operating 
Regulations, which will spell out the rules and procedures for activity 

                                                 
26

  Note that PCU refers to the project coordinating unit for loan 2223/BL-BO, while PCEU refers to the project 
coordination and execution unit for operation BO-L1096. 



 - 12 - 
 
 

 
programming, financial and accounting management, procurement, audits, 
monitoring, and evaluation of the program. It will also cover: (i) responsibilities of 
the entities under the MDRyT, IPD-SA, and PCEU; (ii) eligibility criteria for 
municipios, technologies, and beneficiaries; and (iii) implementation details for 
each subcomponent. As a contractual condition precedent to the first 
disbursement, the program Operating Regulations must enter into force, 
under the terms agreed upon in advance with the Bank. 

3.3 Procurement. The program involves only the procurement of goods and related 
services and the contracting of consulting services; it does not call for works. 
Goods will be procured and services contracted in accordance with the practices 
and procedures set out in Bank policies (documents GN-2349-9 and GN-2350-9) 
and with the loan contract and the program’s Fiduciary Agreements and 
Requirements (see Annex III), which include a procurement plan for the first 
18 months. This plan will be updated yearly, or whenever substantial changes 
occur, subject to Bank approval. Procurements may be reviewed on an ex post 
basis, as described in Annex III.  

3.4 Retroactive expenditures. The Bank may retroactively recognize eligible 
expenditures of up to US$1 million, or 1.6% of the financing amount, incurred 
during the 18 months prior to the date of loan approval by the Bank’s Board of 
Executive Directors. The following will be considered eligible expenses: 
(i) preliminary studies for execution of the subcomponents; (ii) set-up and 
outfitting of the regional operating units; and (iii) hiring of key PCEU personnel as 
stipulated in Annex III.  

3.5 Audits. Each year, for the duration of the loan disbursement period, audited 
program financial statements will be submitted to the Bank within 120 days after 
the close of the PCEU’s fiscal year. These statements will be audited by an 
independent audit firm acceptable to the Bank. The scope and other related 
matters will be determined pursuant to the Financial Management Policy for 
IDB-financed Projects (policy OP-273-6) and the guidelines on financial 
statements and external audits.  

B. Monitoring and evaluation plan 

3.6 Monitoring. The program will use the Management, Monitoring, and Evaluation 
System (SIGESEVA), a computerized monitoring system whose design 
incorporates a database at the PCEU’s central office with a network connection 
to the regional offices. This system will make it possible to track technology 
request, delivery, implementation, verification, and payment processes under the 
program. It will also be used to enter the beneficiaries, technology suppliers, and 
technical assistance providers into the database. The respective payments will 
be made through the Integrated System of Management and Administrative 
Modernization (SIGMA). SIGESEVA will have the following modules: 
Subcomponent 1 (management and tracking of beneficiary producers), 
Subcomponent 2 (management and tracking of technical assistance providers), 
financial management, goods and services administration, and results 
management and monitoring. The system will generate reports for the various 
levels of oversight as well as for results monitoring and evaluation. It will be 
updated to capture detailed microeconomic information during creation of the 



 - 13 - 
 
 

 
registry and the registration of beneficiaries, as well as to link the physical targets 
set out in the Results Matrix with the advances of subcomponent funds.  

3.7 No later than 60 days after the end of every six-month period during program 
execution, the PCEU will, by way of this system, prepare and submit to the Bank 
semiannual progress reports indicating the level of fulfillment and progress (both 
physical and financial) of the program using the indicators set out in the Results 
Matrix and the activities in the annual work plan and procurement plan. The 
reports will explore any problems encountered and propose corrective measures 
to ensure successful program implementation. The reports relating to the second 
six-month period will also include the annual work plan for the following calendar 
year, along with a disbursement forecast, and an updated procurement plan (see 
monitoring plan).  

3.8 Evaluation. The PCEU will submit the following reports to the Bank: (i) a 
midterm evaluation within 90 days after commitment of 50% of the loan 
proceeds; and (ii) a final evaluation within 90 days after disbursement of 90% of 
the loan proceeds. These reports will include: (i) analysis of financial execution 
by subcomponent and source of financing; (ii) progress with respect to outputs, 
outcomes, and impacts; (iii) effectiveness in the application of the program 
Operating Regulations; (iv) the level of compliance with contractual clauses; (v) a 
summary of the results of the social/environmental audits; and (vi) a summary of 
the results of program audits of financial statements, procurement processes, 
disbursements, and internal controls. The final evaluation report will also include 
the results of the program’s impact measurement, in accordance with the agreed 
plan. All evaluations will be carried out independently and will be financed using 
the loan proceeds.  

3.9 Impact evaluation. This evaluation will identify the effects on agricultural income 
and food security in the households of beneficiary producers. It will also provide 
the tools to analyze the process of technology adoption in Bolivian agriculture 
(see evaluation plan). The evaluation will be financed with program resources. It 
is based on an experimental methodology for creating a counterfactual scenario 
wherein the producers will be randomly assigned to treatment and control 
groups. This program lends itself to an experimental evaluation because demand 
outstrips program resources, therefore requiring transparent, equitable 
beneficiary selection. Beneficiaries will be selected in two stages. In the first 
stage, 37 municipios from the list of eligible municipios will be selected at 
random. Of the beneficiary municipios, 50% will be communities whose main 
activity is agriculture. All producers within that group of selected communities 
who meet the stipulated eligibility criteria may benefit. This process will allow for 
two control groups (inside and outside the beneficiary municipios) to be 
constructed for the purpose of measuring the program’s direct impacts and 
spillovers. The remaining 35 beneficiary municipios who enter directly will be 
evaluated using a quasi-experimental instrumental variable methodology. The 
data needed for the evaluation will be generated by way of two surveys 
measuring the impacts in a representative sample of 1,980 producers 
(beneficiaries and control) per round. The survey of producers will include 
detailed information regarding their socioeconomic condition and agricultural 
activities. The design of this operation provides a unique opportunity to generate 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38719418
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38723707


 - 14 - 
 
 

 
empirical evidence that will contribute to understanding the effectiveness of 
agricultural technology transfer projects in the region.  

 






























































PUBLIC 
SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE 

DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 

URUGUAY 

RURAL PRODUCTIVE DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM II 

(UR-L1147) 

LOAN PROPOSAL 



PROJECT SUMMARY 

URUGUAY 
RURAL PRODUCTIVE DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM II 

(UR-L1147) 
 

Financial Terms and Conditions 

Borrower: Eastern Republic of Uruguay 
Flexible Financing Facility(a) 

Amortization period: 24 years 

Executing agency: The borrower, through the Ministry of Livestock, 
Agriculture, and Fisheries (MGAP) 

Disbursement period: 6 years 

Grace period: 6.5 years(b) 

Interest rate: LIBOR-based 

Source Amount (US$) % Credit fee: (c) 

IDB (Ordinary Capital) 24,232,000 89 Inspection and supervision fee: (c) 

Local 2,889,000 11 Weighted average life: 15.25 years(d) 

Total 27,121,000 100 Approval currency: United States dollars 

Project at a Glance 

Project objective/description: To help improve the sustainability of small and medium-sized family-owned agricultural production units. 
The specific objectives are to increase the adoption of climate-smart technologies and to build capacities for technology generation and 
transfer, technical assistance, and rural extension. 

Special contractual conditions precedent to the first loan disbursement: Submission, to the Bank’s satisfaction, of evidence of the 
entry into force of the program Operating Regulations, including the environmental and social management plan (ESMP), in accordance 
with the terms previously agreed with the Bank (paragraph 3.1). 

For contractual conditions of a socioenvironmental nature, see Annex B of the environmental and social management report (ESMR). 

Special contractual conditions for execution: For the use of resources allocated to subcomponents (i), (iii), and (iv) of Component II, 
the signing and entry into force of Standard Framework Agreements between the MGAP (through the Rural Development Bureau 
(DGDR)), and the National Agricultural Research Institute (INIA) and Nonstate Public Institutes (IPNEs) (paragraph 3.2). 

Exceptions to Bank policies: None 

Strategic Alignment 

Challenges:(e) SI 
 

PI 
 

EI 
 

Crosscutting themes:(f) GD 
 

CC 
 

IC 
 

 
(a) Under the terms of the Flexible Financing Facility (document FN-655-1), the borrower has the option of requesting changes to the amortization schedule, 

as well as currency and interest rate conversions. The Bank will take operational and risk management considerations into account when reviewing such 
requests. 

(b) Under the flexible repayment options of the Flexible Financing Facility, changes to the grace period are permitted provided that they do not entail any 
extension of the original weighted average life of the loan or the last payment date as documented in the loan contract. 

(c) The credit fee and the inspection and supervision fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors as part of its review of the Bank’s 
lending charges, in accordance with applicable policies. 

(d) The original weighted average life of the loan may be shorter, depending on the signature date of the loan contract. 

(e) SI (Social Inclusion and Equality); PI (Productivity and Innovation); and EI (Economic Integration). 
(f) GD (Gender Equality and Diversity); CC (Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability); and IC (Institutional Capacity and Rule of Law). 

 
 

 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-39
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-41


 
 

I. PROJECT DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING 

A. Background, problem addressed, and rationale1 

1.1 The agriculture sector: importance, features, and challenges. The agricultural 
sector2 is of critical importance for Uruguay’s economy. In 2016, it accounted for 7% 
of GDP, or 12% of GDP when associated food industries are included (Ackermann 
et al., 2018). It represented 15% of employment and more than 75% of total exports, 
the main categories being beef, agricultural produce, dairy products, and forestry 
products (Uruguay XXI, 2016). Compared with other productive activities, the sector 
has the greatest multiplier effect on the economy (6.22, versus 5.47 for the 
manufacturing industry and 6.08 for services) and the greatest impact on 
employment (0.42, versus 0.33 for the services sector) (Terra et al., 2009). The 
sector received annual support equivalent to 0.58% of GDP over the 2014-2016 
period, of which 63% was for general services and 37% consisted of producer 
support (direct or price support) (Ackermann et al., 2018).3 

1.2 Between 1981 and 2012, total agricultural productivity in Uruguay grew at a higher 
average rate than in the region as a whole (1.5%, compared to 1.2%) (Nin-Pratt, 
Falconi, Ludena, & Martel, 2015). This growth has been uneven, however, with small 
and medium-sized family producers left behind (Instituto National de Investigación 
Agropecuaria [National Agricultural Research Institute] (INIA), 2016). Family 
systems account for more than 70% of farm enterprises and contribute around 25% 
of gross agricultural product. They are characterized by low levels of technology 
adoption and production efficiency, with high levels of variation from one year to the 
next (Albin, 2017); they are also focused primarily (60%) on livestock (Dirección 
General de Desarrollo Rural [Rural Development Bureau] (DGDR) and the Ministry 
of Livestock, Agriculture, and Fisheries (MGAP), 2018c). Climate variability and 
change have a particular impact on small and medium-sized producers (MGAP, 
2017a), as it is reported that family-owned livestock farms tend to be located in areas 
of greater climate vulnerability (de Torres Álvarez et al., 2014). 

1.3 Against this backdrop, the sustainability of smaller-scale production units faces 
challenges across two main dimensions: 

1.4 Dimension 1 – Productive. The productivity of smaller-scale units could be 
enhanced by technical assistance and technology adoption. The results of the 2014 
dairy survey show that the level of productivity is, in general, directly related to farm 
size (Instituto Nacional de la Leche [National Dairy Institute] (INALE), 2017). Based 
on the same survey, Pérez-Quesada and García-Suárez (2016) report that 
productivity can be increased among smaller producers because their level of 
technical efficiency stands at 74%. This indicates that they can use available inputs 
and technologies more efficiently in order to increase production (by 26% on 
average). These authors also indicate that agronomic, veterinary, or accounting 
technical assistance is associated with higher production efficiency. Nonetheless, 
knowledge management difficulties and limited access to extension services are 
barriers that have a particularly marked impact on smaller-scale producers (INIA, 
2016). In 2011, only 46% of farms received technical assistance (Hegedus, 2013), 

                                                
1  See bibliographical references. 
2  Includes forestry and agroindustrial activities. 
3  Estimate based on the methodology of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD). 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-8
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-8
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-27


 - 2 - 
 
 
 

while it has been observed that technical assistance coverage increases in tandem 
with farm size (Arboleya, 2018). 

1.5 This production gap may also be narrowed through technology adoption, including 
improved management practices. In the case of cattle ranching, for example, 
producers that have not received technical assistance report average annual beef 
yields of 50-70 kg per hectare, versus 250 kg per hectare in specialized 
establishments (World Bank and the International Center for Tropical Agriculture, 
2015). A recent project demonstrated the potential for increasing beef productivity 
levels from 70 kg per hectare to 100 kg by using existing technologies and 
implementing practices based on the improved the use of available resources 
(Gómez Miller, 2017). In the case of family-owned dairy producers, a project aimed 
at improving production practices—coordinated by INALE in partnership with dairy 
cooperatives—indicates that 70% of beneficiaries either maintained or increased 
production over the 2013-2017 period, even under extreme climatic conditions 
(Arboleya, 2018). 

1.6 Despite the potential for increased productivity, there are significant barriers to the 
adoption of agricultural technologies. In Uruguay, this is influenced by farm size, 
access to information, technical and managerial capacities, costs, risk, and the 
availability of appropriate technologies (Gómez Miller, 2017; Saravia and Gómez, 
2013). Technology adoption is also directly linked to technical assistance and rural 
extension services (Saravia and Gómez, 2013), and technological change requires 
the identification, validation, and dissemination of technologies that are appropriate 
for family agriculture (Comisión Nacional de Fomento Rural [National Rural 
Development Commission], 2009). 

1.7 Social factors. Knowledge and adoption of technologies is influenced by social 
networks, which are an important source of information and learning that strengthen 
producers’ capabilities (Aramburu et al., 2014; Doss, 2006). Rural associations 
provide positive externalities and produce public and semi-public goods, in addition 
to serving as a tool for economic and social inclusion (Bijman et al., 2012). The 
experience in Latin America indicates that membership of such associations among 
rural extension users helps to overcome scale constraints, as it allows them to 
access the services offered by rural organizations (Escobar, 2012). Collective 
processes are therefore important for family agriculture, and support is needed to 
strengthen these organizations (de Torres Álvarez et al., 2014). 

1.8 In Uruguay, rural associations (cooperatives, rural development enterprises, and 
agricultural trade associations) have sought to meet the diverse needs of producers, 
with the existence of around 200 such organizations with the potential for 
implementing rural technical assistance and extension (RTAE) services (Arboleya, 
2018). In family agriculture, collective approaches have proven effective in 
supporting technological changes, reduced price variability, integration into value 
chains, lower transaction costs, and access to goods and services (Programa Fida 
Mercosur Claeh and Centro Cooperativista Uruguayo, 2014), as well as participation 
in programs to support technology adoption (DGDR/MGAP, 2018a). There is 
evidence of the effectiveness of collective strategies for supporting production: 
increased implementation of such strategies is correlated with economic and 
production improvements (66% increase in per capita farm earnings and 39% in 
liters per hectare) (García Ferreira et al., 2011). Collective approaches also help to 



 - 3 - 
 
 
 

ensure that producers continue to implement activities once an intervention has 
been completed (Universidad de la República, 2006). Nonetheless, collective 
activities aimed at facilitating access to technology face difficulties in terms of access 
to capital; minimum scales for achieving economic and organizational viability; 
visualization of the benefits from an activity (particularly where the impact is long 
term); and a scarcity of the skills necessary for collective work (INIA & DGDR, 2016). 
With respect to RTAE, the critical factors for improving these services include the 
training of technical staff, interagency coordination, and the availability of suitable 
technologies (Hegedus, 2013). 

1.9 At the same time, there are gender and age gaps in access to government rural 
development policies, technical assistance, access to land, assets, own revenues, 
independent work, and farm titles (DGDR, 2018). For example, women account 
for just one in four beneficiaries of policies to improve the productivity and income 
of family producers (compared to 44% of potential beneficiaries), while data from 
the 2011 Agricultural Census indicate that women producers receive less technical 
assistance (38% versus 43% for producers) (Mascheroni, 2016). Likewise, the 
advancing age of producers in the sector (MGAP, 2017b) is a barrier to increased 
productivity, as producer age is inversely correlated with the use of new 
technologies (INIA, 2016). 

1.10 Dimension 2 – Environmental. Climate change magnifies the aforementioned 
problems, as the country is vulnerable to extreme events. For example, preliminary 
estimates by the MGAP indicate that the immediate impact of the 2017-2018 drought 
caused agricultural sector losses equivalent to US$560 million. This amount rises 
by more than US$600 million if delayed impacts are taken into account, relating to a 
decline in the number of calves born and the consequent impact on future exports. 
The sector is also the main source of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions (74% of the 
total in 2012). Within this, beef production accounts for more than 66% of emissions 
(Eastern Republic of Uruguay, 2017). This underscores the importance of 
implementing adaptation and mitigation measures. In fact, Uruguay’s production 
strategy is to rely on technological innovation and inclusion in value chains to double 
output by 2050 in a sustainable and inclusive manner, with greater climate resilience 
and lower rates of emissions (MGAP, 2017b). In addition, the objectives of the First 
Nationally Determined Contribution include reducing the rate of emissions from food 
production, while also indicating the priority given to adaptation in the agricultural 
sector (Eastern Republic of Uruguay, 2017). 

1.11 To achieve these proposals, climate-smart agricultural technologies warrant 
particular consideration, as these either maintain or enhance productivity while 
reducing emissions and/or contributing to climate resilience (World Bank and the 
International Center for Tropical Agriculture, 2015). Accordingly, the 2010 
“Agrointelligent Uruguay” policy has promoted the incorporation of climate-smart 
measures to enhance productivity in an environmentally sustainable manner 
(Ministry of Housing, Land Management, and the Environment, 2016). For example, 
implementation of the policy has facilitated a reduction in emissions rates for beef 
production through the use of feed management technologies and animal husbandry 
methods that help to boost productivity (Eastern Republic of Uruguay, 2017). In 
family-based livestock farming, specifically, estimates indicate that climate-smart 
practices (focused on adjustments in the number of animals per hectare, the use of 
rotational grazing systems, and herd optimization) can increase productivity by 25% 



 - 4 - 
 
 
 

and reduce emission rates by 30%, while simultaneously improving drought 
resilience (Ministry of Housing, Land Management, and the Environment, 2017). 
This reduction in GHG emissions through the implementation of climate-smart 
technologies tends to increase over time, reaching up to 40% in the third year in 
some cases (INIA, 2018). 

1.12 Previous experience. The Food and Agriculture Organization (2009) identifies the 
central elements of agricultural policy that agricultural institutions should focus their 
efforts on. These include government policies to protect and support weaker 
economic sectors; strengthening of the institutional framework for agriculture; and 
the provision of technology transfer and rural extension services. 

1.13 In this sphere, with respect to the implementation of differentiated policies for family 
agriculture in Uruguay, the following issues have been identified as important: 
(i) ensuring strong interagency coordination; (ii) creating synergies with other policy 
instruments (e.g., the promotion of collective endeavors and support for investments 
to enhance resilience); (iii) establishing a technical assistance network consisting of 
professionals committed to the programs and involved in them; (iv) working with 
producers that are nonbeneficiaries of public programs, as well as with those already 
served to incorporate more complex technologies or processes; and (v) leveraging 
the potential of rural organizations to facilitate the promotion and implementation of 
activities (Arboleya, 2018). The importance of addressing these factors is consistent 
with the findings of the Rural Productive Development Program (RPDP) (loan 
2595/OC-UR), whose impact evaluation showed a significant effect on beneficiaries’ 
productivity, with an increase of at least 10% in milk and beef yields per hectare 
(Aguirre et al., 2018). This study also reports that the impact is generally greater 
among those benefiting from MGAP support for the first time, and it indicates that 
the program has helped to strengthen beneficiary organizations, with an 
improvement in their collective processes. Nonetheless, data on program 
participation (DGDR/MGAP, 2018a) show that there is potential for improving the 
inclusion of women and young people as beneficiaries (44% of potential 
beneficiaries are women, yet only 25% benefited, while in the case of young people4 
4% of the total benefited, compared to a potential of 12%) (Beneficiaries of RPDP 
requests for proposals). 

1.14 An analysis carried out for Latin America (Food and Agriculture Organization and 
the IDB, 2016) indicates the need for government funding to ensure that the most 
vulnerable producers are able to access RTAE. It also reports that for these services 
to be effective, they should have a territorial approach, involve the participation of 
public and private stakeholders, provide continuous training for their human 
resources, and be linked to the research. Cumulative experience points to the 
following good practices: emphasizing the inclusion of smaller-scale producers that 
face greater hurdles to increased productivity; the participation of producers in 
determining their needs and prioritizing their problems; the provision of information 
and alternatives based on local agroecological and socioeconomic conditions; the 
simultaneous provision of public and private services at the regional level; and the 
incorporation of information and communication technologies (ICTs) to help reach 
producers and provide information and services to them (Escobar, 2012). ICTs can 
help foster the adoption of technologies to optimize production and increase farmer 

                                                
4  Individuals 15 to 29 years of age, according to the National Youth Institute. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-48
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-32
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-33
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-33


 - 5 - 
 
 
 

incomes (Jack & Tobias, 2017). Evidence from small-scale farmers in India indicates 
that cellphone-based technical assistance helped to increase yields (28% for cumin 
and 9% for cotton), with an estimated private return of US$10 for each dollar 
invested in the service (Cole & Fernando, 2016). 

1.15 Recent Bank experience. The RPDP, which was approved in 2011 with a final 
disbursement date of 31 December 2018, is executed by the MGAP through its Rural 
Development Bureau (DGDR). Its objective is to help improve the incomes of small- 
and medium-scale farmers, by increasing their productivity through the adoption of 
new technologies. To this end, the program focused on providing financing for: 
(i) production support for technology transfer; (ii) the promotion of research into 
adaptive technologies; and (iii) institutional strengthening of the DGDR. The 
operation’s intervention mechanism was based on requests for proposals for group 
management plans, and this serves as the foundation for this program. Its 
outcomes—some of which were measured in the aforementioned impact evaluation 
(paragraph 1.13)—include the following: (i) increases in average agricultural and 
livestock yields; (ii) the incorporation of new technologies validated under family 
agriculture condition; (iii) increases in the number of family producers belonging to 
rural organizations; and (iv) strategic territorial plans approved. 

1.16 Lessons learned. Lessons learned during execution of the RPDP, in particular, 
have been taken into account in the proposed program, together with experiences 
from similar operations (lons 1463/OC-UR, 2443/OC-DR, 1800/OC-PR, 2055/BL-NI, 
and 2223/BL-BO) and the Office of Evaluation and Oversight’s (OVE) Review of the 
Bank’s Support to Agriculture, 2002-2014. These lessons and way in which they 
have been incorporated into the program are presented in Table 1. 

 
Table 1. Lessons learned and their incorporation into program design 

Lessons learned Incorporation into program design 

In the RPDP5 

Coverage  

- Include incentives aimed at incorporating 
RPDP non-beneficiary producers. 

- The lack of information is an obstacle to 
producers’ participation in DGDR programs. 

- Lower proportion of women and young people 
among beneficiaries.  

- Creation and/or strengthening of synergies 
with rural organizations or public 
institutions. 

- Strengthening of program dissemination. 

- Requests for proposals targeting 
exclusively women and young people.  

Technical assistance  

- Assistance provided by individual technicians 
has posed limitations for: (i) the 
comprehensive, multidisciplinary 
consideration of technological options; 
(ii) reaching producers in remote or isolated 
areas; and (iii) high turnover.  

- Introduction of comprehensive technical 
assistance arrangements provided by 
multidisciplinary teams linked to rural 
organizations and/or public institutions. 

                                                
5  See Aguirre et al. (2018), DGDR/MGAP (2018) (Encuesta a Productores/as Familiares No Beneficiarios 

de Convocatorias de la DGDR), DGDR/MGAP (2018a) and Mendoza (2018) (Evaluación del PDPR). 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-34
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-34
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-35


 - 6 - 
 
 
 

Lessons learned Incorporation into program design 

Monitoring and evaluation  

- Monitoring and evaluation require the 
availability and implementation of instruments 
for gathering and analyzing information. 

- The detailed prior design of the impact 
evaluation is essential for the robust analysis 
of program effectiveness. 

- A good practice yet to be implemented 
involves the categorization of technologies 
financed by the program, with a view to 
facilitating the monitoring and evaluation of 
expected outcomes and impacts.  

- Incorporation of instruments that facilitate 
dynamic monitoring and allow evaluation of 
the effectiveness of execution processes.  

- Design of the impact evaluation, and the 
identification and planning of the 
instruments to be used for information 
gathering.  

- Inclusion of typologies of technologies and 
technology packages.  

In similar operations 

Provision of technical assistance and 
technology linkage 

 

- The limited scale, high number, and scattered 
nature of smaller-scale producers lead to high 
costs in providing technical assistance and 
technology adoption on an individual basis. In 
addition, the development and/or adaptation 
of technologies for these producers is limited 
by a disconnect with researchers.  

- Promotion of the creation of groups of 
producers and linkages with rural 
organizations and public institutions to 
provide technical assistance more 
efficiently. 

- Activities that foster interaction between 
producers and technology 
researchers/developers. 

Sustainability of technology adoption  

- Projects frequently provide one-off 
improvements without altering the structural 
barriers experienced by beneficiaries; this 
reduces the sustainability of benefits over 
time. 

- Long-term sustainability is sought through 
the work with rural organizations, 
complementary multidisciplinary technical 
assistance offered by the private and public 
sectors, and technologies designed and 
adapted for the target population.  

 

1.17 Intervention strategy. The proposed program is based on the evidence presented 
above, and it seeks to continue improving the productive and environmental 
sustainability of small-scale agricultural units. To this end, it focuses on technology 
adoption, with particular attention devoted to market failures casued by: information 
asymmetries (paragraphs 1.4 and 1.6), human capital (paragraphs 1.7 and 1.9), and 
coordination (paragraphs 1.10 and 1.11). Using the RPDP as a foundation, the 
lessons learned and good practices identified through the experiences of the MGAP, 
the Bank, and the region were incorporated into the program’s design in order to 
amplify its reach and impact (paragraphs 1.10 to 1.14). These elements are 
summarized in Table 2. 

 



 - 7 - 
 
 
 

Table 2. Summary of key elements of program design 

Targeting 

- Emphasis on new beneficiaries. 

- Previous producers may benefit, but with more complex technologies. 

- Producers determine their needs and priorities, but solutions focus on climate-smart technologies 
(inputs and processes, including ICTs). 

- Special consideration for women and young people. 

Structure 

- Strengthening of interagency coordination and synergies. 

- A territorial approach with the participation of rural organizations and key institutions that 
contribute to promotion and implementation of the program. 

- Comprehensive technical assistance provided by multidisciplinary teams that are committed to 
the program and involved in it. 

- Public and private sector participation. 

 

1.18 Strategic alignment. The program is consistent with the Update to the Institutional 
Strategy 2010-2020 (document AB-3008) and is expected to contribute to the 
Corporate Results Framework 2016-2019 (document GN-2727-6) through the 
development challenge of productivity and innovation, as it fosters increased 
productivity through the adoption of new technologies. It also contributes to the 
indicator of government agencies benefited by projects that strengthen technological 
and managerial tools to improve public service delivery. It is also aligned with the 
crosscutting themes of: (i) gender equity, with a special focus on women’s 
participation, thus contributing to the indicator of women beneficiaries of economic 
empowerment initiatives; and (ii) climate change and environmental sustainability, 
as it includes climate-smart technologies that contribute to resilient, low-carbon, 
sustainable development and thus supports farmers through access to improved 
agricultural services and investments (see Table 3 for specific indicators). It also 
contributes to the Sector Framework Documents on Agriculture and Natural 
Resources Management (document GN-2709-5), Food Security (document 
GN-2825-8); Climate Change (document GN-2835-5); and Innovation, Science, and 
Technology (document GN-2791-8). This is a result of its focus on the following 
dimensions of success, respectively: high levels of agricultural productivity and the 
management of climate impacts in the sector; reducing the vulnerability of food 
systems to climate change and natural disasters; progress in the countries on 
including climate considerations in the sectors; and investment in innovation, 
science, and technology. In addition, it supports the results matrix for the IDB 
Country Strategy with Uruguay 2016-2020 (document GN-2836), as it is linked to 
the strategic pillar of productivity and competitiveness through its support for 
innovation. It is also included in the Update of Annex III of the 2018 Operational 
Program Report for Uruguay (document GN-2915-2). 

1.19 It is estimated that 100% of the operation’s funds will be invested in climate change 
adaptation and mitigation activities, based on the multilateral development banks’ 
joint methodology for estimating climate finance (Climate Change). These funds 
contribute to the IDB Group’s target of increasing financing for climate-change 
related projects to 30% of all approved operations by the end of 2020. 

B. Objectives, components, and cost 

1.20 Objective. To help improve the sustainability of small and medium-sized family-
owned agricultural production units. The specific objectives are to increase the 

https://publications.iadb.org/handle/11319/8505
https://publications.iadb.org/handle/11319/8505
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-36


 - 8 - 
 
 
 

adoption of climate-smart technologies and to build capacities for technology 
generation and transfer, technical assistance, and rural extension. 

1.21 Climate-smart technologies help to strengthen climate resilience and/or reduce 
GHG emissions while also improving performance in terms of yield or return. Based 
on this criterion, priority will be given to those aligned with the actions identified in 
the First Nationally Determined Contribution. 

1.22 Component I. Improved productivity through technology adoption and 
alliance-building (IDB: US$17.94 million; local: US$380,000). This component 
focuses on financing the implementation of plans to improve productivity while 
taking climate considerations into account. It will provide direct support to 
producers who, as a group and in response to open and competitive requests for 
proposals organized by the MGAP, submit management plans that propose the 
use of climate-smart technologies to address their challenges. Groups of at least 
three producers (family, small, and medium-sized) will be eligible, the majority 
being family producers and not necessarily members of rural organizations. 
Support for the implementation of these plans will comprise financing for: 
(i) investments in technology, providing up to 50% of the total cost of materials, 
inputs, and specialized technical assistance for technology adoption (with a 
maximum value of US$8,000 per producer); and (ii) comprehensive technical 
assistance. The comprehensive technical assistance will consist of support and 
training in the areas of production, marketing/value added, and administration, 
provided by teams set up in either rural organizations or public institutions. 

1.23 Support will be differentiated, emphasizing the participation of beneficiaries who 
have not previously received support from the DGDR. In the case of beneficiaries 
who have already received DGDR assistance, the management plans will need to 
include more advanced technologies (as defined in the Technology evaluation). In 
no case will support be provided for practices that have already received 
cofinancing. New beneficiaries will also have the option of receiving greater 
comprehensive technical assistance as determined by the management plan and 
the technology selected (this support will be determined, in due time, in the 
documentation for the request for proposals). To encourage greater participation by 
women and young people, requests for proposals will be issued exclsuively for these 
groups, offering them up to 80% financing for technology adoption and alliance-
building processes. 

1.24 Component II. Capacity-building in technology generation and transfer, 
technical assistance, and rural extension (IDB: US$5.2 million; local: 
US$1.97 million). This componenent involves financing for activities aimed at 
generating and transferring technologies, as well as strengthening the delivery of 
rural technical assistance and extension (RTAE). To this end, strategic partnerships 
will be established with key rural organizations and/or nonstate public institutes 
(IPNEs) that have a local presence and work directly with producers. The component 
encompasses the following subcomponents: 

a. Generation and adaptation of climate-smart technology for family 
agriculture. This seeks to spark the development of new technologies or 
adjustments to existing ones through farm-based research and 
experimentation, based on strategic partnerships between producers’ 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-8
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-37


 - 9 - 
 
 
 

associations and public and/or private research entities. This will allow newly 
developed or adapted technologies to meet to the needs of producers. 

b. Strengthening of private sector RTAE capacities. This focuses on 
strengthening the ability of rural organizations to provide services to producers. 
It includes the creation of multidisciplinary teams to provide comprehensive 
technical assistance, training, as well as programs to disseminate and build 
awareness of the requests for proposals. 

c. Strengthening of public sector RTAE capacities. This is focused on 
improving capacities and coordination between the MGAP and IPNEs to 
support the delivery of RTAE to producers. 

d. Promotion and adoption of ICTs in family agriculture. This encompasses 
support for the use, dissemination, and development of ICTs for family 
agriculture through strategic partnerships with key entities. 

1.25 Monitoring and administrative costs (IDB: US$1.09 million; local: 
US$540,000). This includes the costs of administration, monitoring, audit, 
determination of baselines and final targets, and the midterm and final evaluations. 

C. Key results indicators 

1.26 A total of 3,100 producers are expected to benefit directly from the program, of 
which 50% have not previously benefited from DGDR support. Of this total number 
of beneficiaries, 32% are expected to be women (see Gender annex), with young 
people accounting for 11%. The expected impacts are increased productivity and 
reduced GHG emissions. The following intermediate outcomes are expected: 
(i) increased adoption and availability of climate-smart technologies; (ii) increased 
participation of new beneficiaries, women, and young people; and (iii) greater use 
of agricultural services, including technical assistance. Key indicators are 
presented in Table 3. 

 

Table 3. Main indicators in the results matrix 

Impact indicators 
Timing of 

measurement 
Rationale for selection 

Increase in partial land productivity (kg of 
meat/hectare, liters of milk/hectare) 

Impact 
evaluation 

Measures the contribution to the 
production dimension of sustainability 

Reduction in emissions per unit of output 
(kgs CO2 equivalent/kg of meat) 

Years 1 and 6 Measures the contribution to the 
environmental dimension of 
sustainability 

Increase in the rate of adoption of 
climate-smart technologies by 
beneficiaries  

Years 1 and 6 These measure the use of climate-
smart technologies, a proxy that 
indicates that producers have improved 
their climate resilience and reduced 
emissions  

Increase in the percentage of 
beneficiary producers that manage their 
lands with a safe carrying capacity 

Years 1 and 6 

Increase in the percentage of beneficiary 
family producers that continue to receive 
comprehensive technical assistance once 
the plan has been completed  

Years 1 and 6 Indicator of the intervention’s 
sustainability 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-52


 - 10 - 
 
 
 

Impact indicators 
Timing of 

measurement 
Rationale for selection 

Increase in the percentage of users of 
services provided by rural organizations.  

Years 1 and 6 The supply of services provided by rural 
organizations is a proxy that indicates 
whether producers are better able to 
buy inputs, sell their products, and/or 
purchase services on a group basis, 
thus favoring productivity levels 

Increase in new technologies validated 
for family production 

Years 1 and 6 Measures the availability of new 
technologies for family agriculture 

Increase in the rate of adoption of ICTs 
by family production units  

Years 1 and 6 Measures the effectiveness of training 
and other efforts to promote the use of 
ICTs by family producers 

Increase in the percentage of new 
beneficiaries 

Years 1 and 6 Indicates whether targeting and 
promotion efforts were effective in 
encouraging the participation of new 

beneficiaries 

Increase in the percentage of women 
beneficiaries  

Years 1 and 6 Indicates whether targeting and 
promotion efforts were effective in 
encouraging women’s participation 

Increase in the percentage of young 
beneficiaries  

Years 1 and 6 Indicates whether targeting and 
promotion efforts were effective in 
encouraging youth participation  

 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS 

A. Financing instruments 

2.1 Program cost and financing. Total program cost is US$27.12 million, of which 
US$24.23 million (89%) will be financed through a specific investment loan from the 
Bank’s Ordinary Capital. Table 4 presents the costs broken down by component. 

 

Table 4. Program cost and financing (US$ million) 

Investment component IDB 
Local 

counterpart 
Total % 

I.  Improved productivity through technology 
adoption and alliance-building 

17.94 0.38 18.32 68 

i. Individual plans 17.09 0.38 17.47 64 

ii. Plans, women and young people  0.85 0.00 0.85 3 

II. Capacity-building in technology generation 
and transfer, technical assistance, and 
rural extension 

5.20 1.97 7.17 26 

i. Generation and adaptation pf climate-
smart technologies 

0.42 0.13 0.55 2 

ii. Strengthening of private RTAE 4.26 0.96 5.22 19 

iii. Strengthening of public RTAE 0.19 0.79 0.98 4 

iv. Promotion and use of ICTs 0.33 0.09 0.42 2 

Administration and monitoring 1.09 0.54 1.63 6 

Total (US$) 24.23 2.89 27.12 100 

% 89.00 11.00 100.00  

 



 - 11 - 
 
 
 

2.2 The disbursement period will be six years, based on the expected annual budgetary 
space in the national budget, and also to allow the impacts in the producers’ 
management plans to materialize. See Table 5 for disbursement details. 

 
Table 5. Disbursement schedule (US$ million) 

Year 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 Total 

Amount 4.0 5.9 4.9 4.4 3.5 1.5 24.2 

% 16.5 24.4 20.2 18.2 14.5 6.2 100 

 

2.3 Economic viability. Based on the experience and evaluation of the RPDP, the level 
of support for technology implementation is maintained at up to 50% of total costs, 
with a maximum of US$8,000 per producer. Analyses of the ex ante economic 
evaluation show that subsidies of 50% are sufficient to ensure that investments yield 
a return over that time period (Mendoza, 2018). In camparative terms, a similar 
World Bank program currently under way in Uruguay provides maximum support of 
80% of an investment of up to US$16,000 per producer. However, financing is 
limited to activities with substantial positive environmental externalities (reductions 
in pollution in tributaries and improvements in the efficiency of water usage). 

2.4 The program’s economic viability is based on the cost-benefit analyses carried out 
using a model of the support for climate-smart technology adoption by producers. 
Economic benefits were estimated by calculating the value of increased productivity 
in the targeted farms. Support to producers will be concentrated mainly in the 
segments of livestock farming for beef and wool (65%) and dairy (16%), which will 
be offered incentives for a wide variety of climate-smart technologies. For the 
program as a whole (including both administration, supervision, and monitoring 
costs and investments to strengthen the rural organizations supporting adoption by 
the producers), an internal rate of return of 15.4% was obtained, with a net present 
value of US$5.0 million (based on a 10-year time horizon and a discount rate of 
12%). In light of these results, the benefit/cost ratio is 1.11 for each unit invested. 
The results were subject to a sensitivity analysis indicating that even under more 
conservative assumptions (relating to the technology adoption process, higher 
costs, limitations in access to technical assistance once the intervention has been 
completed), program returns remain above 12%. The program also offers parallel 
benefits in terms of the reduction in GHG emissions, which are accounted for 
separately (Program economic evaluation). 

B. Environmental and social risks 

2.5 This program has been classified as Category B operation in accordance with the 
Environment and Safeguards Compliance Policy (Operational Policy OP-703), as its 
potential direct and indirect impacts are reversible and temporary, of low magnitude, 
and localized in nature. Well-known measures are readily available to mitigate and 
compensate for them, and the implementation thereof is viable. It has also been 
determined that the level of natural disaster risk is low to moderate, taking into 
account the focus on climate-smart technologies. At the same time, highly positive 
effects are expected from the delivery of agricultural extension services, training, 
and climate-smart technology packages that will impact producers and the different 
beneficiaries throughout the entire production chain, as well as consumers across 
the country. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-38


 - 12 - 
 
 
 

2.6 An environmentaland social analysis was prepared for the program, and its 
corresponding environmental and social management plan (ESMP) sets out 
procedures, responsibilities, guidelines, and criteria for identifying, evaluating, 
avoiding, mitigating, and monitoring the environmental and social impacts of the 
specific actions financed. A significant consultation process was implemented during 
preparation of the operation, and there is no evidence of any environmental or social 
liabilities or compliance failures that could affect the future performance of this new 
initiative. 

2.7 The ESMP will be included as an annex to the program Operating Regulations, and 
both documents will establish environmental and social requirements to ensure that 
the project is executed in compliance with the Bank’s safeguards and the conditions 
included in Annex B of the environmental and social management report (ESMR). 

2.8 Environmental and social sustainability risks. Adverse climate conditions 
represent a medium risk to the program. In order to mitigate this, the program will 
focus on climate-smart technologies; requests for proposals that support the 
development and adaptation of climate-smart technologies; the development of 
ICTs that contribute to adaptation to climate change and variability; and the inclusion 
of climate risk management in training for associations, technical staff, and 
producers. 

C. Fiduciary risks 

2.9 Based on the MGAP’s prior experience in executing similar operations, no specific 
weaknesses have been identified in its institutional capacity. Neither the fiduciary 
activities included in the Procurement Plan nor the financial management activities 
are regarded as complex, thus confirming—together with the executing agency’s 
track record of performance and compliance—the low level of risk for this project 
(see Annex III). 

D. Other project risks 

2.10 Development risks. There is a medium level of risk associated with farm 
management plans lacking a comprehensive approach and difficulties in attracting 
new beneficiaries. To mitigate the former, the following activities are planned: 
training for each request for proposals, with specific training regarding the 
comprehensive approach; periodic monitoring and territorial coordination meetings; 
and preparation of a dissemination plan. In the case of the second risk, in addition 
to a dissemination plan, adjustments are planned to the requirements in the requests 
for proposals, as well as the signing of agreements with other public institutions. 

2.11 Macroeconomic risk. The new regional context poses a medium level of 
macroeconomic risk over the next few years for growth in Uruguay, trends in the 
dollar, and the resulting impact on inflation. Nonetheless, country risk remains low 
and stable (172 basis points in September 2018). At the same time, the increase in 
the dollar exchange rate may favor the competitiveness of the export-oriented 
agricultural sector. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-621703441-9
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-41


 - 13 - 
 
 
 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN 

A. Summary of execution arrangements 

3.1 The borrower will be responsible for program execution, through the Ministry of 
Livestock, Agriculture, and Fisheries (MGAP). The MGAP, in turn, will act through 
the Rural Development Bureau (DGDR) with support from the Project Management 
Unit (PMU). The DGDR will be responsible for technical execution and the direction 
of the program, while the PMU will be responsible for fiduciary and administrative 
matters (see Organizational chart). The guidelines and procedures for program 
execution are set out in the program Operating Regulations. As a special 
contractual condition precedent to the first loan disbursement, evidence will 
be provided to the Bank’s satisfaction that that the program Operating 
Regulations (including the ESMP) have entered into force, in accordance with 
the terms previously agreed with the Bank. The aim of this is to establish the 
guidelines and procedures to be followed for successful program execution. 

3.2 Special contractual conditions for execution. Standard Framework Agreements 
are expected to be signed with the National Agricultural Research Institute (INIA) 
and other Nonstate Public Institutes (IPNEs) that are considered key to the execution 
of certain program activities. For the use of resources allocated to subcomponents 
(i), (iii), and (iv) of Component II, the signing and entry into force of Standard 
Framework Agreements between the MGAP (through the DGDR) and the INIA and 
IPNEs will be a special contractual condition for execution. The signing of these 
agreements is essential for implementation of the activities financed under each of 
the subcomponents. 

3.3 Execution arrangements are based on those used during implementation of the 
RPDP, with adjustments aimed at incorporating lessons learned. Details of the 
arrangements are provided in the draft program Operating Regulations, and Table 6 
provides a summary of their key features. 

 

Table 6. Key implementation features 

Technologies financed. These will be determined based on the producers’ needs, taking into 
account local conditions, technical viability, and contribution to climate change mitigation and/or 
adaptation. Multidisciplinary technical teams—the formation of which is supported under 
Component II—will prepare the management plans. 

Management plans. A management plan is considered implemented once at least 60% of the 
activities included in the approved plan have been fulfilled and an evaluation of technology adoption 
has been completed. 

Rural organizations. As part of execution, rural organizations interested in becoming Regional 
Rural Development Agents (ATDRs) will be convened and selected. The ATDRs are rural 
organizations authorized by the DGDR to provide support for the following activities: (i) raising 
awareness among producers; (ii) training for technical staff and producers; (iii) dissemination of the 
requests for proposals; (iv) provision of comprehensive technical assistance; (v) preparation of 
management plans; and (vi) monitoring of the implementation of approved plans. The program will 
finance institutional strengthening of the ATDRs, training of their human resources, and the services 
of promotion, extension, and technical assistance that they provide. 

Program dissemination. The requests for proposals will be widely publicized, using communication 
and awareness-building strategies by the DGDR and the ATDRs. 

 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-64
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-39


 - 14 - 
 
 
 

3.4 Procurement of goods, works, and consulting and nonconsulting services. 
Procurement financed in whole or in part with Bank resources will be conducted in 
accordance with the Policies for the Procurement of Goods and Works Financed by 
the IDB (document GN-2349-9) and Policies for the Selection and Contracting of 
Consultants Financed by the IDB (document GN-2350-9). The Procurement Plan 
contains details of the procurement processes that will be implemented during 
execution, as well as the procedures used by the Bank for their review. 

3.5 Direct contracting. Direct contracts totaling US$6,048,153 are envisaged, of which 
US$4,025,963 will be financed with Bank resources and the rest with local 
counterpart funds. The Bank-financed amount will be used to renew the contracts of 
consultants belonging to the RPDP team (US$3,885,736) and for fuel purchases 
(US$140,227). 

3.6 Single-source selection of consultants is permitted under sections 3.10(a) and 3.11 
of the Policies for the Selection and Contracting of Consultants Financed by the IDB 
(document GN-2350-9), which establish the principle of continuity of service where 
such continuity is more efficient than a new competition. In this case: (i) initial 
selection of the consultants was done on a competitive basis in 2012 and received 
the Bank’s prior no objection; (ii) the consultants whose contracts are to be renewed 
are subject to an annual performance evaluation; and (iii) in the event of 
unsatisfactory results, a consultant’s contract will not be renewed and alternative 
human resources will be sought through a competitive process. With regard to the 
direct purchase of fuel from the state-run Administración Nacional de Combustibles, 
Alcohol y Pórtland [National Fuel, Alcohol, and Cement Administration] (ANCAP), 
this is based, first, on the requirements of section 3.6(c) of the Policies for the 
Procurement of Goods and Works Financed by the IDB (document GN-2349-9), 
which allow direct contracting in cases where a product may only be obtained from 
one source, and, second, on section 33.C.1 of the Texto Ordenado de Contabilidad 
y Administración Financiera [Consolidated Text on Accounting and Financial 
Administration] (TOCAF), which indicates that government bodies or departments 
may engage in direct contracting with each other. 

3.7 The fiduciary agreements and requirements (Annex III) establish the framework for 
financial management and planning, as well as the supervision and execution of 
procurement applicable to program execution. 

3.8 Disbursements. The primary disbursement modality will be advances of funds 
based on actual liquidity needs. These advances will preferably be made every six 
months, once reporting has been filed for at least 70% of the amount advanced. As 
documentary support, the accounting forms will need to be presented along with the 
financial planning spreadsheet. Documentation will be subject to ex post review. 

3.9 Audit. For the duration of program execution, the PMU will submit the program’s 
audited financial statements on an annual basis in accordance with Bank 
requirements. As agreed with the executing agency, audits will be performed by the 
Tribunal de Cuentas de la República [National Audit Office] (TCR). The audited 
annual financial statements will be submitted within 120 days after the end of each 
fiscal year or, in the case of the final statements, within 120 days following the date 
of final disbursement. 



 - 15 - 
 
 
 

B. Summary of arrangements for monitoring results 

3.10 Throughout program execution, the DGDR, in coordination with the PMU, will 
prepare semiannual progress reports and submit them to the Bank within 60 days 
after the end of each six-month period. These reports will indicate the level of 
physical and financial progress toward the indicators and activities included in the 
results matrix, the annual work plan, and the procurement plan, analyzing any 
problems encountered and describing the corrective measures adopted to resolve 
them. The monitoring reports for the second half of each year will include the annual 
work plan for the following year, the updated procurement plan, the status and 
maintenance plan for the executed works, as well as the status of compliance with 
the environmental and social requirements established for the program in the ESMP. 

3.11 The DGDR, in coordination with the PMU, will also submit two evaluation reports: 
(i) midterm, within 90 days after the date on which 50% of resources have been 
committed, or after 50% of the execution period has elapsed, whichever occurs first; 
and (ii) final, within 90 days after the date on which 95% of resources have been 
disbursed. These reports, which will be prepared independently using loan 
resources, will include (i) financial execution by subcomponent and source of 
financing; (ii) progress toward attainment of the outputs, outcomes, and impacts 
contained in the results matrix; (iii) fulfillment of the ESMP; and (iv) a summary of 
the financial accounts, procurement, disbursements, and internal control. 

3.12 The monitoring and evaluation plan agreed with the MGAP and considered in the 
budget includes detailed information on indicators and means of verification; the 
critical path for activities and outputs; monitoring instruments; responsible parties; 
and the methodology and budget for implementation of the plan. 

C. Impact evaluation 

3.13 A quasi-experimental impact evaluation will be conducted that makes use of 
producers’ voluntary registration for the requests for proposals, implementing a 
random promotion to increase the participation rate in a randomly selected treatment 
group. This promotion will be used as an instrumental variable for evaluating the 
program’s impact on beneficiary productivity. A pilot test will be carried out at the 
end of 2018 with a view to selecting an effective promotion tool. Once this tool has 
been fine-tuned, the evaluation will be conducted for the meat and dairy segments 
at a minimum, given that these are representative of the majority of program 
beneficiaries. The source of information for this analysis will consist of surveys 
administered before and after the intervention (in 2019 and 2024), with a total 
sample of approximately 1,000 producers. 




 


 
 


























































 

PUBLIC 
SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE 

 
 
 

DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

HAITI 
 
 
 
 
 
 

AGRICULTURAL AND AGROFORESTRY TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATION 
PROGRAM - PITAG 

 
 

(HA-L1107, HA-G1038) 
 
 
 

GRANT PROPOSAL 
 
 
 

 
 
  

 

PROJECT SUMMARY  

HAITI  

AGRICULTURAL AND AGROFORESTRY TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATION PROGRAM - PITAG 

(HA-L1107, HA-G1038) 

Financial Terms and Conditions 

Beneficiary: Republic of Haiti Amortization Period: N/A 

Executing Agency (EA): Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources 
and Rural Development (MARNDR) 

Disbursement Period: 60 months 

Source Amount (US$) % Grace Period: N/A 

IDB (Grant Facility – HA-L1107):     55,000,000 
 

71.6 
Supervision and 
Inspection Fee: 

N/A 

Other/Co-financing (GAFSP – HA-G1038): 10,000,000 13 
Interest rate: N/A 

Credit Fee: N/A 
Other/Co-financing (IFAD)(a): 10,859,305 14.1 

Local: 1,000,000 1.3 

Currency of Approval: US Dollars  
Total: 76,859,305 100 

Project at a Glance 

Project Objective/Description: The general objectives of the program are to increase agricultural income and 
food security for smallholder farmers in selected areas of Haiti. The specific objectives are to increase agricultural 
productivity and improve the use of natural capital through the adoption of sustainable technologies. 

Special Contractual Clauses prior to the first disbursement of the financing: (i) the approval by the Executing 
Agency and entry into effect of the Program Operating Manual (POM) according to the terms and conditions 
previously agreed with the Bank (¶3.1); (ii) see Annex III that includes a special disbursement; and (iii) see 
Environmental and Social Management Report (ESMR) (REL-3). 

Special Contractual Clauses of execution: see (i) ESMR (REL-3); and (ii) special execution requirements 
contained in Annex III. 

Exceptions to Bank Policies:  None. 

Strategic Alignment 

Challenges(b): SI 
 

PI 
 

EI 
 

Cross-Cutting Themes(c): GD 
 

CC 
 

IC 
 

(a) International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) contribution is, as of today, parallel (co-financing) but might be 
received by the Bank as a Project Specific Grant (PSG), subject to IFAD’s Board approval.  

(b) SI (Social Inclusion and Equality); PI (Productivity and Innovation); and EI (Economic Integration). 
(c) GD (Gender Equality and Diversity); CC (Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability); and IC (Institutional Capacity 

and Rule of Law). 

 
 
 
 
 
 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-6
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-6


- 2 - 

 

I. DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING 

A. Background, Problem Addressed, and Justification 

1.1 The agricultural sector and food security in Haiti. With a per capita annual 
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of US$818 (2015) and 59% of the population living 
in poverty (World Bank, 2012),1 Haiti stands among the poorest countries in the 
world. The United Nations Development Program (UNDP) Human Development 
Index’s socio-economic indicators for 2014 placed Haiti 163rd out of 188 countries.2 
According to the World Bank Group,3 in rural areas, the poverty rate is even higher 
(75%), and more than 80% of Haitians who live in extreme poverty live in rural 
areas, where access to basic services remains very limited. In fact, it is estimated 
that only 10% of the rural population has access to electricity and less than 8% to 
drinkable water. 

1.2 Food insecurity is widespread in Haiti. The country is ranked 115th out of 
118 countries in the 2016 Global Hunger Index (GHI). Results of a recent World 
Food Program (WFP) analysis (2015) indicate that approximately 47% of the 
households are moderately or severely food insecure. In addition, households with 
children of less than five years of age are much more exposed to frequent food 
shortages.4 Therefore, one fifth of children less than five years old are chronically 
malnourished (DHS, 2012).5 

1.3 In this setting, the performance of the agricultural sector is strategic to help raise 
rural households’ incomes and improve their food security.  The sector contributes 
25% of GDP and 85% of employment in rural areas (UNDP, 2015). Haitian 
agriculture, though, presents very low levels of productivity, even when compared 
to other countries in the region (Table I-1 shows yields for the main crops grown in 
Haiti as a proxy for productivity), and per capita income in the Haitian agricultural 
sector has stagnated in recent years. Annual agricultural GDP per capita is 
currently estimated at US$400 per year. 

Table I-1. Yields for main Haitian crops compared to regional yields* 

Product Haiti's yields as % average yields in Central America and the Caribbean 

Cocoa 99% 

Mango 91% 

Sorghum 39% 

Avocado 47% 

Banana 25% 

* Countries considered for this comparison are Central American and Caribbean countries included 
in the FAOSTAT database, years 2010-2014.  

1.4 Agricultural productivity can be influenced by a wide range of factors such as land 
tenure status, human capital level, availability of agricultural inputs, access to 
finance, agricultural services provision (such as information, agricultural research 

                                                 
1  Please see OEL-5 for complete Technical References.  
2  UNDP Human Development Index. 
3  Haiti: Des opportunités pour tous-Diagnostic-Pays Systématique, May 2015. 
4  World Bank and ONPES, 2014. 
5  Haiti Demographic and Health Surveys. 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40


- 3 - 

 

and technology transfer, irrigation, agricultural health and food safety) and 
macroeconomic and trade policies. Some of the main factors that exacerbate low 
productivity include: 

a. Low level of investment and access to technologies. Most producers in 
Haiti are still using basic techniques predominantly for subsistence agriculture 
and lack of access to certified high-quality seeds, appropriate soil conservation 
techniques, inputs for production (i.e. pesticides and fertilizers)6 as well as 
basic tools and equipment. The General Agricultural Census (RGA) shows that 
only 7% of the farmers used mechanical equipment. Also, the baseline data 
collected for Technology Transfer to Small Farmers Program (PTTA) show that 
only 9% of the farmers had used improved seeds and only 22% have 
knowledge of certified seeds. The number of providers is limited in the country 
and their geographical locations do not allow to serve the vaste majority of 
smallholder farmers.7 In addition, a constrained access to factors of production 
(capital, land, labor, water availability)8 greatly limits the capability of farmers 
to increase productivity. This is explained in part by the significant financial 
constraints faced by farmers, due notably to the lack of agricultural credit, 
particularly in rural areas, where financial markets are thin or non-existent. 
Data collected for the evaluation of the agroforestry technology provided by 
PTTA in the North Department show that 28% of the farmers have a bank 
account and 19% have received a credit for agricultural purposes. Lack of 
information about existing technologies, farming techniques, access to 
markets, natural risks and climate change is also a contributing factor.  

b. Lack of financial and human resources to develop agricultural 
innovation. Agricultural research and extension has been virtually 
non-existent in Haiti for nearly three decades, (Cirad, 2015). Aggregate 
numbers show that over the last three decades technical efficiency in the 
Haitian agricultural sector has fallen drastically, at a -1.8% average yearly rate 
(Nin-Pratt, A. et al. 2015). Factors that contribute to explain these findings are 
the outdated institutional research framework, and the lack of technology 
transfer and extension systems. The lack of local expertise in applied and 
adaptive agricultural research as well as technology transfer is in turn partially 
explained by the very limited training and educational opportunities in these 
areas (some universities, such as FAMV, offer academic courses, but the 
quality of their curriculum remains low).9 The institution in charge of agricultural 
research is the Innovation Directorate of the MARNDR, which has 
71 employees distributed across the country, with only 6% of them having an 
education sufficient to conduct research activities. The 2009 RGA reports that 
43% of the farmers identified weak agricultural research and extension 
services as a constraint for the development of the sector. Moreover, only 
2.6% of farmers mentioned receiving some type of technical assistance. 

                                                 
6  In a study conducted by USAID in the North of Haiti in 2017, it is estimated that 28% of farmers use pesticide. 

Fertilizers is used by 4% of cacao producers, 13% of banana producers and 95% of rice producers. 
7     See Technical Document for Component II (Bellande, 2016). 
8  Only 13% of agricultural land has access to water, according to the 2009 General Agricultural Census. 
9   Cirad, 2015. 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40


- 4 - 

 

c. Climate risks. Haiti is one of the countries with the highest Climate Risk Index 
(CRI Germanwatch, 2016) and natural disaster risk index in the world 
(WB, 2005; UNDP, 2004), including climate hazards (Kreft et al., 2015). The 
climatic risks faced by farmers and their ability to cope with them also limit the 
long-term growth of the productivity of the agricultural sector in Haiti, especially 
in a context where watersheds are characterized by severe soil erosion risk 
and, on average, 50% of the upper watersheds is deforested.10 For instance, 
hurricane Matthew caused severe economic damages and estimated losses 
that amounted to US$1.9 billion. The damages and losses in perennial crops 
(coffee, cocoa, breadfruit, coconut, avocado, citrus and other fruit), which are 
extremely important for food security and rural income, were particularly high 
and represented US$433 million, further decreasing capital assets and 
sources of income for Haitian farmers. For the future, climate models predict 
temperatures to increase up to 0.8°C for the 2020s; and precipitation scenarios 
a drying trend in the mid-2020s with 3 to 4% less rainfall in the annual mean 
(IDB, 2016), translating into losses of 25% in average key crops such as 
banana, manioc and beans (UNDP, 2015). The limited access of farmers to 
agricultural technologies (¶1.4a) reduces their ability to cope with these natural 
and climate risks. 

1.5 The agricultural sector policy context. According to the Inter-American 
Development Bank (IDB) Agrimonitor database, total public support to the 
agricultural sector represented, on average, 5.3% of GDP in the period 2006-2012, 
but only 3.2% of the resources are allocated to finance public goods (the lowest 
level in Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC), with funding to research basically 
inexistent), although, in LAC, such public spending has proven higher economic 
return rates than expenditures directed to the financing of private goods 
(Anriquez et al., 2016). 

1.6 Recent reforms. In recent years, the Government of Haiti, with the support of the 
IDB through Policy Grants 2731/GR-HA and 2945/GR-HA, has progressed in key 
areas of agricultural policy that would improve agricultural productivity and 
competitiveness in Haiti, as summarized below. 

a. Agricultural Research.  In 2013 the Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources 
and Rural Development (MARNDR) and other agricultural research 
stakeholders, with the support of the IDB: (i) reviewed and analyzed the 
agricultural research programs and activities implemented in the last three 
decades; (ii) worked on the strategic issues on which research financing should 
focus; and (iii) reviewed different research financing instruments. This work 
resulted in the drafting of a new research institutional framework and a 
financing mechanism (Fonds National de Recherche pour un Développement 
Durable, FONRED), which is expected to be implemented in 2017. 

                                                 
10  Agricultural exploitation stressed the environment and have led to soil erosion and deforestation to be endemic 

problems in Haiti (McClintock, 2003). The great deforestation of the country began during the colonial period 
and was intensified in 1730 with coffee introduction, then other agricultural practices as monoculture and 
clean-cultivation caused rapid erosion and exhausted soil nutrients (Paskett and Philoctete, 1990). Most 
hillsides are eroded and a third of the land is severely degraded (White and Jickling, 1995). Also, gully erosion 
is chronic, which compromises soil fertility, infrastructure quality, and productivity (Wahab et al., 1986). 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40


- 5 - 

 

b. Farmers’ access to technologies. A two-fold strategic approach was 
proposed to address the limited access of farmers to improved technologies: 
(i) create a legal and policy framework for a modern agricultural research 
system in the country (see above); and (ii) expand progressively the incipient 
market-friendly system of “smart subsidies” for promoting the adoption of 
agricultural technologies, reducing the supply-driven distribution of subsidized 
inputs and avoiding the crowding out of private suppliers. 

c. Institutional reform of the Ministry of Agriculture. In 2013, the MARDNR 
created a procurement unit (UPMP, Unité de Passation des Marchés Publics) 
to improve its capacity to absorb and administer financial resources. The 
Studies and Planning Unit (UEP) was staffed with high-level professionals, and 
launched the preparation of programmatic plans, with the objective of 
rationalizing budget preparation. 

1.7 In Haiti, the Bank is already financing investments for the provision of several 
agricultural public goods (agricultural health and food safety, land administration, 
fisheries management, rural infrastructure) through the following operations: 
Natural Disaster Mitigation Program II (3622/GR-HA), Artisanal Fisheries 
Development Program (3492/GR-HA), Modernization of Public Agricultural Health 
Services (3260/GR-HA) and Land Tenure Security Program in Rural Areas 
(2720/GR-HA). Investments in agricultural research and technology transfer 
complement the existing portfolio. 

1.8 Synergies with other initiatives. Several national and international institutions 
are partnering with the MARNDR on the provision of incentives to smallholder 
farmers and on applied agricultural research and training in Haiti: (i) the World 
Bank, USAID and the French Development Agency for the agricultural incentives 
program; and (ii) FAO, the Embassy of France in Haiti, USAID, IICA, the University 
of Quisqueya, the Faculty of Agronomy and Veterinary Medicine (FAMV), and 
NGOs for applied agricultural research and training. 

1.9 On the Bank side, the second phase of the Natural Disaster Mitigation Program 
(PMDN II - HA-L1097/HA-G1031), implemented by the MARNDR since 2016, 
offers possible synergies, notably related to watershed protection (combination of 
infrastructure provided by PMDN and sustainable farming practices promoted by 
PITAG), and to the strengthening of the FAMV curriculum. Other synergies (both 
on content and geographical areas) are envisaged with the Land Tenure Security 
Program in Rural Areas (2720/GR-HA), Water Management Program in the 
Artibonite Basin (3089/GR-HA), the Program to Establish a Partial Credit 
Guarantee Fund for Enterprise Development (2416/GR-HA), and MIF 
interventions in all suitable intervention areas. Collaboration with the last two 
programs will be particularly useful to facilitate the integration of farmers into the 
value chain and their access to broader markets. 

1.10 In order to maximize synergies, avoid duplication and adequately define the 
activities of PITAG, a coordination process was conducted with the various 
initiatives of the institutions listed above and will be continued during program 
execution through regular meetings and especially through the Agricultural 
Sectorial Group (a donor coordination mechanisms) that the Bank’s chairs in Haiti. 



- 6 - 

 

1.11 Lessons Learned. During the period 2011-2016, the MARNDR implemented the 
PTTA (2562/GR-HA), through funding provided by the Bank and the Global 
Agriculture and Food Security Program (GAFSP), and the Natural Disaster 
Mitigation Program (PMDN – 2187/GR-HA). These programs covered a total area 
of 20,240 hectares across the South, North and Northeast departments. They 
benefitted a total of 43,956 small agricultural producers: 9,043 for PMDN and 
34,913 for PTTA 1. While PMDN focused on the promotion of agroforestry 
technological packages, PTTA promoted technological packages for irrigation, 
sisal, annual crops (rice, sweet potato, peanuts and vegetables), and agroforestry 
(coffee, cocoa, diversified crop systems). Qualitative and quantitative evaluations 
assessed that with an average adoption rate of 80%, and with average incentive 
values of US$595/farmer for PMDN and US$700/farmer for PTTA, agroforestry 
technological packages have generated positive results, since they contributed to 
the reforestation of about 13,082 hectares in the country, and led to significant 
increases in gross value added per plot ranging from 10% to 109%. The 
evaluations also found that results have been more limited for the annual crops 
(rice and vegetables), with no significant improvement of gross value added, since 
farmers did not modify their agricultural production practices. However, the 
subsidies contributed to reduce farmer decapitalization, as farmers used the 
vouchers to avoid selling cattle (an average effect of US$227) or contract informal 
and expensive credit to buy agricultural inputs (a 10% points difference between 
treatment and control groups).  

1.12 From a conceptual and operational standpoint, the proposed operation has been 
therefore designed on the basis of the lessons learned through PTTA and several 
other programs that implemented similar incentive mechanisms in Haiti: (i) the 
Agricultural Services Strengthening Program I and II (RESEPAG), financed by the 
World Bank and GAFSP; (ii) the Natural Disaster Mitigation Program II (PMDN 
II- 3622/GR-HA), financed by Bank; and (iii) the Food Security Support Program 
(SECAL), financed by the European Union and the French Development Agency. 
Other similar programs have been financed by the IDB in other countries, such as: 
(i) the Direct Supports for the Creation of Rural Agrifood Initiatives II (CRIAR) in 
Bolivia (3536/BL-BO); (ii) the Agroalimentary Productive Support Program 
(APAGRO) in Nicaragua (2055/BL-NI); and (iii) the Technological Innovation 
Program II (PATCA) in the Dominican Republic (2443/OC-DR). In addition to the 
lessons learned through the aforementioned operations, the design of the 
proposed operation takes into account: (i) the Review of the Bank's Support to 
Agriculture, 2002-2014, published (OVE, 2015); and (ii) the analysis of the 
performance of the incentive mechanism of the programs implemented in Haiti 
(IRAM, 2015). The main lessons learned and their inclusion in the design of the 
program are summarized in Table I-2.



- 7 - 

 

Table I-2. Incorporation of Lessons Learned in the Design of the Proposed Program  

Lesson Learned Source of the 
Lesson 

How the lesson shaped the 
design of the program 

(i) PTTA provided vouchers to rice and vegetable 
producers in order to purchase inputs such as labor, 
fertilizer, and pesticides. The results of the evaluation show 
that while the vouchers led to some adjustments in crop 
choices and input use, these changes did not translate into 
increased agricultural productivity or income. 

A randomized 
control trial impact 
evaluation of PTTA 
(rice and vegetable 
vouchers) (Gignoux 
et al., 2016). 

Agricultural and Agroforestry 
Technological Innovation 
Program (PITAG) shifts its focus 
from subsidies to inputs that are 
widely known and used by 
farmers (i.e. most rice-growers 
reported to have applied urea 
(88%), other chemical fertilizer 
(71%), and pesticide (79%) in the 
baseline survey), towards the 
promotion of more suitable 
technologies and agroforestry 
systems, which enhance soil 
conservation and generate 
positive environmental 
externalities.  

 

(ii) Agroforestry vouchers could be used for services such 
as pruning and grafting, or inputs such as seedlings and 
pesticides. The evaluation shows that, compared to the 
control group, beneficiary farmers increased the total 
number of plots planted and specifically the number of plots 
with annual crops. The project also had a positive impact 
on the use of labor and increased the expenditure in 
permanent seedlings. In addition, the program determined 
a 23% increase in farmers’ expected production, 38% in 
expected income and 78% in expected profits. 

An impact evaluation 
using a propensity 
score matching on 
agroforestry 
vouchers provided 
by PTTA 
(Fahsbender et al., 
2017) 

(iii) Include robust monitoring and evaluation arrangements 
in project design that will establish with certainty which 
elements of the program are effective. 

OVE, 2015 PITAG is built on the lessons 
learned through rigorous impact 
evaluations, and will measure its 
impacts through a rigorous 
monitoring and evaluation 
strategy. 

(iv) In designing projects, place as much emphasis on 
technical assistance as on the productive capital goods to 
be offered to beneficiaries. 

OVE, 2015 Technical assistance to farmers 
and technology providers has 
been strengthened in PITAG, 
through specific activities 
included in Component II. 

(v) The design of new technological packages must be 
directly related to the results of applied agricultural 
research, while considering the diversity of climates and 
social contexts in which they will be implemented. 

IRAM, 2015; PMDN I 
Mid-Term and Final 
Evaluations 

PITAG includes applied research 
component (Component I). 

(vi) The menu of technologies should be designed as to 
enhance agricultural productivity and contribute to climate 
change adaptation, without damaging the environment. 
Also, the promotion of technologies and practices should 
be avoided if certain conditions related to access to factors 
of production (especially water) are not fulfilled. 

IRAM, 2015; PMDN I 
Mid-Term and Final 
Evaluations 

PITAG makes a particular effort 
at identifying specific 
technologies that will facilitate 
climate change adaptation. 

(vii) It is necessary to develop synergies and 
complementarities among projects at local level (i.e., 
watershed protection through the combination of 
infrastructure, adoption of sustainable cropping practices 
and land tenure security; value chain development through 
support to agribusiness and Small and Medium Enterprises 
(SME) and adoption of sustainable cropping practices) to 
maximize impacts. 

PMDN I Mid-Term 
and Final 
Evaluations 

PITAG is designed in 
coordination with other 
complementary initiatives (see 
par. 2.7-2.9). 



- 8 - 

 

1.13 Justification for public intervention. From an economic perspective, several 
reasons justify public investment in agricultural research and training, as well as 
technology transfer services to farmers. Public investment in agricultural research 
and technology transfer schemes show high rates of social and economic returns 
(Alston et al., 2000). In addition, the proposed program will focus its support in 
promoting technologies (mainly agroforestry) that will generate positive 
environmental externalities. Moreover, with regards to technology transfer 
interventions, the literature also recognizes the existence of several market failures 
that hinder the process of agricultural technology adoption in developing countries, 
including: (i) lack of access to information and/or asymmetric information; (ii) input 
and output market inefficiencies (Feder, Just and Zilberman, 1985; Jack, 2013); 
(iii) liquidity constraints and insufficient access to credit; and (iv) risk aversion. 

1.14 The lack of information limits technology adoption not only because agricultural 
producers lack knowledge on the effective use of these technologies, but also 
because they lack information regarding location of private providers or costs of 
production. For instance, in the case of Nepal, Joshi and Pandey (2005) show that 
farmers’ perceptions regarding different rice varieties influence adoption decisions. 
Therefore, the authors conclude that it is important to disseminate information 
broadly using different methods to form accurate perceptions of the technologies 
to be promoted among farmers. Similarly, Conley and Udry (2004) demonstrate 
the importance of learning and information effects on the technological adoption in 
Ghana. Specifically, the authors show that pineapple producers changed their 
input use patterns only when they gained access to information regarding 
production yields from neighboring farmers. Finally, Bentley et. al (2011) measured 
the effect of farmers´ field schools where free information regarding plant health 
and agricultural practices is provided to farmers in Bolivia. The authors found that 
adoption rates are higher (about 82%) for producers who received the information, 
in comparison with the control group. 

1.15 As for the presence of thin markets for technology providers in rural regions, this 
is mainly caused by the small population density spread in remote and large areas 
without accessible roads and high transaction costs (IFAD, 2003). Therefore, it is 
not profitable for technology providers to be located in areas under these 
conditions without certainty of a demand for their technologies. On the other hand, 
it is difficult for farmers to reach technology providers as these are primarily located 
in urban or suburban areas. The presence of liquidity constraints and credit 
restrictions is one of the principal factors that limit smallholder farmers’ technology 
adoption, as mentioned in ¶1.4.  

1.16 Finally, the fourth obstacle that limits technology adoption is risk aversion. This 
factor limits technology adoption because producers prefer certainty regarding the 
future yields that will be obtained with new technologies before incurring the initial 
cost. Thus, producers tend to postpone technology investments until they can 
confirm the benefits associated with the adoption of such technologies through 
experience from other farmers (Feder, 1980). Several studies provide evidence on 
the negative impact of risk aversion on technology adoption such as Abadi 
Ghadim, Pannell y Burton (2005) and Besley and Case (1994), which in the case 
of Haiti could be further accentuated by climate uncertainty.  

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40


- 9 - 

 

1.17 The Agricultural and Agroforestry Technological Innovation Program (PITAG) aims 
to improve technology adoption by reducing the aforementioned market failures. 
Specifically, the provision of a matching grant that partially covers the cost of an 
agricultural technology aims to ease liquidity and credit constraints faced by 
smallholder farmers. Secondly, the provision of technical assistance to farmers 
aims to reduce the barriers related to risk aversion and information asymmetry. 
Lastly, the implementation of technology fairs aims to reduce the lack of 
information and eliminate problems related to shortage of supply and thin markets 
by bringing together demand (small farmers) and supply (technology private 
providers). Given the ability of the program to mitigate these three market failures, 
together with high social returns of agricultural research and technology transfer 
and the positive environmental externalities the program would produce, public 
intervention is justified. 

1.18 Evidence of the relevance of the selected thematic areas of intervention. 
Agricultural productivity can be influenced by a wide range of factors such as land 
tenure status, human capital level, availability of agricultural inputs, climate 
change, access to finance, the provision of agricultural services (such as 
information, agricultural innovation, irrigation, agricultural health and food safety) 
and macroeconomic and trade policies. A strategy to improve the agricultural 
sector’s performance requires a set of well-defined policies geared towards 
promoting efficient factor and product markets.  

1.19 The economic literature presents ample evidence of the linkage between 
agricultural services and agricultural productivity, which is a main driver of 
competitiveness. Research and technology transfer have been shown to be among 
the key determining factors of improvements in agricultural productivity over the 
past 50 years (Pardey et al., 2012). Food and Agriculture Organization of the 
United Nations (FAO, 2012) reports that research and technology transfers are 
priorities in order to meet the growing demand for food because of their high 
returns. Specific studies obtain rates of return ranging from 43% to 67% for 
investments in research and technology transfer (Alston et al, 2014; Jin and 
Huffman, 2015).  

1.20 In addition to the PTTA impact evaluations (mentioned above), other studies have 
analyzed the impact of similar programs in Latin America and the Caribbean. 
Gonzalez et. al. (2009) evaluate the impact of an agricultural technology transfer 
program, Technological Support in the Agricultural Sector, that aims to reduce the 
barriers that limit technology adoption among farmers in the Dominican Republic. 
The study presents evidence that the adoption of the promoted technologies 
increases productivity levels for beneficiary producers of rice and livestock. As for 
technologies that aim to increase agricultural productivity through the promotion of 
environmentally friendly technologies, there is evidence of their impact on income 
and productivity. Specifically, different studies of the Environmental Program of El 
Salvador (PAES), which promoted the adoption of conservation technologies and 
product diversification show that the project had positive effect on household 
income (Cocchi and Bravo-Ureta, 2007; Bravo-Ureta, 2006). Also, (Bravo-Ureta et 
al. (2010) analyze the impact of the Natural Resources and Water Basins 
Management Program (MARENA) in Honduras, which promoted agroforestry and 
soil conservation technologies with the goal to increase diversified farming and 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40


- 10 - 

 

enhance soil, water and forest management. They find positive results of the 
project on the total value of agricultural production. 

1.21 The adoption of sustainable practices can increase the resilience of crop yields, 
which are expected to drop between 5-10% by 2060 because of temperature 
increase and shift in precipitation patterns,11 and improve watershed management 
and soil conservation. The promotion of resilient crops, through the adoption and 
multiplication of agroforestry, and the dissemination of climate change awareness 
has proven to increase system resilience and, therefore, enhance livelihoods. For 
example, use of cover crops in Brazil over maize increased its production by 
198-246% (Altieri, 2001), and intercropping can enhance soil fertility, reduce 
reliance on chemical fertilizers, and therefore reduce the carbon footprint of the 
agricultural sector (Conant, 2010). 

1.22 Finally, with regards to food security, (Salazar et. aAl., 2016) assesses the impact 
of the CRIAR program in Bolivia that aims to improve access to agricultural 
technologies through a voucher-based subsidy scheme. The results show that 
beneficiary households are 20–30% more likely to be food secure than the control 
group and 22% less likely to be concerned about lack of food. This increase was 
driven both by food availability and food access. The annual value of production 
per hectare increased by 92% and the value of production sold by 360%, and the 
results also show that participation in CRIAR increased net annual agricultural 
household income by 36% and per capita household income by 19%.  Also, an 
ongoing study of the PATCA II, that provides voucher-based subsidies to farmers 
to improve agricultural technology adoption, shows that beneficiary farmers 
increased food security by 27% (Salazar et. al., 2016). 

1.23 Consistency with national priorities. The proposed program is consistent with 
the 2010-2025 Agriculture Policy Document, the 2010-2016 and 
2016-2021 National Agriculture Investment Plan (NAIP), the 2011-2016 
Agricultural Extension Plan, and Haiti’s Intended National Determined Contribution 
(INDC, 2015). These documents envision to build-up and strengthen a modern 
agricultural sector based on the efficiency and effectiveness of family agriculture 
and agribusiness. 

1.24 Strategic alignment. The program is consistent with the Update to the Institutional 
Strategy (UIS) 2010-2020 (AB-3008) and is strategically aligned with the 
development challenges of: (i) productivity and innovation, through the generation 
of sustainable agricultural technologies and improving access to those 
technologies, as reflected by the impact indicator “Annual household value of 
agricultural production.” The program is also aligned to the cross-cutting themes 
of: (i) climate change and environmental sustainability, through the generation and 
promotion of climate change adaptation and sustainable technologies, as reflected 
in the result indicators “Beneficiaries who adopted soil protection and restoration 

                                                 
11  According to a vulnerability study for the agricultural sector in Haiti’s National Adaptation Plan of Action (PANA), 

the temperature increase is estimated to vary between 1°C by 2030 and up to 1.7°C by 2060 and precipitation 
patterns are expected to decrease between 20% by 2030 and up to 35.8% by 2060, with a specific impact on 
irrigated crops. Corn projection scenarios foresee a decrease of 4% by 2030 and 7.7% by 2060; b) for rice 
decreases will attain 9% by 2030 and 15% by 2060 and potato will reach a 5% decrease by 2030 and 10% by 
2060. 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40


- 11 - 

 

technologies,” “Additional hectares of land applying agroforestry technologies,” 
and (ii) gender equality and diversity, through the reduction of gender inequalities 
and the promotion of women’s participation, as reflected in the result indicator 
“Women beneficiaries of economic empowerment initiatives.” The program 
contributes to the Corporate Results Framework (CRF) 2016-2019 (GN-2727-6) 
through the indicators of: “beneficiaries of improved management and sustainable 
use of natural capital,” “women beneficiaries of economic empowerment 
initiatives,” “farmers with improved access to agricultural services and 
investments” and “beneficiaries of IDBG projects that contribute to at least one key 
dimension of food security. The program is aligned with the Bank’s Country 
Strategy with Haiti 2011-201512 (GN-2646), which sets agriculture as a priority 
sector of intervention. The program is also included in the 2017 Operational 
Program Report (GN-2884) and is aligned with the Country Strategic Objective 
“Protect the environment, respond to climate change and enhance food security”. 
The program is also consistent with the “Agriculture and Natural Resources 
Management Sector Framework Document” (GN-2709-5) as it focuses on the 
provision of public agricultural goods and promotes access to technology, with the 
“Food Security Sector Framework” (GN-2825-3), as it will increase agricultural 
productivity and therefore contribute to food security, and the “Climate Change 
Sector Framework” (GN-2835-3) as the program enhances resiliency of vulnerable 
farmer communities through adaptation measures. According to the joint MDB 
approach on climate finance tracking, an estimated 64.56% of total IDB funding for 
this project result in climate change mitigation and adaptation activities. This 
contributes to the IDBG’s climate finance goal of 30% of combined IDB and IIC 
operational approvals by year’s end 2020.  

1.25 Gender mainstreaming. In the context of PTTA, a gender gap analysis was 
conducted. This study combined qualitative data from focus groups and 
quantitative data from the baseline survey. The main conclusions are the following: 
(i) women heads of household have less time to allocate to agricultural activities 
and therefore, have higher labor expenditures than men (310 Gdes vs. 280 Gdes); 
(ii) women heads of household have smaller plots and less access to land; 
(iii) women sell a lower proportion of their production and allocate more to home 
consumption compared to men (52% vs. 64% in the case of rice); (iv) more 
female-headed households face severe food insecurity (86% vs 71%); 
(v) female-head of households are less educated than men (55% never attended 
school vs. 30%); and (vi) female-headed households have lower annual income 
(US$176 vs. US$347) (Coelho, 2015). 

1.26 As a result of the gender gap assessment the following activities will be included 
as part of PITAG, with the objective of reducing gender inequalities and promoting 
women’s participation. First, PITAG will include an information campaign that 
targets women directly. Second, Component I will allocate financial resources to 
five applied research projects with the objective of developing new agricultural 
technologies that are directly targeted towards women’s needs or crops usually 
grown by women. Third, Component II will promote post-harvest technologies that 
are targeted towards agricultural activities usually conducted by women (i.e. mills 
and moisture meters). Fourth, the agroforestry packages will include crop varieties 
that aim to reduce food insecurity such as moringa and mirlinton, which are usually 

                                                 
12  Currently in effect until December 2017 (GN-2646-2). 

https://publications.iadb.org/handle/11319/7807
https://publications.iadb.org/handle/11319/7807


- 12 - 

 

grown by female farmers. Fifth, the program will be monitored and evaluated using 
sex-disaggregated indicators. 

1.27 Climate change. The National Determined Contribution of Haiti defines a 
conditional target of 31% GHG emissions reduction, and includes key agricultural 
adaptation and mitigation actions such as development of crops resilient to climate 
change, sustainable practices and conservation of agricultural genetic resources, 
soils and water resources to attain its commitment. The program contributes to the 
NDC target through the development and promotion of sustainable and climate 
resilient technologies (mainly focusing on agroforestry packages), which will also 
contribute to the reforestation of the country and the reduction of net emissions.13 

B. Objective, Components and Cost 

1.28 The general objectives of the program are to increase agricultural income and food 
security for smallholder farmers in selected areas of Haiti. The specific objectives 
are to increase agricultural productivity and improve the use of natural capital 
through the adoption of sustainable technologies. The channels through which 
increases in agricultural productivity are expected to increase food security are 
twofold. First, higher agricultural productivity will translate into higher agricultural 
yields, increasing food production for home-consumption. Second, higher 
agricultural productivity will increase agricultural income from increased production 
sales which, in turn, will improve household’s purchasing power for, amongst other 
goods, foodstuffs. To achieve its objectives, the program will be structured in two 
components. 

1.29 Component I. Applied research and training (US$14,600,000). The objective of 
this component is to generate and disseminate applied agricultural research and it 
will finance the following activities: (i) applied and adaptive agricultural research 
projects developed and implemented by national and/or international institutions. 
These research projects will create, improve and/or adapt sustainable agricultural 
technologies that will enhance the supply of technological options available to 
farmers. Eight main projects (total budget: US$9,318,000) were identified through 
a prioritization exercise based on an index that summarized economic, social, and 
environmental indicators as well as the yield gap vis-à-vis other countries in the 
region. All research projects will include climate considerations and foster 
adaptation and mitigation measures. Seven additional smaller projects will be 
demand-driven (total budget: US$3,080,000) and will be selected through a similar 
prioritization exercise; (ii) the strengthening of the higher education curriculum 
through activities conducted within the research projects (scholarships, among 
others), in order to improve applied and adaptive research and technology transfer 
capabilities in Haiti; and (iii) the institutional strengthening of the MARNDR 
Innovation Directorate (ID), through: (a) technical and scientific support; 
(b) materials and equipment; (c) strengthening of the technical and scientific profile 
of its professionals; and (d) an innovation information system. The component will 
be executed by the ID of the MARNDR. The selection of the various proposals will 
be conducted by a panel composed by Ministry staff and external experts (faculty 

                                                 
13  According to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), agroforestry is a climate smart practice, 

as it has a mitigation potential of 1.1–2.2 Pg carbon over the next 50 years and also provides proven resiliency 
assets. 



- 13 - 

 

members from Haiti and abroad). The results of Component I will progressively 
provide inputs for the technology menu promoted by Component II, including 
climate considerations. A behavioral study will be also conducted to determine 
farmers’ willingness to pay for the new technologies (resulting from the adaptive 
research) to be introduced in the menu. The activities of the component are 
consistent with the recent reforms supported by the IDB as represents a first 
opportunity of application of the FONRED guidelines, whose development was 
supported by the IDB. 

1.30 Component II: Promotion of sustainable agricultural technologies 
(US$55,909,305). This component will finance the adoption of profitable, climate 
smart, and sustainable agricultural technologies that will improve farm profitability, 
generate positive environmental externalities, and facilitate the mitigation of and 
adaptation to climate change. The component will be implemented through the 
agricultural incentives mechanism implemented by the MARNDR. A preliminary 
technology menu has been selected through a prioritization exercise based on the 
relative importance of the different crops, their socio-economic relevance and their 
environmental sustainability. This menu will include: pre-harvest, harvest and 
post-harvest technologies, as well as sustainable soil recovery and conservation 
practices (i.e. agro-forestry systems, sustainable soil management techniques).14 
This menu will be updated each year, taking into consideration the results of 
Component I. To become beneficiaries of this component, interested farmers will 
participate in a series of fairs that will be organized to match demand and supply 
for the various technologies. The component will cover 90%15 of the costs of the 
technologies through a matching grant, and farmers will cover, in cash, the 
remaining 10%. The maximum amount of subsidy will depend on the specific 
technology chosen by farmers and will go up to US$2,000, with a weighted 
average of US$950. Given the damages experienced by farmers in the areas 
affected by hurricane Matthew (South and Grand’Anse Departments), the 
component will finance the total cost of the technologies in these regions. The 
demonstrated results of the selected technologies ensure the sustainability of the 
intervention (see Table I-2). The component will also finance: an information 
system for program implementation, technical assistance for farmers (specific 
assistance on how to choose and apply the technologies and general, strategic 
assistance on farm management and commercialization), and technical assistance 
for technology providers (mainly focused on quality control and environmental 
management). Technical operators will facilitate the implementation of the 
Program in the different intervention areas. 

1.31 Other project costs (US$6,350,000). Other activities to be financed include: 
(i) administration (e.g., consultants, travel, equipment, operational costs, audits); 
(ii) mid-term, final, and impact evaluations; and (iii) contingencies. 

C. Key Results Indicators 

1.32 The Results Framework (Annex II) has been agreed with the Government of Haiti 
and includes the program’s objectives, impacts, results and products, as well as 

                                                 
14  The initial list of technologies includes: motor-pompes, animal traction, cane mills, threshers, stocking 

equipment, different types of agroforestry packages, different types of forestry packages, forages. 
15  This percentage is meant to represent an average across technologies, and was determined on the basis of 

previous experiences, income data, and indicators collected during the evaluation of related programs. 



- 14 - 

 

their respective indicators. Table I-3 summarizes the program’s key impact 
indicators, measurement period and selection rationale. 

Table I-3. Key Indicators 

Impact/ Results indicator Measurement 
period 

Selection rationale 

(i) Percentage of male-headed 
households who are severely 
food insecure using the Food 
Insecurity Experience Scale 
(FIES) 

Y1 and Y5 This indicator measures the degree of food 
insecurity faced by the household, and it will 
be measured separately for male and 
female headed households, and compared 
with a control group. 

(ii) Annual value of agricultural 
production (US$/household) 

Y1 and Y5 This indicator is a proxy for agricultural 
productivity. 

(iii) Additional hectares of land 
applying agroforestry 
technologies 

Y1 and Y5 This indicator will measure the adoption of 
agroforestry technologies and monitor forest 
coverage, and will be measured separately 
for male and female farmers. 

1.33 Economic analysis. The program’s ex-ante economic analysis is based on a cost 
benefit methodology that examines the economic viability for each of the 
technologies selected as well as for the program as a whole. The costs considered 
include the investment (i.e., asset cost, technical assistance and private 
investment), operation, maintenance and reposition of the technologies as well as 
additional production costs and opportunity costs. The net benefits attributed to the 
adoption of the technologies were estimated using technical coefficients for labor 
and inputs obtained from the impact evaluation of agroforestry technologies 
provided with PTTA as well as from the technical report for Component II. The 
results of the analysis, using efficiency prices, an adoption rate of 75%, a 12-year 
horizon, and a discount rate of 12%, confirm that the program is economically 
viable with a net present value of US$28,000,000 and Internal Rate of Return (IRR) 
of 27%. Table I-4 shows the expected effects from each of the options offered in 

the technological menu with their respective IRR. 

Table I-4. Expected Effects and Internal Rates of Returns for the Technologies 

Technology Direct Effects IRR 

Agroforestry Increase productivity and improve soil quality 41.7% 

Irrigation Increase productivity and crop diversification 67.9% 

Animal traction Increase production 22.7% 

Post-Harvest equipment Increase income due to food processing 49.3% 

1.34 Beneficiaries. The program will have the following beneficiaries: (i) 3,000 direct 
beneficiaries of the agricultural applied research and training projects 
(Component I); and (ii) 65,048 farmers that will directly benefit from the matching 
grant mechanism promoting the adoption of technologies (Component II). It is 
expected that women would represent at least 40% of these beneficiaries. The 
departments targeted by the program are: North, North-East, Artibonite, South, 
and Grand’Anse. The first three departments have been selected because of the 
foreseen synergies with other complementary programs and the South and 
Grand’Anse were included to re-capitalize these departments after the damages 
caused by hurricane Matthew. Based on information obtained through PTTA, the 
expected beneficiaries will be farmers who, on average, have access to 



- 15 - 

 

1.4 hectares of land and plant 0.7 hectares; have low levels of income 
(US$248 annual household agricultural income and US$208 income from 
livestock); and low levels of schooling (53% are illiterate, 26% have incomplete 
primary school, 9% finished primary school and 2% have a high school degree). 
Given the program’s limited resources, the proposed targeting will help to: 
(i) ensure the coordination with other rural development programs financed by the 
Bank and other partners (see ¶2.6); and (ii) focus attention on farmers who are in 
most need of the proposed technological changes.

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS 

A. Financing Instruments 

2.1 The total program amount is US$76,859,305. The Grant Facility will finance 
US$55,000,000, the GAFSP16 will finance US$10,000,000, and International Fund 
for Agricultural Development (IFAD)17 will finance the remaining US$10,859,305. 
The local counterpart will finance US$1,000,000 to cover recurrent costs. IFAD 
might elect, by the end of 2017, to contribute to the project through a Project 
Specific Grant (PSG) administered by the Bank, in place of a parallel cofinancing, 
for the budgeted amount. Such additional non-reimbursable funding will contribute 
to the project according to Table II-1. In this case, the Bank would establish a 
commitment from IFAD through an administrative agreement without the 
requirement of preparing or approving a separate project proposal. Under such 
administrative agreement, the resources provided by the donor will be 
administered by the Bank. The Bank will not charge an administrative fee for donor 
contributions to projects in Haiti.  The Board is therefore requested to authorize the 
President, or such representative as he shall designate, to enter into such 
agreements as may be necessary with IFAD and with the Republic of Haiti to 
receive, administer, and allocate to this operation the PSG resources aimed at 
supporting and executing the components of this operation. Table II-1 provides the 
cost summary by investment categories and components. The budget includes all 
costs associated with risks mitigation measures identified in the ESMP and the risk 
analysis.

                                                 
16  This co-financing is subject to the entry into effect of a specific agreement for the financing of this program to 

be signed between the IDB and GAFSP. 
17  This parallel financing is subject to IFAD´s approval. 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-6


- 16 - 

 

Table II-1. Costs and Sources of Financing (US$) 

Investment categories IDB GAFSP IFAD Local Total 

Components 

Component I. Applied 
research and training 14,600,000  

 

 14,600,000 

Component II. Promotion 
of sustainable 
agricultural technologies 35,050,000 10,000,000 

 
 

10,859,305  55,909,305 

Other project costs 

Administration 4,000,000  
 

1,000,000 5,000,000 

Audits 150,000  
 

 150,000 

Monitoring & Evaluation 700,000  
 

 700,000 

Contingencies 500,000  
 

 500,000 

TOTAL 55,000,000 10,000,000 
 

10,859,305 1,000,000 76,859,305 

• IFAD contribution is, as of today, parallel (co-financing) but might be received by the Bank as 
a PSG, subject to IFAD’s Board approval. 

 

2.2 The program is an investment grant operation and it is designed to be disbursed 
in 60 months. The disbursement calendar is presented in Table II-2 and is based 
on the Pluriannual Execution Plan (PEP) (see REL-1).  

 

Table II-2. Disbursement Projections (US$) 

Source Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Total 

IDB 3,123,865 4,150,926 14,565,837 16,471,691 16,687,681 55,000,000 

GAFSP 1,000,000 2,000,000 3,000,000 3,000,000 1,000,000 10,000,000 

IFAD 1,000,000 2,859,305 3,000,000 2,000,000 2,000,000 10,859,305 

Local 200,000 200,000 200,000 200,000 200,000 1,000,000 

TOTAL 5,323,865 9,210,231 20,765,837 21,671,691 19,887,681 76,859,305 

% 6.9 12.0 27.0 28.2 25.9 100 

A. Environmental and Social Safeguard Risks 

2.3 According to OP-703, the program was classified as Category “B.” The expected 
negative impacts are considered to be low, and avoidable through adequate 
mitigation measures. During project preparation, an Environmental Assessment 
and an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) were prepared and 
consulted.18 Key project impacts and risks include: (i) water resource exploitation 
by the introduction of water pumps for irrigation purposes. This risk will present a 
negligible negative impact, based on an ex-ante hydrological assessment of the 
accumulated pumping capacity of the small number of water pumps (450 over all 

                                                 
18  The preliminary draft of the Environmental Assessment (and ESMP) was posted on the Ministry of Agriculture’s 

website (http://agriculture.gouv.ht/view/01/) on January 13, 2017 for public view, as well as on the IDB website 
on January 17, 2017. An updated version, integrating the results of the first consultations, was posted on 
February 16, 2017, prior to QRR. No further update was needed after last consultation events in 
September 2017. 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-3
http://agriculture.gouv.ht/view/01/
http://www.iadb.org/en/projects/project-description-title,1303.html?id=HA-L1107
http://www.iadb.org/en/projects/project-description-title,1303.html?id=HA-L1107


- 17 - 

 

intervention zones) to be financed throughout the life of the program. Moreover, a 
Water Resource Assessment will be completed prior to project execution to allow 
for a better understanding of the present state of water resources in the proposed 
intervention zones. The use of these water pumps will also be monitored; 
(ii) possible conflicts generated by program activities regarding agricultural use of 
land in protected areas/Key Biodiversity Areas (KBA).19 To mitigate this risk, the 
program will only take place in areas where management plans exist and are in 
effect, and will be implemented in accordance with the respective protected area 
management plan, including abiding by existing sustainable development zoning 
regulations; (iii) possible promotion of the use of invasive species. To address this 
concern, during the first year of the program’s implementation, a study on invasive 
and non-invasive species will be completed to identify alternatives. If no alternative 
is found, a management plan relating to the use of the invasive species will be 
prepared and implemented. The beneficiary shall comply with the environmental, 
social, health and safety and labor requirements set forth in the Environmental and 
Social Management Report (ESMR); and (iv) emissions associated with energy 
forests. To address this risk, for the first years of the PITAG project, energy forest 
packages will not be offered. Rather, during this time more research will be 
completed to determine the emissions (particularly of carbon dioxide and black 
carbon) that may be released due to energy forests. This research will examine 
the relationship between carbon emissions and sequestration, and the possible 
contribution to climate change, as well as potential human health impacts from 
burning biomass (in the form of charcoal or fuelwood). 

B. Fiduciary Risk 

2.4 An update of PTTA/RESEPAG institutional assessment related to its financial 
management and internal control processes was completed in January 2017. 
Based on its results, the Bank considers PTTA/RESEPAG overall risk rating to be 
medium due to following weaknesses: (i) financial reports are prepared manually, 
which increases the possibility of errors in financial reporting as SYSCOMPTE 
does not automatically generate financial reports; (ii) limitations identified in the 
Système Intégré de Gestion des Informations (SIGI), system used for the 
management of subsidies to farmers; and (iii) absence of a code of ethics. To 
mitigate those risks the EA: (i) has launched an evaluation of the functionality and 
the design of the SIGI information system which will advise on the best option to 
choose for the implementation of PITAG; (ii) will need to set up SYSCOMPTE 
parameters to allow the automatic generation of financial reports and the 
monitoring and execution of budget; and (iii) includes a code of ethics and 
professional conduct in the POM. The fiduciary risk related to procurement delays 
is classified as medium and its mitigation measures include: (i) anticipation and 
good planning for complex procurement processes; (ii) strengthening of the UPMP; 
and (iii) support to the MARNDR to simplify the procedures for contract approval 
and signature. 

C. Other Key Issues and Risks 

2.5 The design of the program used the methodology “Program Risk Analysis for 
Sovereign Guaranteed Loans.” A risk identification and management workshop 

                                                 
19  Sites contributing significantly to the global persistence of biodiversity.  



- 18 - 

 

was conducted during program preparation, to identify program risks and 
mitigation measures. All main counterparts (IDB, MARNDR, private sector, 
development partners) have been consulted as part of the definition of the risk 
matrix and its mitigation measures. The high risk identified is the insufficient quality 
and quantity of technology providers. Several mitigation measures were identified 
for this risk, namely: (i) strengthened selection process of potential providers, 
including quality and quantity control; (ii) trainings; (iii) updated quality standards 
for technologies; (iv) possibility to exclude providers who do not follow the rules; 
and (v) technology transfer to providers through Component I. The development 
risk related to the cash constraints of suppliers is medium, and its mitigation 
measures include: (i) strengthened selection process of potential providers, 
including quality and quantity control; (ii) promotion of link with microfinance 
institutions, including programs financed by IDB and Ministry of Commerce; and 
(iii) good planning of the campaigns in terms of areas and quantities of subsidies. 
The development risk linked to the lack of local financial counterpart is medium 
and its mitigation measure is the preliminary planning and communication with the 
Ministry of Finance. Extreme climatic events have been identified as a medium 
development risk and the related mitigation measures are: (i) promotion of 
technologies that are resilient to climate change; (ii) research on climate resilience; 
and (iii) good planning of the campaigns in terms of areas and seasons. The 
complexity of the subsidy management process is a medium development risk and 
its mitigations measures include: (i) updated operational procedure, based on 
PTTA experience; and (ii) improvement of information system (SIGI). The limited 
number of actors that can execute quality research in the country is a medium 
development risk, whose mitigation measures are: (i) promotion of consortia with 
national and international research centers; and (ii) efforts to give maximum 
visibility to calls for proposals. The limited transfer of research outputs to producers 
is a medium development risk and its mitigation measures include: 
(i) strengthening of coordination between the two Components, the Innovation 
Directory of the MARNDR; (ii) inclusion of dissemination activities in Component I; 
and (iii) monitoring of research activities in the country. The difficulty to access 
intervention areas has been identified as a medium governance risk, whose 
mitigation measure is the timely preparation of providers and the selection of 
providers that will have access to difficult areas. Finally, a medium sustainability 
risk was identified: value added by the technological packages absorbed by 
household consumption expenses. Its mitigation measures include: (i) promotion 
of synergies with microfinance initiatives; and (ii) introduction of the matching grant 
mechanism. 

2.6 The Government of Haiti and the MARNDR expressed high interest in this program 
and are committed to the sustainability of the activities supported by the Program 
beyond its execution period, since the program is aligned with the Road Map of 
the current administration, the 2010-2025 Agriculture Policy Document, the 
2010-2016 and 2016-2021 National Agriculture Investment Plan (NAIP), the 
2011-2016 Agricultural Extension Plan, and Haiti’s Intended National Determined 
Contribution (INDC, 2015). 



- 19 - 

 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN 

A. Summary of Implementation Arrangements 

3.1 The beneficiary of the program will be the Republic of Haiti, and the EA will be the 
MARNDR, which has been in charge of the execution of most Bank-financed 
operations in the sector, and currently manages an active portfolio totaling 
approximately US$140 million. The EA will manage the program through: (i) the 
technical and administrative team of PTTA/RESEPAG executing unit (PEU); and 
(ii) the UPMP, which have demonstrated their capacity to execute similar programs 
in the past. The EA will be responsible for the overall administration of the program, 
including: planning and reporting technical and fiduciary aspects; execution of 
procurement activities; supervision of firms and service providers; financial and 
accounting management; risk management; monitoring and evaluation; 
supervision and execution of the environmental and social management plan. The 
Innovation Directorate will be responsible for the planning and technical 
supervision of Component I. The approval by the Executing Agency and entry 
into effect of the Program Operating Manual (POM) according to the terms 
and conditions previously agreed with the Bank constitutes a Special 
Contractual Clause prior to the first disbursement of the financing, justified 
by the need to have designated personnel for the execution of the program and 
clear procedures that will guide its implementation. 

3.2 Program Operating Manual (POM). The POM, which establishes standards and 
procedures for the MARNDR with regard to programming activities, procurement 
audits, and monitoring and evaluation, among others, will govern program 
execution. The POM will include, among others, the following: (i) a detailed 
description of the implementation agreement of each component; (ii) roles and 
responsibilities of the agencies involved in the implementation of the program; 
(iii) criteria and procedures to select and contract goods and services; (iv) criteria 
and procedures for management and financial control of the program; 
(v) monitoring and evaluation arrangements; (vi) specific environmental and social 
measures of the program, as described in the ESMR (annexed to the POM); 
(vii) presentation of evidence that the MARNDR has selected a program 
coordinator and a financial officer according to the terms and conditions previously 
agreed with the Bank; and (viii) a provision according to which a technical 
verification of the use of agricultural subsidy funds by the beneficiary will be 
performed on a quarterly basis by an individual consultant who will be hired 
according to the terms and conditions previously agreed with the Bank. A 
preliminary manual of procedures was prepared during program preparation.  

3.3 The following are some salient elements that will be included in the POM regarding 
the execution of Component II. The main selection criteria for beneficiaries are the 
following: (i) to be registered in the MARNDR farmers’ registry; (ii) to be domiciled 
in the area of intervention; (iii) to work on an area equal to or greater than 0.25 Ha; 
(iv) not having received a previous MARNDR technology subsidy; and (v) to meet 
the specific criteria for the desired technical package. The selected farmers will 
pay their contribution to a financial institution and technology providers will provide 
the technology to the farmers. The program will pay the remaining part of the cost 
of the technology to technology providers once it has been verified that they have 



- 20 - 

 

delivered the technology to the farmers. All the transactions and validation will be 
tracked by an updated version of the SIGI. 

3.4 Procurement. All program-related procurement activities will be performed 
following Bank’s Procurement Policies: Policies for the Procurement of Goods and 
Works financed by the Bank (GN-2349-9) and Policies for the Selection and 
Contracting of Consultants financed by the Bank (GN-2350-9) as applicable.  

3.5 Financial and Auditing reports. The program will submit to the Bank the following 
documents: (i) semi-annual financial reports of the program included in the 
semi-annual progress report; (ii) annual financial statements of the program, 
audited by an independent auditor are to be submitted to the Bank within 120 days 
at the end of each fiscal year, beginning with the fiscal year in which the first 
expenditures are incurred; and (iii) a final financial audit report of the program is to 
be submitted by the MARNDR within 120 days after the date of the last 
disbursement.  

B. Summary of Arrangements for Monitoring Results 

3.6 It will be the PEU´s responsibility to put in place a monitoring system to collect data 
related to all the indicators in the Results Framework. This system will be 
instrumental for the PEU to be able to submit to the Bank semi-annual progress 
reports that will describe, among others: (i) the physical progress of the program 
(i.e., in terms of output indicators); (ii) the progress made in terms of outcomes and 
impacts, as stipulated in the Results Framework; and (iii) the status of applicable 
environmental and social mitigation measures. 

3.7 An impact evaluation will be conducted to measure the program’s impact and 
results. Specifically, the impact evaluation will be a combination of experimental 
and quasi-experimental techniques. Component I will be evaluated using a before 
and after calculation. On the other hand, Component II will use a randomization 
methodology to analyze the impact of the adoption of those technologies that will 
experience a demand higher than project’s capacity to supply it (i.e., irrigation), 
and combine it with a quasi-experimental approach of difference-in-difference for 
technologies such as agroforestry and post-harvest. For this purpose, a sample of 
2,000 farmers (1,000 beneficiaries and 1,000 control, representative by gender) 
will be surveyed for baseline and a follow-up surveys. The data collection will be 
representative of female-headed households and separate analysis will be 
performed in order to measure impact by gender. The total budget for the impact 
evaluation amounts to US$550,000 that will be covered with resources from this 
grant. Details on the monitoring and evaluation activities are provided in the 
Monitoring and Evaluation Plan prepared for the program. 

C.  Significant Design Activities Post Approval  

3.8 There will be no significant design activities post approval.  

 




b. Selection and Contracting of Consultants: The consulting services contracts 
generated under this program will be executed through the use of the Standard 
Request for Proposals (SRFPs) issued or agreed to by the Bank. Research entities, 
Firms or Universities will be selected to develop research programs using Selection 
Based on Quality as procurement method. Approximately eight contracts will be 
signed for a total amount of US$13,000,000.  

B. Recurring Expenses 

5.3 Certain recurring expenses will be procured using program funds. These procurement 
activities will be carried out in accordance with the administrative procedures of the EA 
with the prior approval of the Bank who will assess and approve the use of these 
procedures.  

 

 

 

 

 


























































PUBLIC 
SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE 

DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK  
 

 

 

 

PARAGUAY 

 

 

 

PROJECT TO IMPROVE AND EXPAND ANIMAL HEALTH SERVICES IN 
PARAGUAY  

(PR-L1148) 

LOAN PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
 
PROJECT SUMMARY  
PARAGUAY 

PROJECT TO IMPROVE AND EXPAND ANIMAL HEALTH SERVICES IN PARAGUAY  
(PR-L1148) 

Financial terms and conditions 

Borrower: National Service for Animal Health and 
Quality (SENACSA) 

Flexible Financing Facility(a) 

Guarantor: Republic of Paraguay Amortization period: 24 years  

Executing agency: The borrower, through the Project 
Management Unit and with the support of the Bureau of 
Administration and Finance  

Disbursement period: 5 years 

Source Amount (US$) % Grace period:  5.5 years(b) 

IDB Ordinary Capital: 15,000,000 100 

Interest rate: LIBOR-based 

Credit fee: (c) 

Inspection and supervision fee: (c) 

Total: 15,000,000 100 

Weighted average life: 14.75 years 

Approval currency: United States dollars 
from the Ordinary 
Capital 

Project at a Glance 

Project objective/description: The program’s general objective is to help improve the productivity of the livestock sector. 
The specific objectives are to: (i) improve the effectiveness of animal health services with a risk management approach; 
and (ii) expand the coverage of veterinary services, including for smaller species. 

Special contractual conditions precedent to the first loan disbursement: (i) the Program Execution Unit will have been 
formed according to the terms agreed upon with the Bank; and (ii) the borrower will have presented, to the Bank’s 
satisfaction, evidence that the program Operating Regulations have entered into force (paragraph 3.4). 

Special contractual conditions for execution: The project will be executed in accordance with the contractual provisions 
on environmental, social, health, and safety issues set forth in the legal requirements section of the Environmental and 
Social Management Report, including Annex B.  

Exceptions to Bank policies: SENACSA will be the borrower and the executing agency. The guarantee by the Republic 
of Paraguay will be limited to SENACSA’s financial obligations in the context of the loan (including repayment of principal, 
payment of interest, and other lending charges) and will not cover performance obligations or local counterpart 
contributions. Accordingly, the Board of Executive Directors is being asked to approve a partial waiver of the Bank’s 
policy on Guarantees required from the borrower (document GP-104-2) (paragraph 3.1). 

Strategic Alignment 

Challenges:(d) SI 
 

PI 
 

EI 
 

Crosscutting themes:(e) GD 
 

CC 
 

IC 
 

(a) Under the Flexible Financing Facility (document FN-655-1), the borrower has the option of requesting changes to the 
amortization schedule, as well as currency and interest-rate conversions. The Bank will take operational and risk 
management considerations into account when reviewing these requests. 

(b) Under the flexible repayment options of the Flexible Financing Facility, changes to the grace period are permitted 
provided that they do not entail any extension of the original weighted average life of the loan or the last payment date 
as documented in the loan contract.  

(c) The credit fee and inspection and supervision fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors 
as part of its review of the Bank’s lending charges, in accordance with applicable policies. 

(d) SI (Social Inclusion and Equality); PI (Productivity and Innovation); and EI (Economic Integration). 
(e) GD (Gender Equality and Diversity); CC (Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability); and IC (Institutional 

Capacity and Rule of Law). 
 

 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1395480667-25
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1395480667-25


 

I. PROJECT DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING1 

A. Background, problem, and rationale  

1.1 Paraguay closed 2017 with real GDP growth of 4.3%, up from 4.1% in 2016. 
Inflation, meanwhile, reached 4.5%, higher than the target of 4% set by the Central 
Bank of Paraguay (BCP) for 2017, while the central government’s budget deficit was 
1.5% of GDP, similar to the previous year. In the short and medium terms, the 
country’s GDP is expected to grow by around 3.5% to 4.0%, and its fiscal position 
should get stronger in line with the provisions of the Fiscal Responsibility Law. 

1.2 In this context, the agricultural sector is key to the Paraguayan economy, due to its 
contribution to GDP (an annual average of 25% in the 2004-2016 period) as well as 
to its share of the country’s jobs (annual average of 30% during the same period). 
Furthermore, from 2004 to 2016, the sector grew at an average annual rate of 5.7%. 
On par with this growth, the sector’s exports have significantly increased over the 
past decade; in 2016, they accounted for 60% of the total value of exports (BCP, 
2017). The livestock subsector accounts for approximately 5.5% of national GDP, 
with around 13 million head of cattle, 1.3 million pigs, and 500,000 sheep, among 
other species (National Service for Animal Health and Quality, SENACSA, 2016). 
Exports of animal products and byproducts totaled an annual average of 
US$1.424 billion in the three-year period 2014-2016 and account for 16% of all 
exports (SENACSA, 2017).2  

1.3 The importance of sheep, pig, and poultry products in the domestic market should 
also be highlighted. The majority of these products come from small family farms 
(IICA, Paraguay Observatory, 2016). According to the 2008 National Agricultural 
Census, there are 289,000 productive farms managing 31 million hectares of land, 
of which 66% are dedicated to livestock activity. Of these, 92% have less than 
50 hectares and are considered family farms.  

1.4 In the past few years, Paraguayan beef production has increased significantly due 
to growth in the cattle herd and slaughter.3 However, there are still significant 
productivity gaps compared to other countries in the region. For example, in 
Paraguay, the bovine calving rate4 is approximately 46%, lower than in the other 
MERCOSUR countries, which have an average rate of 61% (SIGOR SENACSA, 
2017). The national annual average cattle offtake rate5 is 15%, while in the other 
countries in the region it averages 24%. Likewise, while Paraguay produces 28 kg 
of meat per hectare per year, Brazil produces 49 kg, Argentina 34 kg, and Uruguay 
40 kg.6 With regard to productivity rates for small livestock, in Paraguay the lambing 

                                                
1  The references presented in the document are available at optional electronic link 1. 
2  Paraguay ranks sixth in the world among meat exporters.  
3  SIGOR: in the last decade the cattle herd grew 40% (from 10 million to 14 million heads) and the slaughter 

doubled (from 1.1 million to 2 million head of cattle).  
4  The calving rate refers to the percentage of weaned calves.  
5  The offtake rate is the percentage of cattle slaughtered divided by the population monitored by the official 

veterinary services; it is from 2016. 
6 EA Digital 2014 http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-

sinoineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/. 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1395480667-24
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/


  - 2 - 

rate is 40%; in Uruguay, it is 90%.7 Increasing productivity through technical change 
is complex, above all when taking into account the limited return on certain new 
technologies compared to the extensive production in areas with a relative 
abundance of land. However, expanding the agricultural frontier also has negative 
effects, namely, increasing deforestation.8 The main challenges for improving 
productivity include the availability of improved adapted pastureland; improving the 
genetic quality of the herd to increase efficiency in converting pasture to meat or 
milk; the appropriate management of pastures and livestock; improving reproductive 
efficiency and animal health. Furthermore, productivity is affected by the sector’s 
vulnerability to climate change, and the livestock sector is the country’s principal 
source of greenhouse gas emissions.9  

1.5 The importance of livestock health. International empirical evidence shows that 
animal health has significant positive effects on livestock productivity, access to 
international markets, and consumer health, due to fewer cases of zoonotic 
diseases.10 Globally, there is ever more concern over the sustained increase in 
detections of new and re-emerging infectious agents. This is accompanied by 
significant social and economic impacts on public and animal health in the affected 
regions. The growing risks of transmission of animal diseases and exchange of 
pests associated with trade liberalization, the movement of persons, and climate 
change, has led to greater epidemiological risks (Globalization and Infectious 
Diseases, 2004).  

1.6 The countries in the region, immersed in this risky scenario, are increasingly 
vulnerable, since they have the world’s largest population of animals intended for 
commercial use (Naranjo, 2017). This new global risk scenario led the member 
states of the World Trade Organization to sign an Agreement on the Application of 
Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (WTO, 1995), whereby they commit to 
assessing and managing the risk to ensure sanitary and phytosanitary protection.11 
Accordingly, government veterinary services must design their sanitary strategies 
using a risk management approach that includes the pillars of identifying and 
reducing risks, as well as responding to sanitary emergencies.  

1.7 Pursuant to the Plan of Action 2011-2020 of the Hemispheric Program for the 
Eradication of Foot-and-Mouth Disease,12 the region of South America will move 
toward eradicating foot-and-mouth disease (FMD), which would mean an end to 
vaccination in the near future. This would lead to significant economic benefits by 
making it possible for Paraguay to access markets with more stringent health 
requirements and higher prices, but it would also increase the vulnerability of the 

                                                
7  Efecto de características maternas y del cordero sobre peso vivo al nacimiento, señalada, destete  

supervivencia neonatal [Effect of maternal and lamb characteristics on live weight at birth, marking weight, 
weaning weight, and neonatal survival] (Grasso, 2013).  

8  From 2001 to 2013 pastureland in Latin America was increased by 96.9 million hectares, mostly through 
deforestation in regions like Colombia, central Brazil, western Paraguay, northern Guatemala, and eastern 
Nicaragua (Graesser et al., 2015). 

9  Taking into account emissions from converting forest to cropland (Third National Communication from 
Paraguay to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (SEAM/UNDP/GEF, 2017)).  

10  IDB. Agriculture and Natural Resources Management Sector Framework Document (document 
GN-2709-5).  

11  World Trade Organization. https://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/sps_e/spsagr_e.htm. 
12  Pan American Health Organization/Pan American Foot-and-Mouth Disease Center (PAHO/PANAFTOSA, 

2010). 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/15%20LifeCycle%20Milestones/Draft%20Area/POD%20-%20Enlace%20opcional%20-%20Diagn%C3%B3stico%20Sanidad%20Animal%20SENACSA%20-%20PR-L1148.docx?d=w26f4b22bde8240db8f607175c8775d30
https://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/sps_e/spsagr_e.htm


  - 3 - 

country’s livestock population, which would be left without vaccine protection and 
exposed to potential reintroductions of the disease. This represents a strategic shift 
towards a risk management perspective in the design of health services, entailing 
major structural and organizational-operational adaptations.  

1.8 The animal products market, principally in the pork and poultry production sector, is 
also rapidly evolving towards new requirements related to the comprehensive safety 
of the production chain, including specifications on biosecurity management, 
real-time monitoring of hygienic-sanitary conditions, and farm-to-fork traceability, 
etc. Keeping more than one livestock species is another risk-reduction strategy for 
farmers, as it provides them with a broader range of options for adapting to the 
unpredictability of the weather than if they keep only one species (Reijntjes et al., 
1992). 

1.9 Ties between animal health and climate change. Evidence exists that 
interventions in animal health represent an important strategy for adapting to13 and 
mitigating14 climate change, which impacts animal health through its direct and 
indirect effects on the host-pathogen system environment. In fact, climate variability 
and extreme climate events are important factors in predicting the occurrence of 
diseases in animals.15 The direct effects are more pronounced in vector-transmitted 
diseases and/or diseases affected by weather conditions such as temperature and 
humidity.16 In turn, the indirect effects are derived from changes in biodiversity and 
land use, as well as from animals’ efforts to adapt to the new environment.17 
Managing health risks (which involves preventive veterinary medicine, monitoring, 
detection, and early response) is thus key to addressing the impacts of climate 
change on animal health.18 Therefore, in many countries, measures aimed at and 
support for effective animal health services may be the most important and 
necessary adaptation strategies,19 since efficient veterinary services are vital to 
addressing the impacts of climate change on animal health.20 It is also necessary to 
support animal health services in all countries so as to control and appropriately 
manage transboundary diseases and the food safety problems that may be 
exacerbated by climate change and the intensification thereof associated with 
climate variability.21 

1.10 Health risk management approach. The challenges involved in implementing new 
trade agreements that have stricter health requirements, as well as in addressing 
climate change scenarios, call for a new approach in health services based on 
identifying risks, assessing their potential effects, preventive action programs, and 
timely, effective communication. This entails creating risk management platforms 

                                                
13  Climate Change Impacts and Risks for Animal Health in Asia (S. Forman et al., 2008).  
14  Reducing Greenhouse Gas Emissions through Better Animal Health (A. Stoot et al., 2010).  
15  Climate-smart livestock production. FAO 2017. https://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/sps_e/spsagr_e.htm.  
16  Impact of Climate Change on Livestock Health: A Review (N. Abdela and K. Jilo, 2016).  
17  Climate-smart livestock production. FAO 2017.  
18  Climate Change and Animal Health (J. Lubroth, 2012). 
19  Managing Animal Diseases Risk in Australia: The Impact of Climate Change (P. Van den Bossche and 

J.A.W. Coetzer, 2008). 
20  Climate Change Impacts and Risks for Animal Health in Asia (S. Forman et al., 2008). 
21  Managing Animal Diseases Risk in Australia: The Impact of Climate Change (P.F. Black et al., 2008). 

https://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/sps_e/spsagr_e.htm


  - 4 - 

that use modern information technologies (OIE, 2004 and 2011).22 Therefore, new 
approaches to health certification and management are needed, with public-private 
participation and integration; collaborative monitoring, detection, and intervention 
systems; application of best practices protocols for production, health, and 
biosecurity; and use integrated production systems. A notable example is Mexico’s 
National Service for Agri-Food Health, Safety, and Quality (SENASICA), which has 
successfully adopted the risk management concept. With the launch of its Health 
Intelligence Unit, the incorporation of preventive medicine services, and the creation 
of the Internal Rapid Alert Network for the timely exchange of data and generation 
of strategic information, the country has been able to successfully comply with the 
commitments it acquired upon joining the World Trade Organization, and over the 
past 10 years has doubled the value of its agri-food exports, which has reached 
US$30 billion. According to the OIE, Mexico’s preventive actions have enabled it to 
obtain an animal health status held by only five countries in the world (Australia, 
United States, Portugal, Switzerland, and Mexico).23 

1.11 Livestock health in Paraguay. Paraguay has obtained official status as an 
FMD-free country where vaccination is practiced and as a country free from classical 
swine fever (CSF), pursuant to the World Organisation for Animal Health’s 
Terrestrial Animal Health Code (OIE, 2017). Despite these achievements, the 
country is a prime example of potential vulnerability due to emergency risk 
scenarios. Indeed, Paraguay has the region’s highest proportion of farm animals to 
humans, which reduces its capacity to contain epidemiological outbreaks. And as a 
landlocked country with more than 3,500 km of land borders with three other 
countries, it is highly exposed to the entry of infectious agents (Naranjo, 2017).  

1.12 According to a study24 conducted in 2012, the country suffered losses worth 
US$54 million in beef cattle and US$74 million in dairy cattle due to brucellosis and 
tuberculosis, and lost revenue of US$33 million due to CSF and US$72 million due 
to Newcastle disease in poultry. In 2011, FMD reappeared in Paraguay. The impacts 
of this outbreak caused economic losses of US$170 million in exports alone, 
equivalent to 7.2% of the livestock contribution to GDP (Giménez Rolón, 2012). 
These figures are consistent with reports by the OIE, which attribute more than 20% 
of global livestock production losses to various diseases.  

1.13 Some economically important prevalent diseases25 are still having a significant effect 
on the productivity of the national livestock herd; these diseases have a high 
zoonotic risk and are included among export certification requirements. Addressing 
these diseases is a priority in order to reduce productivity gaps and minimize barriers 
to exportation, as well as because they pose a high risk to public health. Bovine and 
caprine brucellosis are both on the rise in the country. These diseases have high 

                                                
22  OIE, 2004. Handbook on Import Risk Analysis for Animals Products, Vol. 2 quantitative risk analysis. OIE, 

2010. Terrestrial Animal Health Code. Paris, France. 
23  National Service for Agri-Food Health, Safety, and Quality of Mexico. https://www.gob.mx/senasica/ 

articulos/unidad-de-inteligencia-sanitaria-101745?idiom=es. 
24  Análisis del Gasto Publico en Servicios de Sanidad Agropecuaria [Analysis of Public Expenditure on 

Agricultural Health Services] (Giménez Rolón, 2012).  
25  The prevalence of a disease is the total number of individuals who have the disease or a characteristic at 

a given time or during a given period of time, divided by the population at that moment in time or halfway 
through the period. It quantifies the proportion of individuals in a population who have a disease at a given 
time. 

https://www.gob.mx/senasica/%20articulos/unidad-de-inteligencia-sanitaria-101745?idiom=es
https://www.gob.mx/senasica/%20articulos/unidad-de-inteligencia-sanitaria-101745?idiom=es


  - 5 - 

prevalence rates and cause significant losses26 to affected producers (low 
reproduction rates due to abortions, subfertility, and infertility); they also are 
hazardous to human health, principally for family farmers (SENACSA, 2017). 
Although bovine tuberculosis has been sporadically detected in some breeding 
herds, up-to-date information that would make it possible to estimate its prevalence 
and incidence rates is not available. 

1.14 Health services in Paraguay. SENACSA27 is the national body responsible for 
making, regulating, coordinating, implementing, and overseeing the country’s 
policies on and management of animal health and quality. The Ministry of Agriculture 
and Livestock28 is responsible for furthering livestock policies in coordination with 
SENACSA. As the government veterinary service, SENACSA is committed to 
maintaining the health statuses achieved in Paraguay,29 as well as to eliminating 
prevalent diseases, including zoonotic diseases, making greater efforts to process 
samples for surveillance and control throughout the country, including on the 
borders.  

1.15 In 2013, the OIE evaluated SENACSA’s performance (OIE-PVS,30 2014), assessing 
the strengths and weaknesses of the government veterinary service. Among its 
strengths, the service has material resources, including infrastructure, equipment, 
and vehicles. It has been successfully administering the FMD control program for 
years, which has given it experience in managing health programs. SENACSA’s 
veterinary service is highly specialized in the fight against FMD and has 
demonstrated the ability to fulfill its professional obligations of surveillance, control, 
and certification for the safe export of beef to the most selective markets in the world. 
SENACSA has also demonstrated its high level of commitment to the OIE process 
of improving veterinary services. 

1.16 The following are among the weaknesses identified for SENACSA’s transition to a 
risk management approach: (i) shortage of highly trained human resources; (ii) lack 
of infrastructure and modern equipment; (iii) limited capacity for identifying health 
risks, as well as for the control and surveillance of prevalent and emerging diseases; 
and (iv) weaknesses with regard to simplifying procedures and processes that would 

                                                
26  Quantifications of losses due to brucellosis calculated in Brazil in 2013 show an average loss of 

US$120 and US$210 for each female infected with brucellosis in the meat and milk production systems, 
respectively (Bovine Brucellosis Program 2017, IICA-SENACSA). 

27  Law 2426/2004. 
28  SENACSA and the Ministry of Agriculture (Law 81/92) are two independent institutions with 

complementary functions. They coordinate to optimize their respective resources, plans, and programs. 
Specifically, the Ministry of Agriculture, through its Office of the Deputy Minister of Livestock Farming 
(Resolution 1783/11), enforces government policy on the livestock sector and proposes, evaluates, and 
coordinates the enforcement of regulations on the health and quality of products and inputs for national 
and international sales, as well as other functions.  

29  Such as the statuses achieved with regard to FMD, rinderpest, bovine spongiform encephalopathy, peste 
des petits ruminants (also known as sheep and goat plague), among other diseases.  

30  The PVS is the OIE Tool for the Evaluation of Performance of Veterinary Services. The PVS gap analysis 
allows the veterinary services to define the objectives to be reached in the next five years, in compliance 
with OIE quality standards and based on national priorities and limitations. The OIE PVS Tool determines 
the effectiveness of the veterinary services, identifies gaps and weaknesses, and establishes 
recommendations for 40 competencies grouped into four components: (i) human, technical, and financial 
resources; (ii) technical authority and capability; (iii) interaction with interested parties; and (iv) access to 
markets. Each competency is evaluated from 1 to 5, with the latter being the most advanced. The resulting 
values can be expressed as a percentage. In November 2017 the OIE performed a new PVS of SENACSA, 
which will be used as a baseline once published. 



  - 6 - 

make it possible to lower transaction costs.31 Paraguay achieved an average 
performance value of 64% in the PVS evaluation, which is worse than other 
countries in the region like Uruguay (83%), Chile (82%), and Colombia (70%).  

1.17 The PVS also identified the lack of an overall management system as one of the 
government veterinary services’ greatest weaknesses. With the current data 
management system, it is not possible to synthesize useful information for adequate 
analysis, control, and/or planning. SENACSA does have SIGOR32 (the regional 
office computerized management system) in place; this system can record and 
analyze data on establishments and producers, livestock inventories, cattle 
movements, progress on anti-FMD vaccine campaigns, etc. However, there are no 
computerized systems in place for the laboratories, quarantines, food producer 
inspections, and waste control, among other issues. Although SENACSA’s Animal 
Health Bureau uses an animal health system (SISA)33 that was designed to inform, 
store, and maintain a database about animal health in the country through 
SENACSA’s zonal units, it is not integrated into SIGOR. SIGOR and SISA are both 
key tools for the risk management model. 

1.18 In addition, according to the user survey and demand study (Ferrari, 2017), 
incorporating new information technologies into SENACSA’s services is a priority, in 
order to streamline procedures, lower transaction costs, and facilitate the expansion 
of services to users.34 The following key processes that can be improved were 
identified as a result of the study: (i) reduction of in-person procedures; (ii) 24/7 
availability of the online system; (iii) incorporation of functionalities for small livestock 
producers; (iv) strengthening of services associated with the opening and 
development of markets for new export chains; and (v) simplification of import and 
export procedures.  

1.19 Lastly, one of the main limitations observed in the PVS stems from the structure of 
SENACSA’s annual budget. Funds come from several sources: the National 
Treasury contribution (22%), internal resources from the provision of services (21%), 
and taxes on the movement of animals and meat exports (57%). This reliance on 
contributions from the livestock sector for services provided is a disadvantage of the 
government veterinary services’ specialization in beef production, as it can create a 
dependence on beef exports, meaning that if they are restricted for health reasons, 
funding could be affected. A recent analysis of the effectiveness of various health 
systems in Latin America (OVE, 2015) concluded that it was important to allocate 
resources to generating public goods from the services. This analysis highlighted 
the achievements of health campaigns in terms of reducing the effects of diseases, 
as well as the social return on those initiatives.  

                                                
31  In the 2013 PVS, SENACSA achieved scores of 66% and 53% in the categories of (i) human, technical, 

and financial resources; and (ii) technical authority and capacity, respectively.  
32  SIGOR is a web-based system developed to manage the services provided by SENACSA throughout the 

country. SIGOR manages health information, the control of poultry and cattle movement, revenue under 
Law 808/96, and proceedings in legal cases. The system is used in facilities including zonal units, livestock 
fairs, control posts, and meat packing plants. SIGOR has 12 modules in place and 3 online services offered 
through the institution’s portal. 

33  SISA has four modules in place (property georeferencing, immediate notification of diseases, attention to 
suspected cases, and monthly epidemiological records). 

34  This study sought to identify evidence of benchmarking associated with foreign trade practices involving 
similar procedures, but did not find any. SENACSA does not have any studies on procedure costs. 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/15%20LifeCycle%20Milestones/Draft%20Area/POD%20-%20Enlace%20opcional%20-%20Estudio%20de%20Demanda%20SENACSA%20-%20PR-L1148.pdf


  - 7 - 

1.20 The same assessment made recommendations for putting together joint strategies 
for the public and private sectors, promoting the recovery of costs for institutional 
sustainability, preventive health work, the economic evaluation of outcomes, and the 
development of new health capacities. In Paraguay, public-private collaborative 
efforts in animal health have been successful.35 SENACSA’s involvement with the 
cattle sector is effective and encouraged, due to the importance of beef exports to 
the country. However, coordination with other productive sectors, such as the dairy, 
pig, small ruminant, and poultry sectors, is still incipient (OIE-PVS, 2013). 
Accordingly, the Government of Paraguay is interested in emulating the public-
private sector coordination achieved in the cattle subsector in other livestock 
subsectors (e.g., pig, sheep, goat, and poultry). 

1.21 Bank experience. Between 2002 and 2014, the Bank approved 17 investment 
loans to strengthen agricultural health and food safety systems in the region, for 
US$359 million, approximately 10% of the total sector portfolio (OVE, 2015).36 Based 
on those operations, as well as on some recently approved ones (Peru 4457/OC-PE, 
Uruguay 3800/OC-UR, Bolivia 3797/BL-BO, Guyana 3798/BL-GY, and Mexico 
3864/OC-ME), and taking into account the conclusions and recommendations that 
issue from the OVE document Comparative Project Evaluation of Agriculture Health 
and Food Safety 2002-2014, Table 1 below shows the main lessons learned and 
how they have been incorporated into the design of the proposed operation. 

 
Table 1. Incorporation of recommendations into program design 

Recommendations  Incorporation into program design 

Participation of the private 
sector, through joint work and 
the incorporation of new 
information and 
communications technologies.  

The program makes it a priority to make more services 
available online, so as to streamline and improve the 
efficiency of service delivery. Animal health control programs 
will be executed in coordination with producers.  

Make the laboratories 
sustainable. 

The laboratories currently operated by SENACSA are self-
financed, but they do not have the capacity required to 
execute the public disease control programs. The program 
will finance the improvement of the laboratories’ capacities. 
The laboratories will continue to be self-financed. 

Evaluation and outcomes, with 
regard to the direct 

beneficiaries.  

The program includes a monitoring and evaluation program, 
and an impact assessment plan, which will analyze the 

impacts of the program actions on its direct beneficiaries. 

 

1.22 Country strategy with the sector. The project is first and foremost aligned with the 
guidelines and objectives of the National Development Plan 2030, the Agriculture 
Strategic Framework 2014-2018, and SENACSA’s Institutional Strategic Plan 
2013-2018. The project is linked to the following strategic pillars of the National 
Development Plan 2030: (i) inclusive economic growth and (ii) Paraguay’s 
international integration, as well as with the crosscutting pillar of efficient and 
transparent public management. The program will also contribute to the Agriculture 
Strategic Framework strategic pillar of “livestock and farm development,” which 
prioritizes establishing disease monitoring and control programs, maintaining and 

                                                
35  Law 808/96 declared the national FMD eradication program to be mandatory and created the Interagency 

Commission, forming a public-private partnership (PPP) made up of representatives of SENACSA and the 
Rural Association of Paraguay. 

36  Of the 17 loans approved for agricultural health between 2002 and 2014, none involved Paraguay. 



  - 8 - 

improving the health status of livestock production, and upgrading and modernizing 
the laboratory system. It is also aligned with the national contribution, which identifies 
livestock farming as a priority sector for climate adaptation and highlights the 
country’s commitment to reducing its vulnerability to climate change.37 

1.23 IDB country strategy. The operation is aligned with the IDB Country Strategy with 
Paraguay (2014-2018) (document GN-2769), since it contributes to the strategic 
objective of increasing “the supply of agricultural public goods and services.” 

1.24 Strategic alignment. The program is aligned with the Update to the Institutional 
Strategy 2010-2020 (document AB-3008) and with the challenge of productivity and 
innovation, by improving the provision of essential public goods, like health services 
for rural development and economic integration. The program is also aligned with 
the crosscutting areas of: (i) strengthening institutional capacity and the rule of law, 
by strengthening an institution that is strategic for rural development; and (ii) climate 
change and environmental sustainability, by providing mechanisms that contribute 
to climate change adaptation. It also contributes to the Corporate Results 
Framework 2016-2019 (document GN-2727-6), through the indicator: “government 
agencies benefitted by projects that strengthen technological and managerial tools 
to improve public service delivery.” In addition, the operation is included in the 2018 
Operational Program Report (document GN-2915). The program is also consistent 
with the first dimension of success of the Agriculture and Natural Resources 
Management Sector Framework Document (document GN-2709-5), which calls for 
achieving high levels of agricultural productivity in the region and proposes that 
high-quality health services and public goods be provided; the Food Security Sector 
Framework Document (document GN-2825-3) with regard to the dimension of 
access to safe and nutritious foods; and the Climate Change Sector Framework 
Document (document GN-2835-3), in that it promotes higher agricultural productivity 
through the adoption of climate change adaptation practices. 

1.25 Approximately 41% of operation resources will be invested in climate change 
mitigation and adaptation activities, in accordance with the Multilateral Development 
Banks’ joint methodology for estimating climate finance.38 These resources 
contribute to the IDB Group’s target of increasing financing of climate-change-
related projects to 30% of combined total approvals by the end of 2020. 

B. Objectives, components, and cost  

1.26 Objective. The program’s general objective is to help improve the productivity of the 
livestock sector. The specific objectives are to: (i) improve the effectiveness of 
animal health services with a risk management approach; and (ii) expand the 
coverage of veterinary services, including for smaller species. 

1.27 To those ends, investments are planned in two components, described below: 

1.28 Component I. Health risk management (US$10.8 million). This component will 
strengthen SENACSA’s capacities for identifying, assessing, and managing risk, by 
expanding the functions of its information systems to generate epidemiological 
information for decision-making. With a properly equipped monitoring network, 
inspection processes at entry points, and posts for monitoring farm animal 
movements, protocols will be established for responding to health events, and 

                                                
37  National Contributions of the Republic of Paraguay (Republic of Paraguay, 2015). 
38  See optional electronic link 5 for detailed information.  

https://publications.iadb.org/handle/11319/7807
https://publications.iadb.org/handle/11319/7807
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1395480667-17


  - 9 - 

strategies will be drawn up for mitigating their potential effects. The institutional 
strengthening will also include the training of human resources and the provision of 
specific inputs and equipment. A health intelligence network will be implemented 
while improving physical infrastructure at certain identified priority points; this will 
involve equipping and modernizing the SENACSA laboratories. A network of public 
and private laboratories will also be set up and provided with a comprehensive 
management system to expand and speed up diagnostic and control capacities, as 
required by the risk management approach. In addition, given the potential of 
individual identification and traceability as a tool for health risk management, the 
component will finance the design of software and the procurement of the equipment 
necessary for animal identification and individual traceability. Moreover, in keeping 
with the risk management approach, the component will support the Reproductive 
Diseases Program in eradicating brucellosis, by helping to improve SENACSA’s 
capacities for managing, preventing, and responding to that type of health event. In 
short, this component will finance: (i) a health intelligence network (for identification 
and prevention, with an early alert system for preventive communication and an 
emergency response system); (ii) the modernization and expansion of physical 
infrastructure (in the various regions, at control posts, and on the border) and 
equipment to support the tasks of diagnosis, surveillance, and control; (iii) the 
identification of individual animals for traceability; (iv) support for the national 
brucellosis program; and (v) a program to modernize the organization. 

1.29 Component II. Expansion of services (US$3.1 million). This component will 
improve and expand service delivery to users by simplifying and digitizing 
procedures,39 emphasizing the most important ones, to decrease transaction costs. 
The component will also develop new computer functionalities, including expanding 
and optimizing SIGOR, to facilitate decision-making and the provision of health 
services. This will include not only expanding the systems’ capacities and improving 
telecommunications, but also securing computer services to ensure availability 
remotely and in zonal offices. The program will include training for human resources 
on generating services for users and risk management capacities. The expansion of 
SENACSA’s services is expected to involve the preparation and implementation of 
health plans that will include the identification, registry, health management, 
vaccination, surveillance, and certification of smaller species (sheep, goat, pigs, 
poultry). To facilitate the process of executing the health plans and providing 
services to small and medium-sized producers, the component will finance the 
formation and operation of a public-private partnership40 that will include 
representatives of SENACSA and of small livestock producer associations. The 
component includes support activities to obtain the effective participation of 
producers, such as: (i) training; (ii) certification of private technicians; and (iii) the 

                                                
39  This is aligned with the “infrastructure and connectivity” pillar of the digital agenda that the Bank is 

promoting in Paraguay; among other improvements, the ability to use an electronic signature for priority 
procedures will be incorporated.  

40  The PPP will be formed by representatives of SENACSA and of the small livestock production sector 
(Rural Association of Paraguay, associations of sheep, goat, pig, and poultry farmers). It will have one 
standing member and one alternate from each institution, who will be unpaid and will each have a single 
vote; it will be led by SENACSA, which will be responsible for auditing and certifying all national and 
international processes. It will have one coordinator, and the Commission will decide how the allocated 
resources are to be handled. Among its functions, the PPP will: (i) actively participate in health plans and 
campaigns; (ii) ensure the use of best practices with regard to animal wellbeing and the defense of the 
environment; (iii) implement compartmentalization for health campaigns; and (iv) update and train the 
various actors. 



  - 10 - 

preparation of materials for dissemination. To summarize, this component will 
finance: (i) the incorporation of new functionalities into the computer system, new 
online services, and the implementation of electronic signatures to improve 
efficiency in the delivery of services to users; and (ii) the preparation and 
implementation of health plans (identification, registration, health management, 
vaccination, surveillance, and certification) for small species (sheep, goat, pigs, 
poultry); a public-private partnership will be formed to that end, and will facilitate 
implementation of the health plans as well as the development and strengthening of 
small livestock chains. 

1.30 Program administration (US$1.1 million). Program administration resources will 
be used to fund the formation and operation of the Program Execution Unit (PEU), 
as well as for contingencies and reporting. 

1.31 Activities from both components, in particular those focused on identifying, 
monitoring, assessing, and managing health risks, and the training sessions for 
technicians and producers, contribute to climate actions (optional electronic link 5). 

C. Key results indicators  

1.32 The program has a Results Matrix agreed upon with the borrower (Annex II) that 
contains the program impact, outcome, and output indicators, and the respective 
baselines and targets. In line with the program’s objective, the principal impacts will 
be: (i) improved cattle offtake rate (proxy for improved productivity); and 
(ii) increased small species exports. The expected outcomes are: (i) improved 
effectiveness of the animal health services (SENACSA’s score on specific aspects 
rated in the PVS, including risk management); (ii) reduced prevalence of brucellosis; 
and (iii) health coverage expanded to new categories, emphasizing small livestock.  

1.33 The incorporation of the risk management approach and the implementation of the 
health surveillance unit represent important innovations that will improve the 
country’s health capacity. In this context, SENACSA will enter into partnership 
agreements with institutions that are leaders on this issue, such as Mexico’s 
SENASICA.  

1.34 Economic viability. An ex ante economic analysis (optional electronic link 2) of the 
program has confirmed its expected viability. Based on a comparison of the costs 
and benefits expected over a 20-year period, the analysis estimates that the 
program will have a net present value (NPV) of US$58.4 million and an internal rate 
of return (IRR) of 34.2%. 

1.35 These estimates take into account the potential positive effects of the program in 
terms of fewer losses from possible disease outbreaks, improved access to markets, 
improved productivity, and SENACSA’s more efficient service delivery. More 
specifically, the analysis includes the expected program benefits with regard to the 
following: (i) beef productivity, production, and exports, as a result of improved 
control of FMD, bovine brucellosis, and implementation of a traceability system; 
(ii) pork production and exports, as a result of improved control and prevention of a 
potential CSF outbreak; (iii) chicken productivity, production, and exports, as a result 
of improved control of avian influenza and Newcastle disease, and the expansion of 
SENACSA services to small species; and (iv) SENACSA’s administrative 
management of services. It should be noted that other important benefits (like the 
improvements in public health derived from the improved control of zoonotic 
livestock diseases) were not considered in the analysis due to the difficulty of 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1395480667-17
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1395480667-18


  - 11 - 

accounting for them. Therefore, the program’s NPV and IRR may be 
underestimated. 

1.36 In terms of economic costs, the analysis took into account the program investment 
as well as the associated incremental costs, namely: (i) incremental costs incurred 
by SENACSA (on staff, transportation, control and monitoring, laboratories, 
traceability, and operation of the SISA); and (ii) additional sanitation costs incurred 
by the producers. 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS 

A. Financing instruments 

2.1 The program is designed as a specific investment loan under the Flexible Financing 
Facility (document FN-655-1). It has a total cost of US$15 million, fully financed by 
the Bank from Ordinary Capital resources.  

 
Table 2. Program cost and financing (US$ thousands) 

Description IDB % 

Component I. Health risk management  10,860 73 

Component II. Expansion of services 3,074 20 

Administration (audit, evaluation, and contingencies) 1,066 7 

TOTAL 15,000 100 

 

2.2 The program’s disbursement period will be five years starting from the loan 
contract’s effective date. Program funds will mostly be disbursed as advances of 
funds, but the direct payment and reimbursement of expenditures modalities may 
also be used.  

 
Table 3. Disbursement schedule (in US$) 

 Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Total 

Total 1,191,162 6,898,277 4,901,727 1,054,167 954,667 15,000,000 

% 8 46 33 7 6 100 

 

B. Environmental and social risks 

2.3 The program has been classified as a Category “B” operation according to the 
Bank’s Environment and Safeguards Compliance Policy (sector policy OP-703); 
Disaster Risk Management Policy (sector policy OP-704); Access to Information 
Policy (operational policy OP-102); Gender Equality in Development (sector policy 
OP-761); Indigenous Peoples Policy (sector policy OP-765); and Involuntary 
Resettlement Policy (sector policy OP-710). 

2.4 The Environmental and Social Analysis (optional electronic link 8) performed for the 
program indicates that the construction works for the service facilities (regional, 
zonal, and at border points) may have low to moderate localized, short-term 
environmental and social impacts, such as: elimination of the plant cover; increased 
noise levels; emission of gases, particulate matter, and dust; generation of waste; 
and increased accident rates. An environmental and social management plan 
(ESMP) was designed to prevent and mitigate these impacts. None of the projects 
analyzed will entail resettlement, expropriation of lands, or significant harm to 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1327205104-7


  - 12 - 

indigenous communities or territories. The ESMP also includes a plan for improving 
the environmental management of SENACSA’s central laboratory, to be 
implemented prior to the equipment procurement bidding process. Although natural 
threats in the project areas include drought, forest fires, and heat waves, the 
associated risk is considered to be low. Nonetheless, the ESMP includes measures 
to prevent exacerbation of the risk from heat waves (limiting construction work hours, 
ensuring systems are in place for providing water at the work sites) and fires 
(ensuring fire prevention systems are in place at the construction areas and in the 
design of projects). 

2.5 Meaningful consultations were held for the projects in Campo Aceval, Villa Hayes, 
Filadelfia, Puerto Casado, Puerto Falcón, and Ciudad del Este. Queries included 
requests for materials to be procured and labor contracted locally, and for horse 
tie-up sites to be planned. The consultations report was published on the Bank’s 
website (optional electronic link 9). The program will strengthen SENACSA by 
financing the design and implementation of a socioenvironmental management 
system. To ensure compliance with the program’s socioenvironmental 
commitments, the coordinating unit will include a socioenvironmental specialist.  

C. Fiduciary risks  

2.6 The following aspects of SENACSA’s institutional capacity were evaluated during 
preparation of the operation: capacity for programming and organizing; capacity for 
executing the programmed and organized activities, including systems for managing 
staff, goods, services, and finances; and control capacity. According to the 
evaluation, in general the executing agency has technical competencies in fiduciary 
matters, and the consolidated result of the evaluated capacities reveals that it has a 
satisfactory degree of development. However, its lack of prior experience in 
executing projects with multilateral financing, principally in the area of procurement, 
is considered a weakness. Accordingly, the project has been assigned a medium 
level of risk. As an action to mitigate the risk of delays in project procurement 
processes, the area responsible for procurement requires strengthening with 
competent staff knowledgeable about the policies of multilateral organizations, as 
well as through specific workshops and courses on IDB procurement policies. 

D. Other project risks  

2.7 The following principal risks were identified, with their principal mitigation measures: 
(i) as high risk: delay in processing of the loan law; and (ii) as medium risk: (a) a lack 
of candidates interested in holding key positions in the PEU; (b) limited internet 
connectivity and access speed; (c) traceability software not developed due to the 
lack of a legal framework; and (d) execution times or priority affected by a change of 
government. The respective mitigation activities were defined and agreed upon, and 
are especially supported by SENACSA and the Rural Association of Paraguay, with 
leading public and private sector agents, to reinforce the policy-level work in the 
critical institutions identified. 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN 

A. Summary of implementation arrangements  

3.1 Borrower and executing agency. SENACSA will be the borrower and the 
executing agency. The guarantee by the Republic of Paraguay will be limited to 
SENACSA’s financial obligations in the context of the loan (including repayment of 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1327205104-8


  - 13 - 

principal, payment of interest, and other lending charges) and will not cover 
performance obligations or local counterpart contributions.41 Accordingly, the Board 
of Executive Directors is being asked to approve a partial waiver of the Bank’s policy 
on Guarantees required from the borrower (document GP-104-2). The executing 
agency will be SENACSA, acting through the Project Management Unit (PMU) with 
the support of the Bureau of Administration and Finance (DIGEAF).  

3.2 For program management, the executing agency will form a Program Execution Unit 
(PEU), which will report to the program management unit (PMU) and will be directly 
responsible for and have jurisdiction over the program’s technical and operational 
issues. For execution and monitoring, the PEU will work in coordination with the 
DIGEAF for the fiduciary processes involved in program management.42 The PMU 
will play the strategic role of the program’s technical and operational management, 
and will also be responsible for coordinating relations with other institutions and 
SENACSA units involved in program execution. The program’s fiduciary procedures 
will be carried out through SENACSA’s DIGEAF, which will determine how to 
coordinate with the PEU and the functions for which the PEU is responsible.  

3.3 The key program execution positions established for the PEU are: (i) general 
coordinator; (ii) component I coordinator; (iii) component II coordinator; (iv) financial 
and administrative specialist; (v) procurement specialist; (vi) planning and 
monitoring specialist; and (vii) socioenvironmental specialist. 

3.4 The following will be special contractual conditions precedent to the first loan 
disbursement: (i) the PEU will have been formed according to the terms 
agreed upon with the Bank; and (ii) the borrower will have presented, to the 
Bank’s satisfaction, evidence that the program Operating Regulations have 
entered into force.43 These conditions will be fulfilled before the start of program 
execution. The program Operating Regulations define the basic rules applicable 
during loan execution (for example, field work, regional coordination and oversight, 
data processing and analysis, in addition to the fiduciary considerations), as well as 
the PEU members’ levels of responsibility.  

3.5 Procurement of works, goods, consulting and nonconsulting services. 
Procurement financed in whole or in party with Bank resources will be conducted in 
line with the Policies for the Procurement of Works and Goods Financed by the 
Inter-American Development Bank (document GN-2349-9) and the Policies for the 
Selection and Contracting of Consultants Financed by the Inter-American 
Development Bank (document GN-2350-9). Pursuant to document GN-2538-11 of 
October 2013, the use of the electronic reverse auction and competitive bidding 
subsystems of Paraguay’s public sector procurement system (SCSP) will apply to 
the operation in the terms specified in the Fiduciary Agreements and Requirements 
(Annex III). The Procurement Plan contains a breakdown of the procurement 

                                                
41  SENACSA is an autonomous, self-governing legal entity of the Republic of Paraguay subject to public law, 

which is able to finance its budget with resources from national and/or international loans. SENACSA has 
sufficient capacity to execute the obligations assumed with respect to the Bank. Therefore, the waiver will 
not affect the operation’s risk profile. 

42  This arrangement will be maintained while SENACSA requests that the Finance Ministry change the 
PMU’s status to Financial Administration Subunit and Procurement Operations Subunit, so it will be able 
to manage the program independently from the DIGEAF. 

43  For the Operating Regulations to enter into force, they must be approved by resolution of SENACSA’s 
highest authority. 



  - 14 - 

processes to be implemented during execution, as well as the procedures the Bank 
will apply to review them. 

3.6 The Fiduciary Agreements and Requirements (Annex III) establish the framework 
for the financial management, planning, supervision, and execution of procurement 
involved in program execution. No specific situations that require special 
arrangements or treatments are foreseen with regard to procurement. 

3.7 Disbursements. Disbursements will be made as established in the financial 
management guidelines set forth in document OP-273-6. Preferably, advances will 
be made on a semiannual basis, once at least 80% of the advanced amount has 
been justified with the required presentation of the accountability forms and the 
financial planning spreadsheet. 

3.8 Audits. During execution, the PEU will present, on an annual basis, the audited 
financial statements for the program, in the terms required by the Bank. An 
independent audit firm acceptable to the Bank will be selected for the program. The 
audited financial statements will be presented within 120 days following the close of 
the fiscal year, with the closing statements being presented within the 120 days 
following the date set for the last disbursement.  

B. Summary of arrangements for monitoring results  

3.9 The project has a detailed monitoring and evaluation plan that has been agreed 
upon with SENACSA, which, through the PEU, will be responsible for generating the 
information necessary to monitor the indicators contained in the Results Matrix, and 
for sharing it with the Bank. 

3.10 Monitoring. During project execution, the PEU will prepare semiannual monitoring 
reports and send them to the Bank no later than 60 days following the end of each 
six-month period. These reports will provide a detailed account of the physical and 
financial execution of the project, as well as of the progress made on all Results 
Matrix indicators. The reports will also provide a detailed account of the problems 
encountered during project execution and the corrective measures taken, and will 
explain any deviation from the project management instruments (multiyear 
execution plan, annual work plan, procurement plan). No later than the final quarter 
of each year of project execution, the PEU will present, to the Bank’s satisfaction, 
the AWP for the following year and the maintenance plan for the equipment 
purchased with loan proceeds, as well as compliance with the program’s 
environmental and social requirements established in the ESMP. Bank staff will 
make periodic inspection visits during which they will meet with PEU staff to discuss 
the progress made on the activities set forth in the AWP, the degree of compliance 
with the indicators established in the Results Matrix, the AWP for the following year, 
and the Procurement Plan for the next 12 months. 

3.11 Pursuant to the Monitoring and Evaluation Plan, the project will include a midterm 
and final evaluation. The midterm evaluation will be performed within 90 days 
following the date on which 50% of the loan proceeds are committed, or when the 
execution period is half over, whichever occurs first. The purpose of this evaluation 
will be to review the progress of all activities, analyze the causes of any potential 
deviations from the planned progress, and propose corrective measures. The final 
evaluation will be conducted within 90 days following the date on which 95% of loan 
proceeds have been disbursed. These reports will include: (i) financial execution by 
subcomponent and financing source; (ii) progress made with regard to the Results 



  - 15 - 

Matrix outputs, outcomes, and impacts; (iii) compliance with the ESMP; 
(iv) summary of the financial statements, procurement, disbursements, and internal 
control; (v) review of implementation; and (vi) lessons learned. The midterm and 
final evaluations will both be performed by non-PEU external consultants. 

3.12 Impact evaluation. As set forth in the Monitoring and Evaluation Plan (required 
electronic link 3), the program as a whole will be evaluated reflectively based on the 
indicators included in the Results Matrix. Given that the program is an intervention 
to strengthen a national institution, it is not feasible to construct a counterfactual 
analysis that would make it possible to compare the final value of the impact and 
outcome indicators with what would have occurred without the program being in 
place. 

3.13 Nevertheless, the impact of the reproductive diseases program, financed in 
Component I, will be evaluated, since the its characteristics make this possible. This 
program consists in the application of a treatment procedure to eliminate brucellosis 
in infected beef-production establishments. As a pilot program, it will only treat 
300 establishments, to be identified through serological tests of the cows brought to 
cattle fairs.  

3.14 The impact evaluation will follow an experimental methodology, using a treatment 
group of 300 establishments and a control group of the same size. Both groups will 
be selected randomly from among the infected establishments (of which there are 
around 3,000). Once selected, the establishments in both groups will be notified that 
they are infected. The control group establishments will be quarantined and will be 
given a document with recommendations for carrying out the treatment at the 
property. The treatment group establishments will be quarantined and the same 
treatment procedure (which was merely recommended to the control group 
establishments) will be performed there at no cost. 

3.15 The treatment process will last five years and will fundamentally consist in 
vaccinating the entire herd and in appropriately managing the infected animals, by 
separating them out. As part of the treatment process, and to monitor brucellosis 
prevalence and incidence rates, at each establishment a representative sample of 
animals will be taken. These animals will be identified with tags and will be tested 
throughout the treatment process. The information obtained from the samples at 
each establishment, together with the administrative information from the 
reproductive diseases program and a series of surveys performed at the beginning, 
middle, and end of the program, will be used to perform a difference in differences 
analysis of the treatment and control groups, before and after the reproductive 
diseases program has been carried out. 

3.16 The evaluation is important because it will make it possible to rigorously measure 
the effectiveness of the treatment program implemented by SENACSA versus the 
effectiveness of merely providing the producers with information on how to perform 
the procedure. There appears to be some evidence (from Chile and Uruguay) that 
the intervention of health authorities in implementing this type of treatment process 
is highly effective, leading to a notable reduction of the disease’s incidence rate in 
the short term. However, to date there is no rigorous empirical evidence showing 
that it does so, above all compared to the possibility of voluntary implementation for 
which the producers themselves are responsible. 

 




























































PUBLIC 
SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE 

DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK  
 

 

 

 

BOLIVIA 

 

 

 

RURAL LAND REGULARIZATION AND TITLING PROGRAM 

(BO-L1113) 

LOAN PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

PROJECT SUMMARY 

BOLIVIA 
RURAL LAND REGULARIZATION AND TITLING PROGRAM 

(BO-L1113) 
 

Financial Terms and Conditions 

Borrower: Plurinational State of Bolivia  OC FSO 

Amortization period: 30 years 40 years 
Executing Agency: National Agrarian Reform Institute (INRA) 

Disbursement period: 5 years 5 years 

Source Amount (US$) % Grace period: 6 years 40 years 

IDB (OC): 51,000,000 51 
Inspection and supervision 
fee: 

(a) 
N/A 

IDB (FSO): 9,000,000 9 Interest rate: SCF fixed
(b) 

0.25% 

Local cofinancing: 40,000,000 40 
Credit fee: 

(a) 
N/A 

Approval currency: US$ US$ 

Total: 100,000,000 100 

Project at a Glance 

Program objective/description: To increase legal certainty over rural property. 

Special contractual conditions precedent to the first disbursement of the loan: (i) the borrower, through the Ministry of 

Economy and Public Finance, the Ministry of Development Planning, and the National Agrarian Reform Institute (INRA) will sign a 
subsidiary agreement defining the following matters, among others: (a) the method to be used to transfer the loan proceeds to INRA; 
and (b) INRA’s commitment to conduct program activities in accordance with the terms of the loan contract (paragraph 3.2); 
(ii) appointment of the Director of INRA’s Planning Bureau (DGP) as the program’s general coordinator and of the program 
component coordinators, in accordance with the terms previously agreed upon with the Bank; and the contracting of the following 
specialists: financial, procurement, planning, environmental management, and social management, through a competitive process, in 
accordance with terms previously agreed upon with the Bank (paragraph 3.4); and (iii) the entry into force of the program’s Operating 
Regulations, under terms previously agreed upon with the Bank (paragraph 3.7). 

Special contractual conditions by component: Evidence of the signing and entry into force of the following interagency 

cooperation agreements: (i) between INRA and the Real Property Rights Registry prior to the disbursement to finance activities 
related to public registries under Component 2 (paragraph 3.5); (ii) between INRA and the Forest and Land Social Control and 
Oversight Authority, the Madre Tierra [Mother Earth] Plurinational Authority, and the Office of the Deputy Minister for Land, prior to 
disbursement to finance activities related to the program’s Environmental and Social Management Plan in Component 2 (paragraph 
3.5); and (iii) between INRA and the National Statistics Institute, prior to disbursement to finance activities related to the baseline of 
the program’s monitoring and evaluation plan (paragraph 3.5). 

Exceptions to Bank policies: None 

Strategic Alignment 

Challenges
(b)

: SI 
 

PI 
 

EI 
 

Cross-cutting issues
(c)

: GD 
 

CC 
 

IC 
 

(a)
 The credit fee and the inspection and supervision fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors as part of its review of the 

Bank’s lending charges, in accordance with relevant policies. 
(b)

 The borrower will pay interest on the outstanding balances of the Ordinary Capital portion of the loan at a LIBOR-based rate. Once the outstanding 
balance reaches 25% of the net amount approved or US$3 million, whichever is greater, the rate will be set for this balance. 

(c)
 SI (Social Inclusion and Equality); PI (Productivity and Innovation); and EI (Economic Integration). 

(d)
 GD (Gender Equality and Diversity); CC (Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability); and IC (Institutional Capacity and the Rule of Law). 

 
 

 



 

I. PROJECT DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING 

A. Background, problems addressed, and rationale 

1.1 Property rights over land and agricultural competitiveness. The agriculture 
sector is one of the most important sectors of the Bolivian economy. Between 2002 
and 2014, average annual growth in the sector was 4.16%, accounting for close to 
13.4% of gross domestic product. It employs 30% of the total labor force nationally 
and is even more significant in rural areas where it employs 62% of the labor force. 
The agriculture sector also makes a significant contribution to Bolivian exports; 
between 1999 and 2014, exports grew at an average annual rate of 13%, leaping 
from US$247 million to US$1.29 billion. Over this period, the agriculture sector 
accounted for between 14% and 18% of the total value of the country’s exports.1 
Considering that the economy of rural households is closely tied to agricultural 
activities, growth in the sector contributed to a 21 percentage point reduction in 
rural poverty levels, with poverty falling from 62% to 39% (Castellani and Zenteno, 
2015).  

1.2 Despite the importance of the agriculture sector, a detailed examination shows low 
productivity levels. According to the United Nations’ Food and Agricultural 
Organization (FAO), agricultural yield from grain production is 57% of the average 
for South America and 39% in the case of starchy root crops. In addition, a Bank 
analysis shows that growth in Bolivia’s total factor productivity has been lower than 
the regional average, with a decline in efficiency but increases in technological 
change (Nin-Pratt et al., 2015). Data from the Social and Economic Policy Analysis 
Unit indicate that the area under cultivation increased by 460,000 hectares 
between 2006 and 2014. This means that sector growth has been due more to 
expansion of the area under cultivation than to increased productivity. Sector 
growth was concentrated in a small group of items intended for export in the 
eastern part of the country, where producers have benefited from the region’s 
natural characteristics (soils, topography, and water), a good level of public 
spending on sector public goods, and private investments in intensive systems of 
production with access to financing and the latest technologies. 

1.3 The agriculture sector’s potential contribution to economic growth and rural poverty 
reduction depends on farmers’ increased productivity, particularly among small and 
medium-sized producers (World Bank, 2008; Escobal, J., 2012). In Bolivia, most 
small and medium-sized producers are located in the valleys and highlands. The 
main items of those agricultural producers are crops such as potato, corn, and 
grains. More than 80% of the parcels with pending regularization and titling belong 
to the small farmer category, which includes rural producers with fewer than two 
hectares in the highlands and up to 50 hectares in the lowlands. These agricultural 
producers are estimated to represent 83% of the country’s rural households.2 

1.4 Improving agriculture sector productivity and thus efficiency and sustainability in 
the use of land in Bolivia requires investments in sector public goods to promote 
farmers’ private productive investments (Lopez, 2004, Blackman et al. 2014, 
Quisumbing and Kumar, 2014; Ali, et al., 2014). A requirement for achieving this 

                                                
1
 The Observatory of Economic Complexity (OEC). What Does Bolivia Export? 

(http://atlas.media.mit.edu/en/profile/country/bol/) and National Statistics Institute (INE, 2012). 
2
  http://bolivia.um.dk/es/danida-es/programas-sectoriales/agricultura 

http://atlas.media.mit.edu/en/profile/country/bol/
http://bolivia.um.dk/es/danida-es/programas-sectoriales/agricultura


- 2 - 

objective is to establish secure property rights over land. According to the available 
empirical evidence, such rights reduce the risk of expropriation and give farmers 
the incentive to make investments that increase productivity and the sustainability 
of rural properties. In the Bolivian case, the empirical evidence is limited because 
no rigorous assessments of the impacts of titling on the productivity and 
sustainable management of agricultural producers’ natural resources have been 
done. Nonetheless, empirical evidence in the region shows the positive impact of 
titling on the use of inputs, increased productive investments, stimulation of the 
land market, reduced deforestation, and farmers’ income (Aldana and Fort, 2001, 
Ghatak and Besley, 2010; Deininger and Chamorro, 2004; Hernández and 
Reardon, 2012; Foltz, Larson and Lopez, 2000, Torrero and Field, 2005; Zegarra, 
2008, Gignoux, J. et al. 2013; Lawry et al. 2014; and Rockson et al., 2013). 

1.5 Property rights, sustainability, and conflicts. Property rights in and of 
themselves do not guarantee the sustainable use of natural resources. In 
Nicaragua, the assignment of property rights improved agricultural productivity and 
also increased the rate of deforestation (Liscow, 2013). The preliminary data for 
Bolivia (Santa Cruz) indicate that land titling, particularly for ranchers, increases 
deforestation (Murguia, 2016). Thus, if the regularization of rural property rights is 
not accompanied by a legal framework and the corresponding environmental 
management instruments, the results of rural titling tend to generate environmental 
degradation. In this regard, the evidence shows that a requirement for ensuring the 
positive impacts of rural land titling on environmental management is the ability to 
monitor and penalize violations (OECD, 2009). With respect to social conflicts, 
10% of the last 25 million hectares subject to intervention are paralyzed by social 
conflicts. This problem is estimated to be significant in the area where property 

rights are yet to be regularized, covering 15 million hectares (paragraph 1.6), in that 
small landholdings (minifundios) are involved (Carrasco, 2016). Under this 
scenario, dispute resolution is important to remove barriers to titling. 

1.6 Status of regularization and titling. The Bolivian government has made 
significant strides in the regularization of rural property and the regularization, 
cadastre, titling, and registration of rural lands is reaching its final stage. Table 1 
indicates that the regularization and titling target was approximately 106 million 
hectares. Between 1996 and 2014, the National Agrarian Reform Institute (INRA) 
has been involved in interventions covering approximately 93 million hectares as 
follows: (i) it regularized and titled approximately 41 million private hectares, which 
included collective properties (Territorios Indígenas Comunitarios Campesinos 
[Rural Community Indigenous Territories] (TIOCs) and Comunidades 
Interculturales Originarias [Native Intercultural Communities (CIOCs)) and 
individual properties; (ii) it regularized approximately 25 million hectares of public 
lands; and (iii) it made headway with the regularization of rural lands that did not 
yet comply with all the legal and technical requirements, involving 27 million 
hectares. The work of regularization, titling, and registration of rural lands that is 
pending for the next few years is to continue in the areas not yet subject to 
intervention, amounting to 15 million hectares, and to finalize the regularization 
process in 25 million hectares that were already subject to intervention but have 
not yet complied with all the requirements of the regularization process. 

1.7 The indigenous peoples and intercultural communities were the primary 
beneficiaries of INRA’s interventions, for a total of approximately 32 million titled 
hectares, which represents 78% of the total titled area in the country (Table 1). 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40320821/R


- 3 - 

This is the result of the effect of Law 3,545, which gave priority to the regularization 
and titling of TIOCs and CIOCs. Small and medium-sized properties occupy 
second place in terms of titled area, with 5.6 million hectares, which represents 
14% of the country’s titled area. According to INRA, this individual titling progress 
occurs in settlement areas, Andean-Amazonian transition areas, and integrated 
management areas of the Amboró National Park (Cochabamba and Santa Cruz). 
Lastly, three million hectares held by agricultural companies were dealt with in the 
regularization process, representing 8% of the country’s titled area. The company-
held properties are located in Santa Cruz, Pando, and Beni. 

Table 1. Status of Regularization and Titling between 1996 and 2014. 

Categories 
Titles 

(Number) 

Area 

(Hectares) 
% 

A. Regularization and titling target  - 106,751,722 100 

B. Titled Area 391,685 40,786,475 38.2 

B1. Small property  377,802 3,852,050 9.4 

B2. Medium-sized property 3,148 1,667,651 4.1 

B3. Agricultural company 1,374 3,091,530 7.6 

B4. Community properties (CIOCs)    8,921 9,176,971 22.5 

B5. Rural Community Indigenous Territories (TIOCs) 440 22,998,273 56.4 

C. Regularized public lands - 24,542,520 23.0 

D. Area in the process of being regularized - 26,867,679 25.2 

E. Area without regularization and titling - 14,555,048 13.6 

Source: INRA, 2016 and Colque et al. 2016. 

 

1.8 According to data from INRA (Andrade, 2016), the areas still not covered by the 
titling policy are distributed throughout the country. Nonetheless, the demand for 
titling of rural lands is concentrated primarily in La Paz, Potosí, Oruro, 
Cochabamba, Beni, and Santa Cruz. In terms of the number of titles to be 
delivered, La Paz (48%) has the highest percentage, followed by Potosí (15%) and 
Cochabamba (14%). The departments with the largest areas to be titled are: 
Santa Cruz (30%), La Paz (22%), and Beni (22%). 

1.9 Institutional framework of property rights.  The institutional structure for 
establishing property rights over rural land was developed under the Agrarian Law 
of 1953. That law created the National Agrarian Reform Service, which is headed 
by the President and implemented through the National Agrarian Reform Council. 
The Council controlled the operational aspects of the work of titling rural lands at 
that time. This institutional framework was redesigned in 1996 with the enactment 
of Law 1,715/96. With the new law, the Council was replaced by INRA, identified 
under Law 1,715/96 as a technical and legal institution with operational 
responsibilities for defining rural land ownership rights. In 2006, Law 3,545/06, 
which reinstituted the agrarian reform on a community basis, amended Law 
1,715/96 by facilitating the titling of collective lands and establishing that all 
available public lands would preferably be assigned to indigenous or campesino 
peoples or communities that had limited land. It also established that private lands 
(medium-sized property owners and companies) would revert to the State if they 
failed to serve an economic and social function (Endo, 2016; Colque et al., 2016). 

1.10 Laws 1,715/96 and 3,545/06 retained the National Agrarian Reform Service as the 
body responsible for planning, executing, and consolidating the agrarian reform 
process. The Service is made up of: (i) the President, the supreme authority 



- 4 - 

responsible for signing title deeds, among other duties; (ii) the Ministry of Rural 
Development and Land (MDRyT), which is responsible for implementing policies 
and other strategic activities in the sector; (iii) the National Agrarian Commission, a 
mixed government/civil society agency charged with community oversight and the 
strategic course of the agrarian reform process; (iv) the Agrarian Judicatura [bench 
of judges], a specialized body for the administration of agrarian justice, made up of 
the Agri-Environmental Tribunal and the Agri-Environmental Courts, for the 
resolution of disputes arising from land ownership and property rights, which was 
conceived as an independent institution and is thus not part of the Service; and 
(v) INRA, an autonomous decentralized public agency under the MDRyT 
responsible, among other things, for steering, coordinating, and executing agrarian 
property regularization policies (Endo, 2016; Colque, et al., 2016). 

1.11 Law 1,715/96 kept unchanged the rural property types previously defined by the 
Agrarian Law of 1953. Rural property types include: campesino site, small 
property, medium-sized property, and agricultural enterprise. However, Law 
1,715/96 added a new type of collective property, the Native Community Land, and 
recognized equal property rights for men and women, defining parity criteria in land 
distribution, management, tenure, and use. Another important change introduced 
by Law 1,715/96 was the development of new instruments recognizing rural 
property rights. The regularization instruments were developed to implement the 
multiple objectives of Law 1,715/96: to regularize property rights, consolidate 
indigenous territories, recover idle lands, certify public lands and distribute them to 
those who need them, resolve disputes, and develop the rural cadastre (Endo, 
2016). 

1.12 The Real Property Rights Registry (DDRR) supplements the institutional 
framework of property rights mentioned above. The DDRR is the Judicial Council 
entity responsible for recording all entries and annotations covering real property 
rights, including real estate and real estate rights, in Bolivia. It was created by the 
Law on the Registration of Real Property Rights of 1887; its operational rules are 
defined in the Civil Code and the regulations approved by Supreme Decree 29,757 
of 2004. For a large-scale rural land regularization and titling operation like that 
proposed in this program, the technical, operational, and technological link 
between INRA and the DDRR is very important for expediting the registration of 
rural properties that have been regularized and surveyed. The workloads 
generated by INRA exceed the existing capacities of the DDRR, which sometimes 
receives packets of more than 10,000 property titles in files and titling data maps 
all at once. 

1.13 Bank actions and other sources of financing. Various funding agencies have 
supported the activities involved in regularizing rural land property rights. The 
World Bank granted a loan of US$24.7 million; the Nordic Development Fund 
financed US$7.5 million; the Kingdom of the Netherlands provided support through 
a nonreimbursable fund of US$8.8 million; the European Union contributed 
US$4 million to the process. The Bank began its support for land titling in Bolivia 
through the “Environmental and Social Protection Project in the Santa Cruz – 
Puerto Suárez Corridor” (1099/SF-BO), through which it financed a titling 
subcomponent amounting to US$2.4 million. The Bank consolidated its 
participation in this area with a land titling operation for US$22 million called the 
“Land Regularization and Legal Cadastre Program” (1512/SF-BO). These funds 
totaled US$70 million and were executed between 1996 and 2012. 



- 5 - 

1.14 The advances made in the area of land regularization are part of a series of 
reforms in the country’s legal framework. Since the National Agrarian Reform 
Council was replaced by INRA, a series of rules was developed to expedite the 
process of regularizing rural lands. Although an institutional structure was created, 
INRA still lacked the capacity to implement the new legal framework for land 
regularization. To overcome the institutional constraints, the decision was made to 
contract land regularization companies, which transferred regularization 
technologies and trained local specialists during contract implementation. With the 
entry into force of Law 3,545/06, the method whereby companies were contracted 
for land regularization became obsolete and INRA assumed the direct execution of 
land regularization. The existing financial resources were thus reallocated to 
finance INRA’s specialized brigades (equipment, vehicles, and specialists). The 
Bank also supported the development, implementation, and linkage of the initial 
versions of the rural property cadastre and registration systems.3 

1.15 Problems in land regularization, cadastre, titling, and registration. The 
diagnostic assessments of the process of regularization, titling, and registration of 
rural land indicate that the following issues need to be addressed:  

1.16 Limitations of the regulatory framework. According to the diagnostic 
assessment of the existing legal framework (Endo, 2016), the latter permits 
program execution to start. Nonetheless, the following problems must be 
overcome during program execution: (i) the regularization, titling, and cadastre 
manuals are outdated; (ii) the rural land regularization procedures are not entirely 
suited to the new areas of intervention; (iii) the rural land regularization procedures 
do not incorporate technological changes that will have a positive impact on titling; 
(iv) the current dispute resolution mechanism needs to be reformulated to reduce 
the burden of pending litigation in titling processes; (v) the ability to use land as a 
guarantee for obtaining credit is restricted to medium-sized property and 
agricultural enterprises; and (vi) the costs for maintaining the formal status of rural 
properties are high and the incentives for maintaining the rural cadastre are 
insufficient. 

1.17 Limitations of the regularization process. The cadastral sweep (barrido 
catastral)4 is the most efficient methodology for large-scale regularization of land 
tenure in rural areas with large numbers of producers and low titling levels. The 
cadastral sweep takes advantage of economies of scale; per title costs are thus 
lower than regularization based on individual demand. Operation 1512/SF-BO 
helped the government to implement the cadastral sweep method. Operation 
1512/SF-BO financed the basic inputs for implementing the sweep, including: 
(i) the formation of regularization specialist brigades – contracting of specialists; 
(ii) the purchase of equipment for the field work; and (iii) logistical support. 
According to the regularization diagnostic assessment (Andrade, 2016), in order to 
achieve the program targets, it is essential that: (i) brigade staff members working 
in INRA under contingent contracts be retained throughout program execution; 
(ii) equipment for the field work be modernized; and (iii) the logistical support 
infrastructure be replaced. An estimated 150 to 200 field brigades will need to be 

                                                
3
  The project completion reports (PCR) for project 1099/SF-BO and program 1512/SF-BO detail the efforts 

made by the Bank and the government to overcome the challenges of regularization work in Bolivia. 
4
  The cadastral sweep is a methodology for systemic surveying of each and every one of the rural parcels 

in an area to gather the technical and legal information on the property and its owner for the mass 
regularization of rural property tenure.  

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40323309/R
pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40319504/R
pcdocs://IDBDOCS/37382628/R
pcdocs://IDBDOCS/36662436/R


- 6 - 

financed each year. These brigades are made up of seven regularization 
specialists. Each brigade’s field operations require a minimum infrastructure of 
GPS equipment, portable computers, complete stations, and vehicles. 

1.18 Deficiencies of the technological platform. According to the diagnostic 
assessment of the technological platform (Solíz, 2016), the current technology is 
capable of continuing the rural land regularization, cadastre, titling, and registration 
process. However, the following problems must be overcome: (i) consolidating the 
Land Maintenance and Management System (SIMAT) and the Integrated Cadastre 
System (SIC) as technical tools; (ii) migrating data from the Integrated 
Regularization and Titling System (SIST) to the SIMAT/SIC systems; (iii) replacing 
the use of the SIST with the SIMAT/SIC in all INRA offices; (iv) improving the 
electronic link between INRA and the DDRR for the large-scale property tilting and 
registration process; (v) reorganizing the data centers and updating the data 
servers; (vi) updating the equipment (computers); (vii) developing the INRA nexus 
with GeoBolivia; (viii) reviewing and consolidating administrative systems; 
(ix) cleaning spatial data; (x) completing the process of digitization and indexation 
of the INRA documentary collection; and (xi) developing the INRA platform. 

1.19 Limitations of environmental and social management tools. According to the 
results from the program’s Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment 
(SESA) (see Carrasco, 2016), the current legal framework is sufficiently developed 
for the environmental and social management of the rural property regularization 
process. However, the management tools for handling potential environmental and 
social problems stemming from rural property regularization are not fully 
developed. The main conclusion of the SESA indicates that the above weaknesses 
produce a situation in which current regulations are not fully enforced and/or 
compliance with them is not verified. Accordingly, the following problems must be 
overcome during program execution: (i) forest coverage monitoring does not 
generate information in real time for monitoring and controlling deforestation; 
(ii) the rural cadastre does not include the environmental information needed to 
facilitate monitoring and control at each rural property; and (iii) the tools that INRA 
has for managing social conflicts are inadequate for addressing the complexity of 
the conflicts and the processes for resolving them.  

1.20 Lessons learned. The proposed project has taken into account lessons learned 
from loans 1099/SF-BO and 1512/SF-BO and other similar Bank-financed 
operations in the region (see Table 2).  

  

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40323300/R
pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40320821/R


- 7 - 

Table 2. Lessons learned from the Bank’s experience in the sector 

Problem by work area Reflected in project design 

Legal framework. It is necessary to 

ensure that the legal framework 
allows rural titling to be carried out. 

While the current legal framework allows for moving 
forward with the regularization, titling, and registration of 
rural lands, the program will finance activities to improve 
the regulatory framework. 

Institutional organization. Titling 

requires the participation of various 
public agencies that neither share 
information nor coordinate activities 
well. 

The project will finance the strengthening of key 
institutions involved in the process of regularizing rural 
property.  

Information safeguards. The rural 

cadastre information must be 
protected.  

The working methodology for the cadastral survey will be 
100% digital with backup systems.  

Cadastral survey. The cadastral 

sweep methodology has yielded good 
results. 

The sweep methodology will be improved for working in 
highland areas with small landholdings, through the use 
of unmanned aerial vehicles, for example. 

Monitoring and quality control 
system. The lack of monitoring 

systems makes it difficult to manage 
progress made in rural titling. 

The project will develop an integrated system for 
monitoring progress, including the reactivation of 
participatory monitoring mechanisms. 

Community participation. The 

communities’ participation in the 
titling process was a key factor in the 
success of the operation. 

The program will reinstall the interagency titling 
committees with the participation of authorities from 
indigenous communities and territories. 

Support for permanent institutions. 

It is important to focus efforts on 
supporting permanent institutions. 

The project will support INRA, the DDRR, the Forest and 
Land Social Control and Oversight Authority (ABT), and 
the Mother Earth Plurinational Authority (APMT), which 
are permanent government institutions, in the work of 
regularization and environmental and social 
management of rural property.  

Management of the regularization 
brigades. It is critical to design a 

cadastral sweep methodology with 
incentives and penalties. 

In the first year of program execution, funds will be 
earmarked for the design of a system to monitor the field 
brigades, taking into account incentives for achieving 
goals and penalties. 

Source: OVE, 2014. Comparative Evaluation: Land Regularization and Management, PCRs for the following 
projects: 906/OC-PE, 1340/OC-PE, 1099/SF-BO, and 1512/SF-BO. 

 

1.21 Conceptual overview of the operation. The project is conceived as an operation 
that continues the rural property regularization process initiated by the Government 
of Bolivia through loans 1099/SF-BO and 1512/SF-BO. The project design 
emphasizes the key aspects identified in the diagnostic assessment of the current 
situation: (i) the strengthening of integrated mass sweep campaigns for the 
regularization of rural property, which will make it possible to proceed with rural 
titling on a cost-effective basis; (ii) modernization of the cadastre and public 
registry system, which will help to strengthen the integration of titling entities and 
public registries, as well as the efficient and secure management of cadastral 
information; (iii) strengthening of environmental and social management tools, 
which will help to reduce the environmental and social problems identified; and 
(iv) maintenance of the cadastre and public registry of rural properties, which will 
help to reduce transaction costs for the end user. 

1.22 Strategic alignment with the Update to the Institutional Strategy 2010-2020, 
the Corporate Results Framework (CRF) 2016-2019, and the Bank’s strategy 
with Bolivia 2016-2020. The program is consistent with the Update to the 
Institutional Strategy 2010-2020 (document AB-3008). Specifically, the program is 



- 8 - 

in line with the challenge of low productivity and innovation, by increasing farmers’ 
productivity related to the establishment of secure land ownership rights. The 
program is aligned with the Bank’s country strategy with Bolivia 2016-2020 
(document GN-2843) in that it contributes to the priority area of increasing 
productivity and diversification in the economy as well as with its strategic 
objectives: (i) promotion of innovation and (ii) provision of quality public goods and 
services. The operation is included in the 2016 Country Programming Document  
and the 2016 Operational Program Report (document GN-2849). Lastly, the 
program is consistent with the Agriculture and Natural Resources Management 
Sector Framework (document GN-2709-5), which identifies security of land tenure 
as a key activity for improving productivity and the sustainable use of natural 
resources. 

B. Objectives, components, and cost. The objective of the program is to increase 
legal certainty over rural property. 

1.23 Target population. The program beneficiaries are small and medium-sized 
agricultural producers and indigenous communities. Small and medium-sized 
producers characteristically have small family farming operations, primarily for their 
own consumption and with low levels of access to financing and productive 
technologies. The livelihood of the indigenous communities is based on the use of 
natural resources, along with small-scale farming usually occupying less than one 
hectare.  

1.24 Component 1: Land regularization, titling, and registration (US$74.9 million). 
This component will support rural land regularization, titling, and registration. In this 
respect, the following stages in the process need to be financed: (i) preparatory 
stage, which will support: evaluations of the areas of intervention, preparation of 
the technical and legal diagnostic assessment, increased density of geodetic 
points; (ii) field survey, which will support: dissemination of regularization, signage 
of vertices and boundaries, signing of records of agreement, survey of the rural 
property file, verification of the social function and/or social and economic function, 
dispute resolution, and development of the cadastral database; and (iii) titling and 
registration, which will finance: the preparation of draft resolutions, the signing of 
resolutions, the issuance of property titles, and registration of the titles in the 
DDRR. This component will also support management of social conflicts and the 
activities to be financed include: dispute resolution training for INRA staff; 
implementation of dispute resolution brigades; strengthening of the 
Agri-Environmental Tribunal for dispute resolution, development and 
implementation of customer service protocols and mechanisms, and strengthening 
of INRA’s Transparency Unit. 

1.25 Component 1 will use loan proceeds to finance key inputs for continuing with rural 
land regularization (paragraph 1.17). The key inputs for carrying out the 
regularization work include: (i) retention of INRA temporary staff; (ii) purchase of 
computer equipment, navigation and measuring equipment, and furniture; and 
(iii)  purchase of logistical support vehicles. Up to US$47 million in loan proceeds 
will be used to finance staffing requirements, to hire technical personnel to perform 
land regularization work. The “service delivery contractor” model indicated in 
paragraph 3.21 of the Policies for the selection and contracting of consultants 
financed by the IDB (document GN-2350-9) was identified as being suited to 
INRA’s needs. According to this Bank policy, this model is recommended when 



- 9 - 

project execution requires the hiring of large numbers of individuals who deliver 
services on a contract basis. 

1.26 Component 2: Land management (US$14.04 million). This component will 
finance: (i) modernization of INRA’s rural cadastre technological platform and the 
DDRR’s rural land registration platform to facilitate the administration of mass rural 
land cadastre, titling, and registration processes; and (ii) the program’s 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP), which will contribute to the 
social and environmental management of titled land. 

1.27 To modernize INRA’s cadastral system, the component will finance: the 
consolidation of the SIMAT and SIC as technical tools for rural land administration, 
the development and implementation of the INRA–GeoBolivia nexus, the design 
and implementation of the INRA services platform, and the digitization and 
indexation of the INRA documentary collection. To modernize the DDRR 
registration system, the component includes: the development of the DDRR 
services platform; training for DDRR office staff in the use of the platform 
developed; and the implementation of the cadastral maintenance campaigns. To 
implement the ESMP, the component will finance: the strengthening of the national 
forest coverage monitoring system; the development of the environmental 
dimension of the rural cadastre; indigenous land management measures; and 
measures to strengthen the gender focus and interculturality in the titling process.5 

C. Results matrix and key indicators 

1.28 The program has a results matrix (see Annex II) agreed upon with INRA; it shows 
impact, outcome, and output indicators with their respective baselines, targets, and 
means of verification. The program’s main outcomes are: (i) to regularize and title 
approximately 24.5 million hectares; (ii) to record property rights in the DDRR for 
approximately 1,340,000 parcels of small and medium-sized rural producers, 
benefiting approximately 490,000 families; (iii) to regularize and title the pending 
indigenous territories; (iv) to modernize the cadastral and registration information 
systems; and (v) to institutionally strengthen the Bolivian government in order to 
improve the environmental and social management of land. Over the long-term, 
the impact of the program will be reflected in increased agricultural income for 
small and medium-sized agricultural producers.  

Table 3. Main Results Matrix Indicators 

Impact Indicators 
Frequency of 
measurement 

Rationale for selection 

Per household agricultural 
income (US$) 

Baseline and final 
evaluation of the program 

See paragraph 1.3. Increased productivity 
results in higher income.  

Gross value of agricultural 
production per hectare 
(US$/ha) 

Baseline and final 
evaluation of the program 

See paragraphs 1.3 and 1.4. Greater 
certainty regarding land tenure increases 
productive investment; and this investment 
increases agricultural productivity. 

 

                                                
5
  In the final stage of the design of the Rural Land Regularization Program, the Ministry of the 

Environment and Water, the technical focal point for the Global Environment Facility (GEF), asked the 
IDB for an additional project to be financed by the GEF Fund to implement the environmental dimension 
of the rural cadastre in the amount of approximately US$6 million. This additional project will 
complement the activities envisaged in the program (ESMP). 



- 10 - 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS 

A. Financing instruments 

2.1 The total cost of the program is US$100 million, which will be financed by the Bank 
through a blended loan as follows: US$51 million from Ordinary Capital funds and 
US$9 million from the Fund for Special Operations (FSO). The local counterpart is 
US$40 million. The distribution of the financing by source is shown in Table 4 
below: 

Table 4. Program costs and financing (in millions of U.S. dollars) 

Investment category IDB Local Total % 

I. Administration 2.80 4.44 7.24 7.24 

Execution unit 2.80 4.44 7.24 7.24 

II. Direct costs 56.32 35.56 91.88 91.88 

Component 1. Regularization, titling, and 

registration 
46.92 28.01 74.93 74.93 

Component 2. Land management 9.40 7.55 16.95 16.95 

III. Monitoring and evaluation 0.58 - 0.58 0.58 

IV. Audit 0.30 - 0.30 0.30 

Total 60.00 40.00 100.00 100.00 

 

2.2 The program is structured as a specific investment operation, to be executed over 
five years according to the following disbursement schedule and the preliminary 
financial plan: 

Table 5. Program costs and financing (in millions of U.S. dollars) 

Source Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Total 

IDB Total  20.95  19.11 9.07  6.95 3.92 60.00 

% 34.9% 31.8% 15.1% 11.6% 6.5% 100% 

 

B. Economic viability 

2.3 The ex ante economic analysis of the program uses a cost-benefit methodology. 
The analysis is based on the program’s expected incremental costs and benefits 
using a time horizon of 15 years and a discount rate of 12%. Program costs 
include investment, operation, and maintenance. The benefits stem from an 
estimate of marginal changes in agricultural income as a result of improvements in 
land tenure certainty and reduced processing time for registering property. Data 
from the 2008 Agricultural Survey, the 2013 Agricultural Census, and INRA titling 
databases were used to quantify the direct benefits associated with an 
improvement in the land tenure situation. The results indicate that the families that 
obtained title to their land increased their annual agricultural income by US$336 
and the gross value of agricultural production by US$216/household. Surveys and 
process analyses at both INRA and the DDRR office were used to estimate the 
benefits of reduced costs and processing time at the DDRR office. The results 
show benefits amounting to US$22.1 million due to a 16% reduction in processing 
times. The cost-benefit analysis indicates that the program has a positive net 
present value and an internal rate of return (IRR) of 51%. An analysis was done of 
the sensitivity to variations in the speed with which the benefits of titling were 
generated. In the worst case, in which the benefits increase gradually, the IRR is 
36%. The benefits of reduced processing time for registration exceed the expected 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40319553


- 11 - 

costs of maintaining the cadastre, which increases system sustainability by 
transferring these benefits to the users. 

C. Environmental and social risks 

2.4 This program has been classified as a Category B operation in accordance with 
the Bank’s Environment and Safeguards Compliance Policy (OP-703). During the 
preparation of the program a Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment 
(SESA) was developed; it determined that the program would have significant 
positive impacts and negative risks and impacts. The principal risks identified in the 
SESA were summarized in the program’s environmental and social management 
report (ESMR). They include: (i) failure to meet the indigenous peoples’ demand 
for titling due to conflicts already existing in the area of intervention; (ii) weakening 
of campesino communities’ organizations due to the demand for individual titling; 
(iii) maintenance of gender inequality in terms of access to and use of the land; 
(iv) exacerbation of existing social conflicts and creation of new conflicts due to 
land titling; and (v) loss of biodiversity and ecosystem services in lowlands due to 
the deforestation of titled properties. A program environmental and social 
management plan (ESMP) was developed to mitigate these risks and negative 
impacts. Table 6 summarizes the main risks and mitigation measures proposed in 
the ESMP. Thus, the requirements of the Bank’s safeguard policies have been 
fulfilled, especially those of the Indigenous Peoples Policy (OP-765). The ESMR 
presents compliance with the safeguards policies in detail (paragraph 3.18 of the 
ESMR). Lastly, consultation processes have been carried out, resulting in records 
of agreement with the program signed by the principal national organizations 
representing the program’s beneficiaries (paragraphs 3.22 and 3.23 of the ESMR). 

Table 6. Main Risks and Mitigation measures  

Problem and risks (ESMR) Main Mitigation Measures (ESMP) 

Problem: Remaining demand from indigenous 

people in lowlands consists of lands where 
third parties are present.  
Risk: Failure to provide titling for indigenous 

populations and potential fragmentation of 
their territories. 

(i) Participatory mechanisms will be implemented for the 
titling of the remaining areas; 
(ii) The extent to which the territorial demand of the 
indigenous populations is met will be evaluated; 
(iii) INRA will be trained to incorporate the intercultural 
approach in rural land titling activities.  

Problem: Parceling of collective lands in 

peasant communities. 
Risk: Weakening of community organizations. 

(i) Will contribute to making decisions that are appropriate 
for communities by providing information on the 
advantages and disadvantages of collective and individual 
titling. 

Problem: Gender inequality in access to and 

use of land. 
Risk: Continued gender inequality in access to 

and use of land through rural titling. 
 

(i) INRA’s Gender Unit will be strengthened; 
(ii) INRA will be trained to implement a gender approach 
in titling and registration; 
(iii) Women’s knowledge/exercise of their rights over the 
land will be promoted.  

Problem: Exacerbation of existing conflicts 

and emergence of new social conflicts; 
Risk: Delay in the regularization of property 

rights.  

(i) A comprehensive strategy for resolving disputes over 
rural land will be implemented; 
(ii) INRA staff will be trained in dispute resolution; 
(iii) Specialized dispute resolution brigades will be formed 
in INRA; 
(iv) The dispute resolution capacity of the Agri-
environmental Tribunal will be strengthened. 

Problem: Increased deforestation of titled 

properties; 
Risk: Loss of biodiversity and ecosystem 

services.  

(i) The national plant cover monitoring system will be 
strengthened; 
(ii) The environmental dimension of the rural cadastre will 
be developed; 
(iii) Soil use plans will be updated. 

Source: Program’s Environmental and Social Management Report and Environmental and Social 

Management Plan, 2016. 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40320821/R
pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40319558/R


- 12 - 

D. Fiduciary risks 

2.5 Based on the results of the institutional assessment, INRA has the institutional 
capacity needed to assume responsibilities as the executing agency for the 
proposed operation. The results indicate that programming and organizational 
capacity, execution capacity, and control capacity are at a satisfactory level of 
development and present a low level of risk. However, based on the risk analysis, 
some institutional weaknesses affecting the institution’s fiduciary capacity have 
been identified. Accordingly, an institutional development plan was drawn up to 
mitigate the risks identified. The main actions include: (i) contracting procurement 
and financing specialists to strengthen execution capacities; (ii) deepening and 
institutionalizing an operational framework for risk management; and 
(iii) developing a framework of internal procedures for accounting and cash flow, as 
well as updating internal administrative management documents. 

E. Other project risks 

2.6 The SESA has identified the risk that the presence of third parties with legitimate 
rights within the lowland TIOCs may become an obstacle for completing the titling 
of all the territory claimed by these TIOCs. This could turn into a reputational risk 
for the Bank. To mitigate this risk, Component 1 includes participatory titling 
mechanisms6 that involve the authorities of the TIOCs, to reach consensus on 
titling processes and results. In addition, the ESMP includes a diagnostic 
assessment of the extent to which the territorial demand of lowland indigenous 
peoples is met, as well as the formulation of new public policies in the event that 
this demand has not been addressed. An extensive process of consultation with 
the principal organizations representing those benefiting from and affected by land 
titling was carried out during the preparation of the program. These consultations 
have resulted in the signing of records of agreement with the program by the 
participants, beyond what is required for projects with the identified level of risk and 
impacts (see paragraphs 3.20 to 3.24 of the ESMR for more details on the 
consultations). 

2.7 As indicated earlier, the Bolivian government has been financially supporting the 
regularization of rural property for the last 20 years. The proposed program, with a 
total cost of US$100 million, will complete the work of regularizing rural lands 
throughout the country, involving 106 million hectares. Once the investment for 
regularizing rural properties is completed, long-term sustainability will depend on 
the ability of the key stakeholders to keep the information on rural properties up to 
date, both in the rural cadastre system (INRA) and in the Real Property Rights 
Registry (DDRR) system, as identified in the report on the legal framework for the 
regularization of rural property (Endo, 2016). The program seeks to improve, 
simplify, and reduce the costs of rural cadastre and property registration services, 
as well as to generate information on obligations and benefits so that owners will 
have incentives and will report to the official entities the existence of changes in 
property rights (through market transfers or inheritance) or through cadastral 
conservation processes (subdivisions or consolidations). 

                                                
6
  The Interagency Titling Committees are the main mechanism of participation. The participants in these 

committees are the authorities of indigenous and campesino organizations and the representatives of 
the program’s beneficiaries. The role of the committee is to reach agreement with INRA on the work 
plans for the titling of beneficiary communities and TIOCs and to promote the beneficiary population’s 
participation in and monitoring of the execution of these plans. The role of the committees will be duly 
clarified in the program’s Operating Regulations. 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40323309/R


- 13 - 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN 

A. Summary of implementation arrangements 

3.1 The borrower will be the Plurinational State of Bolivia and the executing agency will 
be INRA, legally established under Law 1,715/96 as a decentralized public entity of 
the MDRyT with national jurisdiction and legal status.  

3.2 INRA’s responsibilities as executing agency include: (i) maintaining consolidated 
accounting records that make it possible to identify the sources and uses of 
program funds by component; (ii) preparing and submitting disbursement requests 
and supporting documentation to the Bank, together with the financial statements 
for the components under its responsibility; (iii) contracting the program’s annual 
external audits and submitting the respective reports to the Bank; (iv) preparing 
open calls for proposals and bid processes, processing contracts and payments, 
and providing technical supervision of the contracts for activities under its 
responsibility; (v) preparing the consolidated monitoring and evaluation reports 
required, submitting them to the Bank, and making them publicly available; and 
(vi) ensuring compliance with the contractual clauses established in the loan 
contract, the program’s Operating Regulations, and the agreements signed for 
program implementation. A condition precedent to the first disbursement will 
be the signing of a subsidiary agreement between the Ministry of Economy 
and Public Finance, the Ministry of Development Planning, and INRA 
defining the following aspects among others: (i) the method to be used to 
transfer the loan proceeds to INRA; and (ii) INRA’s commitment to conduct 
program activities in accordance with the terms of the loan contract.  

3.3 Program execution will use INRA’s existing organizational structure, in both 
technical and fiduciary (procurement and finances) and legal matters. In this 
respect, the Planning Bureau (DGP) will be designated as the entity responsible for 
the general coordination of the program and the ESMP; the Regularization and 
Titling Bureau will be designated as the entity responsible for the execution of 
Component 1; the Land Management Bureau will be designated as the entity 
responsible for the execution of Component 2; and, lastly, the Administration and 
Finances Bureau will manage the program’s budget, procurement, legal analysis, 
and financial control. 

3.4 The Director of INRA’s DGP will serve as the general coordinator of the program 
with sufficient autonomy to make operational decisions, prepare all documents, 
program actions, and coordinate with the participating entities and the IDB. A 
condition precedent to the first disbursement will be the appointment of the 
Director of INRA’s DGP as the general coordinator of the program, 
appointment of the program component coordinators, in accordance with 
the terms previously agreed upon with the Bank, and the contracting of 
financial, procurement, planning, environmental management, and social 
management specialists through a competitive process, in accordance with 
the terms previously agreed upon with the Bank.  

3.5 During program preparation, provision was made for the signing of interagency 
collaboration agreements between INRA and the DDRR Office, the APMT, INE, 
and the ABT. These agreements will lay the foundation for cooperation among 
those involved and will describe the activities covered under the agreement, the 
parties’ commitments, including the operation and maintenance of investments, 



- 14 - 

and other conditions necessary for execution. Evidence of the signing and entry 
into force of the following interagency cooperation agreements: (i) between INRA 
and the DDRR, will be a special condition for the disbursement of financing for 
activities related to public registries under Component 2; (ii) between INRA, the 
ABT, the APMT, and the Office of the Deputy Minister for Land, will be a special 
condition for the disbursement of financing for activities related to the program’s 
ESMP under Component 2; and (iii) between INRA and INE, will be a special 
condition for the disbursement of financing for activities related to the baseline of 
the program’s monitoring and evaluation plan. 

3.6 To facilitate implementation of the ESMP, in the context of the program, INRA may 
provide cooperation and technical coordination to the relevant public institutions 
that assist in achieving the program’s objective. 

3.7 Program Operating Regulations. Execution of the program will be governed by 
the program’s Operating Regulations. These regulations establish guidelines and 
operational procedures related to: (i) the responsibilities of the entities participating 
in the program; (ii) operational procedures for the planning and programming of the 
activities to be financed; (iii) financial and procurement instructions; (iv) procedures 
for the program’s environmental and social management; and (v) operational 
instructions for the implementation of activities to monitor and evaluate the 
program’s impact. The entry into force of the program’s Operating 
Regulations, under terms previously agreed upon with the Bank, will be a 
contractual condition precedent to the first disbursement.  

3.8 Procurement. The procurement of works, goods, and consulting services funded 
with program resources will be carried out in accordance with the Bank’s policies 
as set forth in documents GN-2349-9 and GN-2350-9 and the provisions of the 
loan contract and the program’s Fiduciary Agreements and Requirements (see 
Annex III), including the procurement plan for the first 18 months. That plan 
includes the purchase of vehicles, operations and computer equipment, furniture, 
the contracting of individual consultants and consulting firms, and other items. In 
addition, the procurement plan includes the contracting of “service delivery 
contractors” corresponding to the staff engaged in the regularization and titling 
process (paragraph 1.25). The contracting procedures currently used by INRA for 
annual or multiyear periods will continue to be used for these individual 
consultants. The procurement plan will be updated each year or whenever there 
are substantial changes, subject to the Bank’s approval. Procurement may be 
made using the ex post review method as established in Annex II. 

3.9 Recognition of retroactive expenses. The Bank may recognize and charge 
against the local contribution up to US$6,000,000 (15% of the local contribution) in 
eligible expenses incurred by INRA prior to the loan approval date for operational 
and temporary staffing expenses, provided that requirements substantially similar 
to those established in the loan contract have been met. Said expenses must have 
been incurred on or after 6 January 2016, the program profile approval date, but in 
no case may they include expenses incurred more than 18 months prior to the loan 
approval date. 

3.10 Audit. During the loan disbursement period, within 120 days following the end of 
INRA’s fiscal year, the program’s annual audited financial statements will be 
submitted to the Bank. The audit will be performed by a firm of independent 
auditors acceptable to the Bank. The determination of the scope and other related 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40320765


- 15 - 

aspects will be governed by the Guide to Financial Management for Projects 
Financed by the IDB (OP-273-6) and the guide on financial statements and 
external audit.  

B. Summary of results monitoring arrangements 

3.11 Monitoring. The program has a monitoring and evaluation plan. INRA will prepare 
and send a monitoring report to the Bank no later than 60 days following the end of 
each six-month period during project execution. These reports will focus on the 
achievement of the output indicators and progress made in terms of outcomes, the 
identification of problems encountered and corrective measures adopted. INRA will 
submit to the Bank’s satisfaction the annual work plan (AWP) corresponding to the 
upcoming year, no later than within the final quarter of each year during project 
execution. INRA will perform two independent evaluations financed using loan 
proceeds: (i) the midterm evaluation will be submitted to the Bank no later than 
90 days after 50% of the loan proceeds have been executed; and (ii) the final 
evaluation will be conducted no later than 90 days after 90% of the project’s funds 
have been executed. These reports will include an evaluation of the quality of the 
data in the monitoring system, the degree to which the expected outputs, 
outcomes, and impacts established in the Results Matrix have been achieved, as 
well as the level of compliance with the ESMP, including progress made in the 
social and environmental indicators. 

3.12 Evaluation. The impact estimates will be based on the differences-in-differences 
method applied to a panel of households that includes a treatment group and two 
control groups. To this end, provision has been made for two surveys, a baseline 
and the final evaluation. The proposed sample includes the non-random 
identification of a group of municipios with a high percentage of titling in the first 
two years of the program. Later, through a propensity score matching process, a 
control group of municipios with a high percentage of titling prior to 2016 (control 
group 1) and another control group of municipios that will be titled at the end of the 
program (control group 2) will be identified. The municipios in control group 1 will 
serve to verify the proportion of attributable marginal change over time, while the 
municipios in control group 2 will be used to measure the program’s impact in the 
execution period. The sample for the baseline study is estimated to include 3,500 
farmers distributed in 50 municipios (20 treated and 30 in the two control groups; 
households will be selected at random within each municipio). A similar sample will 
be used for the final evaluation. The data collection budget has been included in 
the project. The design of the operation provides a good opportunity for generating 
empirical evidence on the impact of rural land titling on productivity, income, and 
the sustainable use of natural resources. 

 
































































 

PUBLIC 
SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE 

 
 
 

DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

GUYANA 
 
 
 
 
 
 

SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM 
 
 

(GY-L1060) 
 
 
 
 

LOAN PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
  



PROJECT SUMMARY  
GUYANA 

SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM 

(GY-L1060) 

Financial Terms and Conditions 

Borrower: Co-operative Republic of 

Guyana 

 

 OC FSO 

Amortization Period: 30 years 40 years 

Executing Agency: Ministry of Agriculture    

Disbursement Period: 5.5 years 5.5 years 

Source Amount (US$) % Grace Period: 6 years 40 years 

IDB (OC): 7,500,000 50 Supervision and Inspection Fee: (a)  NA 

IDB (FSO): 7,500,000 50 Interest rate: FU fixed (b)  0.25% 

Total: 15,000,000 100 
Credit Fee: (a)  NA 

Currency of Approval: US$ US$ 

Project at a Glance 

Project Objective/Description: Increase productivity of the agricultural sector while maintaining a sustainable 

and climate resilient use of natural resources in Guyana. The specific objectives are: (i) produce high quality data 
for the agricultural sector; (ii) increase productivity, especially for medium and small farmers; and (iii) increase 
sanitary and phytosanitary (SPS) standards and access to meat processing facilities. Higher productivity will also 
contribute to reduce pressure on forest and fragile ecosystems, and at the same time, increase income for small 
and medium-sized farmers. 

Special contractual conditions prior to the first disbursement of the financing: (i) the presentation of 

evidence that the Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) has selected a program coordinator, a financial officer and a 
procurement officer according to the terms and conditions previously agreed with the Bank (¶3.1); (ii) approval 
and entry into effect of the Program Operating Manual (POM) according to the terms and conditions previously 
agreed with the Bank (¶3.4); and (iii) presentation of an initial report, including, the Program’s Pluri-annual 
Execution Plan (PEP), the Procurement Plan, the Financial Plan and the Results Matrix according to the terms 
and conditions previously agreed with the Bank (¶3.12).  

Special contractual execution conditions: (i) prior to the implementation of the activities related to the Guyana 

Bureau of Statistics (GBS) under Component 1, the subscription and entry into effect of an agreement between 
the MoA and the GBS, according to the terms and conditions previously agreed with the Bank (¶3.2); (ii) prior to 
the bidding of infrastructure works under Components 2 and 3, the subscription and entry into effect of an 
agreement between the MoA and the EPA, according to the terms and conditions previously agreed with the 
Bank (¶3.2); (iii) prior to the building of infrastructure works related to the meat processing facilities financed 
under Component 3, the subscription and entry into effect of an agreement between the MoA and a producer’s 
association responsible for operating the abattoir, according to the terms and conditions previously agreed with 
the Bank (¶3.7); and (iv) compliance with the environmental and social conditions established in Section VI of the 
Environmental and Social Management Report (ESMR). 

Exceptions to Bank Policies: None 

Strategic Alignment 

Challenges
(c)

: SI 
 

PI 
 

EI 
 

Cross-Cutting Themes
(d)

: GD 
 

CC 
 

IC 
 

(a)
 The credit fee and inspection and supervision fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors during 

its review of the Bank’s lending charges, in accordance with the relevant policies. 
(b) 

   The borrower shall pay interests on the outstanding balance of the Ordinary Capital loan at a Libor based rate. Each time 
the outstanding balance reaches 25% of the net approved amount or $3 million, whichever is greater, the interest rate will 
be fixed. 

(c)
 SI (Social Inclusion and Equality); PI (Productivity and Innovation); and EI (Economic Integration). 

(d)
 GD (Gender Equality and Diversity); CC (Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability); and IC (Institutional Capacity 

and Rule of Law).
 



- 2 - 

 

I. DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING 

A. Background, Problem Addressed, Justification
1
 

1.1 Guyana’s green economy development model. Guyana has 10 administrative 
regions and more than 75% of the territory is 
covered with forest. Savannahs represent 
10% of the territory. Forest and savannah 
ecosystems offer a wide range of goods and 
environmental services, necessary for 
agricultural development. Since 2009, 
Guyana in partnership with Norway started a 
payment-for-performance, forest conservation 
program. This partnership aims to maintain or 
reduce deforestation rates, currently at 
0.56%, one of the lowest in the world. 
Because agriculture is one of the drivers of 
deforestation in Guyana, increased 
production and productivity need to consider 
secondary effects on forests and savannahs.   

1.2 Agricultural Production. In 2014, agriculture represented almost 18% of total 
Gross Domestic Product (GDP), contributed 20% of employment (70% in rural 
areas), and is one of the main sources of foreign exchange earnings, representing 
19% of total exports (GBS, 2016). Coastal regions (2, 3, 4 and 5, mostly) 
concentrate in agricultural production especially export crops like sugar and rice. 
Although Guyana experienced high rates of economic growth between 2009 and 
2013 (4.5% annual average), the share of agriculture in GDP (and natural 
resources in general) has decreased consistently (Modeste, 2016). This is in part 
due to lower international prices for commodities, but also low productivity, 
especially among small farmers.  

1.3 Although small farmers produce most of the fruits and vegetables grown in Guyana 
(80% of the country’s grains, 60% of coconuts, and 40% of all coconut oil [FAO, 
2012]); productivity is still considered low compared to other countries with similar 
farm production systems (yields of corn, beans, and small scale rice, on average, 
are 40% lower than the Caribbean average). Livestock production is focused on 
poultry, with cattle and small ruminants produced mainly on small farms, with 
similarly low productivity (FAO, 2012). In the aggregate, as a result of the farming 
structure and low levels of agricultural services, the sector’s efficiency, as part of 
Total Factor Productivity (TFP) is one of the lowest in Latin America and the 
Caribbean (LAC) (Nin-Pratt, et al., 2015). As Fuglie and Rada (2013) have shown, 
45% of growth in productivity in the agricultural sector (global average) can be 
attributed to the adoption of better technologies.  

1.4 Low productivity is not the only challenge. Agriculture in Guyana is also affected by 
changes in weather patterns, particularly drought severity. The drought of      

                                                 
1
  References included in this document can be found in IDBDocs40279510 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40279510/R


- 3 - 

 

2014–2015 was one of the longest and most severe of the last two decades, 
extending the dry days from 145 to 189 (OCC-MP, 2016). Such drought poses 
enormous risk to farmers, and food security, particularly those in the hinterlands 
(Region 9), where water availability is one of the main constraints to agriculture 
and livestock development. Climate change impacts, including intensified drought 
as well as flooding, increase the need to facilitate the identification and adoption of 
adaptation measures, both for large and small farmers (IFPRI, 2009).  

1.5 Agricultural production in Regions 9 and 10 requires the adoption of practices 
tailored to ensure long–term conservation and ecosystem service supply in these 
environments. Although more than 90% of households in the hinterlands practice 
agriculture, most are subsistence–based with only 35% with agriculture as their 
main source of income. This low percentage is the function of precipitation patterns 
in the region (six months on average with less than 50mm of rainfall per month), 
little information on regionally appropriate agricultural practices and a lack of       
all-weather road connection with Georgetown. Improved technologies and 
practices for water management and use are critical in these regions where 
seasonal variation in precipitation induces drought stress as well as flooding.  

1.6 A study commissioned by the Bank (2016) analyzed the relative support to 
producers using the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development 
(OECD) methodology (Derlagen, 2016). The main findings show that the 
Government of Guyana employs various policy instruments in support of the 
agricultural sector, including trade policies, fiscal measures as well as public 
investment in infrastructure, research, extension services and marketing. During 
the preparation of the Program, a diagnostic of these services was clustered in 
three sections: (i) information systems; (ii) research, innovation and extension; and 
(iii) SPS standards and compliance. These sub–sectors represent the bulk of 
public goods and services provided by the Government. Through these services 
the Government has the opportunity to improve productivity and the sustainable 
use of natural resources.  

1.7 Agricultural information system (AIS). The MoA has a Monitoring and 
Evaluation (M&E) Unit created in 2014 that aggregates information produced by 
the Guyana Marketing Corporation (GMC); National Agricultural Research and 
Extension Institute (NAREI), the Guyana Livestock Development Agency (GLDA), 
the Guyana Sugar Corporation (GUYSUCO) and the Guyana Rice Development 
Board (GRDB), among others. An assessment carried out by the FAO in 2015 
showed that nine agencies of the MoA collect statistical data, but standards and 
consistency are lacking (see Optional Link 2). The last national agricultural census 
was implemented in 1952 and there is scant information on the current 
configuration of farmers, farming systems and cost structures across the country. 
Regional and national development plans are based on population censuses, with 
little or anecdotal information about production activities or productivity. The 
evidence and historical experience is clear and unambiguous: strategic 
investments in agricultural sector information increase productivity (Alston, 2010) 
and private sector investment (Fuglie, 2016). 

1.8 Limitations of the AIS. Because data from non-traditional crops are collected on 
an ad hoc basis, farmer characteristics, particularly in the hinterlands, are not well 
known and therefore provide little input into the preparation of regional 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40663628/R


- 4 - 

 

development plans and policies. Land use and pressure on the environment can 
currently only be assessed on an anecdotal basis. Furthermore, as the 
assessment of the agricultural information system of the MoA shows, data 
collection, processing, and reporting protocols and standards need to be 
established and staff trained as a prerequisite to improving the AIS (see Optional 
Link 2). Lack of quality data present problems for suppliers, by also for users, like 
the Government, private investors and development agencies. Fundamentally, a 
comprehensive census is needed to provide the necessary basis for data-driven, 
evidence-based policy and decision making, robust survey design for commodity 
and sector specific analysis; and an accurate portrayal of agriculture’s contribution 
to economic growth. In the absence of this information, both the public and private 
sectors develop their policies and investments in an environment of high 
uncertainty and risk; they face higher costs as a result, and; their probabilities of 
success are much lower than in environments where information is available and 
credible. 

1.9 Research, innovation and technology transfer. NAREI, established in 2011, is 
the leading research and extension agency in Guyana. NAREI has 30 researchers 
(three PhD and four MSc) and 20 experiments under implementation, but no 
research programs. NAREI has released at least 10 new varieties of                 
non-traditional crops and five new technologies in the last five years, but adoption 
is difficult to assess or quality of the genetic material. NAREI has a budget of   
US$4 million annually. Also, GUYSUCO and GRDB have their own research 
facilities and personnel to develop technologies for the sugar and rice industries. 
Together they invest approximately US$0.5 million annually in research and 
innovation. NAREI and GLDA only have 35 technical staff dedicated to extension 
and technology transfer, which given the number of farmers in Guyana, this is well 
below international best practices (FAO, 2008). Medium and large sugar and rice 
farmers are the ones benefiting most from current investment in research and 
innovation.  

1.10 Analysis at the regional (Avila et. al, 2010) and global level (Heisey, 2001) show 
that a higher proportion of research, innovation and technology transfer of the 
agricultural GDP is correlated with higher productivity and incomes. On average, 
for LAC, an increase in 10% in public expenditure in public services (including 
research, innovation and technology transfer) results in a 5% increase in the 
agricultural sector value added per capita (Foster, et. al. 2016). However, the total 
research budget of Guyana represented just 0.86% of the agricultural GDP in 
2014, which is below the average of 1.15% observed for LAC and the Anglophone 
Caribbean (Stads, et. al., 2016). Based on a systematic review, Waddington et. al. 
(2014) reported that access to extension and innovation increases revenues and 
use of sustainable practices, by 25% and 60% respectively. Moreover, a World 
Bank study (2011) of 86 impact evaluations (15 in LAC), found strong effects of 
research and extension on yields, income and productivity. An increase in 
productivity may result in less area used for pastures, reducing pressure on forest 
and ecosystems. Furthermore a survey conducted during the preparation of this 
loan showed that only 3% of farmers reported having received some kind of 
technical assistance; only 8% have access to credit and do not have access to 
public infrastructure. IFPRI (2009) reports a likely 25% fall in yields for an average 
of three global models for Guyana. Experience in LAC (Salazar, 2015; Mullally and 
Maffioli, 2014) show that a combination of technical assistance with incentives for 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40663628/R
pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40663628/R
http://www.fao.org/nr/gen/gen_081001_en.htm


- 5 - 

 

adoption of new technologies have a positive effect on productivity and incomes, 
especially for small farmers.  

1.11 Limitations of the research, innovation and extension services in Guyana. 
Guyana lacks the necessary infrastructure and research programs to promote 
agricultural production, especially for non–traditional crops. Furthermore, although 
NAREI and GLDA have access to research stations, the scientific rigor of research 
program design and implementation is unlikely to generate substantive gains (see 
Optional Link 3). Limitations to collaborate with international research programs 
and institutions need to be resolved to access genetic material and reduce costs of 
validation and technology transfer in Guyana. In addition, little agricultural research 
and extension has been carried out in the ecologically (and socially) distinct 
savannahs of Regions 9 and 10 and thus knowledge of appropriate technologies is 
similarly lacking. High transaction costs, associated with the lack of research and 
innovation and the size of the market, limit the exposure of small famers in the 
target area to new technologies (Agriculture SFD). Increased attention is needed 
toward the identification and adoption of sustainable and climate resilient practices 
which protect fragile ecosystems and watersheds (including pasture/crop rotation, 
fertilizer use, and improved water storage and management), and reduce the risks 
of losses and food insecurity. 

1.12 Animal Health and Sanitary and Phytosanitary framework. GLDA was 
established in 2010. Its main objective is to provide services and research for the 
livestock industry. The GLDA is a semi-autonomous organization of the MoA and 
has offices in all regions, except Regions 1 and 8. GLDA staff is comprised of 148 
people and provides inspection and technical assistance services. GLDA also has 
eight authorizing officers that enforce the Animal Health Act in the country; the 
Veterinarian Act; and the Guyana Livestock Development Authority Act. Although 
the Animal Health Act was approved in 2011, regulations are still pending.  

1.13 Guyana has 10 registered abattoirs all of which are in poor condition and do not 
comply with current standards (see Optional Link 5). The Georgetown abattoir is 
the main abattoir and slaughters approximately 60% of all animals slaughtered in 
Guyana. Small producers in Region 9 process 35 animals per month, out of a 
current potential of 100. Overall, opportunities for the export of meat from Guyana 
are severely constrained by lack of infrastructure, adequate regulations, trained 
inspectors and supporting policies. Noncompliance increases risks of animal 
diseases (like foot and mouth) and compromises human health and environmental 
quality. OVE (2015) reports that investments in sanitary and phytosanitary 
activities increased competitiveness and productivity in the countries analyzed. 
Better access to infrastructure and technical assistance will increase productivity 
and prices for small producers, through higher quality and better prices (Agriculture 
SFD, 2016).  

1.14 Problems with meat processing and SPS standards. Current standards in 
Guyana compromise human health and environmental quality, as well as access to 
revenue from export markets. Meat inspections are carried out under the authority 
of the Public Health Ordinance of 1915 with updates circa 1977, as well as 
sections of the Food and Drug Act of 1972, also updated in 1977. Waste disposal 
is also under the Public Health Ordinance and the Environmental Protection Act, 
1996, that created the Environmental Protection Agency. Regulations of this act 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40663634/R
pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40589854/R


- 6 - 

 

are not available. Standards for abattoirs, are based on standards from India 
dating from 1979, and are outdated. A comprehensive analysis of the costs of 
complying with local and international standards is not available in Guyana. 
Practical implementation of standards and regulations is not readily available to the 
private sector to evaluate the feasibility of medium and large investments. There 
are important public goods associated with SPS standards, but small farmers also 
lack access to capital and knowledge to improve practices (Agriculture SFD). 
Access to processing facilities will generate incentives for higher productivity and 
quality, as demonstrated by Ding (2014). 

1.15 Bank interventions and other investments. The Bank has supported the country 
in the modernization of the agricultural sector since 2004 through operations 
1558/SF-GY and 1929/BL-GY. Also, operations 3106/BL-GY and 3422/BL-GY 
helped the Government to implement a Low Carbon Development Strategy, which 
included support for the agricultural sector. These two operations helped the 
Government of Guyana (GoG) to comply with agreements with the Government of 
Norway that aim to reduce the deforestation below 0.56% annually. 1558/SF-GY 
improved the competitiveness of the agricultural sector through investment in 
drainage and irrigation systems and 1929/BL-GY focused on non-traditional 
agricultural export like aquaculture, fruits, vegetables and livestock. It also 
facilitated the creation and startup of NAREI and GLDA. The MIF approved three 
projects for the agriculture sector (ATN/ME-12052-GY, ATN/ME-11699-GY and 
GY-L1062) and Compete Caribbean has financed two projects. The International 
Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) is preparing a new investment loan for 
up to US$9 million that will target Region 9 and Region 1. Also the European 
Union is financing a US$9 million project to facilitate the diversification of the sugar 
sector and the GRIFF is financing the land titling program in the hinterlands.  

1.16 Additionally, the Ministry of Business, with support from the Bank is preparing loan 
GY-L1059 (Enhancing the National Quality Infrastructure for Economic 
Diversification and Trade Promotion). Laboratories to be implemented with        
GY-L1059 funding will support a national system, for calibration and standards. 
Laboratories planned for Region 9 and Region 10 financed by the Program will be 
small facilities for soil analysis to support, mainly, research activities. However, 
investments in national standards and metrology supported by GY-L1059 will 
facilitate the implementation of Component 3 of this Program.  

1.17 Lessons learned. The proposed operation draws lessons from the final evaluation 
of loans 1929/BL-GY, 3106/BL-GY and 3422/BL-GY, and lessons from IFAD’s 
project 742-GY final evaluation – draft (see Table I-1). 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



- 7 - 

 

Table I-1. Lessons learned from projects implemented by the Bank and IFAD 

Lessons learned How it was addressed in the design 

Legal framework and regulations take 
time to be reviewed and agreed 

The Program will facilitate the update and drafting of legislation 
and regulations focusing on meat processing (¶1.26). 
Documents to be updated have been identified and activities 
financed by the Program will target specific parts of the 
legislation to facilitate the implementation of pilot facilities 
(¶1.26).  

Support to farmers and producers 
associations are part of the social 
capital needed for success 

Producers associations will manage pilot facilities. Two 
producers associations have been identified and strengthening of 
their administrative, institutional and technical capacities will be 
implemented before the infrastructure is delivered (¶3.7).  

Infrastructure is a basic input, but 
needs to be accompanied with training, 
management and maintenance 
provisions 

The Program will finance training and startup operations of 
agriculture centers and pilot facilities (¶1.24 and ¶1.26). 
Research programs have been prepared in collaboration with 
NAREI and GLDA (¶1.24) and will include collaboration with 
international research institutions.  

Enforcement of environment 
management and mitigation measures 
has to be included in the design 

To ensure compliance with local legislation and Bank’s policies, 
the Program will finance the monitoring and supervision of 
environmental impact evaluations (¶1.24). The Program will also 
include training for MoA staff to facilitate the preparation of ToR, 
bidding documents and supervision as it related to environmental 
management. 

Baseline and monitoring need to start 
implementation before the project is 
approved 

During the preparation of the Program, a survey was 
implemented in Regions 5, 9 and 10. This baseline provided 
valuable information to prepare the impact evaluation and 
economic analysis (¶1.21).  

1.18 Conceptualization. This Program will contribute to the MoA strategy for the 
development of Guyana’s agricultural sector. Most agriculture is concentrated in 
the coast, facing climate change risks and reduced availability of water and 
suitable land. The MoA wants to increase production in the hinterlands (Regions 
10 and 9) where natural resources are available. By generating the necessary 
capacity for data collection and analysis, the MoA will be in the position to propose 
policy and investments that generate the highest return for the country, in line with 
the National Strategy for Agriculture (2013 – 2020). This document includes 
objectives for the collection and analysis of statistical information. Preparation of 
agricultural policies and regional plans will benefit from better information. Better 
information will reduce uncertainty and risk in both public and private investments 
of all scales, and will result in higher production and incomes. Productivity gains 
will be achieved through scientifically rigorous research program design and 
implementation, and an expansion of Guyana’s capacity to transfer these 
technologies to farmers. Farmers will have access to genetic material, practices 
and technologies not currently available, which will increase yields, production, 
incomes and food security. Improved agriculture and livestock technology will 
reduce pressure on fragile ecosystem and facilitate adaptation to climate change if 
sufficient guidance and adequate support is provided. Guyana’s ability to produce 
livestock safe for domestic and export consumption will be enhanced, spurring 
investment and growth. Public goods supported by the Program (¶1.8, ¶1.11 and 
¶1.14) will be enhanced with incentives for technology adoption (¶1.25) and 
access to infrastructure to add value to production (¶1.26) that address the costs 
and access to knowledge in Regions 9 and 10.  

1.19 Gender and diversity inclusion strategy. Twenty-eight percent of households in 
the target area are headed by women. Only 1.9% of women head of households in 



- 8 - 

 

Regions 5, 9 and 10 reported access to technical assistance and a very low use of 
sustainable agricultural practices (23%). Extension services will be implemented at 
the community level and will include strategies to promote the participation of 
women (for example providing childcare and food for the participants). Members of 
livestock producers associations are more than 50% women and will receive 
training and technical assistance. The agriculture census will assess the 
involvement of women and other vulnerable groups in agriculture. Because a large 
share of households in Region 9 is comprised of Amerindian communities, a 
specific strategy for technology transfer has been prepared for this region.   

1.20 Strategic alignment. This operation is consistent with the IDB Country Strategy 
with Guyana (GN-2690) through the priority area “Natural resources management” 
and cross-cutting issues related to indigenous population in Guyana. The Program 
is consistent with the Update to the Institutional Strategy (UIS) 2010-2020         
(AB-3008) and is strategically aligned with the development challenge of 
productivity and innovation by increasing productivity of farmers in Guyana (impact 
indicators). The Program is also aligned with the cross-cutting themes of:              
(i) climate change and environmental sustainability by reducing the pasture area 
allocated to livestock production; and (ii) institutional capacity and rule of law by 
the improvement of SPS regulations. The Program also contributes to gender 
equality and diversity by increasing the participation of women in agricultural 
technical assistance. Additionally, the Program will contribute to the Corporate 
Results Framework (CRF) 2016-2019 (GN-2727-6) by increasing the number of 
farmers that improve the use and management of natural capital. This operation is 
also consistent with: (i) the Food Security SFD (GN-2825-3), contributing to two 
sources of food security: (a) access, and (b) availability; (ii) the Agriculture and 
Natural Resources SFD (GN-2709-5); and (iii) Gender and Diversity SFD         
(GN-2800), promoting livelihood opportunities for indigenous peoples.  

B. Objective, Components and Cost 

1.21 The main objective of the Program is to increase productivity of the agricultural 
sector while maintaining a sustainable and climate resilient use of natural 
resources in Guyana. The specific objectives are to: (i) produce high quality data 
for the agricultural sector; (ii) increase productivity, especially for medium and 
small farmers; and (iii) increase SPS standards and access to meat processing 
facilities. Higher productivity will also contribute to reduce pressure on forest and 
fragile ecosystems, and at the same time, increase incomes for small and  
medium-sized farmers. 

1.22 Target population. The main beneficiaries of the Program will be farmers of 
Regions 5, 9 and 10 and the MoA and its agencies (see Optional Link 9). The 
Population Census 2012 identifies 29,457 households in these regions (13,847 in 
Region 5, 4,929 in region 9, 10,681 in Region 10), of which 35% are farmers 
according to the 2002 estimation provided by the Guyana Bureau of Statistics 
(GBS). A survey prepared for the design of this operation shows that farmers in 
these regions are small on average. The Program will target 5,000 farmers in 
these three regions (out of a total of 10,310), 89% of them, cultivating less than 
five Ha. The main annual crops are cassava, beans and corn. Average annual 
household income for these farmers is US$4,649, with agriculture, livestock and 
forestry production accounting for more than 25% (up to 50% in Region 9). 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40588061/R


- 9 - 

 

Agricultural productivity is low, averaging 260 USD/Ha/year (and only 200 
USD/Ha/year in Region 9), compared to other countries of similar development. 
Only 3.6% of interviewed farmers report technical assistance and 8% have access 
to finance or equipment for agricultural production. Forty-eight percent report to be 
part of Amerindian communities (93% in Region 9) and have some productive 
activities at the community level.   

1.23 Component 1: Information for policy making and natural resource 
management (US$4.17 million). This component will enhance the capabilities of 
the MoA for data collection, analysis and dissemination. Data collected will be 
based on a nationwide agricultural census. This new information will be used not 
only by the Government, but also by the private sector to develop investments in 
agriculture, in line with the Green Development Strategy.

2
 Land use plans and 

promotion of sustainable practices will draw from the results of the census. The 
census will also contribute to monitoring of other variables, for example Monitoring, 
Reporting and Verification (MRV) related to the Guyana REDD+ Investment Fund 
(GRIF). The MoA through the M&E Unit will produce reports based on the census 
and data collected with support of the Program. The Program will finance:            
(i) strengthening of the MoA’s Agricultural Information System. This will include 
strengthening of the MoA’s M&E Unit; update of regulations and legal framework, 
training of MoA and the Guyana Bureau of Statistics staff, purchase of equipment 
and software, and dissemination; and (ii) the implementation of a national 
agricultural census. The agricultural census will collect data from all regions of 
Guyana and will use the latest technology for collection, analysis and quality 
control. Among other topics, the census will assess the involvement of women and 
vulnerable groups in the agricultural sector. Field activities will include training, 
pilot testing and a communication strategy. The implementation of the census will 
require the training of more than 600 enumerators and interviewing more than 
120,000 households.  

1.24 Component 2: Strengthening the agricultural innovation and extension 
system (US$6.39 million). This component will finance the implementation of 
research programs in Region 9 and Region 10, including the setup of an extension 
strategy tailored to the different groups of beneficiaries. Adoption of sustainable 
practices will be promoted through an incentives scheme targeting small farmers / 
communities. The main activities to be financed are: (i) the design and construction 
of an agricultural center in Region 9. This agriculture center will house research 
programs to be implemented by NAREI, GLDA and the Hydrometeorological 
Service. The agriculture center will also have facilities for the Guyana School of 
Agriculture (GSA) and the National Drainage and Irrigation Authority (NDIA);       
(ii) design and construction of a water reservoir for the agricultural center in Region 
9. This reservoir will harvest rainfall that will facilitate irrigation and livestock 
research in the agriculture center in Region 9; (iii) design and upgrade of facilities 
in Region 10 to implement a fully functional agricultural center in Ebini;                 
(iv) implementation of soil laboratories in both Region 9 and Region 10 for 
research purposes. These laboratories will facilitate the preparation of fertility 
maps for Region 9 and Region 10 and support extension services;                       
(v) implementation of research programs in each agricultural center. During 

                                                 
2
  Guyana’s Green Development Strategy is the strategy being developed by the current Government. It has 

four pillars: energy, environment security, ecological services and enterprise and employment.  



- 10 - 

 

preparation of the loan the following crops/areas of research were identified, 
among others: cassava, peanuts; orchards, livestock (cattle and small ruminants); 
and pastures. The POM will describe eligibility criteria to include other crops/areas 
of research in the Program. The design of these research programs, include the 
financing for visiting researchers; inputs for agricultural research; equipment and 
training for NAREI and GLDA staff; (vi) preparation and implementation of an 
extension strategy that will include incentives for technology adoption for small 
farmers. This strategy will include specific activities to include women in training 
events. Extension will be based on individual visits and group activities, centered in 
demonstration plots; and (vii) support to the EPA for environmental monitoring.  
The MoA has already requested the lease of land for the agriculture center in 
Region 9 to the GL&SC, which indicated that it is available.  

1.25 This component will also finance incentives targeting individual small farmers, and 
will be complementary to investments being prepared with IFAD funding. The IFAD 
funded project will provide support at the group (producer association or 
cooperative) and individual levels. Incentives will facilitate technology adoption and 
enhance the probability of increases in productivity. Farmers / communities will 
receive an incentive for at least 50% of the cost of the technology package 
financed by the Program. The POM will detail the process to identify and 
implement the incentives strategy (see ¶3.6).  

1.26 Component 3: Support for compliance with sanitary and phytosanitary 
standards (US$2.8 million). This component will finance the provision of technical 
assistance to develop the legal and regulatory framework and specific investments 
to improve SPS standards for meat processing. These investments will increase 
the volume of meat processed in accord to sanitary standards and lead to the 
attainment of better prices. The validation of the enforcement process and control 
will improve the safety of meat products for Guyanese and visitors and in the 
longer term, position the Food Safety System to be recognized by international 
trading partners and open the opportunity for export of meat products. The 
Program will finance the: (i) development and implementation of a simplified 
grading system for beef; (ii) update of abattoir standards and preparation of legal 
framework; (iii) technical assistance for the adaptation of the International Codex 
Alimentarius to the Guyana context; (iv) provision of support to GLDA to enforce 
standards; (v) technical assistance for the preparation of regulations pertaining to 
the new Food Safety Act; (vi) financing of two meat processing centers (one in 
Region 9 and one in Region 5), that will include infrastructure for processing, 
waste management, and equipment. These facilities will be managed by producers 
associations, which are 50% women (¶3.7). The Rupununi Livestock Producers 
Association (RLPA) and the Weste Berbice Sheep and Goat Association (WBSGA) 
have been identified to manage these facilities. Processing facilities will include all 
environmental mitigation activities described in the ESMR; (vii) training of GLDA 
staff in meat inspection, effective enforcement and audit; and members of selected 
producers associations members in management; standards; best practices; and 
environment protection; and (viii) strengthening of producers associations to 
enhance management. 



- 11 - 

 

C. Key Results Indicators 

1.27 The MoA and the Bank have agreed on a Results Matrix for the Program. The 
principal results of the Program are: (i) higher private investment in the agricultural 
sector; (ii) regional development plans prepared based on the agricultural census; 
(iii) higher productivity at the farm level; (iv) adoption of sustainable agricultural 
practices; (v) higher value of products processed by pilot facilities; and                
(vi) increase in the use of practices that reduce pressure on ecosystems. At the 
end of the Program, productivity (measured as the gross value of production per 
hectare per year) will increase and pressure on fragile ecosystems will be reduced 
(see Annex 2).   

Table I-2. Principal indicators of the Program 

Impact indicators 
Proposed 

measurement 
Justification 

Gross value of farm’s agricultural 
production (increase expected) 

US$ per farm 
per year 

Higher gross value reflects higher productivity 
and lead to higher incomes 

Gross value of farm’s livestock 
production (increase expected) 

US$ per farm 
per year 

Higher gross value reflects higher productivity 
and lead to higher incomes 

Reduction of the area allocated to 
pastures for livestock production 

Area (hectares) Higher efficiency in land use reduces pressure 
on ecosystems and increases sustainability 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS 

A. Financing Instruments 

2.1 The total Program amount is estimated at US$15,000,000 of which US$7,500,000 
will be financed by Ordinary Capital and US$7,500,000 will be financed by the 
FSO. The disbursement period will be 66 months. Table II-1 provides the cost 
summary by investment categories and components. The budget includes all costs 
associated with risks mitigation measures identified in the ESMP and the risk 
analysis. 

Table II-1. Costs and sources of financing (US$) 

 IDB Total % 

Component 1 4,170,000 4,170,000 27.8% 

Component 2 6,398,000 6,398,000 42.7% 

Component 3 2,800,000 2,800,000 18.7% 

Monitoring and Evaluation 400,000 400,000 2.7% 

Program Administration 1,232,000 1,232,000 8.2% 

Total 15,000,000 15,000,000 100% 

2.2 The Program is a specific investment operation and it is designed to be disbursed 
in five years and six months. The disbursement calendar is presented in Table II-2 
and it is based on the PEP (see Required Link 1).  

Table II-2. Disbursement projections (US$) 

 Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Year 6
1
 Total 

IDB 1,326,935 3,633,645 5,218,345 3,163,525 1,111,475 546,075 15,000,000 

% 8.8% 24.2% 34.8% 21.1% 7.4% 3.6% 100% 

Total 1,326,935 3,633,645 5,218,345 3,163,525 1,111,475 546,075 15,000,000 
1 

Last year of implementation is only six months. 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40647380/R
pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40564707/R


- 12 - 

 

B. Economic viability 

2.3 The ex-ante economic evaluation includes all components of the Program, 
following the vertical logic (see ¶1.18). The analysis was undertaken in two stages 
and follows best practices (World Bank, 2011). In the first stage, a break-even 
analysis was conducted in an optimization and cost benefit analytical framework to 
estimate the minimum net economic return per adopting farming household 
required for the net present value (NPV) of the Program to be equal to zero at a 
12% discount rate (2017 to 2040). Costs follow directly from the PEP and include: 
Program costs estimated in the design stage, and operations and maintenance 
costs of the agricultural research centers and processing facilities. Costs also 
include opportunity costs of training for farmers. Key assumptions in the analysis 
are: the technological adoption ceiling, assumed to be 20% of the 5,000 targeted 
farming household beneficiaries, and the adoption path which is assumed to follow 
a logistical functional form. The minimum return per adopting household for the 
Program to be economically viable is US$2,196 per household/year.   

2.4 The second stage of the analysis characterized the current farming System 1 
based on the farming household survey described in Optional Link 11. Key 
variables include area planted, harvest output, prices, yields and costs. System 2 
is the potential farming system that the Program aims to achieve. The crops bora 
bean and cassava, as well as livestock were chosen to characterize System 2, 
based on Program design. Yields to characterize System 2 crops were extracted 
from statistics on actual national average yields supplied by NAREI and the 
Ministry of Agriculture (2014), while beef cattle yields were drawn from FAO 
(2013). 

2.5 Yields reported in the household farm survey are considerably lower than those 
reported by NAREI and FAO and therefore a conservative approach to scenario 
design was pursued. Three scenarios are evaluated: an average scenario where 
achieved yields are 35% of those reported by NAREI and FAO; an optimistic 
scenario where 50% of potential yields are achieved, and; a pessimistic scenario 
where only 25% of potential yields are achieved. Across scenarios, a low adoption 
ceiling of 20% of potential new beneficiaries and current farmers is used. The 
average scenario results in a net present value (NPV) US$1,531,706 and an 
internal rate of return (IRR) of 14%; the optimistic scenario generates a NPV of 
US$17,762,431 and an Internal Rate of Return (IRR) of 31%, and the pessimistic 
scenario resulted in a negative NPV of US$8,243,387. Sensitivity analysis around 
the adoption ceiling shows that the Program breaks even when the adoption 
ceiling is 16.25% or greater, which is considered low in comparison to similar 
investments in agricultural research, extension and information.    

C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Risks 

2.6 The Program is classified as Category “B” pursuant to the Bank's Environment and 
Safeguards Compliance Policy (OP-703) and an Environmental and Social 
Analysis (ESA) was conducted which incorporated inputs from consultations with 
stakeholders, via meetings and a public consultation. The main direct impacts of 
the project relate to inadequate siting, design and operation of the facilities, 
especially animal welfare and waste management from the abattoirs and the high 
water use for both the abattoir and research station. Additionally, given the 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40588061


- 13 - 

 

sensitive nature of the ecosystem (especially in Region 9) and the emphasis on 
sustainable agriculture there is a need to ensure that training and research does 
not lead to unsustainable agricultural development in the region. These programs 
must not lead to the introduction of invasive species, the excessive use of 
pesticides and herbicides or high water demands. These measures help reduce 
the Program’s indirect impacts.  

2.7 Based on the ESA, specific management actions and mitigation measures were 
recommended to address the Program’s direct and indirect impacts. The measures 
are incorporated into the procedures and requirements for execution as part of the 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP). The main mitigation 
measures identified in the Plan include effective measures for site selection, 
design and construction to high standards for all new infrastructures, ensuring 
capacity for the supervision of construction and operation, and ensuring training 
courses are inclusive of indigenous groups and women, and do not result in the 
introduction of invasive species. The Environmental and Social Management 
Report (ESMR) provides a summary of the ESA and ESMP in relation to Bank 
policies.  

2.8 The ESMP describes how the Program complies with the Disaster Risk 
Management Policy (OP-704), the policies on Indigenous Peoples (OP-765) and 
on Gender and Equality (OP-761).

3
 The Program will promote risk reduction, 

climate change adaptation and the building of resilience to natural disasters and 
climate change. The Program also promotes opportunities and empowerment for 
low income women and indigenous peoples participating in agricultural activities. 

D. Fiduciary Risk 

2.9 The Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) has the lead responsibility for reporting on 
fiduciary matters and overall Program progress to the Ministry of Finance and the 
IDB. Based on discussions with the MoA during Program preparation, the 
Agricultural Service Development Unit (ASDU) will serve as the project 
implementation unit. As described in Annex III to the present POD, the fiduciary 
risk has been ranked as medium. The main fiduciary risks relate to:                        
(i) procurement processing delays due duplication of efforts to meet internal 
controls requirements for multiple approvals within the MoA and at the national 
level as per GoG national procurement regulations; (ii) most activities will be 
implemented in Region 9 and 10, which will require a high level of coordination;  
and (iii) budget and institutional capacity constraints due to ability to retain qualified 
technical  consultants (e.g., engineers, contractors) to provide technical assistance 
on some procurements.  

2.10 These are being addressed through: (i) the design of an Program Operating 
Manual (POM) which seeks to provide adequate guidance and mitigation 
measures to discharge all fiduciary duties in accordance with the Bank’s rules and 
procedures; (ii) continuous support to streamline the timely execution of all 
fiduciary activities; and (iii) providing continuous technical supervision and training 

                                                 
3
  Section 6 of the ESMP describes in detail expected impacts and proposed mitigating activities. Section 7 

describes the management plan for all mitigating activities.  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40664054
pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40564651/R


- 14 - 

 

in financial management and procurement staff who will be responsible for 
fiduciary activities under the present Loan. 

E. Other Risks 

2.11 The design of the Program used the methodology “Program Risk Analysis for 
Sovereign Guaranteed Loans”. Besides environmental and fiduciary risks, this 
analysis identified the following risks: (i) coordination between agencies (a national 
and regional coordinating committees will support the MoA, ¶3.3); and (ii) delays in 
the design, environmental and social impact evaluation and procurement of 
infrastructure (two procurement specialists will support the ASDU in the 
implementation, ¶2.6).  

2.12 Agriculture centers in Regions 9 and 10 will be managed, maintained and 
supported by the MoA. Specific budget lines are available in NAREI and GLDA 
budgets.  

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN 

A. Summary of Implementation Arrangements 

3.1 The Borrower is the Co-operative Republic of Guyana. The executing agency is 
the MoA, which will implement the Program through its ASDU. The ASDU is a 
specialized unit under the Permanent Secretary (PS) of the MoA. The ASDU will 
be responsible for all the fiduciary obligations to manage the Program, including:  
(i) planning of the technical and fiduciary aspects related to the Program activities; 
(ii) procurement of goods, works and services for the Program; (iii) the oversight 
and evaluation of Program activities; (iv) financial and accounting management of 
the Program, including the submission of disbursement requests and preparation 
of financial reports; and (v) risk management. The Program will strengthen the 
ASDU to facilitate the implementation of the Program, through the financing of 
specialized personnel dedicated to the Program, including among others; program 
coordinator; procurement officer; financial officer; civil engineer; and administrative 
assistant. The presentation of evidence that the Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) 
has selected a program coordinator, a financial officer and a procurement 
officer according to the terms and conditions previously agreed with the 
Bank will be a special contractual condition prior to first disbursement of the 
financing.  

3.2 Support to partner agencies. Additionally, the Program aims at strengthening the 
capacity of GBS and EPA, through the financing of consulting services to support 
supervision and monitoring. For this purpose, the MoA will subscribe an agreement 
with each GBS and EPA, which shall include, inter alia, a description of the roles 
and responsibilities of each entity in the implementation of the Program activities. 
The subscription and entry into effect of an agreement between the MoA and the 
GBS, according to the terms and conditions previously agreed with the Bank will 
be a special contractual condition prior to the implementation of the agricultural 
census included in Component 1. The subscription and entry into effect of an 
agreement between the MoA and the EPA, according to the terms conditions 



- 15 - 

 

previously agreed with the Bank will be a special contractual condition prior to the 
bidding of infrastructure works under Components 2 and 3. 

3.3 Institutional coordination. Coordination at the national level will use the same 
structure proposed by the IFAD funded loan. A National Steering Committee 
(NSC) will be established, and it will include: (i) the MoA; (ii) the Ministry of 
Indigenous People’s Affairs; (iii) Ministry of Public Health; (iv) Ministry of Business;        
(v) Ministry of Natural Resources (MNR); (vi) the Office of Climate Change at the 
Ministry of the Presidency; and (vii) the Ministry of Finance. The responsibilities 
and composition of the NSC will be detailed in the POM, but it will include:             
(i) support the implementation of loan; (ii) provide institutional and technical advice 
and support; and (iii) coordinate field activities. At the regional level, technical 
coordination will be implemented through the establishment of a Regional 
Management Committee (RMC). This RMC will include: (i) Regional Chairman;    
(ii) Regional representative of the Ministry of Indigenous People’s Affairs;            
(iii) Regional representative of the MNRE; (iv) Regional representative of each 
NAREI or GLDA; and (v) a regional representative of the beneficiaries. The roles 
and responsibilities of each of the members of the RMC, composition and its 
functions will be detailed in the POM, which will include: (i) support the 
implementation of the Program at the Regional level; (ii) support the ASDU in the 
implementation of the AOP; (iii) provide guidance to the AOP; and (iv) collaborate 
in coordinating with local and community leaders. 

3.4 Program Operating Manual (POM). The POM; which establishes standards and 
procedures for the MoA with regard to programming activities, procurement audits, 
and monitoring and evaluation, among others, will govern Program execution. The 
POM will include: (i) a detailed description of the implementation agreement of 
each component; (ii) roles and responsibilities of the agencies involved in the 
implementation of the Program; (iii) criteria and procedures to select and contract 
goods, services and works; (iv) criteria and procedures for management and 
financial control of the Program; (v) monitoring and evaluation arrangements; and 
(vi) specific criteria for environmental and social management of the Program, as 
described in the ESMR. The approval and entry into effect of the POM 
according to the terms and conditions previously agreed with the Bank will 
be a special contractual condition prior to first disbursement of the 
financing. 

3.5 Incentives for technology adoption. Research programs under Component 3 
will generate technology packages to be transferred to farmers. To increase the 
likelihood of adoption, the Program will finance incentives to adopt new 
technologies targeting small farmers. The eligibility criteria will be: (i) area under 
production / fallow; (ii) agriculture / forestry is the main source of income;            
(iii) farmer have farms located in Region 5, 9 or 10; and (iv) evidence that the 
farmer has the property rights, possession, community rights or rights of use of the 
land, as applicable. 

3.6 The steps to identify and select participants in the incentives program are detailed 
in the POM, and will be: 



- 16 - 

 

a. Farmers will be selected from the lists prepared by the MoA during the 
promotion of the Program. The target number of beneficiaries for the 
incentives is 2,000.   

b. Farmers will be selected from a random sample of communities. As a part of 
the registration process, each farmer will sign an implementation agreement 
with the MoA. However, during the preparation of the loan, a progression of 
500, 700, 800 farmers per year was suggested (see Optional Link 8 and 12).  

c. Farmers will select the technologies they want to implement from the 
packages offered by the MoA. Each package will include: (i) inputs; (ii) land 
preparation; (iii) equipment; and (iv) technical assistance. Packages will be 
designed for a specific unit of production. 

d. Each farmer will receive the incentive in designated bank accounts or 
through vouchers, based on verification of the implementation of the 
technologies, according to the conditions established in the POM. Vouchers 
will be redeemed by service providers after verification from the MoA. The 
MoA will verify the implementation of the technology in the field and prepare 
a report.  

e. Additionally, an external verification process will be implemented. This 
verification process will review, at random, the implementation of 
technologies; support provided by the MoA; and financial flows. 

3.7 Management of meat processing facilities. The implementation of the meat 
processing facilities under Component 3 requires the strengthening of the 
producers associations, which will manage these facilities. The associations will 
sign an agreement with the MoA to manage the facilities, that will include: (i) the 
length of the lease or other form of transfer; (ii) responsibilities of the association, 
in terms of payments or fees to be paid to the MoA, liabilities, limitations of the 
agreement in terms of responsibilities of the MoA; and penalties; and                  
(iii) monitoring and evaluation to be implemented by the MoA. The subscription 
and entry into effect of an agreement between the MoA and a producer’s 
association responsible for operating the abattoir, according to the terms and 
conditions previously agreed with the Bank will be a special contractual condition 
prior to the building of infrastructure works related to the meat processing facilities 
financed under Component 3. 

3.8 Procurement. All Program related procurement activities will be performed 
following Bank’s Procurement Policies: Policies for the Procurement of Goods and 
Works financed by the Bank (GN-2349-9) and Policies for the Selection and 
Contracting of Consultants financed by the Bank (GN-2350-9) as applicable.  

3.9 The Program is currently looking into the possibility of a Direct Contract with the 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) for a total of   
US$4 million. This Direct Contract would be based on the FAO’s experience in 
carrying out Agricultural Surveys as described in Component 1 of the present Loan 
and hence, the request for same would be grounded on Section 3.10 (d) of       
GN-2350-9, which foresees that “Single-source selection may be appropriate only 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40587606/R
pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40588248/R


- 17 - 

 

if it presents a clear advantage over competition: […] (d) when only one firm is 
qualified or has experience of exceptional worth for the assignment”

4
.  

3.10 Retroactive financing. The Bank may finance retroactively under the loan up to 
the amount US$350,000 (2.33% of the proposed loan amount), eligible expenses 
incurred by the Borrower prior to the date of loan approval to: (i) design, 
environmental and impact evaluation, and supervision of the infrastructure 
included in Components 2 and 3; (ii) contract specialized personnel of the ASDU 
dedicated to the Program; and (iii) finance the travel, per diem expenses and office 
supplies, provided that all the requirements substantially similar to those set out in 
the loan agreement requirements are adhered to. These expenses must have 
been incurred on or after June 16

th
, 2016 (PP approval date), and under no 

circumstances shall expenditures incurred more than 18 months prior to the loan 
approval date be included.  

3.11 Auditing. The Program will submit to the Bank the following documents:              
(i) semiannual financial reports of the Program are to be included in the 
semiannual progress report which will be submitted by the MoA to the Bank;         
(ii) annual financial statements of the project, audited by the Auditor General of 
Guyana are to be submitted to the Bank within 120 days at the end of each fiscal 
year, beginning with the fiscal year in which the first expenditures are incurred; and 
(iii) a final financial audit report of the Program is to be submitted by MoA within 
120 days after the date of the last disbursement. 

B. Summary of Arrangements for Monitoring Results 

3.12 Monitoring. Indicators and targets will be monitored using the Agricultural 
Information System and the Results Matrix. The M&E Unit of the MoA will collect 
the data and prepare the reports. The Program will prepare reports for the Bank 
every six months, which will be submitted no later than 45 days after the end of 
each semester. Also, the MoA will submit to the Bank an Annual Operations Plan 
(AOP) no later than 45 days prior to the beginning of each calendar year. The AOP 
will include the update of the PEP and will detail the activities and procurement 
proposed for the year. The presentation by the Borrower of an initial report, 
including, the Program’s Pluri-annual Execution Plan (PEP), the Procurement 
Plan, the Financial Plan and the Results Matrix according to the terms and 
conditions previously agreed with the Bank, will be a special contractual 
condition prior to first disbursement of the financing. 

3.13 Evaluation. Two independent evaluations will be contracted by the MoA:              
(i) mid–term evaluation, to be implemented when 50% of the resources have been 
committed or thirty months after the date of effectiveness of the loan contract, 
whichever comes first; and (ii) a final impact evaluation, to be implemented when 
90% of the resources have been committed. These reports will be contracted 
based on Terms of Reference agreed with the Bank (see Required Link 3). 

                                                 
4
  This does not constitute a request for approval/no objection to the Direct Contract. Such request will be 

processed in accordance with the applicable rules during execution. FAO is a specialized agency of the 
United Nations and has executed similar censuses around the world. It is the only agency worldwide with 
this kind of experience, except national statistic agencies.  

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40564750/R


- 18 - 

 

3.14 Impact evaluation. The impact evaluation will have two parts. First, investments in 
Component 1 and Component 2 will be evaluated through a quasi–experimental 
design. The planned evaluation intends to assess the impact of data availability 
and research and extension services and seeks to answer the question whether 
these services, provided through the agricultural census, newly constructed 
agriculture centers, improved the production, productivity, and income of 
beneficiary farmer households. In order to answer this question, the evaluation 
relies on a difference-in-difference approach paired with randomized order of 
phase-in (see Optional Link 8). Specifically, the evaluation will take advantage of 
the staggered implementation of the Program over three years by using beneficiary 
farmers in later cohorts as the control group for the early treatment group. In this 
manner, the evaluation can control for potential bias from self-selection among 
beneficiary farmers and ensure a reliable impact estimate. A carefully planned 
selection mechanism (clustered randomized assignment) at the community level 
further allows the inclusion of such farmers who live in close proximity to 
beneficiaries and may enjoy indirect spillover effects that could increase program 
impact. The evaluation will rely on three rounds of surveys: (i) a baseline survey 
administered in year one prior to the provision of extension services to the first 
cohort; (ii) the first follow-up survey administered in year two prior to the provision 
of extension services to the second cohort; and (iii) a final follow-up survey 
administered in year three prior to the provision of extension services to the third 
cohort. A final impact evaluation report will be due at the end of year six of 
Program implementation. 

3.15 The second part of the evaluation will use a before – after approach to evaluate 
the impact of investments in pilot facilities for meat processing proposed under 
Component 3.  As a key impact indicator, livestock production (volume of meat, 
number of animals) will be measured both at the farm level and at the processing 
facility level. Also, prices received by farmers will be recorded to reflect changes in 
sales due to higher quality and compliance with sanitary and phytosanitary 
standards.  




























































PUBLIC 
SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE 

DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK  
 

 

 

 

ARGENTINA 

 

 

 

PROVINCIAL AGRICULTURAL SERVICES PROGRAM – PROSAP IV 

(AR-L1198) 

 

THIRD INDIVIDUAL OPERATION UNDER THE CONDITIONAL CREDIT LINE FOR 
INVESTMENT PROJECTS (CCLIP)  

(AR-X1006) 

 

 

 

LOAN PROPOSAL 


PROJECT SUMMARY 

ARGENTINA 
PROVINCIAL AGRICULTURAL SERVICES PROGRAM – PROSAP IV 

(AR-L1198) 
THIRD INDIVIDUAL OPERATION UNDER THE CONDITIONAL CREDIT LINE FOR INVESTMENT 

PROJECTS – (AR-X1006)  
 

Financial Terms and Conditions 

Borrower: Argentine Republic 
Flexible Financing Facility(a) 

Amortization period: 25 years 

Executing agency: Ministry of Agroindustry 

Original WAL: 15.25 years 

Disbursement period: 4 years 

Grace period: 5.5 years 

Source Amount (US$) % Inspection and supervision fee: (b) 

IDB (OC): 100,000,000 76 Interest rate: LIBOR based 

Local 31,426,000 24 Credit fee: (b) 

Total 131,426,000 100 Approval currency: 
U.S. dollars from the 
Ordinary Capital 

Project at a Glance 

Project objective/description:  

The objective of the Conditional Credit Line for Investment Projects (CCLIP) is to contribute to the competitiveness and development of 
regional rural economies through the execution of individual programs consistent with this purpose. Specifically, the third i ndividual 
operation proposed herein seeks improvements to productivity and an increase in sales and value-added for small and medium-sized 
agricultural producers, with a focus on increasing resilience to climate change. 

Special contractual condition precedent to the first disbursement of the loan proceeds: 

The executing agency, through the Unit for Rural Change (URC), will provide evidence that the updated program Operating Regulations 
have been approved and entered into effect, and have been reviewed in accordance with the terms previously agreed upon with the 
Bank, including the Environmental and Social Manual (ESM) (paragraph 3.3). 

Special contractual conditions for environmental and social execution: 

Those established in the environmental and social management report (ESMR) will be included (paragraph 2.6).  

Exceptions to Bank policies: None. 

Strategic Alignment 

Challenges:(c) SI 
 

PI 
 

EI 
 

Crosscutting themes:(d) GD 
 

CC 
 

IC 
 

 
(a) Under the terms of the Flexible Financing Facility (FN-655-1), the borrower has the option of requesting changes in the amortization schedule as well as 

currency and interest rate conversions. The Bank will take operational and risk management considerations into account when reviewing such requests. 
(b) The credit fee and the inspection and supervision fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors as part of its review of the Bank’s 

lending charges, in accordance with applicable policies. 
(c) SI (Social Inclusion and Equality); PI (Productivity and Innovation); and EI (Economic Integration).). 
(d) GD (Gender Equality and Diversity); CC (Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability); and IC (Institutional Capacity and Rule of Law). 

  



 
 

I. DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING 

A. Background, problem addressed, and rationale 

 Recent context on the development of the agricultural sector in Argentina  

1.1 In Argentina, the agrifood sector accounts for around 10% of gross domestic product 
(GDP), and 20% of GDP including the agroindustry sector. The sector generates 
65% of total exports (US$35 billion) and 36% of employment. The country’s Pampa 
region1 generates 90% of agricultural production by value and 80% of the sector’s 
exports. The non-Pampa agriculture sector accounts for around 65% of agricultural 
exploitation, generates 20% of total production, and provides 54% of all rural jobs to 
220,000 rural families, the majority of them without their own capital (INDEC, 
Gallacher, and Lema, 2014).  

1.2 Over the last 10 years, Argentina’s agricultural sector passed through three distinct 
periods of sector and macroeconomic context that significantly affected its structure 
and performance. Between 2006 and 2012, the strong growth of the sector’s grain 
exports stood out, a result mainly of high demand from Asian countries and the 
agricultural capacity of the Pampa to meet growing international demand. Six 
products accounted for 65% of all exports, with a significant contribution from the 
soy chain and with export destinations highly concentrated: 82% of the soy was 
exported to China and 60% of the wheat to Brazil. For agricultural products, 30% is 
exported without any processing, and only 54% of agribusiness exports are products 
with basic processing (soy oil and flour). Although the expansion of soy was 
concentrated in the Pampa provinces, growing areas have also expanded to other 
regions, causing changes in land use and replacement of traditional crops (Anlló, 
Bisang, and Salvatierra, 2010).  

1.3 A second contextual period from 2012 to 2015 was characterized by the application 
of policies resulting in strong macroeconomic distortions: taxes and quantitative 
restrictions on agricultural exports (grains mainly), foreign-exchange controls and 
differentiated exchange rates, import controls, price controls, and targeted 
subsidies. Estimates from the IDB Agrimonitor (2014) show that from 2007 to 2012, 
producers generated net transfers to the public purse (via tax collection) and to 
consumers (through lower prices) that averaged US$11 billion annually, accounting 
for more than 30% of the value of the sector’s production. This policy framework 
caused productive and export activity in general to stall, but particularly impacted the 
non-Pampa regional economies, since as described in the following section, these 
regions face significant development gaps, forcing them to compete with greater 
disadvantages (Gallacher and Lema, 2014). 

1.4 A third period of context began with the change of government in December 2015, 
one of whose first measures was to eliminate the macroeconomic and sector policy 
distortions (Argentina, Country Development Challenge 2016 – CDC). Along these 
lines, restrictions on corn and wheat were eliminated and restrictions on soy were 
reduced; the exchange rate was free floated and foreign exchange restrictions were 
removed, as were administrative price and import controls. The new government 
seeks to reposition Argentine agriculture to make it competitive in external markets, 

                                                
1  Argentina’s provinces are grouped into the following five broad geographic regions: (i) Pampa region; 

(ii) Northeast region (NEA); (iii) Northwest region (NWA); (iv) Cuyo Region; and (v) Patagonia region. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386


 - 2 - 
 
 

 
incentivize private investment in cutting-edge technology, and focus attention on 
structural shortcomings and development gaps that affect the sector, particularly in 
the more vulnerable regional economies that have fallen behind in terms of social 
and economic development (Belgrano Plan). 

 Gaps in regional development and priorities for competitiveness and 
developing rural regional economies  

1.5 Development gaps in regional economies, particularly the Norte Grande (NG) 
provinces, are notable. The per capita GDP in the NG is 47.5% of that of the nation 
as a whole. With 20.7% of the total population, the NG only generates 9.8% of the 
country’s GDP and exports around 10% of the national total. (Meloni, 2012; 
Argentina CDC). In a study on production and technology gaps for the agricultural 
sector, Cuervo (2016) tracks the Global Yield Gap in Agriculture. The index 
measures the production gap based on maximum achievable yield and actual yield 
(farm yield) for national-scale field crops. The production gap shows low relative 
levels of technical efficiency: 41.5% for corn, followed by wheat with 41% and soy 
with 31.7%. Measured as “yield” differences in the production of national field crops 
(cereals and oilseeds) for the 2011-2014 period, the productive gap figures show 
that the NG’s technical efficiency index in corn is 62% that of the humid Pampa area, 
while for soy it is 82%, for wheat it is only 53%, sorghum stands at 62%, and 
sunflower at 74%. 

1.6 A number of factors affect the regional gaps in technology and development for 
Argentina’s rural regional economies, with the following generally standing out: (i) a 
deficit in production infrastructure, particularly irrigation, connectivity, and rural 
logistics infrastructure, as well as dependable access to energy sources; (ii) climate 
change and its implications for water availability for high quality and high volume 
agricultural production; (iii) deficits in services for improving competitiveness and 
value added, restricting productivity and innovation; and (iv) institutional, 
governance, and social participation weaknesses, both public and within private 
organizations and associations of small and medium-sized rural producers. (Lema, 
2010; Lissi and Losi, 2010; Leyva, 2016; Bisang, Campi, and Aniló, 2013). These 
factors are described below. 

1.7 Productive infrastructure: Irrigation. According to the 2014 National Irrigation 
Plan and the study “Potencial de Ampliación del Riego en la Argentina,” [Potential 
for Expanding Irrigation in Argentina, United Nations Food and Agriculture 
Organization (FAO), PROSAP, World Bank, 2015], Argentina has a little more than 
2 million hectares of irrigated land, with potential to expand that to around 6 million 
hectares.2 The non-Pampa regions are the most dependent on this infrastructure for 
agricultural development. Half of all irrigated land is in dry regions with annual 
precipitation of less than 500 mm (e.g. the Andean areas of Jujuy, Salta, Tucumán, 
Catamarca, La Rioja, San Juan, and Mendoza), while 20% is in the semi-dry central 
and northern regions, with between 600 mm and 800 mm of rain during the summer. 
The water stress situation in these regions is worsening due to the effects of climate 
change and more intense drought periods. Irrigation accounts for 70% of total water 
consumption in Argentina, and 75% of the water used for this purpose comes from 

                                                
2  Including expansion over existing areas, new areas, and complementary irrigation.  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386


 - 3 - 
 
 

 
surface sources, generally reservoirs created by dams and river diversion, with the 
other 25% coming from aquifers through individual wells. 

1.8 The four irrigation systems identified by the program have low efficiency (60%) as a 
result of: (i) main canals that are not lined (75%); (ii) secondary canals that are not 
lined (80%); and (iii) little use of pressurized irrigation systems (25% of farmers). The 
records and technical evaluations of the systems rehabilitated by PROSAP show 
that it is possible to increase initial efficiency levels from 60% to over 90% in terms 
of water loss reduction. Also, in terms of technology, at the level of the individual 
farm, the use of inefficient irrigation technology is still prevalent (e.g. surface 
irrigation) partly due to limited management capacity and knowledge, but also 
because of the property investment costs. The improved gravity systems have an 
average cost of US$398/hectare, but with objective efficiency of 65%, while 
pressurized irrigation systems (micro spray, drip, pivot) that achieve efficiency of 
80% to 90%, cost between US$2,600/hectare and US$4,000/hectare 
(FAO-PROSAP).  

1.9 The PROSAP interventions address the investment niche needed to rehabilitate 
existing systems and expand irrigated areas in provinces with a high degree of water 
stress, while targeting the needs of small and medium-sized producers. In the NG, 
investments have been identified of around US$3.6 billion that would make it 
possible to increase arable land by between 22% and 50% (approximately 320,000 
hectares). In any case, the success of irrigation interventions requires ensuring 
proper coordination between three areas: (i) institutional and legal, including 
regulatory frameworks, land titling and registration, institution-strengthening, and 
development of financially-autonomous user organizations; (ii) economic, including 
accessible financing instruments, viable public-private partnership models, 
affordable water fees and prices, and tax incentives; and (iii) technical, for dealing 
with cutting-edge engineering and technology, modern water information systems, 
and environmental studies. Investments in irrigation infrastructure financed by 
PROSAP have included actions in these three areas and contributed to improving 
productivity in the intervention areas (see paragraphs 1.19, 1.20, and 1.21).  

1.10 Productive infrastructure: Rural roads and rural energy. Of the total volume of 
cargo transported, 95% is moved over the country’s road network. Annual average 
daily traffic has been increasing, but not evenly across all regions, with significant 
imbalances for cargo traffic (Agosta, R. 2010). For rural economies in the non-
Pampa provinces, the poor condition of secondary and tertiary roads results in: 
(i) high transportation and logistical costs; and (ii) poor accessibility to large 
expanses of territory. For example, the project for secondary route RT13 in 
Corrientes province shows that the route is closed on average more than 80 days 
out of the year. RT13 is 163 km, unpaved and without drainage. In the rainy season, 
70 km of it (43%) is impassable. This worsens the competitiveness of non-Pampa 
rural areas considering that for the main exportable grains and oilseeds, logistical 
costs of transportation to the ports or mill account for 30% of the price for NEA and 
NWA producers (IDEA. FIEL, 2009). Likewise, regarding the rural public energy 
infrastructure, significant gaps and coverage needs are evident. Nationally, more 
than 60% of rural homes do not have access to electricity, with the farms furthest 
from the grid’s main lines being the most affected (Mendoza, 2016).  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40677487
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386


 - 4 - 
 
 

 
1.11 Climate change challenges. Given the fundamental role that Argentina plays in 

global food security, addressing extreme events resulting from climate change is of 
vital importance considering their impact on agricultural activity and the production 
and provision of food. Agricultural and livestock activity are estimated to contribute 
28% of the country’s total greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, for which reason these 
sectors are a central focus for the government as it complies with its goal of reducing 
GHG emissions by 15% by 2030, as established in its intended nationally 
determined contribution (INDC) under the United Nations Framework Convention on 
Climate Change.  

1.12 According to Argentina’s Second National Message on Climate Change, there is 
evidence that the effects of climate change have contributed to glacier melt in the 
Andes Mountains, increasing desertification, and an increased recurrence in forest 
fires over the last 10 years. From the perspective of impact on agriculture, the most 
severe effects manifest themselves through water stress and water availability for 
production, particularly in the areas of Cuyo, NEA, and NWA where PROSAP is 
engaged (Argentina: Second National Message; ECLAC 2012; Ludeña, Wilk, and 
Quiroga).  

1.13 The Cuyo region has been under a water emergency during 7 of the last 10 years, 
and the trend toward declining availability of water directly impacts availability of the 
irrigation needed to maintain the current levels of irrigation-dependent wine and fruit 
production (Brown, 2015). According to a study entitled “The Economics of Climate 
Change in Argentina” (ECLAC, 2014), if adaptation measures are not taken, climate 
change-related productivity losses could reach 17% of the national agriculture 
sector’s value added, along with drops in yield of between 11% and 16% for wheat, 
15% and 24% for corn, and 14% and 25% for soy. In terms of its effect on irrigation, 
in a study of Argentina’s irrigation potential, the FAO reports potential climate 
change-related productivity losses in areas under irrigation equivalent to the loss of 
325,000 hectares, or production value of US$900 million. 

 
Table 1. Production losses due to climate change in areas under irrigation (in 1,000s of ha) 

 

*FAO-PROSAP World Bank (2015). 

51

74 78

58

18

62
29

9

1

8

22 24 22 19 7
0

20

40

60

80

100

120

Central Cuyo NWA NEA Patagonia

Underground irrigation Surface irrigation

Losses (% of total surface area)

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386


 - 5 - 
 
 

 
 

1.14 Competitiveness services gaps. Integration of agricultural producers into clusters 
and value chains is necessary for regional economies to take off. The diagnosis of 
Argentina’s CDC indicates that the lower competitiveness of the non-Pampa 
agricultural systems can be partly attributed to the lower degree of sophistication of 
scientific-technological-educational subsystems and of management in general, as 
well as their poor links to agricultural technology supply companies. Along these 
lines, Martin, Mayer, and Mayneris (2008) find that the benefits of increased sector 
clustering are positive and highly significant, although to be effective it requires 
strengthened institutions. Likewise, using company-level data, Long and Zhang 
(2011) show that China’s rapid industrialization is characterized by the growing 
formation of clusters. They find that the clusters help overcome the credit restrictions 
that small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) face. Scalice (2016) finds in an 
analysis of nine agrifood supply chains in Argentina’s NG that more than 80% of 
small producers of are not part of a value chain, nor do they have access to financial 
services. The author also identifies a number of limitations to developing competitive 
chains and clusters, including: (i) low product quality; (ii) limited access to capital; 
(iii) lack of economies of scale; (iv) weak organizational capacity; and (v) limited 
capacity to innovate. Regarding access to capital, Sanguinetti (2011) identifies 
access to financial services as one of the main restrictions faced by rural areas of 
regional economies, and Lapelle (2007) finds that more than 80% of SMEs in 
regional economies are self-financing. 

1.15 Weaknesses in institutions, governance, and social participation. The various 
provinces are distinctly heterogeneous in terms of their institutional capacities. The 
provinces in the NWA and NEA have institutional quality gaps averaging -2.3 
and -1.2, respectively This means that, compared to the national average, these 
regions are being left behind. (Villalobos, 2015, CDC Argentina). In terms of social 
participation, which is an integral part of governance, unequal access for and 
participation by women is a key weakness. The URC report entitled “Las nuevas 
generaciones de mujeres rurales como promotoras de cambio (2015)” [New 
generations of rural women as agents of change] conducts a quantitative and 
qualitative analysis of the needs of and opportunities for young rural women. This 
study provides evidence of the relatively low impact of participation among women 
in rural areas, although regional differences are noteworthy (between 5% and 20%), 
and for young women facing a series of disadvantages that intensify in remote rural 
areas, the differences are related to difficulties participating in the labor market while 
caring for members of the household. PROSAP project design has found that only 
5% of the beneficiaries of training or technical assistance are women, and only 
between 0.3% and 3% of land owners in irrigator organizations are women.  

 Progress and outcomes of PROSAP loans from the CLIPP 

1.16 The national government implemented PROSAP in the mid-1990s to support 
agricultural development in the rural economies of the non-Pampa provinces. The 
implementation of this program was mainly focused on the construction of rural 
public works. PROSAP’s first phase was financed by the Bank through operation 
899/OC-AR. Based on that program’s outcomes, in 2008, the Government of 
Argentina requested a CCLIP (AR-X1006) for US$600 million. The CCLIP began 
with operation 1956/OC-AR (PROSAP II), execution of which completed in 2014. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386


 - 6 - 
 
 

 
The second operation, 2573/OC-AR (PROSAP III) was approved in 2011. Its level 
of execution is 90%, and it is set for closure in March 2017. Project completion 
reports (PCR) for loans 899/OC-AR and 1956/OC-AR, as well as the midterm 
evaluation for 2573/OC-AR, describe in detail the outputs and outcomes achieved, 
as well as the lessons learned in each operation. The following table summarizes 
the scope and main outputs of the PROSAP operations.  

 
Table 2. Outputs of PROSAP operations 

 
PROSAP I: 
899/OC-AR 

PROSAP II: 

1956/OC-AR 

First operation 
under the 

CCLIP 

PROSAP III: 
2573/OC-AR 

Second 
operation under 

the CCLIP 

Loan amounts (millions of US$) 322 200 230 

Irrigation and drainage systems built (km) 294 154 374 

Hectares irrigated 137,521 73,038 59,560 

Beneficiaries of irrigation systems 12,769 14,489 5,269 

Rural roads improved (km) 482 339 49  

Rural electrification (km of power lines) 5,251 1,020 45  

Producers receiving services, technical 
assistance, and training 

111,819 34,039 149,111 

Business plans financed—
Nonreimbursable contribution (NRC) 

133 85 229 

 

1.17 The types of outputs that have been generated from PROSAP I to PROSAP III 
reflect the evolution of the interventions from an approach predominately aimed at 
physical infrastructure to interventions that are more balanced with technical 
assistance and soft components on management and market development. The 
PCRs for the completed PROSAP projects show that they have achieved the direct 
outcomes and effects expected, including: (i) productive overhaul of irrigation 
projects, with increases in surface area irrigated, better water availability and quality 
throughout the year for irrigators, and improved irrigation efficiency; (ii) improved 
productivity at the level of individual farms for specific crops; (iii) irrigator 
organizations strengthened and taking over the operation, maintenance, and 
financial management of their systems; (iv) the rural roads that were financed are 
usable year-round; and (v) development and consolidation of clusters that have 
been able to diversify into and/or export processed products for the first time. An 
ex post economic assessment of the Canal del Norte and 25 de Mayo, San Juan 
rehabilitation projects and the project to improve rural roads in productive areas in 
Entre Ríos, Zone VII, based on surveys conducted upon project completion shows 
that both projects achieved economic benefits demonstrating their economic return, 
with economic internal rates of return (EIRR) of 21.1% and 19.4%, respectively.  

1.18 Other noteworthy outcomes of PROSAP are institutional and strategic. Among them, 
PROSAP has provided the Ministry of Agroindustry with a land management 
operating model that enables it to strengthen and leverage programs with greater 
scope and coverage in the provinces as part of its provincial strategies for the 
agrifood sector (PSAS) and its development and competitiveness improvement 
plans (DCIP). Among other outcomes, this has enabled the strengthening of an 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40679857
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40120638
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676141


 - 7 - 
 
 

 
environmental and social area that enables it to move forward on these issues 
proactively, incorporating the inclusion of the gender dimension in rural 
development, as well as addressing climate change, resulting in the Ministry 
qualifying as an executing agency for the Climate Change Adaptation Fund.  

1.19 PROSAP impact evaluations. During the design of PROSAP I and PROSAP II, 
impact evaluations were not performed for experimental designs. Recently, 
PROSAP III has incorporated a methodology for evaluating the impact of quasi-
experimental designs that will enable analysis of how outcomes are attributed to the 
program’s investments. These evaluations will be conducted once PROSAP III ends 
in 2017. However, some partial and complimentary impact evaluations have been 
conducted using data generated by PROSAP projects, as described below. 

1.20 Using quasi-experimental methodologies, Gibbons, Maffioli, and Rossi (2016) and 
Rossi (2016) evaluated the impact of the PROSAP component providing improved 
irrigation channels in the provinces of Mendoza and San Juan. These studies 
conclude that PROSAP had positive impacts on both production and per-hectare 
productivity, showing that producers who participate in the program produce 9.4% 
more than nonparticipants, with per-hectare yields higher by 7%. 

1.21 Lastly, the Inter-American Institute for Cooperation on Agriculture conducted a study 
entitled The Territorial Impact of Public Policies: The case of PROSAP (2016), which 
evaluated the outcomes of PROSAP I projects from 1998 to 2010. The study applied 
a synthetic methodology by comparing administrative data from departments that 
had PROSAP interventions with data from departments that did not. The study finds 
that out of all the departments, those with PROSAP projects had better development 
results in each of the dimensions analyzed and in the total synthetic index. The 
degree of overall development of the departments without PROSAP was almost 
37%, while for those benefiting from PROSAP it was almost 50%. 

 Lessons learned for PROSAP IV design and compliance with CCLIP 
requirements 

1.22 The main lessons learned from the execution of PROSAP II and III were taken into 
account when preparing this operation and formed the basis for the inclusion of 
certain adjustments. The following table provides a summary of these lessons. 

 
Table 3. Lessons learned and adjustment measures for PROSAP IV 

Lesson learned Agreed measures 

Institutional consolidation. The creation of a 

comprehensive strategic coordination 
structure, with the same functions as the URC, 
has been the basis for better PROSAP project 
performance  

The Ministry of Agroindustry has decided to 
maintain the URC’s functional structure and 
has launched a process to consolidate it 
internally as a specialized agency for 
coordinating investment with external funding. 

Coordination of public interventions in the 
field. Prioritizing projects in the framework of 

the PSASs, which were introduced starting 
with PROSAP II, has enabled participatory 
processes that offer better coordination and 
strategic synergy with a variety of initiatives, 
expanding the area of impact.  

The proposal is to strengthen and consolidate 
these processes for territory and microregion 
management in the framework of the PSAS so 
as to achieve synergies among PROSAP 
projects and other URC projects, in addition to 
better coordinating the intervention of other 
public policy instruments in the same areas. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386


 - 8 - 
 
 

 
Table 3. Lessons learned and adjustment measures for PROSAP IV 

Lesson learned Agreed measures 

Priority on investment in public goods, 
complemented by direct support that is 
intelligent and well targeted on producers. 

The initial focus of the first PROSAP on 
building public works demonstrated the need 
for supporting small and medium-sized 
producers with technical assistance and NRC 
for in-field improvements and development of 
new products. The evaluations conducted, 
including those of the Office of Evaluation and 
Oversight (OVE), found that the instrument 
had positive outcomes, but that it was 
necessary to ensure that the NRCs were 
applied with stricter diagnostic, eligibility, real 
market failure justification, measurement, and 
variability criteria.  

The Technology Modernization Fund, which 
includes NRC, has been redesigned based on 
the standards established in the recent 
Agriculture and Natural Resources 
Management Sector Framework Document: 
(i) focus on technological support for mitigation 
of and adaptation to climate change and 
environmental sustainability; (ii) eligibility of 
small producers lacking access to credit and 
associations organized to establish new local 
networks and value added in new markets; 
(iii) technical assistance to promote the 
participation of the banking sector in financing 
the sector’s technological modernization, in 
coordination with private sector operations; 
and (iv) transient nature of the support and 
transparent, flexible, and evaluable 
mechanisms for granting it.  

Minor infrastructure works for rural 
development. During PROSAP III, a pilot 

program of minor works intended to meet the 
local production needs of small producers was 
piloted successfully. These works, which are 
prioritized in the PSAS, saw high ownership 
and participation levels among producers. 

The minor works component is continued in a 
reinforced context of PSAS interventions in 
priority microregions, along with technical 
assistance for local organizations to ensure 
the works’ sustainability. 

 

1.23 Eligibility of the operation under the CCLIP. Compliance with the eligibility 
conditions for a new individual operation under CCLIP AR-X1006 of 17 April 2008 
has been verified: (i) the program is framed within the sectors and components 
defined under the CCLIP; (ii) its objectives are related to the Bank’s country strategy, 
and it is included in the country program; (iii) the aforementioned agreement 
stipulated that the executing agency would be the same for all the individual loans 
under the line, which is the case given that the URC will continue to be in charge of 
execution; (iv) the outcomes obtained by the URC in these two individual operations 
are satisfactory and have been supported by the corresponding performance 
evaluations for PROSAP II and PROSAP III, meaning the project team and national 
authorities can expect the new proposed program will perform satisfactorily; 
(v) regarding the financial execution of PROSAP III, under execution, 84% of the 
loan proceeds have been committed, while 94% of the proceeds have been 
disbursed; and (vi) the borrower and executing agency have fulfilled the conditions 
of the loan contract and the Bank’s policies on disbursements and procurement of 
goods and services, including updated financial statements.3 

 Design of PROSAP IV  

1.24 As the third individual operation under CCLIP AR-X1006, PROSAP IV has the same 
design as the first two operations. Specifically, PROSAP IV is designed to bolster 

                                                
3  The most recent report including audited financial statements includes a minor qualification that does not 

affect the reasonableness thereof. This minor qualification refers to a debt observed by the Office of the 
National Auditor General between contractors and the provinces of Mendoza, Entre Ríos, and Catamarca, 
set forth in a note to the financial statements, representing an integral part thereof. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40120638
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676141


 - 9 - 
 
 

 
local production systems via the strengthening of critical local assets (public goods: 
the economic infrastructure—irrigation, transportation, energy, social capital—
business culture; quality of regional associations and business networks) and 
improve the effectiveness of the intergovernmental framework. These actions 
contribute to improving the efficiency of local production systems by creating positive 
externalities through clustering and by resolving market and coordination failures. 

1.25 In particular, PROSAP IV will strengthen local development mechanisms, bolstering 
public-private partnerships in order to increase the competitiveness of producers 
and their associations. Also, the following specific objectives will be consolidated 
and strengthened: (i) internalization of measures for adapting to climate change with 
special emphasis on managing water resources and implementing climate-smart 
irrigation systems; (ii) the comprehensive incorporation of the gender dimension in 
the program through implementation of specific gender action plans for each 
provincial public investment project that include gender diagnostics, training, 
technical assistance, access to available funds, and monitoring of indicators; and 
(iii) consolidation of mechanisms for measuring outcomes and impacts.  

1.26 Strategic alignment with the Update to the Institutional Strategy (UIS) 
2010-2020, and the Corporate Results Framework (CRF) 2016-2019. The 
program is consistent with UIS 2010-2020 (document AB-3008) and strategically 
aligned with the development challenges of productivity and innovation through 
investments in productive public infrastructure and technical assistance that will 
enable increases in the productivity of rural producers in the program’s work areas. 
The program is also in line with the crosscutting issue of climate change and 
environmental sustainability through improved use of water and land via investments 
in irrigation technology. A full 100% of the proceeds of the operation are invested in 
climate change adaptation activities, according to the as climate financing for 
adaptation to climate change according to the multilateral development banks’ joint 
methodology for tracking climate finance. These resources contribute to the IDB 
Group target of increasing financing for projects related to climate change to 30% of 
all operation approvals through 2020. The program provides additionality in terms of 
gender equality through specific activities for promoting the participation of women 
in the training provided by the program through gender action plans. In addition, the 
program will contribute to the goals of CRF 2016-2019 (document GN-2727-6) via 
the indicator of the number of beneficiaries that improve their management and use 
of natural resources. 

1.27 Alignment with the IDB country strategy. The operation is aligned with the IDB 
Country Strategy with Argentina 2012-2015 (document GN-2687), in particular with 
the priority area “Alleviating Obstacles to Growth” in the area of rural and agricultural 
development, the objectives of which include supporting investment programs in 
basic rural infrastructure in regional economies. It is also aligned with the priorities 
of the new Country Strategy with Argentina (2016-2019), which is in the approval 
process as of the distribution date of this loan proposal, in particular with the 
following strategic areas: (i) business climate improvement by fostering 
environmentally sustainable solutions; and (ii) strengthening of private-sector 
integration and insertion into value chains by developing public goods for innovation 
and cluster development.  

https://publications.iadb.org/handle/11319/7807


 - 10 - 
 
 

 
B. Objectives, components, and cost 

1.28 The objective of the CCLIP is to contribute to the competitiveness and development 
of regional rural economies through the execution of individual programs consistent 
with this purpose. Specifically, the third individual operation proposed herein seeks 
improvements to productivity and an increase in sales and value-added for small 
and medium-sized agricultural producers, with a focus on strengthening resilience 
to climate change. The program is structured in two main components. 

1.29 Component 1: Investment to support competitiveness (loan amount: 
US$80.2 million). This component includes: (i) a subcomponent for strengthening 
public infrastructure of major works aimed at increasing the coverage and quality of 
rural infrastructure in the provinces by executing the public investment projects 
prioritized in the PSAS. Investments include the rehabilitation of irrigation and 
drainage systems, forest fire prevention, and tertiary roads in climactically vulnerable 
areas with a focus on adaptation and resilience, and (ii) a subcomponent for minor 
infrastructure works for building, overhauling, or expanding public works and 
community improvements. All investments include financing for the technical 
assistance and training necessary for execution, use, and maintenance of the works 
and for strengthening local governance and the provincial and municipal agencies 
that manage water resources for irrigation while managing the promotion of 
participation by women. The objective of all the works and activities under this 
component is to support adaptation of the agricultural productive activity to scenarios 
and conditions of climactic vulnerability, with technical designs that take those 
scenarios into account in the long-term.  

1.30 The major infrastructure works to be financed whose final technical, economic, 
social, climactic, and environmental designs are in place are the following:  

 

Table 4. Major Works Projects 

Project 

Total 
amount 

(US$ 
millions) 

Lining of the of the upper section of the Cacique Guaymallén irrigation channel. 
First section. Mendoza 

21.5 

Improvements to the Colorado River irrigation system. Second stage. Colonia 
Santa Rosa. Salta 

13.9 

Improvements to the Benavidez Gral. 9 de Julio Canal system. Departments of 
Rivadavia, Chimbas, Santa Lucía, and 9 de Julio. San Juan 

17.7 

Development of the Tala River system irrigation area. Department of Trancas. 
Tucumán 

19.4 

Improvement of rural roads in productive areas of the province of Corrientes. 
Provincial Route 13 

10.4 

Improvement of provincial fire management services for preventing and 
controlling fires in the Northwest of Chubut 

6.1 

Total 89.1 

 

1.31 For their part, the minor works being prioritized and whose technical, economic, and 
environmental designs are in place are: (i) overhaul of systems for surface irrigation 
and increasing production yields, located in Anjullon, La Rioja; (ii) irrigation 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40677496
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40677507
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40677534
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40677541
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40677487
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40677483
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40677618


 - 11 - 
 
 

 
improvement project in Colalao del Valle, Tucumán; (iii) water system improvement 
project in Angulos, La Rioja; (iv) improvements to the irrigation infrastructure of the 
water system in Figueroa, Santiago del Estero; and (v) micro reservoirs in the Cano 
River basin, Córdoba.  

1.32 Component 2: Support services for competitiveness (loan amount: 
US$14.4 million). This component finances technical assistance and business 
plans aimed at strengthening the competitiveness and value-added of agricultural 
products in regional economies, with a priority on complementing the major and 
minor works projects of Component 1. The criteria for prioritizing and selecting 
business plans and technical assistance activities is detailed in the program 
Operating Regulations and the technical annexes for each of the three instruments, 
with technical, economic, financial, institutional, social, and environmental feasibility 
being a priority prerequisite: (i) Technology modernization fund, which uses NRCs 
to cofinance in-field  and partnership-building projects that contribute to closing 
technological gaps, bolstering value added at origin; and promoting environmentally 
sustainable practices and climate smart agriculture (CSA) to address the challenges 
of climate change. The focus of the fund is generating positive externalities and 
seeking synergies with private initiatives that promote producer access to formal 
banking and its financial product lines, including access to green financing;4 
(ii) Territorial development initiatives for financing development projects and 
consolidating agrifood clusters that are formulated and prioritized in the participatory 
framework of the DCIPs, which bring together public/private actors with 
scientific/technology actors and producers in the provinces. These projects finance 
technical assistance activities, generating knowledge and cutting edge technology 
that benefit the cluster and the regions where they are developed; (iii) Institutional 
strengthening and preinvestment, providing underlying and crosscutting support for 
technical assistance and training activities to improve management in provincial 
institutions, including raising awareness on climate change and improving capacities 
to identify, prepare, and monitor public investment projects. 

1.33 The program’s beneficiary provinces are the non-Pampa provinces, which will be 
prioritized based on the criteria set forth in the program’s Operating Regulations, 
including: (i) relative degree to which they lag behind; (ii) vulnerability to climate 
change; (iii) provincial sector strategies with a time horizon of at least 10 years; 
(iv) provincial association in place with adequate human and technical resources; 
and (v) due authorizations in place for the province to take on debt in order to accept 
PROSAP resources. The projects are chosen through a planning process consistent 
with the priorities of Argentina’s CDCs and the diagnostics performed. The program 
Operating Regulations defines project eligibility criteria, considering the different 
decision levels, type of project, criteria for analysis, and the project cycle from 
identification and preparation through to approval and execution.  

1.34 Program coordination, monitoring, and evaluation will also be financed. 
Under this item, support will be provided for the strengthening, operation, and 
maintenance of the project monitoring and evaluation system; the URC’s 
incremental operating expenses; the preparation of studies, including impact 

                                                
4  MIF project AR-T1170 includes financing technology packages for small producers and their cooperatives 

through a new line of credit between the Fund and Banco Credicoop. As part of the actions to integrate the 
IDB Group, once the MIF operation is approved, the proposal is to offer PROSAP producers this line of credit.  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670869
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670869
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40677606
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40677611
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40679514
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40679514


 - 12 - 
 
 

 
evaluations, progress reports, and audit reports; and environmental and social 
monitoring. 

C. Key results indicators  

1.35 The program has a Results Matrix agreed upon with the executing agency 
(Annex II). It includes indicators for impact, as well as outcomes and outputs, with 
their corresponding baseline values, targets, and means of verification. The main 
outputs include 31,638 hectares under irrigation, 71 km of main irrigation channels; 
and 44 km of rural roads. The main outcomes expected from the sample projects 
are described in Table 5. The program is expected to directly benefit 18,200 rural 
producers in six provinces. Over the long term, the program’s impact will be reflected 
in higher gross value of the production of rural producers and lower losses from 
drought associated with climate change. 

 

Table 5. Key Results Matrix Indicators 

Outcomes 
Time of 

measurement 
Proposed indicators 

Improved productivity for producers 
served by financed irrigation systems. 

Year 4  Average increase in land productivity 
(including both agriculture and livestock). 

Greater irrigation water use efficiency by 
rehabilitated systems. 

Year 4  Volume of water delivered to the farms / 
Volume of water that enters the system. 

Improved rural accessibility on Route 13 in 
the province of Corrientes. 

Year 4  Lower number of impassable days. 

Reduction of the average area affected 
annually by fire. 

Year 4  Average area affected by fire in the 
province of Chubut. 

Diversification of markets and/or products 
in regions served by the program. 

Annual  Number of business initiatives that 
increase sales by at least 20%. 

Users who adopt technologies for 
adaptation to climate change. 

Annual  Number of agricultural and livestock 
producers adopting pressurized irrigation 
technologies. 

1.36 Economic viability of the program. Overall analysis of the program yields an 
average weighted EIRR of 20.6% for a time horizon of 20 years. The benefits include 
marginal changes to productivity and increases in the area under irrigation. The 
costs include the total investment in the program, opportunity costs for training the 
farmers; operation and maintenance; and additional investment on the plot (see 
Annex). At a discount rate of 12%, overall net present value (NPV) is 
US$77.7 million. The sensitivity analysis considered: (i) modification of investment 
costs; (ii) changes in crop yields; (iii) changes in the costs of investment 
sustainability; (iv) delays in benefit realization; and (v) technology adoption rates. 
For a 30% increase in costs, the NPV is US$52.3 million, and the EIRR is 16.9%. 
For a three-year delay in benefit realization, the NPV is US$77.7 million and EIRR 
is 17.1%. For an adoption rate of 70%, the EIRR is 15.5%, with NPV of 
US$28.3 million.  

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS 

A. Financing instruments and costs  

2.1 The program’s cost is US$131,426,000, of which the Bank will finance 
US$100 million, chargeable to the Ordinary Capital in United States dollars under 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40681141


 - 13 - 
 
 

 
CCLIP AR-X1006.5 The needed for the works and interventions analyzed accounts 
for 100% of the available financing. It will be structured as an investment loan, with 
an execution period of four years, taking into consideration that the major works to 
be financed are all at the stage of executable projects ready for public tender, and 
that the annual disbursements under PROSAP III over the last four years have 
demonstrated execution levels in keeping with the proposed planning.  

 

Table 6. Program cost and financing (in US$) 

Investment categories* IDB 
Local 

contribution 
Total % 

1. Component 1: Support investments 80,200,000 26,476,000 106,676,000 81 

1.1  Strengthening public infrastructure 73,000,000 26,476,000 99,476,000 76 

1.2 Minor works 7,200,000 0 7,200,000 5 

2. Component 2: Support Services  14,400,000 3,600,000 18,000,000 14 

2.1  Technology modernization fund 5,600,000 1,400,000 7,000,000 5 

2.2  Territorial development initiatives 6,400,000 1,600,000 8,000,000 6 

2.3  Provincial institutional strengthening 2,400,000 600,000 3,000,000 2 

3.  Management, monitoring, and evaluation 5,400,000 1,350,000 6,750,000 5 

3.1  Management 5,013,900 1,253,475 6,267,375 5 

3.1  Monitoring and evaluation (includes 
environmental and social) 

378,000 94,500 472,500 0 

3.2  Audits 8,100 2,025 10,125 0 

Total 100,000,000 31,426,000 131,426,000 100 

Percentage 76 24 100   

 

2.2 Bank financing will be disbursed according to the timetable provided in Table 7 and 
detailed in the Multiyear Execution Plan. 

 

Table 7. Estimated disbursement timetable (in thousands of US$) 

Source Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Total % 

IDB 23,626.00 33,530.00 34,194.00 8,650.00 100,000.00 76% 

Local 7,513.00 10,631.60 10,797.60 2,483.80 31,426.00 24% 

Total 31,139.00 44,161.60 44,991.60 11,133.80 131,426.00 100% 

% 24% 34% 34% 8% 100%  

 

B. Environmental and social risks 

2.3 In accordance with the Environment and Safeguards Compliance Policy 
(Operational Policy OP-703), and pursuant to the applied safeguards forms, this 
program has been classified as a category “B” operation. This program is designed 
to promote better management of natural resources related to agricultural production 
and improve producers’ climate resilience and adaptation. Irrigation projects 

                                                
5  Total financing of the CCLIP (AR-X1006) was set at US$600 million, of which US$200 million were executed 

under the first operation (1956/OC-AR) and US$230 million were allocated to the second operation 
(2573/OC-AR), leaving US$170 million available. In the context of programming loans with the Bank for 2016, 
the government has decided to allocate US$100 million to the financing of this third operation, leaving a 
remainder of US$70 million. No additional operations are expected. 



 - 14 - 
 
 

 
internalize measures for adapting to hydrometeorological and climate change risks 
(e.g., expanding drainage for rural roads, reviewing hydrological series for irrigation 
works), as well as elements of sustainability and water use efficiency. Another 
benefit is climate change mitigation through the project to improve rural roads in 
Corrientes by reducing greenhouse gas emissions by 69.9 tons of CO2 equivalent 
thanks to reductions in fuel consumption, or an emissions cut of 43.2% from the 
scenario without the project. 

2.4 The execution of the PROSAP program is governed by the program Operating 
Regulations and the respective Environmental and Social Manual (ESM), with 
updated guides for environmental and social evaluation, including involuntary 
resettlement and mitigation and control procedures, as well as public consultation 
and monitoring and evaluation. In line with directive B.14 of Operational Policy 
OP-703, during preparation, an independent socioenvironmental review of the 
execution of PROSAP III was conducted. It found that the executing agencies had 
improved their socioenvironmental management capacity, and no 
socioenvironmental liabilities were identified. 

2.5 All of the infrastructure projects have socioenvironmental impact studies and 
environmental and social management plans that comply with IDB policies. The 
program Operating Regulations and ESM were reviewed mainly to incorporate 
gender equality opportunities and actions to prevent and adapt to the risks from 
disasters and climate change. Also, monitoring measures were strengthened by 
defining evaluation and monitoring indicators. Where applicable, projects include 
plans to ensure that indigenous peoples share in the projects’ benefits, in keeping 
with Operational Policy OP-765. Plans are also in place to address effects on assets, 
in keeping with Operational Policy OP-710. Likewise, all the projects include plans 
for pest management in their training and assistance programs, as well as plans for 
taking action on gender with a view toward increasing the participation of women in 
training programs, technical assistance, and other services, consistent with 
Operational Policy OP-761 of the Bank. 

2.6 Participatory consultative meetings were held in the areas to benefit from the 
projects as part of the design process. Prior to the Bank’s no objection for contracting 
the works, where necessary, the provinces will submit the pertinent environmental 
permits granted by the corresponding authorities. As established in the program 
Operating Regulations, prior to issuing the public tender for the works, the URC will 
present evidence to the Bank that it has obtained those permits. The environmental 
and social studies are available for consultation at the URC/PROSAP and Bank 
websites. The environmental and social management report (ESMR) summarizes 
the outcomes of and recommendations for environmental and social management 
to ensure the operation’s environmental and social sustainability. The borrower 
agrees to carry out—through the executing agency—the program activities in 
accordance with the environmental and social standards and recommendations 
included in the program Operating Regulations, including its ESM and the program’s 
environmental and social management plan (ESMP). The special contractual 
conditions on environmental and social management are detailed in paragraph 6.4 
of the ESMR. 

http://www.prosap.gob.ar/uas_evaluaciones.aspx
http://www.prosap.gob.ar/uas_evaluaciones.aspx
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40664746


 - 15 - 
 
 

 
C. Fiduciary risks  

2.7 The main fiduciary risks identified are associated with processes of interaction 
between the national and provincial levels, which are often complex. These risks 
include: (i) delays in procurement processes; (ii) delays in the submission of 
AWPs/procurement plans by the provinces and deficient quality thereof; and 
(iii) delays in providing accounting information to the Bank. Experience with 
execution has demonstrated that these risks are medium, that the executing agency 
has adequate execution capacity, and that the executing agency has been able to 
manage the aforementioned risks effectively in previous operations. The following 
were agreed upon as the main mitigation measures: (i) quarterly update and 
management of the procurement plan; (ii) implementation of Subcomponent 2.3: 
Provincial Institution Strengthening; and (iii) permanent 65% flexibility for justification 
of expenses for disbursement of advances of funds (see Annex III). 

D. Other project risks and special issues  

2.8 An inherent risk involved in rural infrastructure works is weak commitment by 
beneficiaries to operating and maintaining the infrastructure works. The main 
mitigation measure for this comes in the framework of participatory processes for 
local empowerment, as well as the implementation of training and technical 
assistance programs. Also, the risks associated with changes to the national and 
provincial government are: weak interagency coordination between the program’s 
executing agencies, as well as scattered and uncoordinated implementation of 
external financing for agricultural projects The main mitigation measure is thus the 
implementation of targeted training plans for the provincial execution units. 

2.9 Regarding the program’s overall sustainability, at the level of the provincial 
governments and producer organizations, PROSAP has been able to build 
management mechanisms and secure commitments to ensure the operation and 
maintenance of the works. It has also been able to consolidate the capacities and 
processes developed in Component 2 (See program Operating Regulations).  

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN 

A. Summary of implementation arrangements 

3.1 The borrower is the Argentine Republic, and the Ministry of Agroindustry will be the 
executing agency, through the Unit for Rural Change (URC). The URC will be 
responsible for the execution, administration, and supervision of the program. Within 
it, the Program and Project Management Area will be in charge of executing the 
activities of the projects financed under the program. It will also have support from 
the crosscutting support areas and units that are part of the URC. 

3.2 The Ministry of Agroindustry is responsible for the local counterpart of the national 
projects. The URC’s main responsibilities include: preparing the budget and 
controlling and supervising fulfillment of the local contribution by the provinces and 
other participating agencies; supervising and coordinating the preparation of the 
AWPs, procurement plans, and financial plans; preparing and verifying 
disbursement requests; supervising work and providing legal and administrative 
support to the subexecuting agencies in procurement processes; paying contractors 
and suppliers; coordinating all program activities with the provinces and other 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670869


 - 16 - 
 
 

 
beneficiaries; monitoring and evaluating project and program activities; and 
commissioning and serving as counterpart for the external audit. 

3.3 The program’s execution is governed by the program Operating Regulations, which 
contain the details required to guide and regulate program operations, including the 
requirements for transferring resources to the provincial projects. The program 
Operating Regulations and their annexes also describe the specific execution 
mechanism for each component. As a special condition precedent to the first 
disbursement of loan proceeds, the executing agency, through the URC, will 
provide evidence that the updated program Operating Regulations have been 
approved and entered into effect, and have been reviewed in accordance with 
the terms previously agreed upon with the Bank, including the ESM. The review 
will include updating the description of the program’s components and excluding 
investment projects with Category “A” socioenvironmental impacts under the 
environmental and social safeguard policies from eligibility. 

3.4 Component 1 of the program is executed through the URC’s Program and Project 
Management area and its Infrastructure and Services unit, which coordinates the 
relationships with the liaison entities and the units executing the projects at the 
provincial level, as established in the program Operating Regulations. For each 
case, specific planning, execution, monitoring, and evaluation functions are 
established for the projects. Component 2 of the program is executed by the 
Program and Project Management area through its Competitiveness unit and 
through NRC. The process for executing this component includes the following 
phases: identification and eligibility of clusters and territorial initiatives based on 
prioritization criteria; preparation and evaluation of specific plans for improving 
competitiveness; and implementation, monitoring, and technical evaluation of the 
projects. The execution of both components is supported by the following 
crosscutting areas of the URC: institutional development, environmental 
management, legal issues, internal control, finance and accounting, procurement, 
and management oversight and outcomes. 

3.5 Furthermore, the main fiduciary measures to be applied to the proposed operation 
were agreed upon during preparation. These measures are described in Annex III 
and include aspects of disbursements and audits, as well as thresholds for 
procurement processes, in accordance with the Bank’s policies and procedures as 
set forth in documents GN-2349-9 and GN-2350-9. 

B. Summary of arrangements for monitoring results 

3.6 Monitoring. The program has a Monitoring and Evaluation Plan. During project 
execution, the executing agency will prepare and send the Bank a monitoring report 
no later than 60 days from the end of each six-month period. These reports will focus 
on fulfillment of the output indicators and progress on outcomes, identifying 
problems encountered, and corrective measures taken. No later than during the last 
quarter of each year during project execution, the executing agency will submit the 
AWP for the following year, to the Bank’s satisfaction. 

3.7 Evaluation. The executing agency will conduct two independent evaluations funded 
by the loan proceeds: (i) the midterm evaluation will be submitted to the Bank no 
later than 90 days after 50% of the loan proceeds have been disbursed or two years 
have passed from the date of the Bank’s first disbursement of the loan proceeds, 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670869
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40679756


 - 17 - 
 
 

 
whichever occurs first; and (ii) the final evaluation, no later than 90 days after 90% 
of the loan proceeds have been disbursed by the Bank. These reports will include: 
(i) an evaluation of the quality of the data provided by the monitoring system; (ii) the 
level of fulfillment of the expected outputs, outcomes, and progress on the expected 
impacts as established in the Results Matrix; and (iii) the level of compliance with 
the ESMPs for the program and the investment projects, including a summary of the 
socioenvironmental audits and the progress in the social and environmental 
indicators. 

3.8 Impact evaluation. Evaluation of the program’s impact will have two parts. The 
proposed impact evaluation for public infrastructure will be conducted for two 
irrigation systems and a rural road. Impact estimates will be based on the difference 
in differences method applied to a panel of homes divided into a treatment group 
and a control group. For this, two surveys—a baseline and a final evaluation—are 
planned. The sample size for the treatment group will be 465, as well as 465 for the 
control group (total for the three projects). For the beneficiaries of the public 
investment projects, the control group will be comprised of farmers with no access 
to irrigation systems and/or improved roads. Farmers will be selected at random 
from the lists available in the executing agency’s archives.  

3.9 To evaluate the impact of the NRCs and clusters, the phase-in and difference in 
differences methods will be used. The implementation strategy will identify a 
treatment/control group based on the year in which producers enter the program. 
NRC not involving pressurized irrigation will be included in the evaluation (as they 
are included in the evaluation of public works investment). Thus, 220 NRCs will be 
evaluated. The sample will be 155 producers, selected at random from among the 
NRC. The control group will be defined based on farms that requested NRC but did 
not receive funding. 



counting will be used and International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) will 
be followed when applicable in accordance with established national criteria. The 
following financial reports will be required: (i) financial execution plan for up to 
180 days following a request for an advance of funds; (ii) audited annual financial 
statements as stipulated in Article 7.03 paragraph (a) of the General Conditions of 
the loan contract; and (iii) other reports required by the fiduciary specialists.  

 Internal control and internal audit 

6.7 The national internal control body is the Sindicatura General de la Nación [Office of 
the Comptroller General] (SIGEN). The internal audit of each executing agency is 
performed through the Internal Audit Unit. The unit, which reports directly to the 
minister, is in charge of conducting audits and making recommendations pursuant 
to the powers granted under Law 24,156 (Financial Administration Act).  

 External control: External financial audit and project reports 

6.8 In 2011, the Bank concluded a diagnostic on the government auditing practices of 
the AGN, the result of which was to validate the AGN as auditor of Bank projects. 

6.9 However, based on the track record of the promptness of audit submissions, in 
October 2014, it was agreed with Argentina to reduce the AGN’s portfolio to match 
its real compliance capacity. Programs 2853/OC-AR, 2740/OC-AR, 3255/OC-AR, 
and 2573/OC-AR are being audited by the AGN. 





